S.Amdt.523 to S.Con.Res.11 - 114th Congress (2015-2016) - Amendment Text
Amendment Text: S.Amdt.523 — 114th Congress (2015-2016)

There are 2 versions of the amendment: Amendment as Proposed (03/26/2015) Amendment as Submitted (03/24/2015)

Shown Here:

Amendment as Proposed (03/26/2015)

This Amendment appears on page S1971-1972 in the following article from the Congressional Record.

[Pages S1960-S2008] From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov] CONCURRENT RESOLUTION ON THE BUDGET, FISCAL YEAR 2016 The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senate will resume consideration of S. Con. Res. 11, which the clerk will report. The legislative clerk read as follows: A concurrent resolution (S. Con. Res. 11) setting forth the congressional budget for the United States Government for fiscal year 2016 and setting forth the appropriate budgetary levels for fiscal years 2017 through 2025. Pending: Enzi (for Kirk) amendment No. 545, to establish a deficit- neutral reserve fund relating to reimposing waived sanctions and imposing new sanctions against Iran for violations of the Joint Plan of Action or a comprehensive nuclear agreement. Rounds/Inhofe amendment No. 412, to establish a deficit- neutral reserve fund to prevent the Environmental Protection Agency and the United States Fish and Wildlife Service from engaging in closed-door settlement agreements that ignore impacted States and counties. Rubio modified amendment No. 423, to increase new budget authority fiscal years 2016 and 2017 and modify outlays for fiscal years 2016 through 2022 for National Defense (budget function 050). Daines amendment No. 388, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to the designation of national monuments. Daines amendment No. 389, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to holding Members of the Senate and the House of Representatives accountable for failing to pass a balanced budget. Moran amendment No. 356, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to providing health care to veterans who reside more than 40 miles driving distance from the closest medical facility of the Department of Veterans Affairs that provides the care sought by the veteran. Roberts/Flake amendment No. 352, to establish a deficit- neutral reserve fund relating to Federal employee performance awards. Roberts amendment No. 462, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to over-the-counter medications. Vitter amendment No. 515, to establish a spending-neutral reserve fund relating to requiring the Federal Government to allow states to opt out of Common Core without penalty. Vitter amendment No. 811, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to ending Washington's illegal exemption from Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Gardner amendment No. 443, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to protecting privately held water rights and permits. Coats/Warner amendment No. 595, to establish a deficit- neutral reserve fund to improve cybersecurity. Coats amendment No. 368, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to providing States the Medicaid flexibility they need to implement innovative reforms to improve care and enhance access for our Nation's most vulnerable. Daines amendment No. 465, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to Second Amendment rights. Daines amendment No. 387, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to postal reform. Wyden/Crapo amendment No. 434, to provide for an adjustment to committee allocations for wildfire suppression funding. Paul amendment No. 940, to increase new budget authority for fiscal years 2016 and 2017 and modify outlays for fiscal years 2016 through 2022 for National Defense (budget function 050) with offsets. Sanders (for Murray/Alexander) amendment No. 697, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund for legislation that reforms and strengthens elementary and secondary education. Sanders (for Murray) amendment No. 798, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund for legislation to allow Americans to earn paid sick time. Sanders (for Cantwell) amendment No. 800, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to a comprehensive approach to crude-by-rail safety. Sanders (for Murray) amendment No. 812, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund to provide women with affordable access to comprehensive health care, including preventative services (such as contraception and breast cancer screenings), improve maternal health, and ensure that a woman has [[Page S1961]] the same benefits and services no matter what part of the United States she lives in, all of which is critical to improving the health and well-being of women, children, their families, and society as a whole, and is an essential part of a woman's economic security and opportunity. Sanders (for Murray) amendment No. 951, to establish and fund a new Federal-State partnership to expand access to high-quality preschool programs for children from low- and moderate-income families, offset with revenue from closing loopholes. Sanders (for Durbin/Coons) amendment No. 345, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to increasing funding for Federal investments in biomedical and basic scientific research. Sanders (for Durbin) amendment No. 817, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund to provide tax benefits to patriot employers that invest in American jobs and provide fair pay and benefits to workers and to eliminate tax benefits for corporations that ship jobs or profits overseas. McCain/Flake amendment No. 360, to establish a deficit- neutral reserve fund relating to deterring the migration of unaccompanied children from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. Wyden/Bennet amendment No. 708, to establish a deficit- neutral reserve fund relating to simplifying and expanding tax incentives for higher education to boost student attendance and completion. Wyden amendment No. 791, to strike reconciliation instructions to the Committees on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and Finance and require regular order. Wyden amendment No. 870, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to extending tax provisions expiring in 2013 or 2014 for 2 years, such as those contained in the EXPIRE Act of 2014. Heller amendment No. 453, to establish a spending-neutral reserve fund relating to ensuring that the Secretary of Transportation prioritizes the construction of projects that are of national and regional significance and projects in high priority corridors on the National Highway System, which will improve the safe, secure, and efficient movement of people and goods through the United States and facilitate economic development and create jobs in the United States. Heller amendment No. 452, to establish a spending-neutral reserve fund relating to ensuring that the Secretary of the Interior enters into candidate conservation agreements with each of the relevant 11 Western States before the United States Fish and Wildlife Service makes a listing determination on the greater sage-grouse under the Endangered Species Act of 1973. Heller amendment No. 457, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to prohibition of Veterans Benefits Administration executive bonuses until the backlog of disability claims for veterans is eliminated. Heller amendment No. 456, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to ensuring that medical facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs meet the privacy, dignity, and safety needs of women veterans. Coons/Bennet amendment No. 343, to establish a deficit- neutral reserve fund relating to preserving mandatory appropriations for agricultural conservation programs. Coons amendment No. 391, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to the expansion of access to the income tax credit for employee health insurance expenses of small employers. Coons/Rubio amendment No. 392, to establish a deficit- neutral reserve fund relating to promoting the use of college savings accounts while students are in elementary school and secondary school. Coons amendment No. 394, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to special treatment of the income tax credit for research expenditures for startup companies. Coons amendment No. 802, to offset the costs of the war against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. Baldwin amendment No. 432, to provide additional resources to create the opportunity for more Americans to obtain a higher education and advanced job skills by supporting two free years of community college paid for by raising revenue through requiring millionaires and billionaires to pay their fair share. Baldwin amendment No. 436, to preserve the point of order against the reconciliation legislation that would increase the deficit or reduce a surplus. Manchin amendment No. 694, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to investing in advanced fossil energy technology research and development. Manchin amendment No. 578, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to addressing methamphetamine abuse in the United States. Whitehouse amendment No. 700, to ensure high-income earners pay a fair share in taxes and to use the revenue to invest in repairing our Nation's bridges, coastal infrastructure, and damage from wildfires. Whitehouse/Udall amendment No. 867, to establish a deficit- neutral reserve fund relating to making it more difficult for corporations and billionaires to secretly influence elections by making unlimited undisclosed campaign expenditures, and to prevent such entities from evading campaign finance law, including through making false statements to government agencies. Whitehouse amendment No. 895, to prohibit budget resolutions that support cutting over $1,000,000,000,000 in spending without identifying specific programmatic effects. Casey amendment No. 632, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to providing reasonable accommodations for pregnant workers. Casey amendment No. 633, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to enhancing the child and dependent care tax credit. Merkley/Coons amendment No. 842, to establish a deficit- neutral reserve fund relating to consumer financial protection. Merkley amendment No. 843, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to restoring reductions in the Republican budget to the Stafford loan program that would mandate that students currently in college pay interest on their loans before they have received their education benefits, to make college more affordable, to reduce the debt burden of students, and to help graduates afford to pay back student loans. Merkley/Brown amendment No. 952, to establish a deficit- neutral reserve fund relating to establishing a more level playing field in trade agreements. Merkley amendment No. 953, to save student financial aid and reduce the student loan debt levels in the Republican budget by 15 percent by eliminating new mandated interest charged while students are still in school. Blumenthal amendment No. 825, to expand the deficit-neutral reserve fund for veterans and servicemembers. Cassidy amendment No. 341, to establish a spending-neutral reserve fund relating to the promotion of United States offshore energy production. Cassidy amendment No. 539, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to improving Medicaid based on successful and bipartisan State demonstration projects. Cassidy amendment No. 795, to establish a spending-neutral reserve fund relating to authorizing Federal permitting for manufacturing and energy construction projects relating to national primary or secondary ambient air quality standard for ozone lower than a certain existing standard. Coons (for Bennet) amendment No. 715, to create clean energy jobs through predictable and fair incentives for renewable energy. Murkowski (for Thune) amendment No. 607, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund to allow for the permanent elimination of the Federal estate tax. Murkowski (for Thune) amendment No. 743, to reduce funding for the General Services Administration by $1,000,000 until 50 percent of counties in nonattainment for the 1997 National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for ground-level ozone as of January 30, 2015, achieve the air quality standard set forth in the 1997 NAAQS, and direct those funds to the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency for the purpose of helping municipalities reach attainment with the 2008 NAAQS for ground-level ozone, acknowledging that (1) given limited State and Federal resources and the delay of the Administrator in issuing to States implementation guidance for the 2008 ground-level ozone NAAQS, priority should be given to achieving the 2008 standard, (2) the Administrator has not sufficiently implemented that standard, (3) focusing by the Administrator on the most polluted areas that are in nonattainment with that standard would benefit public health, and (4) promulgating a lower standard at this time would impose undue costs on the economy and workforce of the United States. Murkowski/Sullivan amendment No. 838, to establish a spending-neutral reserve fund relating to the disposal of certain Federal land. Murkowski amendment No. 770, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to the construction of Arctic polar icebreakers. Gardner (for Ayotte) amendment No. 485, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund to provide equity in the tax treatment of public safety officer death benefits. Gardner (for Ayotte) amendment No. 490, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund to address the disproportionate regulatory burdens on community bankers. Gardner (for Ayotte) amendment No. 852, to establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to providing small business regulatory relief and preventing duplicative regulations for investment advisors. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Wyoming. Mr. ENZI. Mr. President, this has been an important week for the Senate as we work to set spending goals for our Nation. Before this year, the Senate has only been able to pass two budgets in the past 6 years. Now that Congress is under new management, we are on track to pass a budget after only 3 months. The reason we are working so hard is to restore the trust of the American people, who want and deserve more effective and efficient government. This week, as part of the Senate's regular order, we have been debating and offering amendments and have actually voted more than a dozen times on how best to set spending limits and make government live within its means, including votes to protect property rights of all Americans and to save Medicare. The spending goals and limits we have set are why passing a budget is so [[Page S1962]] important to our Nation. They let congressional policymakers who actually allocate the dollars get to work by following our spending limits. Without that, they are delayed. We have had that situation for a number of years, in which the fiscal year actually ends and we don't have the spending bills done. That is what happens with government shutdowns. That is what happens with extending its ability to operate without having a budget. That shouldn't happen. So we want to get a budget passed by April 15 so that the spending committees can get busy looking at their areas of jurisdiction, their specific areas of interest, to come up with the best policies possible that have a total spending package that will keep government operating and meeting its objectives as the people expect. But today is the day for which we all have been waiting. Today the Senate will begin voting on many amendments offered this week by way of what is affectionately known as a vote-arama. We will start voting early this afternoon, and we will continue until we are exhausted, until we are done, until people think their amendments have been covered sufficiently. That is the way we do it in the Senate. The Senate debate on this balanced budget demonstrates that Congress is doing its part to deliver a healthy economy for each and every American. The important first steps we have taken this week will help deliver a government that is more accountable, which is absolutely essential for strong job growth and job creation. This budget will help every American who wants to find a good-paying job and a fulfilling career. I am incredibly proud of my colleagues who are working together to deliver real solutions, real results, and real progress for hard- working taxpayers. I find this a little bit stressful. I am an accountant. I have found a way to escape some of that tension. I have been reading the Tax Code, and it is time for us to reform the Tax Code. There are hundreds of pages on minor decisions, on different ways of calculating it, and I am excited that we are going to do that. One of the things both sides of the aisle have talked about is speculation on tax reform. Tax reform needs to be done in a bipartisan way. I know the chairman of the Finance Committee and the ranking member on the Finance Committee have already been working on it. We have subgroups set up to solve different parts of the Tax Code, and I am confident we can do that. There are general instructions in the budget bill that allow some latitude to the Finance Committee in a number of different ways, and I am hoping we can wind up with a simpler Tax Code, one that will not take care of my frustrations in future years, but will ease the frustrations of the American people as to taxes. There has been a lot of speculation on where budget cuts are being made. I know there is a lot of frustration on the other side. Our budget sets limits for the different spending groups. It doesn't get into the details. The people who know the details in those areas are on the committees, and they can make better decisions than we as the Budget Committee can make. I do point out frequently that part of my discovery during this process was that there are 260 programs whose authorizations have expired. That means the specific committees that came up with the idea for these programs haven't looked at them for some time, and that didn't stop us from going ahead and funding them anyway. They have expired, but in some cases we are spending four times as much as what was originally envisioned for that particular program. Does it amount to much money? It amounts to $293 billion a year--$293 billion a year. If the committees do their work, there is a lot of money available for the areas outside of defense. Defense has its authorization done every year, so they are in a different category from all of the rest of the Federal Government programs. So if you are thinking there are a lot of hands tied on what can be done, there is $293 billion out there that is being spent that has expired and ought to be looked at. In businesses, they have to look at their expenses every single year and see where they can cut in order to continue the business. Around here one of those programs hasn't been looked at since 1983. So there is a lot of work for us to do. It is all included in the budget. I hope we can finish the budget tonight and put everybody to work on these extra tasks. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Illinois. Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, I heard my friend from Wyoming say he is relieving his stress over the budget by reading the Tax Code. In my religion, when you go to confession, you are given a penance for your sins. I cannot think of a more awesome penance than reading the Tax Code. I certainly hope it gives my friend from Wyoming a good frame of mind as he attacks this vote-arama. I am going to be brief because our ranking member on the budget has arrived on the floor, but I do want to say this: Budgets make choices, and there are one or two choices--certainly more than one or two but one or two that I would like to highlight that I think are worrisome. The Republican budget eliminates health insurance for 27 million Americans. That is 9 percent of people in America who would lose their health insurance protection because of the Republican budget. Part of it is the passionate refusal of the Republicans to accept the Affordable Care Act, which now in itself protects 15 to 16 million Americans. We have said to them, if you don't like the Affordable Care Act, give us an alternative, and they have yet to do so--and, frankly, because it is fairly difficult, as it was passing this bill. But to take health insurance away from 27 million Americans and say that is going to make a better life for working families? No, it will not. It will make a bigger challenge for these families which will be extremely difficult. Secondly, I am worried and I think other Members from both sides of the aisle share concerns about sequestration cuts when it comes to areas such as biomedical research. How in the world can we justify cutting research from the National Institutes of Health to find cures for diseases such as cancer, Alzheimer's, diabetes--the list goes on. If we believe we are making a better America by cutting back research and innovation, particularly biomedical research, it is extremely shortsighted. When I take a look at the 200 or so pending amendments on budget resolution, it looks like there are 10 of them--including one I am going to offer--relative to medical research. Democrats and Republicans are saying spare this area of Federal spending. I would like to propose that all of us who share this goal on both sides of the aisle join in an effort to make sure this is treated differently in our budget. It shouldn't be subject to mindless and deep cuts in biomedical research, which will deny to a lot of suffering people the hope they need and deny cures that will not only save lives but save dramatic amounts of money. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Vermont. Mr. SANDERS. Mr. President, when we look at budgets, we look essentially at two things. First off, we look at what the budget actually does, because it is a set of priorities, and we look at what the budget does not do. Any sensible group of people, whether it is a family, whether it is local government, State government, whether it is a business--people sit around the table and say, OK, these are our needs, this is what we have to address or this is no longer relevant or this is wasteful and we have to get rid of it. That is what a budget process is about. When you examine the Republican budget, it almost seems they turn that equation upside down and they do everything we should not be doing and they don't do what we should be doing. The overall reality of America that most people understand is the middle class of this country for the last 40 years has been shrinking. Yes, we are in a lot better shape today than we were when President Bush left office, but real unemployment is 11 percent. We have the highest rate of childhood poverty in the industrialized world. Despite the modest gains to the Affordable Care Act, 35 million Americans still have no health insurance. Millions of families--whether it is in Nevada or Vermont-- are wondering how in God's name they are going to be able to send their kids to college when school is so expensive. What happens to those [[Page S1963]] young people when they leave school deeply in debt? People are working in Vermont, in Nevada, in Wyoming for horrendously low wages because we have a minimum wage of $7.25 an hour, and people are wondering why it is that they work 40 hours a week and still have to go to the emergency food shelf to put food on the table. Those are some of the issues the American people are talking about and they are thinking about, and they wonder, How does it happen that while they are working longer hours for low wages, the people on top and the large profitable corporations are doing phenomenally well? How does it happen that in the last 2 years, 14 of the wealthiest people in this country have seen a $157 billion increase in their wealth? How does it happen that one family, the Walton family, owns more wealth than the bottom 40 percent of the American people? How does it happen that 99 percent of all new income generated in America since the Wall Street crash goes to the top 1 percent? Those are the issues the American people are wondering about. Why, with an increase in productivity, am I working longer hours for lower wages? Why, if I am a woman worker, do I make 78 cents on the dollar compared to a male worker? Those are the questions. Then you look at the Republican budget. The Republican budget does nothing to address the real problems except to make them worse. One of the problems, to be very frank, and works to the Republicans' advantage--and I have to say this, frankly--the Republican budget is so outrageous that when we explain it, people don't believe what we are saying. Senator Durbin made the point--no debate here--if I am wrong, somebody jump up and correct me. The Republican budget eliminates the Affordable Care Act, right? It does that, and 16 million Americans lose their health insurance--16 million people have no health insurance. But that is not enough. The Republican budget cuts over $400 billion in Medicaid. That is another 11 million people losing their health insurance--16 plus 11 is 27 million people losing health insurance. Does anybody in America think that makes any sense at all? These are men, women, children. You cut Medicaid and you throw people off. These are pregnant women who need to go to the doctor to make sure the baby they are carrying is healthy or little babies who are born. That is what they do. But meanwhile, here is something they do not do. When they get up there and say this budget does not include any tax increases, they are right. I can see that. They are right. But what they are really saying is: We will not--we will never ask the billionaires in this country to pay a nickel more in taxes. We will not ask the one out of four major corporations that pay nothing in taxes to start paying their fair share of taxes. We will make it harder for kids to go to college, we will throw people off of health insurance, but we will not ask the rich and the powerful to pay more in taxes. That is what this budget debate is about, and I hope the American people pay attention to that. With that, Mr. President, I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Ohio. Amendment No. 689 Mr. PORTMAN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending amendment and call up my amendment No. 689. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The clerk will report. The legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Ohio [Mr. Portman] proposes an amendment numbered 689. Mr. PORTMAN. I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: (Purpose: To improve the dynamic scoring provision) On page 104, line 16, after ``shall provide'' insert ``, in addition to the estimate of budgetary effects without macroeconomic effects, an estimate of the budgetary effects from changes in economic output, employment, capital stock, interest rates, and other macroeconomic variables resulting from the major legislation and'' Mr. PORTMAN. Mr. President, we had an energetic discussion this morning about the budget that is before us. The amendment I am going to offer will help us have a better process to get to pro-growth tax reform to actually get this economy growing. My colleague, Senator Sanders, talked about the fact that real unemployment is far higher than the numbers that are officially reported. I agree with him on that. I agree with him that the economy is not out of the woods, and I agree with him that a lot of people are left behind and will continue to be until we get this economy growing the way you normally see an economy grow during a recovery. It is the weakest economic recovery, economists tell us, since the Great Depression; that is, measured in terms of economic growth, GDP, and in terms of job growth. So what this budget does is it puts in place the process for us to actually get pro-growth on policies: yes, on health care; yes, on taxes, on regulations, and so on to be able to move the economy forward. It was President John F. Kennedy who said that ``a rising tide lifts all boats.'' Now, some people get stuck on the shoals and we need to take care of them too. That is why this budget also has a strong safety net necessary to get economic growth--not sufficient but necessary. That is what this budget does. By the way, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office--not the Republicans, not I--the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office looks at this budget and says, you know what. By balancing the budget in 10 years--balancing the budget--therefore, reducing the amount of deficits and the huge debt overhang--a record level of debt we have in our country right now--that will result in more economic growth and more jobs. That is what the Congressional Budget Office said. So this notion that somehow by actually dealing with the debt and deficit and by actually having a balanced budget is bad for the economy--it is just the opposite. This is a first but incredibly important step to getting this economy back on track and to bringing back these jobs. By the way, this is about not just economic growth but about better jobs, about rising wages, and it is about getting to a situation where instead of having wages going down--which is what has been happening over the last 6 years--we can actually see wages go up. On average, wages have gone down about 8 percent. So for working families in Ohio and around this country, we have seen wages go down 8 percent. By the way, half of that reduction in wages came during the so-called recovery. So something is not working. Part of what is not working is running these hundreds of billions of dollars of deficit every year and spending more than this place takes in every year and building up these levels of debt that are unprecedented--over $18 trillion. We did vote on the President's budget yesterday. It is the only alternative we have to be able to compare what this side of the aisle wants to do and what the other side of the aisle wants to do. In the budget the President put out, there was an $8 trillion increase-- increase--in the debt over the next 10 years. That is adding to the over $7 trillion of debt that has been added over the last 6 years under the Obama administration. That may be why not a lot of people voted for the budget that the President presented. In fact, only one person did--1 out of 100. The reason is, it adds so much more debt and so much more in annual deficits that it actually puts that wet blanket over the economy and doesn't enable us to see the economic growth we want. So one element of growth, as the chairman of the Budget Committee talked about this morning, is tax reform. I think everybody acknowledges that our Tax Code is antiquated. It is out of date. It is inefficient. It does not let us compete around the world. So workers in Ohio are competing with one hand tied behind their backs because our Tax Code is so inefficient that it does not let them compete effectively around the world. So let's reform the Tax Code. Everybody who looks at it--economists right, left, or center--agrees the Tax Code does not work. They have different ideas on how to fix it, but they all say: if you could fix this Tax Code, you would see more growth. By the way, you would see not just more jobs but better jobs. If you look [[Page S1964]] at the issue of business tax reform--there is actually a lot of similarity between what the administration is talking about and what Members of Congress on my side of the aisle are talking about. The economic analysis there is that the No. 1 impact of having the highest business tax rate in all the developed world is on wages and benefits. The No. 1 beneficiary will be workers because they are going to see their wages go up and they are going to see their benefits go up. These are the middle-class jobs we want to create in this country. So let's have this tax reform. Let's make sure it is pro-growth. Now back to this amendment and why it is so important to that. This is an amendment that says: Let's require the Joint Committee on Taxation--that is the group who handles scoring those tax reform proposals--to give us the right analysis so we can come up with pro- job, pro-growth tax reform that will actually enable us to bring back these good middle-class jobs. That is what this amendment says. It requires them to provide us what is called macroeconomic scoring. Right now, unbelievably, when you provide a tax reform proposal on the floor of the Senate, what you get back is just a static score that has no relationship to what the impact will be on the economy. It assumes there will be zero impact on the economy. Now, nobody believes that. Everyone knows tax changes will have some impact on the economy-- good, bad, indifferent--yet we do not have that information to be able to ensure that we are writing the right tax reform to get to the result we all want. It seems absurd, I know, but that is the current situation. What this amendment says is, let's have a requirement that the Joint Committee on Taxation provide to the Senate a dynamic score, a macroeconomic score. By the way, they already do it. They already have a model to do it. They just do not provide it to us. Would there be a so-called static score, too, that shows no economic changes? Yes, you would have that too. I cannot imagine that any Member of this body, Republican or Democrat, would not want to have that information, would not want to know what the actual impact is on the economy. Think about this: If McDonald's raises the price of its Big Mac to $10 or $12, what is going to happen? Under a static score, it would say: McDonald's will get more revenue. We know what will happen. We will not go to McDonald's and our kids will not go to McDonald's because it is too expensive. The revenue will go down. We need to have that kind of commonsense analysis here on the floor of the Senate so we can, indeed, put forward tax reform that makes sense for the economy and makes sense to the American people and helps to do precisely what Senator Sanders talks about, which is to get that unemployment number down and provide better jobs, higher paying jobs. If we do not do that, we are letting down the people we are elected to represent. I hope this amendment No. 689 is supported by Democrats and Republicans alike as a commonsense approach to this. Let's apply macroeconomic analysis to anything that is a tax reform proposal over $15 billion. That is the right level. The House has similar analysis in their legislation, so this could actually end up being something on which the House and Senate can agree. Let's ensure that we have the information we need to write the right kind of legislation to get this economy moving and to deal with both sides of the coin. One, spending restraint--and we all know that has to happen--and two, growth, get this economy moving. If we do that, we will see more gross revenues and be able to make this objective we have set out in this budget, which is to actually, for the American people, who cannot understand why we cannot do it, balance this budget. They have to balance their budgets. We have to in our families. We have to in our businesses. We have to in our States. We ought to do it here in the Congress as well. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rounds). The Senator from West Virginia. Amendments Nos. 415 and 416 En Bloc Mrs. CAPITO. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending amendment to call up amendments Nos. 415 and 416 en bloc. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendments are called up en bloc. The amendments are as follows: Amendment No. 415 (Purpose: To establish a spending-neutral reserve fund relating to a requirement that any new environmental agreement signed by the United States with any foreign country or countries not result in serious harm to the economy of the United States) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. SPENDING-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO A REQUIREMENT THAT ANY NEW ENVIRONMENTAL AGREEMENT SIGNED WITH ANY FOREIGN COUNTRY NOT RESULT IN SERIOUS HARM TO THE ECONOMY OF THE UNITED STATES. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to a requirement that any new environmental agreement signed by the United States with any foreign country or countries not result in serious harm to the economy of the United States by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not raise new revenue and would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Amendment No. 416 (Purpose: To establish a spending-neutral reserve fund relating to protecting the reliability of the electricity grid) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. SPENDING-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO PROTECTING THE RELIABILITY OF THE ELECTRICITY GRID. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to prohibiting the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency from proposing, finalizing, or issuing any regulation that would reduce the reliability of the electricity grid by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not raise new revenue and would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Mrs. CAPITO. Mr. President, I wish to briefly address these two amendments. The first amendment simply says that the United States should not sign an international environmental agreement that would do serious harm to our own economy. That commonsense principle passed the Senate by a vote of 95 to 0 in 1997. Last year, the administration announced the climate agreement with China. That agreement requires significant short-term carbon emission reductions here in the United States, but China is allowed to continue increasing its carbon emissions until 2030. That disparity could place the United States at a significant economic disadvantage. In November, global talks began in Paris on a broader international agreement. My amendment simply states what every Senator who voted in 1997 said: No agreement should cause serious harm to the American economy. My second amendment protects the reliability of our electricity grid. North American Electric Reliability Corporation released a report that found that the targets set forward in the President's Clean Power Plan will be difficult if not impossible to achieve without degrading the reliability of the grid. We all want to have our lights turn on and our heat and air- conditioning work. This is in peril. My amendment simply makes sure families and businesses have the reliable electricity they expect by blocking the EPA from finalizing, proposing, or issuing any regulation that would reduce the reliability of the electricity grid. I ask my colleagues to support these amendments. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Michigan. Amendment No. 437 Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending amendment and call up Peters amendment No. 437. [[Page S1965]] The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The clerk will report. The senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Michigan [Mr. Peters] proposes an amendment numbered 437. Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to enhancing and improving the United States Patent and Trademark Office in order to reduce the patent application backlog) At the end of title III, add the following: SEC. 3__. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO ENHANCING AND IMPROVING THE UNITED STATES PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE IN ORDER TO REDUCE THE APPLICATION BACKLOG. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to enhancing and improving the United States Patent and Trademark Office in order to reduce the patent application backlog by the amounts provided in such legislation for that purpose, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, the amendment that I have just called up that is pending before the Senate deals with what I think is a critical issue for this country; that is, making sure we can continue to move forward with innovation to grow the economy. There certainly are many debates that are going to be held as to how we get the productivity in this country to increase, how we create more middle-class jobs and grow the economy from the top to the bottom. But I think there is broad consensus that what has really driven our economy--really through the centuries but certainly most recently in the United States--has been innovation. It is about innovation, creating the next big thing, the big products that transform people's lives. In order to do that, companies that come up with these ideas need to have patent protection so that the effort they put into that product, the money they put into that product, they are able to protect as they market that product and get a return on their investments. Unfortunately, however, the backlog of patent applications at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office has become completely unacceptable. The America Invents Act made a number of very important changes to our patent system that targeted the reducing of the backlog and driving innovation. At the time that act was passed, there were more than 700,000 patent applications at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. Those applications had an average review time of 3 years or longer before the applications were granted patent protection. Three years is simply an unacceptable amount of time to wait as these inventors who are trying to get their patent protections--they have to wait several years before they can bring those products to the market and have the protections of patents. What makes it even more unacceptable is that these folks who are applying for these patents pay a user fee. They pay a fee in order to have this work done. Yet, with sequestration and other types of budget maneuvering, the patent office actually cannot fully utilize the fees that are generated by the people who are paying these fees. So, in a sense, this is an innovation tax. People who are innovating pay a tax while they are innovating, when what we should be doing is accelerating their ability to bring these products to market, create jobs, and advance the economy. The backlog now, after the passage of the act, still stands at 600,000, with an average review time of 2.3 years. So we have made some progress, but we still have a long way to go. So in order to reduce the patent application backlog, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office needs the ability to access all of the fees it receives in order to hire additional examiners and administrative patent judges. That is what this amendment before us does--it gives the patent office the resources it needs in order to do its job effectively. The end result is a stronger American economy. I urge my colleagues to adopt this amendment. Amendment No. 521 Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the pending amendment be set aside and call up Peters amendment No. 521. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The clerk will report. The senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Michigan [Mr. Peters] proposes an amendment numbered 521. Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to investing in science, technology, and basic research in the United States) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO INVESTING IN SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND BASIC RESEARCH IN THE UNITED STATES. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to investment in science, technology, and basic research in the United States, which may include educational or research and development initiatives, public-private partnerships, or other programs, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, this amendment is similar to the previous amendment in that it focuses on innovation. It focuses on what this country does best, which is create new products and advance the knowledge with scientific discoveries and new inventions. This amendment, however, deals specifically with scientific discovery and technological breakthroughs that drive our economy. We have known throughout human history that the drivers of that have been the big breakthroughs, whether it is the cotton gin or the internal combustion engine or the railroads. These have been inventions that have transformed the entire planet. We need to continue to have those innovations, but in order to do that, we need to invest in basic scientific research. Investments in basic research have resulted in countless innovations that improve our day-to-day lives and support the Nation's overall productivity and competitiveness. The Federal Government has long played a crucial role. This has always been, in the past, a very bipartisan issue, that the Federal Government invest in this basic, cutting-edge research and development. However, we have seen a very I think disturbing trend over the last few decades as R&D; spending has fallen. The amount of money which the Federal Government puts into basic scientific research now is less than 1 percent of GDP. This is simply unacceptable. We have to look at basic scientific research as the seed corn for our economy. We need to invest in seed corn so we can harvest the rewards of that investment. This amendment would strengthen Congress's ongoing commitment to responsibly increasing investments in science, technology, and basic research and help ensure U.S. science and technology leadership in an increasingly competitive world. I urge my colleagues to vote yes on this amendment to show our commitment to investing in basic scientific research so we can continue to make the U.S. economy the strongest in the world. Amendment No. 639 Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the pending amendment be set aside and call up Peters amendment No. 639. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The clerk will report. The senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Michigan [Mr. Peters] proposes an amendment numbered 639. Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with. [[Page S1966]] The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to supporting trade and travel at ports of entry) At the end of title III, add the following: SEC. 3__. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO SUPPORTING TRADE AND TRAVEL AT PORTS OF ENTRY. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to supporting trade and travel at ports of entry, which may include construction at ports of entry or increased staffing at ports of entry, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 and the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, this amendment deals with another critical aspect of growing our economy. Certainly innovation and basic scientific research are the real drivers of long-term economic growth, but another very important aspect of that is international trade. The United States has the best workers in the world. We have the best entrepreneurs. We have the best innovators. We need to be in a position that we can continue to promote trade across the world. So I rise to offer an amendment that will support trade and travel through our U.S. ports of entry. As we all know, trade and travel drive economic development. In fact, they generate over $2 trillion in economic impact and support nearly 15 million jobs nationwide. However, it is unfortunate to say that many our busiest ports of entry are in need of modernization in order to safely and efficiently process travelers and goods. I speak about this with firsthand experience. In Michigan, our manufacturers and agricultural producers rely on efficient trade with Canada, which is our Nation's largest export market, our top customer, as well as our closest ally. However, existing infrastructure at our ports of entry often does not allow for the most efficient processing of trucks and cargo. We have two major crossings in Detroit--in Windsor, Canada, as well as Port Huron in Sarnia. Both of those trade areas need additional investment in their customs plazas to efficiently handle the trade between our two countries. Those investments are important investments in the future of this country and important in order to make sure we continue to expand trade and economic activity. I urge my colleagues in the Senate to support this amendment. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Maryland. Mr. CARDIN. First, Mr. President, I thank Senator Peters for the amendments he just offered. We had a hearing in the Small Business and Entrepreneurship Committee in regard to the patent issues. It is clearly a huge concern by the innovators, the small business, biotech, and high-tech firms. I thank the Senator very much for giving us an opportunity to act on that matter. Secondly, let me compliment the Senator on the research issues. I took to the floor yesterday and talked about the budgets of the National Institutes of Health and how critical that is, not only for their direct mission, which is to find answers to diseases, but also to provide the answers to building blocks for companies that do incredible work. I was at AstraZeneca in Frederick on Monday, where they do the biologics manufacturing, and they depend very much on the NIH budget. I thank the Senator for the amendments he offered. I know we will have a chance to act on them a bit later. Amendments Nos. 364, 367, 439, 440, 899, and 900 en bloc Mr. CARDIN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending amendment to call up the following amendments en bloc: Cardin amendments Nos. 364, 367, 439, 440, 899, and 900. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendments are called up en bloc. The clerk will report the amendments by number. The senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Maryland [Mr. Cardin] proposes amendments numbered 364, 367, 439, 440, 899, and 900 en bloc. The amendments are as follows: Amendment No. 364 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to improving oral health care for children and pregnant women under Medicaid) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO IMPROVING ORAL HEALTH CARE FOR CHILDREN AND PREGNANT WOMEN UNDER MEDICAID. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to initiatives that would improve oral health care for children and pregnant women under the Medicaid program by the amounts provided in such legislation for such purpose, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Amendment No. 367 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to providing a funding stream for a voter reinfranchisement initiative) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING PROVIDING A FUNDING STREAM FOR A VOTER REINFRANCHISEMENT INITIATIVE. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to providing a funding stream for a voter reinfranchisement initiative, which may include Bureau of Prisons notifications for released inmates of voting rights, notifications by United States attorneys of voting rights restrictions during plea agreements, and a Department of Justice report on the disproportionate impact of criminal disenfranchisement laws on minority populations, including data on disfranchisement rates by race and ethnicity, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Amendment No. 439 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to mandating a higher threshold that the Small Business Administration may guarantee, through the Surety Bond Guarantee Program, of the bonds that small businesses are required to obtain so that they may be able to better compete successfully for Federal Government contracts) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO INCREASING THE GUARANTEE THRESHOLD FOR THE SURETY BOND GUARANTEE PROGRAM. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to the Surety Bond Guarantee Program of the Small Business Administration, which may include exploring or raising the range for surety bonds, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Amendment No. 440 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to increasing the Family Funds limit of the Small Business Investment Company Program from $225,000,000 to $350,000,000, as passed by the Committee in 2013, which is zero subsidy and funded entirely through fees paid by investors and businesses) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO RAISING THE FAMILY OF FUNDS LIMIT OF THE SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENT COMPANY PROGRAM. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to the Small Business Investment Company Program of the Small Business Administration, which may include raising the Family of Funds limit of the Small Business Investment Company Program, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years [[Page S1967]] 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Amendment No. 899 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to the importance of financial literacy education to allow individuals to make informed and effective decisions with their financial resources) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO THE IMPORTANCE OF FINANCIAL LITERACY EDUCATION TO ALLOW INDIVIDUALS TO MAKE INFORMED AND EFFECTIVE DECISIONS WITH THEIR FINANCIAL RESOURCES. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to financial literacy education, which may include improvements to financial literacy education curricula in schools or which may improve the capacity of teachers to provide effective financial literacy education, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Amendment No. 900 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to the importance of civics and government education) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO THE IMPORTANCE OF CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT EDUCATION. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to civics and government education, which may include improving instruction in civics and government education or which may improve the capacity of teachers to provide effective civics and government education, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Mr. CARDIN. Mr. President, I wish to take a few minutes to talk a little bit about the amendments. I see Senator Portman on the floor, and I want to talk about amendment No. 899, which provides a deficit-neutral reserve fund for financial literacy. The two of us have been working for over a decade to increase the amount of savings for Americans, particularly retirement savings. We know that at early ages people need to understand the importance of saving. I offer this amendment, and Senator Portman has been very helpful to me in developing this amendment. I hope we will be able to act on this a little bit later. Amendment No. 364 deals with oral health, which establishes a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to improving oral health care for pregnant women and children under Medicaid. Let me point out to my colleagues something they may not be aware of; that is, the oral health of a pregnant woman very much impacts the baby. Therefore, it is important pregnant women have attention to their oral health care needs. It is transmitted to their babies. I urge my colleagues to help us in supporting this effort. We have taken major steps to improve pediatric dental care. This is another step we can take by dealing with pregnant women. With regard to amendment No. 367, which sets up the deficit-neutral reserve fund to provide for voter reenfranchisement initiatives, once again I think my colleagues would be surprised to learn there is an estimated 5.85 million citizens who cannot vote as a result of criminal convictions and nearly 4.4 million of those have already been released from prison. We have 4.4 million people living in our community whom we expect to be productive citizens, and yet they have been disenfranchised from voting. Nationwide 1 in 13 African Americans of voting age have lost their right to vote, a rate four times the national average. I think that should give us all concern. Latino citizens are also impacted because they are disproportionately overrepresented in the criminal justice system. States have vastly different approaches to people voting with criminal convictions. This patchwork of State laws has caused confusion among the election officials and the public, sometimes resulting in the disenfranchisement of even eligible voters. So this amendment would provide much needed information into the hands of citizens returning from incarceration. I thank my colleague Senator Paul for his work with regard to this issue. The two of us are trying to find a way we can bring forward together a workable way that can help many who have been released from our prisons to have the right to vote and participate in our community. With regard to two amendments I am offering, amendments Nos. 439 and 440, both are related to my work as the ranking Democrat on the Small Business and Entrepreneurship Committee. One would set up a deficit reserve fund to deal with surety bonds. We have increased the limit of the surety bond by the SBA for small companies, which is very important. This would help make that a more permanent increase. The small companies, if they try to get a surety bond, have to pledge just about every one of their assets in order to get it. The SBA program helps with that credit so they can get affordable surety bonds without jeopardizing their ability to raise capital. This amendment calls attention to that need where we can help small businesses in this country. I also set up the deficit-neutral reserve fund for family funds within the small business investment company. I thank Senator Risch. He has been working on this issue, and I have been working with him on this issue. I think we will hopefully be able to come together on legislation that will increase the opportunities under the small business investment companies, which is, again, an avenue for capital for small companies, the driving force for job innovation in our community. This amendment would allow us again to focus on that legislation, which we hope to move through the Small Business and Entrepreneurship Committee. Lastly, I have offered a deficit-neutral reserve fund, amendment No. 900, concerning civic education. I have taken the floor to point out that, yes, we need to stress areas of excellence in the sciences, et cetera, in education, but let's not forget civic education. The bedrock of our country's values are based upon our civic system, and it is important that young people have a full understanding of civic education. This amendment would give us an opportunity, in this Congress, to move forward in promoting civic education for our school system. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Ohio. Mr. PORTMAN. Mr. President, first, I applaud my colleague from Maryland for these constructive amendments. I am happy to be a cosponsor of the financial literacy amendment, which enables all of our constituents to be able to save and invest more, particularly with regard to retirement savings for retirees. The savings rate is low. Baby boomers are retiring without having lifetime savings, and financial literacy is critical for them. It is also critical for our young people to give them the opportunity to start saving early with the power of compound interest and to be able to make wise decisions for their future--whether it is for retirement, whether it is for health care or whether it is for other purposes. I have enjoyed working with my colleague Senator Cardin on this issue over the years, and I am proud to cosponsor his amendment. Amendment No. 681 I wish to call up another amendment this morning because it is very important for all of us in this Chamber because all of us are affected by it. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending amendment to call up my amendment No. 681. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. The clerk will report. The senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Ohio [Mr. Portman] proposes an amendment numbered 681. Mr. PORTMAN. I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. [[Page S1968]] The amendment is as follows: (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to demolishing vacant and abandoned homes) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO DEMOLISHING VACANT AND ABANDONED HOMES. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to increasing funding to improve the safety of neighborhoods in the United States, which may include demolishing blighted and abandoned homes, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Mr. PORTMAN. Mr. President, this is a commonsense amendment that calls for prioritizing the investments to tackle a very important issue for our cities and towns across our country, especially those hardest hit by the housing crisis. Main Streets, unfortunately, across our country have become littered with abandoned and blighted properties. In Ohio, there are about 80,000 of these abandoned home; hundreds of thousands, of course, across the country. I have had the opportunity to walk the streets in some of our cities in Ohio with some of our farsighted mayors who are tackling this issue. They are looking for a little bit of help. I have been in Warren, OH, Toledo, OH, and Lima, OH. When you walk these streets and talk to the people in the neighborhoods, they let you know how they are feeling about this. They don't like these blighted properties, in part, because it reduces the home values for the whole neighborhood. In fact, there is some evidence out there that these blighted properties can cost neighbors up to 80 percent of their home value. So one of the best things you can do for tumbling home values in America right now in struggling neighborhoods is demolish these abandoned properties. Second, and this is very important, they become magnets for crime, for arson, and for other dangerous activities that put neighbors at risk. It puts first responders at risk. There are stories around the country. Unfortunately, in my home State of Ohio, some first responders, firefighters, have gone to a fire in an abandoned structure, actually been injured, and in one case lost their life. This is something neighbors feel strongly about. When I was in Toledo, with the mayor of Toledo, observing one of the demolitions--it was a house that was about 10 feet away from a neighboring home. The mother was there with some of her young children, and she said: Thank goodness this is happening, because every night I go to sleep I put my head on my pillow praying that the house next door is not going to be subject to the arson attacks that have happened in the city of Toledo in these abandoned structures and praying that my children are not going to be injured by an arson next door to me. It is critical that we provide this help. Land banks in these areas have done a terrific job. Cleveland, in particular, I will hold up as doing a great job. But in States like mine and in other manufacturing States--Florida, Michigan, and other States around the country--these land banks are doing the best they can, but they need additional resources to demolish many of these properties in order to help struggling neighborhoods recover. This has been a bipartisan issue. We have been able to direct some funding there, including from the hardest hit funds. I want to continue to make progress because it is so important, again, for our neighborhoods and for the safety of those people who live in these neighborhoods that are affected most directly by abandoned homes. I hope we can get some votes from both sides of the aisle for this amendment today and make it clear to those local officials across our country, and to those neighbors in these communities, that we are going to do what we can to help provide the resources to be able to deal with these blighted and abandoned structures. I yield back the remainder of my time. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Florida. Amendment No. 944 Mr. NELSON. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending amendment to call up my amendment No. 944. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. The clerk will report. The senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Florida [Mr. Nelson], for himself and Mr. Schatz, proposes an amendment numbered 944. Mr. NELSON. I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: (Purpose: To create a point of order against legislation that would use tax dollars to censor publicly-funded climate science) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ____. POINT OF ORDER AGAINST USING TAX DOLLARS TO CENSOR PUBLICLY-FUNDED CLIMATE SCIENCE. It shall not be in order in the Senate to consider any bill, joint resolution, motion, amendment, amendment between the Houses, or conference report that would censor or otherwise limit the ability of any Federal employee or Federal agency to use in official documents or presentations terms common in scientific literature describing atmospheric, climate, weather, or oceanic processes, including terms relevant to changes in the global climate system or other risks to human health, the environment, and the economy related to air pollution. Mr. NELSON. Mr. President, what this amendment does is it supports the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution: freedom of speech, to prohibit censorship of Federal agencies and Federal employees from speaking in scientific terms about the oceans, the weather, the atmospheres, and the climate. You would think this is so common sense and so understood under our freedom of speech in our U.S. Constitution, but we have all read news reports at the State level, at the local level, and maybe even at the Federal level that, indeed, some folks are trying to muzzle scientists from speaking about the science involving the oceans, the atmosphere, climate, and the weather. I have the privilege of knowing something about the space program. When I hear people saying they don't want NASA to get involved in climate, well, NASA builds the satellites, NASA launches the satellites--but then NOAA, in the Department of Commerce, operates these weather satellites--other satellites that are taking measurements of the Earth to understand what is happening to our atmosphere, what is happening to our climate. When I start talking about the atmosphere, I can't help but flash back 29\1/2\ half years ago, looking at our planet out the window of a spacecraft and looking at the rim of the Earth and seeing the thin little film that is the atmosphere that sustains all of our life. There is a lot about it that we don't know. There is a lot about it that we, in fact, can measure scientifically. Yet for some reason, there is some commentary going on in America today that we want to muzzle our scientists. So this amendment is a simple, little, commonsense amendment that says you can't muzzle a Federal agency or a Federal employee, telling them they can't use their First Amendment right of freedom of speech to speak in scientific terms about the oceans, the weather, the atmosphere, and the climate. Imagine if we were going to muzzle researchers at the National Institutes of Health and censor them, saying they couldn't use medical terms such as asthma or cancer. What if that was off limits? There is not even a question that we would consider that. Last week, when we got into the matter of climate, a study suggested the massive Antarctic glacier is melting. The water from that melting glacier will impact global sea levels, potentially raising them by 10 feet. This week, researchers tell us the melting of Greenland's ice sheet is slowing the cyclical ocean current that drives the warm gulf stream, which comes right along the southeastern coast of my State and goes out through the middle [[Page S1969]] of the Atlantic and warms parts of Western Europe. To understand all of that, it is critical we have this information, which has the potential to impact all of us, no matter where we live. At times of seasonal high tide, the streets of Miami Beach are flooded. The mayor of Miami Beach campaigned paddling in a kayak on Alton Road, which is on the west side of the city of Miami Beach. He campaigned in a kayak at the time of seasonal high flood talking about what the city needed to do because of what NASA's scientists tell us. This is what NASA has testified to before the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation. This was not a forecast, they were not projections, but measurements of the rise of the sea level in south Florida over the course of the last 45 years--6 to 8 inches. Again, this was not a forecast but measurements. Do we want to muzzle that NASA scientist who testified before our committee and who, by the way, in this case is also a NASA astronaut? Do we want to muzzle him? Scientists simply must have the tools and the ability to tell us what they observe without limitation on the terms they can speak. So let us make clear that public science cannot be muzzled, that we won't support censorship, and that the taxpayers deserve an honest return on their investment. Mr. President, I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Maine. Amendments Nos. 346, 425, 426, 427, 442, and 810 En Bloc Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending amendment to call up my amendments Nos. 346, 425, 426, 427, 442, and 810 en bloc. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendments are called up en bloc. The clerk will report the amendments by number. The senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Maine [Ms. Collins] proposes amendments numbered 346, 425, 426, 427, 442, and 810 en bloc. The amendments are as follows: amendment no. 346 (Purpose: To modify the deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to promoting jobs in the United States through international trade to include the reauthorization or extension of trade adjustment assistance programs) On page 58, between lines 6 and 7, insert the following: (4) reauthorizing or extending trade adjustment assistance programs; amendment no. 425 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to improving retirement security) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO IMPROVING RETIREMENT SECURITY. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to improving retirement security by making it easier for small businesses to provide retirement plans for their employees by easing the administrative burden and by encouraging individuals to increase their savings by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. amendment no. 426 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to promoting economic growth and job creation for small businesses) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO PROMOTING ECONOMIC GROWTH AND JOB CREATION FOR SMALL BUSINESSES. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to promoting economic growth and job creation by making it easier for small businesses to plan their capital investments and reducing the uncertainty of taxation by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. amendment no. 427 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to investment in Alzheimer's disease research) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO INVESTMENT IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE RESEARCH. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to providing sufficient investment in Alzheimer's disease research, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. amendment no. 442 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund to restore a sensible definition of full-time employee for purposes of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO THE DEFINITION OF FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports related to the employer penalties under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Public Law 111-148), which may include changes to the definition of ``full time employee'' under that Act, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. amendment no. 810 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to increasing access to higher education for low-income Americans through the Federal Pell Grant program) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO INCREASING ACCESS TO HIGHER EDUCATION FOR LOW-INCOME AMERICANS THROUGH THE FEDERAL PELL GRANT PROGRAM. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to increasing access to higher education for low- income Americans through the Federal Pell Grant program, which may include allowing for 1 or more additional payment periods during the same award year, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, there will be very little time later today when we start voting for there to be full explanations of any of these amendments, which I think is very unfortunate. I do want to let my colleagues know about some of these amendments, and I am proud to say that, for the most part, the amendments I have filed and have now called up are bipartisan amendments that enjoy support on both sides of the aisle. For example, my amendment No. 427 would create a deficit-neutral reserve fund to support sufficient investment in Alzheimer's disease research to achieve the goal set by the national plan to address Alzheimer's disease--of having the means to prevent and effectively treat that disease by the year 2025. This amendment is cosponsored by Senator Moran, Senator Warner, Senator McCaskill, Senator Toomey, and Senator Donnelly. It is modeled very much on a bill that Senator Klobuchar and I have introduced to increase funding for Alzheimer's research. Just yesterday the Special Committee on Aging, which I lead along with Senator McCaskill, held an extensive hearing on Alzheimer's disease. We listened to preeminent researchers and individuals such as B. Smith, who unfortunately has been afflicted with early onset Alzheimer's. We listened to a caregiver and to a geriatric physician from Portland, ME. We had testimony [[Page S1970]] from the Mayo Clinic and testimony from the individual who heads the Institutes on Aging at the National Institutes of Health. To a person they pointed out that we are spending $226 billion a year caring for people with Alzheimer's, yet we are investing less than $600 million in this disease. The experts tell us that if our investment were at the level of $2 billion a year, we could explore the promising breakthroughs, the therapeutic targets that are needed to develop a means of prevention or better treatments or, ultimately, even a cure for Alzheimer's. Think of that. That $2 billion figure that is recommended by the expert advisory council, headed by Dr. Ron Peterson from the Mayo Clinic, is less than 1 percent of what we are spending caring for people with Alzheimer's. This disease is going to bankrupt the Medicare and the Medicaid Programs. We are currently spending $154 billion from those two programs for care of patients with Alzheimer's. That is one of the amendments I will be proposing. I see the Senator from Illinois is on the floor, and he has been another real leader in this area. Mr. DURBIN. Will the Senator from Maine yield for a question? Ms. COLLINS. Yes, I will be happy to yield. Mr. DURBIN. First, I want to thank her. I took a look at the 200 pending amendments on this budget resolution, and I think at least 10 relate to biomedical research from both sides of the aisle. This is clearly a bipartisan issue, and I thank my colleague for speaking out on this Alzheimer's issue, because these victims and advocates for research came this week to visit. It is stunning, just stunning, to think for a moment that we diagnose a person with Alzheimer's in America once every 68 seconds. When staff told me that, I couldn't believe it. I said, that has to be wrong, but it is right. It is an indication of the rapid development and growth of this terrible disease. So I thank my colleague for putting in perspective the fact we spend over $200 billion a year already on it, and that doesn't calculate all of the sacrifices of the caregivers in helping members of the family. It would seem to me that amidst all this budget debate there should be certain areas that are sacred, and I think biomedical research should be one of them. I thank my colleague for speaking up on Alzheimer's and I hope we can continue this dialog on behalf of NIH and the other agencies doing the research. Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, I want to thank my colleague and friend from Illinois for his comments. I happened to catch his speech yesterday. There was a sea of purple at our hearing--purple representing the Alzheimer's cause. I hope one day purple will represent Alzheimer's survivors. Wouldn't that be wonderful. This is a high priority for me. And I agree with the Senator from Illinois, I believe we should be increasing our investment in biomedical research, particularly for Alzheimer's, but in many other areas as well. The irony is that, ultimately, it will reduce not only human suffering but the cost of health care. The trajectory of Alzheimer's is such that if we do not develop better treatments, a means of prevention, or a cure, by the year 2050 the estimate is we are going to be spending more than $1 trillion taking care of people with Alzheimer's. For all of us in the baby boomer generation, the estimates are that by age 85, nearly 1 out of 2 of us will be afflicted with Alzheimer's, if the current trajectory is unchanged. Frankly, we are going to be spending our golden years either with Alzheimer's or taking care of someone with Alzheimer's. So this is a crisis, and it deserves our attention. I know Senator Moran also has a broader amendment on biomedical research, which I am proud to be a sponsor of, and this is an area where I hope we can come together in a bipartisan way, as my colleague has suggested. Mr. President, there are other amendments I would like to briefly discuss, seeing no one seeking the floor immediately, I don't believe. I will have my staff check on that. I am also going to offer an amendment to create a deficit-neutral reserve fund to increase access to higher education for low-income Americans through the Federal Pell grant program, including an innovative idea that I am very interested in, and that the chairman of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, Senator Lamar Alexander, is very interested in, which would allow for year-round Pell grants so that individuals could complete their education more quickly. Before I was elected to the Senate, I worked at a college in Maine-- Hudson University in Bangor, ME--and I saw firsthand the difference that Pell grants made in the lives of these students. Indeed, on my staff today there are highly talented individuals who were able to go to college solely because of the existence of Pell grants. Their families did not have experience with higher education and could not afford higher education. Pell grants made possible a bright future for these two women on my staff. This is the kind of opportunity that should unite us and that all of us should rally behind. Allowing year-round Pell grants would allow students to complete their education more quickly and join the workforce more quickly, which would help them financially as well. So I hope this is something we can pursue and that will be adopted as well. Another of my bipartisan amendments, No. 442, would establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund to change the definition of full-time employee under ObamaCare so a worker could work for more than 30 hours per week before the employer mandate penalty would be triggered. This, too, is bipartisan. Senator Donnelly, Senator Murkowski, Senator Manchin, and I have all been working on this. I hear from workers who are telling me their hours have been cut to 29 hours a week because of these penalties their employers simply cannot afford. It is not just in the for-profit hospitality industry, it is also in school systems, community colleges. So that is yet another of my amendments that I hope will enjoy support later today. Mr. President, I see a number of my colleagues on the floor, so I yield the floor. I suggest the absence of a quorum. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Will the Senator withhold her request? Ms. COLLINS. I am happy to withhold the request. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Hawaii. Amendments Nos. 877 and 878 En Bloc Ms. HIRONO. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending amendment in order to call up two of my amendments en bloc: Hirono amendments Nos. 877 and 878. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendments are called up en bloc. The clerk will report the amendments by number. The senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Hawaii [Ms. Hirono] proposes amendments numbered 877 and 878 en bloc. The amendments are as follows: AMENDMENT NO. 877 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to increasing college completion, which may include expanding Federal Pell Grant eligibility by allowing college students to use Pell Grants for more than 2 semesters in an academic year) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO INCREASING COLLEGE COMPLETION. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to increasing college completion, which may include expanding Federal Pell Grant eligibility by allowing college students to use Federal Pell Grants for more than 2 semesters in an academic year by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Amendment No. 878 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to investing in clean energy and preserving the environment) At the appropriate place, insert the following: [[Page S1971]] SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO INVESTING IN CLEAN ENERGY AND PRESERVING THE ENVIRONMENT. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to the reduction of the dependence of the United States on imported energy and the investment of receipts from domestic energy production, or energy efficiency and renewable energy development, or new or existing approaches to clean energy financing, or reducing greenhouse gas emissions levels, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Ms. HIRONO. Mr. President, before I briefly outline my amendments, I need to say a few words about the budget before us. The vision outlined in the budget before us is truly a disaster for the middle class and our economy. This budget lays out priorities that would undermine the gains that millions have made in getting affordable health insurance. It would undermine the ability of millions of students to get a college education. It puts tax cuts for the wealthy ahead of giving even a modest wage boost to those who are working hard to get ahead. This budget would give big corporations the opportunity to write their own rules while reducing the opportunity for the disabled veterans and children to live a decent life. Democrats have tried to improve this budget. We tried to eliminate the sequester in a fair way. Republicans said no. We tried to make sure our commitments to those on Social Security and Medicare remain ironclad. The Republicans said no. We tried to close a few loopholes to invest in our communities and create jobs. The Republicans said no. We tried to give students the opportunity to get an affordable college education. The Republicans said no. Given all these problems, I cannot support this budget. This budget favors the wealthy and special interests on the backs of middle-class families, seniors, and students in Hawaii and across the Nation, but I want to offer two ideas that I hope can improve this budget just a little bit. Amendment No. 877 would restore year-round Pell grants without increasing the deficit. Many college students juggle work and family schedules. To balance these commitments they need to attend college year-round. But Pell grants can only be used in two semesters, currently. My amendment would allow students to access Pell grants year-round, as they could from 2008 to 2011. This has been a bipartisan idea in the past. In fact, Senator Collins just now offered her similar amendment, amendment No. 810, that I also support. We should adopt this commonsense, bipartisan policy. I thank Senator Collins for her work in enabling students to complete their college education in a way that would allow them to do so without disruptions and additional costs. I look forward to working with her as we move forward on this bipartisan-supported idea. The second amendment I am offering, amendment No. 878, is very simple as well. The budget resolution allows for energy legislation, provided it is paid for only with cuts. It also lays out what I think is a very limited view of our Nation's energy priorities, particularly the heavy focus on fossil fuel development. My amendment would provide a broader, more forward-looking view of our Nation's energy priorities. My amendment allows for energy legislation that reduces our dependence on foreign oil, increases energy efficiency and renewable energy deployment and innovation, and addresses carbon pollution. Hawaii relies on imported oil for energy. The U.S. military recognizes that overreliance on fossil fuel is a national security risk. We have to recognize our future can't be based on fossil fuels. Hawaii and other States are leading the way in transitioning to a clean energy economy. My amendment would ensure that Congress's priorities are more in line with where Hawaii and our Nation are heading in the future. I hope my colleagues will join me in supporting these two amendments. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Colorado. Amendments Nos. 445, 448, and 449 En Bloc Mr. GARDNER. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending amendment to call up the following amendments en bloc: Gardner amendments Nos. 445, 448, and 449. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendments are called up en bloc. The clerk will report the amendments by number en bloc. The legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Colorado [Mr. Gardner] proposes amendments numbered 445, 448, and 449 en bloc. The amendments are as follows: Amendment No. 445 (Purpose: To prevent labor disputes at seaports in the United States from causing national economic disruptions and crippling businesses across the United States) At the end of title III, add the following: SEC. 3__. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND TO PREVENT ECONOMIC DISRUPTIONS AT SEAPORTS IN THE UNITED STATES. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to preventing economic disruptions at ports in the United States by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Amendment No. 448 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to encouraging expedited approval of liquefied natural gas export applications at the Department of Energy) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO ENCOURAGING EXPEDITED APPROVAL OF LIQUEFIED NATURAL GAS EXPORT APPLICATIONS BY DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to encouraging approval of liquefied natural gas export applications, without raising new revenue, by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. Amendment No. 449 (Purpose: To establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to supporting efficient resourcing for the Asia rebalance policy) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO SUPPORTING EFFICIENT RESOURCING FOR THE ASIA REBALANCE POLICY. The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to providing funding related to supporting efficient resourcing for the Asia rebalance policy by the amounts provided in such legislation for those purposes, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2020 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2016 through 2025. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Michigan. Amendment No. 523 Ms. STABENOW. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending amendment to call up the following amendment: Stabenow amendment No. 523. The PRESIDI