S.Amdt.4858 to H.R.2578 - 114th Congress (2015-2016) - Amendment Text
Amendment Text: S.Amdt.4858 — 114th Congress (2015-2016)

There is one version of the amendment.

Shown Here:

Amendment as Submitted (06/23/2016)

This Amendment appears on page S4555-4557 in the following article from the Congressional Record.

[Pages S4554-S4559] From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov] TEXT OF AMENDMENTS SA 4857. Mr. GRASSLEY (for himself and Mr. Isakson) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed to amendment SA 4685 proposed by Mr. Shelby (for himself and Ms. Mikulski) to the bill H.R. 2578, making appropriations for the Departments of Commerce and Justice, Science, and Related Agencies for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2016, and for other purposes; which was ordered to lie on the table; as follows: At the appropriate place in title V, insert the following: SEC. 5__. ADDITIONAL PROTECTIONS FOR OUR VETERANS. (a) In General.--Chapter 55 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec. 5511. Conditions for treatment of certain persons as adjudicated mentally incompetent for certain purposes ``(a) In General.--Beginning on the date of enactment of this section, in any case arising out of the administration by the Secretary of laws and benefits under this title, the Secretary shall not determine a person to be adjudicated as a mental defective under subsection (d)(4) or (g)(4) of section 922 of title 18 unless the Federal Government has met the burden of proving, by clear and convincing evidence, that the person is a danger to self or others. The process to determine whether such person is a danger to self or others, as set forth in this section, shall be separate from the Department's process to determine a person mentally incompetent for the purposes of assigning a fiduciary. A person that is subject to the process that may result in a finding that he or she is a danger to self or others shall be provided formal notice and a process by which to challenge the Federal Government's position, and shall be provided written notice of the effect of the ruling with respect to their ability to own and possess firearms and the protections granted under this section. ``(b) Medical Review.-- ``(1) In general.--The process by which a person may be determined to be a danger to self or others shall be initiated, with the exception of those persons described in subsection (i)(1), only after 2 health care professionals of the Department conclude, based on clear and convincing medical evidence, that the person is a danger to self or others. ``(2) Limitation.--If a conclusion by 2 health care professionals of the Department that a person is a danger to self or others is not made in accordance with paragraph (1) , the Federal Government may not begin the process to find that such person is a danger to self or others. ``(c) Process.--If a conclusion that a person is a danger to self or others is made under subsection (b)(1), not later than 30 days after that date on which such conclusion is made, the Department shall provide notice to the person, in writing, of the medical finding, the rights and protections afforded by this section, and the effect of a future administrative or judicial ruling with respect to the ability of the person to own and possess firearms. ``(d) Administrative Review.--(1) Except as provided in subsection (i), not later than 60 days after the date on which a person described in subsection (a) receives notice of the pendency of the Federal Government action to determine whether or not such person is a danger to self or others, such person may request a review by the board designed or established under paragraphs (2) and (3) or a court of competent jurisdiction to determine whether such person is a danger to self or others. If such person does not specify a forum, the Federal Government shall choose the forum. In such assessment, the board may consider the person's honorable discharge or decoration and other mitigating factors. ``(2) Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall designate or establish a board that shall, upon request of a person under subsection (a), make a determination after both parties have presented their case as to whether a person is a danger to self or others. If the board determines that the Federal Government failed to prove that the person is a danger to self or others, the person shall not be required to present his or her case. ``(3) The board shall consist of 3 former or current Federal judicial officers for a term of two years each and a majority decision shall control. ``(4) A determination by the board designated or established under paragraphs (2) or by a court of competent jurisdiction that a person does not meet the standard under subsection (f) shall preclude the Secretary from reporting such person to the National [[Page S4555]] Instant Criminal Background Check System for the purpose of prohibiting the acquisition, receipt, transfer, shipment, transportation, or possession of firearms or ammunition. ``(5) Not later than 90 days after the date on which the person or Federal Government chooses the administrative review process, the board shall make a determination. If the board does not make a determination within the required 90- day period, the Secretary shall not report the person to the National Instant Criminal Background Check System for the purpose of prohibiting the acquisition, receipt, transfer, shipment, transportation, or possession of firearms or ammunition. ``(e) Judicial Review.--Not later than 45 days after the date on which an assessment of a person under subsection (d) is made, such person or the Federal Government may file a petition for judicial review of the board's determination with a court of competent jurisdiction. Such court shall review the case de novo. ``(f) Burden of Proof.--The burden of proof for all actions arising under this section shall be on the Federal Government to prove, based on clear and convincing evidence, that a person is a danger to self or others and such burden shall be met before the person may be adjudicated as a mental defective under subsection (d)(4) or (g)(4) of section 922 of title 18. ``(g) Emergency Order.--(1) In the case of a person who the Secretary believes may be an imminent danger to self or others, the Secretary may file an emergency petition in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek a temporary order prohibiting the acquisition, receipt, transfer, shipment, transportation, or possession of firearms or ammunition, if the Secretary has already transmitted the notification letter described in subsection (c). The court in which such action is filed may, if the court finds probable cause exists that a person is an imminent danger to self or others, grant such petition. The Secretary shall submit to the court the information and documents, in unredacted form, that support the Secretary's position. ``(2) Except as provided in paragraph (3), an emergency order issued under this subsection shall expire on the earlier of-- ``(A) the date that is 90 days after the date on which the order is issued; or ``(B) the date on which a determination is made by the board established under subsection (d)(2) or a court of competent jurisdiction as to whether the person is a danger to self or others. ``(3) The court may, in its discretion, extend an order issued under this subsection for a reasonable amount of time. ``(h) Regulatory Changes.--Consistent with the requirements imposed under this section, the Secretary shall review all relevant regulations and revise such regulations as necessary. ``(i) Persons With Existing Records.--(1) For persons with existing records in the National Instant Criminal Background Check System database supplied by the Secretary as of the date of enactment of this section, not later than 90 days after such date of enactment, the Secretary shall provide written notice of the opportunity for administrative review or judicial review consistent with this section. ``(2) Each person described in paragraph (1) may, at any time, request administrative review under subsection (d) or judicial review by a court of competent jurisdiction to challenge the placement of the person in the National Instant Criminal Background Check System database consistent with the procedures set forth in this section. If such person does not specify a forum, the Federal Government shall choose the forum. In such assessment, the board may consider the person's honorable discharge or decoration and other mitigating factors. ``(3) In an action under this subsection, the failure of the Federal Government to prove, based on clear and convincing evidence, that a person is a danger to self or others consistent with the procedures in this section shall result in the removal of such person's information from the National Instant Criminal Background Check System database. ``(j) New and Material Evidence.--A person or the Federal government may reopen a finally adjudicated case by submitting new and material evidence consistent with this section. ``(k) Court of Competent Jurisdiction Defined.--In this section, the term `court of competent jurisdiction' means the district court of the United States for the district in which the person who is subject to the assessment or determination lives.''. (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 55 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``5511. Conditions for treatment of certain persons as adjudicated mentally incompetent for certain purposes.''. (c) Applicability.--Section 5511 of title 38, United States Code (as added by this section), shall apply, subject to the aforementioned exceptions, with respect to all persons who are determined by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to be mentally incompetent as of the date of enactment. After the date of enactment of this Act, and separate from a finding of mental incompetency, in any case arising out of the administration by the Secretary of laws and benefits under this title, for persons determined to be a danger to self or others, such determination shall be made consistent with section 5511 of title 38, United States Code (as added by this Act). (d) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section or the amendments made by this section shall be construed to require that the Secretary of Veterans Affairs first determine that a person is mentally incompetent for purposes of assigning a fiduciary before the Secretary may initiate the process to determine whether a person is a danger to self or others, consistent with section 5511 of title 38, United States Code, as added by this section. ______ SA 4858. Ms. COLLINS (for herself, Ms. Heitkamp, Ms. Ayotte, Mr. Heinrich, Mr. Flake, Mr. Kaine, Mr. Graham, Mr. King, Mr. Nelson, Mr. Manchin, Ms. Baldwin, Mr. Kirk, and Mr. Warner) submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by her to the bill H.R. 2578, making appropriations for the Departments of Commerce and Justice, Science, and Related Agencies for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2016, and for other purposes; as follows: At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. ___. DISCRETIONARY AUTHORITY TO DENY TRANSFERS OF FIREARMS, EXPLOSIVES, AND FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES LICENSES AND PERMITS TO TERRORISTS. (a) Authority.-- (1) In general.--On and after the date of enactment of this Act, in accordance with the procedures under this section, and without regard to section 842, 843, section 922(g) or (n), or section 923 of title 18, United States Code, the Attorney General may deny the transfer of a firearm, not later than 3 business days after a licensee under chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, contacts the national instant criminal background check system established under section 103 of Public Law 103-159 (18 U.S.C. 922 note), deny the transfer of an explosive, or deny the issuance of a Federal firearms or explosives license or permit, if either of the following are met: (A) No fly list.--The Attorney General determines that the transferee or applicant-- (i) based on the totality of the circumstances, represents a threat to public safety based on a reasonable suspicion that the transferee or applicant is engaged, or has been engaged, in conduct constituting, in preparation of, in aid of, or related to terrorism, or providing material support or resources therefor; and (ii) based on credible information, poses-- (I) a threat of committing an act of international terrorism or domestic terrorism with respect to an aircraft (including a threat of piracy, or a threat to airline, passenger, or civil aviation security); (II) a threat of committing an act of domestic terrorism with respect to the homeland; (III) a threat of committing an act of international terrorism against any United States Government facility abroad and associated or supporting personnel, including United States embassies, consulates and missions, military installations, United States ships, United States aircraft, or other auxiliary craft owned or leased by the United States Government; or (IV) a threat of engaging in or conducting a violent act of terrorism and is operationally capable of doing so. (B) Selectee list.--The Attorney General determines that the transferee or applicant-- (i) based on the totality of the circumstances, represents a threat to public safety based on a reasonable suspicion that the transferee or applicant is engaged, or has been engaged, in conduct constituting, in preparation of, in aid of, or related to terrorism, or providing material support or resources therefor; and (ii) based on credible information, is-- (I) a member of a terrorist organization (including a foreign terrorist organization designated pursuant to a statute or Executive Order); and (II) associated with terrorist activity, unless information exists that demonstrates that the application of secondary screening to such individual is not necessary. (2) NICS.--Solely for purposes of sections 922(t) (1), (2), (5), and (6) of title 18, United States Code, and section 103(g) of Public Law 103-159 (18 U.S.C. 922 note), a denial by the Attorney General under paragraph (1) shall be treated as equivalent to a determination that receipt of a firearm would violate subsection (g) or (n) of section 922 of title 18, United States Code. During the 3-business-day period beginning when a licensee under chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, contacts the national instant criminal background check system established under section 103 of Public Law 103-159 (18 U.S.C. 922 note), and notwithstanding section 922(t)(2) of title 18, United States Code, the Attorney General may delay assigning a unique identification number to a transfer of a firearm in order to determine whether the transferee or applicant meets the requirements under paragraph (1). (b) Notification of Prospective Firearms and Explosives Transfers to Known or Suspected Terrorist.--The Attorney General and Federal, State, and local law enforcement shall be immediately notified, as appropriate, of any request to transfer a firearm or explosive to a person who is, or with in the previous 5 years was, identified in the Terrorist Screening Database maintained by [[Page S4556]] the Terrorist Screening Center of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. (c) Review of Denial.-- (1) Remedial procedures and petition for review.-- (A) In general.--An individual who is a citizen or lawful permanent resident of the United States who seeks to challenge a denial by the Attorney General under subsection (a)(1) may-- (i) pursue the remedial procedures under section 103(g) of Public Law 103-159 (18 U.S.C. 922 note); or (ii) file a petition for review and any claims related to that petition in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia or in the district court of the United States for the judicial district in which the individual resides. (B) Exhaustion not required.--A petitioner is not required to exhaust the remedial procedures authorized under clause (i) of subparagraph (A) before filing a petition for review under clause (ii) of subparagraph (A). (C) Procedures.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Attorney General may promulgate regulations governing proceedings under subparagraph (A)(i) to prevent the unauthorized disclosure of information that reasonably could be expected to result in damage to national security or ongoing law enforcement operations. (2) Deadlines for filing.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), a petition for review under paragraph (1)(A)(ii), and any claims related to that petition, shall be filed not later than the earlier of-- (i) 1 year after the petitioner receives actual notice of the reason for the denial by the Attorney General; or (ii) 5 years after the petitioner receives notice of the denial by the Attorney General. (B) Exception.--The district court in which a petition for review is to be filed under paragraph (1)(A)(ii) may allow the petition to be filed after the deadline specified in subparagraph (A) only if there is good cause for not filing by that deadline. (3) Authority of district courts.--The district court in which a petition for review is filed under paragraph (1)(A)(ii)-- (A) shall have-- (i) jurisdiction to decide all relevant questions of law and fact; and (ii) exclusive jurisdiction to affirm, amend, modify, or set aside any part of the denial of the Attorney General that is the subject of the petition for review; and (B) may order the Attorney General to conduct further proceedings. (4) Exclusive jurisdiction.-- (A) In general.--No district court of the United States or court of appeals of the United States shall have jurisdiction to consider the lawfulness or constitutionality of this section except pursuant to a petition for review under subsection (c)(1)(A)(ii). (B) Noncitizens.--No district court of the United States or court of appeals of the United States shall have jurisdiction to hear any claim by an individual who is not a citizen or lawful permanent resident of the United States related to or arising out a denial by the Attorney General under subsection (a)(1). (d) Requirement for an Administrative Record and Procedures for Judicial Review.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the following procedures shall apply with respect to a petition for review filed in a district court under subsection (c)(1)(A)(ii): (1) The United States shall file with the court an administrative record, which shall consist of-- (A) the information the Attorney General relied upon in denying the transfer or application; (B) a summary of known material mitigation information; (C) any information the petitioner has submitted pursuant to any administrative process; and (D) any information determined relevant by the United States. (2)(A) The petitioner may file with the court any information determined relevant by the petitioner. (B) With leave of the court, the United States may supplement the administrative record with additional information. (3) All information in the administrative record that is not classified and is not otherwise privileged or subject to statutory protections shall be provided to the petitioner. (4) No discovery shall be permitted, unless the court shall determine extraordinary circumstances requires discovery in the interests of justice. (5) Sensitive security information contained in the administrative record may only be provided to petitioners counsel, pursuant to a protective order. (6)(A) The administrative record may include classified information, which the United States shall submit to the court in camera and ex parte. The court shall review all classified information in camera and ex parte unless it enters an order under paragraph (C). (B) The United States shall notify the petitioner if the administrative record filed under paragraph (1) contains classified information. (C) The court is authorized to determine the extent to which cleared counsel shall be permitted to access classified information necessary to protect the due process rights of a petitioner and enter an appropriate order. (D)(i) If the court enters an order under subparagraph (C) providing for the disclosure of information and the United States files with the court an affidavit of the Attorney General objecting to the disclosure, the court shall order that the information not be disclosed. (ii) If information is not disclosed under clause (i), the court shall enter such an order as the interests of justice require, which may include an order quashing the denial by the Attorney General under subsection (a)(1). (iii) An order under subparagraph (C) or clause (ii) of this subparagraph shall be subject to review by a court of appeals pursuant to section 1292 of title 28, United States Code. (iv) An order under clause (ii) shall be administratively stayed for 7 days. (v) The functions and duties of the Attorney General under this subparagraph-- (I) may be exercised by the Deputy Attorney General, the Associate Attorney General, or by an Assistant Attorney General designated by the Attorney General for such purpose; and (II) may not be delegated to any other official. (E) Any information disclosed under subparagraph (C) shall be subject to an appropriate protective order. (7)(A) The administrative record may include information obtained or derived from an order issued under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.), without regard to subsections (c), (e), (f), (g), and (h) of section 106 (50 U.S.C. 1806), subsections (d), (f), (g), (h), and (i) of section 305 (50 U.S.C. 1825), subsections (c), (e), (f), (g), and (h) of section 405 (50 U.S.C. 1845), and section 706 (50 U.S.C. 1881e) of that Act. If the United States intends to use such information against an aggrieved person (as defined in section 101, 301, or 401 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 U.S.C. 1801, 1821, and 1841)), it shall provide in camera and ex parte notice to the court concerning such use. (B) If the court receives a notice under subparagraph (A), the court shall review, in camera and ex parte, the order described in that subparagraph and any other materials that may be submitted by the United States. (C) If the court determines that the order described in subparagraph (A) was not lawfully authorized, or the information was not obtained in conformity with the order, it shall exclude such information from consideration as part of the administrative record. (8) Any classified information, sensitive security information, law enforcement sensitive information, or information that is otherwise privileged or subject to statutory protections, that is part of the administrative record, or cited by the court or the parties, shall be treated by the court and the parties consistent with the provisions of this subsection, and shall be sealed and preserved in the records of the court to be made available in the event of further proceedings. In no event shall such information be released as part of the public record. (9) The court shall award reasonable attorney fees to a petitioner who is a prevailing party in an action under this section. (10) After the expiration of the time to seek further review, or the conclusion of further proceedings, the court shall return the administrative record, including any and all copies, to the United States. All privileged information or other information in the possession of counsel for the petitioner that was provided by the United States under a protective order shall be returned to the United States, or the counsel for the petitioner shall certify its destruction, including any and all copies. (e) Scope of Review.--The district court shall quash any denial by the Attorney General under subsection (a)(1), unless the United States demonstrates, based on the administrative record, on a de novo review of fact and law-- (1) that the transferee or applicant-- (A) based on the totality of the circumstances, represents a threat to public safety based on a reasonable suspicion that the transferee or applicant is engaged, or has been engaged, in conduct constituting, in preparation of, in aid of, or related to terrorism, or providing material support or resources therefor; and (B) based on credible information, poses-- (i) a threat of committing an act of international terrorism or domestic terrorism with respect to an aircraft (including a threat of piracy, or a threat to airline, passenger, or civil aviation security); (ii) a threat of committing an act of domestic terrorism with respect to the homeland; (iii) a threat of committing an act of international terrorism against any United States Government facility abroad and associated or supporting personnel, including United States embassies, consulates and missions, military installations, United States ships, United States aircraft, or other auxiliary craft owned or leased by the United States Government; or (iv) a threat of engaging in or conducting a violent act of terrorism and is operationally capable of doing so; or (2) that the transferee or applicant-- (A) based on the totality of the circumstances, represents a threat to public safety based on a reasonable suspicion that the transferee or applicant is engaged, or has been engaged, in conduct constituting, in preparation of, in aid of, or related to terrorism, or providing material support or resources therefor; and (B) based on credible information-- [[Page S4557]] (i) is a member of a terrorist organization (including a foreign terrorist organization designated pursuant to a statute or Executive Order; and (ii) is associated with terrorist activity, unless information exists that demonstrates that the application of secondary screening to such individual is not necessary. (f) Effect of Quashing.--If the district court quashes a denial by the Attorney General under subsection (e), notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Attorney General shall-- (1) for a denial of the transfer of a firearm, cause a unique identifier to issue pursuant to section 922(t)(2) of title 18, United States Code, not later than 3 days after the issuance of the order under subsection (e); and (2) for a denial of a license or permit, expeditiously issue a license or permit under chapter 40 or 44 of title 18, United States Code, as applicable. (g) Review of Decision of District Court.--A final decision of a district court under this section shall be subject to review by a court of appeals in accordance with section 1291 of title 28, United States Code. (h) Exclusive Remedies.--The remedial procedures and a petition for review authorized under subsection (c)(1)(A) shall be the sole and exclusive remedies for a claim by an individual who challenges a denial under subsection (a)(1). (i) Expedited Consideration.-- (1) Courts.--Not later than 14 days after the date on which a petition is filed challenging a denial under subsection (a)(1), a district court shall determine whether to quash the denial, unless the petitioner consents to a longer period. (2) Of quashing.--If the district court quashes a denial by the Attorney General under subsection (e), a petitioner may submit the order quashing the denial to the Department of Homeland Security for expedited review, as appropriate. (j) Transparency.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and quarterly thereafter-- (1) the Attorney General shall submit to the Committee on the Judiciary and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate and the Committee on the Judiciary and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives a report providing-- (A) the number of individuals denied a firearm or explosives transfer or a license or permit under subsection (a)(1) during the reporting period; (B) the number of petitions for review filed under subsection (c)(1)(A)(ii); and (C) the number of instances in which a district court quashed a denial by the Attorney General under subsection (e); and (2) the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, the Select Committee on Intelligence, and the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate and the Committee on Homeland Security, the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives a report providing-- (A) the number individuals-- (i) with respect to whom a district court quashed a denial by the Attorney General under subsection (e); and (ii) who submitted the order quashing the denial to the Department of Homeland Security under subsection (i)(2); and (B) a description of the actions taken and final determinations made by the Department of Homeland Security with regard to submissions described in subparagraph (A)(ii) respecting the status of individuals on the No Fly List or Selectee List, including the length of time taken to reach a final determination. (k) Definitions.--In this section: (1) Classified information.--The term ``classified information'' has the meaning given that term in section 1(a) of the Classified Information Procedures Act (18 U.S.C. App.). (2) Domestic terrorism.--The term ``domestic terrorism'' has the meaning given that term in section 2331(5) of title 18, United States Code. (3) International terrorism.--The term ``international terrorism'' has the meaning given that term in section 2331(1) of title 18, United States Code. (4) Military installation.--The term ``military installation'' has the meaning given that term in section 2801(c)(4) of title 10, United States Code. (5) National security.--The term ``national security'' has the meaning given that term in section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1189). (6) Sensitive security information.--The term ``sensitive security information'' has the meaning given that term by sections 114(r) and 40119 of title 49, United States Code, and the regulations and orders issued pursuant to those sections. (7) Terrorist activity.--The term ``terrorist activity'' has the meaning given that term in section 212(a)(3)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(a)(3)(B)). (l) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to-- (1) except as set forth in this section, authorize the Attorney General to modify the length of period before a firearm may be transferred under section 922(t) of title 18, United States Code; or (2) apply to any claim other than a claim challenging the denial of a firearm, explosive, or issuance of a firearm or explosives permit or license by the Attorney General. ______ SA 4859. Mr. McCONNELL (for Mr. Johnson (for himself, Mr. Lankford, Mr. Cornyn, and Mr. Rubio)) proposed an amendment to amendment SA 4858 submitted by Ms. Collins (for herself, Ms. Heitkamp, Ms. Ayotte, Mr. Heinrich, Mr. Flake, Mr. Kaine, Mr. Graham, Mr. King, Mr. Nelson, Mr. Manchin, Ms. Baldwin, Mr. Kirk, and Mr. Warner) to the bill H.R. 2578, making appropriations for the Departments of Commerce and Justice, Science, and Related Agencies for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2016, and for other purposes; as follows: In lieu of the matter to be inserted, insert the following: SEC. ___. DISCRETIONARY AUTHORITY TO DELAY OR DENY TRANSFERS OF FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES AND ISSUANCE OF FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES LICENSES AND PERMITS TO TERRORISTS. (a) Authority.-- (1) In general.--On and after the date of enactment of this Act, in accordance with the procedures under this section, and without regard to section 842, 843, section 922(g) or (n), or section 923 of title 18, United States Code, the Attorney General may delay or deny the transfer of a firearm, not later than 3 business days after a licensee under chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, contacts the national instant criminal background check system established under section 103 of Public Law 103-159 (18 U.S.C. 922 note), delay or deny the transfer of an explosive, or delay or deny the issuance of a Federal firearms or explosives license or permit, if-- (A) the transferee or applicant is appropriately included on the No Fly or Selectee List; and (B) the Attorney General determines-- (i) there is a reasonable basis to believe, based on specific and articulable information and credible evidence, that the transferee or applicant is engaged, or has been engaged, in conduct constituting, in preparation of, in aid of, or related to terrorism, or providing material support or resources therefor; or (ii) the transferee or applicant poses a credible threat of-- (I) committing an act of international terrorism or domestic terrorism with respect to an aircraft (including a threat of piracy, or a threat to airline, passenger, or civil aviation security); (II) committing an act of domestic terrorism with respect to the homeland; (III) committing an act of international terrorism against any United States Government facility abroad and associated or supporting personnel, including United States embassies, consulates and missions, military installations, United States ships, United States aircraft, or other auxiliary craft owned or leased by the United States Government; or (IV) engaging in or conducting a violent act of terrorism and is operationally capable of doing so. (2) NICS.--Solely for purposes of sections 922(t) (1), (2), (5), and (6) of title 18, United States Code, and section 103(g) of Public Law 103-159 (18 U.S.C. 922 note), a denial by the Attorney General under paragraph (1) shall be treated as equivalent to a determination that receipt of a firearm would violate subsection (g) or (n) of section 922 of title 18, United States Code. During the 3-business-day period beginning when a licensee under chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, contacts the national instant criminal background check system established under section 103 of Public Law 103-159 (18 U.S.C. 922 note), and notwithstanding section 922(t)(2) of title 18, United States Code, the Attorney General may delay assigning a unique identification number to a transfer of a firearm in order to determine whether the transferee or applicant meets the requirements under paragraph (1). (3) Delay or denial.--A delay or denial under paragraph (1) shall occur according to the process set forth in subsection (c). (b) Notification of Prospective Firearm Transfers to Known or Suspected Terrorist.--The Attorney General and Federal, State, and local law enforcement shall be immediately notified, as appropriate, of any request to transfer a firearm or explosive to a person who is, or with in the previous 5 years was, identified in the Terrorist Screening Database maintained by the Terrorist Screening Center of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, if the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation annually reviews and certifies the identities of the known or suspected terrorists and the appropriateness of such designation. (c) Process for Delay or Denying a Transfer of a Firearm or Explosive or Issuance of License or Permit.-- (1) Emergency petition.-- (A) In general.--Under the authority under subsection (a), except as provided in paragraph (9) the Attorney General may delay the transfer of a firearm or explosive, or the issuance of a license or permit, and file an emergency petition in a court of competent jurisdiction within 3 business days, to deny such transfer or issuance. The transfer of such firearm or explosive shall be delayed during the pendency of a petition under this subsection. (B) Expedited review.--A petition under subparagraph (A) and subsequent hearing [[Page S4558]] shall receive the highest possible priority on the docket of the court and be subject to the Classified Information Procedures Act (18 U.S.C. App.). A hearing shall occur not later than 7 business days after the petition is filed (including any extension granted under paragraph (5)), and a decision by the court shall be issued not later than 3 business days after the hearing. (2) Hearing.-- (A) In general.--The prospective transferee or applicant shall receive notice of the hearing and an opportunity to participate with the assistance of counsel. (B) Standard.--The court shall authorize the Attorney General to deny a transfer or issuance if the court finds-- (i) that the prospective transferee or applicant is appropriately included on the No Fly or Selectee List; and (ii) that-- (I) there is a reasonable basis to believe, based on specific and articulable information and credible evidence, that the prospective transferee or applicant is engaged, or has been engaged, in conduct constituting, in preparation of, in aid of, or related to terrorism, or providing material support or resources for terrorism; or (II) the prospective transferee or applicant poses a credible threat of-- (aa) committing an act of international terrorism or domestic terrorism with respect to an aircraft (including a threat of piracy, or a threat to airline, passenger, or civil aviation security); (bb) committing an act of domestic terrorism with respect to the homeland; (cc) committing an act of international terrorism against any United States Government facility abroad and associated or supporting personnel, including United States embassies, consulates and missions, military installations, United States ships, United States aircraft, or other auxiliary craft owned or leased by the United States Government; or (dd) engaging in or conducting a violent act of terrorism and is operationally capable of doing so. (3) Denial of petition.--If a petition under paragraph (1)(A) is denied, the Attorney General shall-- (A) for a transfer of a firearm or explosive, cause a unique identifier to issue pursuant to section 922(t)(2) of title 18, United States Code, not later than 3 days after the denial; and (B) for the issuance of a license or permit, expeditiously issue the license or permit under chapter 40 or 44 of title 18, United States Code, as applicable. (4) Court costs and attorney's fees.--If a petition under paragraph (1)(A) is denied, the government shall be responsible for all reasonable costs and attorney's fees. (5) Request for extension.-- (A) In general.--The Attorney General may request from the court an extension for filing a petition under paragraph (1)(A) of not more than 10 additional business days. (B) Grant of extension.--A court shall grant an extension if the Attorney General makes a preliminary showing to the court-- (i) that the prospective transferee or applicant is appropriately included on the No Fly or Selectee List; and (ii) that-- (I) there is reasonable articulable suspicion and credible evidence that the prospective transferee or applicant is engaged, or has been engaged, in conduct constituting, in preparation of, in aid of, or related to terrorism, or providing material support or resources for terrorism; or (II) the prospective transferee or applicant poses a credible threat of-- (aa) committing an act of international terrorism or domestic terrorism with respect to an aircraft (including a threat of piracy, or a threat to airline, passenger, or civil aviation security); (bb) committing an act of domestic terrorism with respect to the homeland; (cc) committing an act of international terrorism against any United States Government facility abroad and associated or supporting personnel, including United States embassies, consulates and missions, military installations, United States ships, United States aircraft, or other auxiliary craft owned or leased by the United States Government; or (dd) engaging in or conducting a violent act of terrorism and is operationally capable of doing so. (C) Ex parte proceeding.--A preliminary showing under subparagraph (B) may occur in an ex parte proceeding. (6) Opportunity to appeal.--If the court rules in favor of a denial of a transfer or issuance, the prospective transferee or applicant shall be provided the opportunity to file a petition for review and any claims related to that petition in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit or in the court of appeals of the United States for the judicial circuit in which the individual resides. (7) Detention or arrest.--The Attorney General may detain or arrest a prospective transferee or applicant for whom a petition under paragraph (1)(A) has been filed if probable cause exists to believe that the prospective transferee or applicant is engaged, or has been engaged, in conduct constituting, in preparation of, in aid of, or related to terrorism, or providing material support or resources for terrorism. (8) Authority of courts of appeals.--The court of appeals in which a petition for review is filed under paragraph (1)(A)-- (A) shall have-- (i) jurisdiction to decide all relevant questions of law and fact; and (ii) exclusive jurisdiction to authorize, modify, set aside, or deny any part of a denial requested by the Attorney General in a petition under paragraph (1)(A); and (B) may order the Attorney General to conduct further proceedings. (9) Noncitizens.--For an individual who is not a citizen or lawful permanent resident of the United States-- (A) the Attorney General may delay or deny a transfer or issuance under subsection (a)(1) without regard to the procedures under paragraphs (1) through (9); and (B) no district court of the United States or court of appeals of the United States shall have jurisdiction to hear any claim by such an individual related to or arising out such a denial by the Attorney General. (d) Requirement for an Administrative Record and Procedures for Judicial Review.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the following procedures shall apply with respect to a petition filed in a court of appeals under subsection (c): (1) The United States shall file with the court an administrative record, which shall consist of-- (A) the information the Attorney General relied upon in delaying the transfer or application; (B) any information the prospective transferee or applicant has submitted pursuant to any administrative process; (C) any information determined relevant by the United States; and (D) any information that is exculpatory. (2)(A) The prospective transferee or applicant may file with the court any information determined relevant by the prospective transferee or applicant. (B) With leave of the court, the United States may supplement the administrative record with additional information. (3) All information in the administrative record that is not classified and is not otherwise privileged or subject to statutory protections shall be provided to the prospective transferee or applicant. (4) No discovery shall be permitted, unless the court shall determine extraordinary circumstances requires discovery in the interests of justice. (5) Sensitive security information contained in the administrative record may only be provided pursuant to a protective order. (6)(A) The administrative record may include classified information, which the United States shall submit to the court in camera and ex parte. (B) The United States shall notify the prospective transferee or applicant if the administrative record filed under paragraph (1) contains classified information. (C) The court may enter an order, after notice and a hearing, allowing disclosure to the prospective transferee or applicant, counsel for the prospective transferee or applicant, or both, of-- (i) an unclassified summary of some or all classified information in the administrative record; (ii) a statement admitting relevant facts that some or all classified information in the administrative record would tend to prove; (iii) some or all classified information, if counsel for the prospective transferee or applicant possess the appropriate security clearance; or (iv) any combination thereof. (D)(i) If the court enters an order under subparagraph (C) providing for the disclosure of classified information and the United States files with the court an affidavit of the Attorney General objecting to the disclosure, the court shall order that the classified information not be disclosed. (ii) If classified information is not disclosed under clause (i), the court shall enter such an order as the interests of justice require, which may include an order denying the petition by the Attorney General under subsection (c)(1)(A). (iii) An order under subparagraph (C) or clause (ii) of this subparagraph shall be subject to review pursuant to section 1254 of title 28, United States Code. (iv) An order under clause (ii) shall be administratively stayed for 7 days. (v) The functions and duties of the Attorney General under this subparagraph-- (I) may be exercised by the Deputy Attorney General, the Associate Attorney General, or by an Assistant Attorney General designated by the Attorney General for such purpose; and (II) may not be delegated to any other official. (E) Any information disclosed under subparagraph (C) shall be subject to an appropriate protective order. (7) Any classified information, sensitive security information, law enforcement sensitive information, or information that is otherwise privileged or subject to statutory protections, that is part of the administrative record, or cited by the court or the parties, shall be treated by the court and the parties consistent with the provisions of this subsection, and shall be sealed and preserved in the records of the court to be made available in the event of further proceedings. In no event shall such information be released as part of the public record. (8) The court shall award reasonable attorney fees and costs to a prospective transferee or applicant who is a prevailing party in an action under this section. [[Page S4559]] (9) After the expiration of the time to seek further review, or the conclusion of further proceedings, the court shall return the administrative record, including any and all copies, to the United States. All privileged information or other information in the possession of counsel for the prospective transferee or applicant that was provided by the United States under a protective order shall be returned to the United States, or the counsel for the prospective transferee or applicant shall certify its destruction, including any and all copies. (e) Supreme Court Review.--A decision by a court of appeals under this section may be reviewed by the Supreme Court under section 1254 of title 28, United States Code. (f) Exclusive Remedy.--The judicial review of a petition filed by the Attorney General under subsection (c) shall be the sole and exclusive remedy for a claim by an individual with respect to the denial requested under the petition. (g) Expedited Consideration.-- (1) Courts.--Not later than 14 days after the date on which a petition is filed under subsection (c)(1)(A) seeking a denial, a court of appeals shall determine whether to authorize the denial, unless the prospective transferee or applicant consents to a longer period. (2) Of denial.--If the court of appeals denies a petition by the Attorney General under subsection (c)(1)(A), a prospective transferee or applicant may submit the order denying the petition to the Department of Homeland Security for expedited review, as appropriate. (h) Transparency.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and quarterly thereafter-- (1) the Attorney General shall submit to the Committee on the Judiciary and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate and the Committee on the Judiciary and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives a report providing, for the reporting period-- (A) the number of petitions filed under subsection (c)(1)(A); (B) the number of individuals denied a firearm or explosive transfer under an order granting such a petition; and (C) the number of instances in which a court of appeals denied such a petition; and (2) the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate and the Committee on Homeland Security and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives a report providing-- (A) the number individuals-- (i) with respect to whom a court of appeals denied a petition by the Attorney General under subsection (c)(1)(A); and (ii) who submitted the order denying the petition to the Department of Homeland Security under subsection (g)(2); and (B) a description of the actions taken and final determinations made by the Department of Homeland Security with regard to submissions described in subparagraph (A)(ii) respecting the status of individuals on the No Fly List or Selectee List, including the length of time taken to reach a final determination. (i) Definitions.--In this section: (1) Classified information.--The term ``classified information'' has the meaning given that term in section 1(a) of the Classified Information Procedures Act (18 U.S.C. App.). (2) Domestic terrorism.--The term ``domestic terrorism'' has the meaning given that term in section 2331(5) of title 18, United States Code. (3) International terrorism.--The term ``international terrorism'' has the meaning given that term in section 2331(1) of title 18, United States Code. (4) Military installation.--The term ``military installation'' has the meaning given that term in section 2801(c)(4) of title 10, United States Code. (5) National security.--The term ``national security'' has the meaning given that term in section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1189). (6) Sensitive security information.--The term ``sensitive security information'' has the meaning given that term by sections 114(r) and 40119 of title 49, United States Code, and the regulations and orders issued pursuant to those sections. (j) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Attorney General to modify the length of period before a firearm may be transferred under section 922(t) of title 18, United States Code. ______ SA 4860. Mr. McCONNELL proposed an amendment to amendment SA 4859 proposed by Mr. McConnell (for Mr. Johnson (for himself, Mr. Lankford, Mr. Cornyn, and Mr. Rubio)) to the amendment SA 4858 submitted by Ms. Collins (for herself, Ms. Heitkamp, Ms. Ayotte, Mr. Heinrich, Mr. Flake, Mr. Kaine, Mr. Graham, Mr. King, Mr. Nelson, Mr. Manchin, Ms. Baldwin, Mr. Kirk, and Mr. Warner) to the bill H.R. 2578, making appropriations for the Departments of Commerce and Justice, Science, and Related Agencies for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2016, and for other purposes; as follows: At the end, add the following: This Act shall take effect 1 day after the date of enactment. ______ SA 4861. Mr. ROUNDS submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the bill H.R. 5293, making appropriations for the Department of Defense for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2017, and for other purposes; which was ordered to lie on the table; as follows: At the appropriate place, insert the following: Sec. __. None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act for the Department of Defense may be used to enter into a contract with any offeror or any of its principals if the offeror certifies, pursuant to the Federal Acquisition Regulation, that the offeror or any of its principals-- (1) within a three-year period preceding the offer has been convicted of or had a civil judgment rendered against it for-- (A) commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with obtaining, attempting to obtain, or performing a public (Federal, State, or local) contract or subcontract; (B) violation of Federal or State antitrust laws relating to the submission of offers; or (C) commission of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, making false statements, tax evasion, violating Federal criminal tax laws, or receiving stolen property; (2) is under indictment for, or otherwise criminally or civilly charged by a governmental entity with, commission of any of the offenses enumerated in paragraph (1); or (3) within a three-year period preceding the offer, has been notified of any delinquent Federal taxes in an amount that exceeds $3,000 for which the liability remains unsatisfied. ______ SA 4862. Ms. HIRONO submitted an amendment intended to be proposed to amendment SA 4685 proposed by Mr. Shelby (for himself and Ms. Mikulski) to the bill H.R. 2578, making appropriations for the Departments of Commerce and Justice, Science, and Related Agencies for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2016, and for other purposes; which was ordered to lie on the table; as follows: At the appropriate place, insert the following: Sec. ____. Of amounts provided by this Act or by any prior appropriations Act that remain available for obligation, for necessary expenses of the programs of the Bureau of Justice Statistics of the Department of Justice, under section 302(c) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3732(c)), up to $1,000,000 shall be available to enter into cooperative agreements with appropriate entities to disaggregate local, State and Federal criminal justice statistics to the extent possible by ethnicity and the racial group categories in the decennial census. ______ SA 4863. Mr. THUNE submitted an amendment intended to be proposed to amendment SA 4685 proposed by Mr. Shelby (for himself and Ms. Mikulski) to the bill H.R. 2578, making appropriations for the Departments of Commerce and Justice, Science, and Related Agencies for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2016, and for other purposes; which was ordered to lie on the table; as follows: At the appropriate place, insert the following: Sec. __. The Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration shall ensure that the Administration responds in a timely manner to requests from the Chair or Ranking Member of a Congressional Committee or their staff for responses to questions for the record, requests for technical assistance, or views on legislation. ______ SA 4864. Mr. McCONNELL (for Mr. Nelson) proposed an amendment to the concurrent resolution S. Con. Res. 39, honoring the members of the United States Air Force who were casualties of the June 25, 1996, terrorist bombing of the United States Sector Khobar Towers military housing complex on Dhahran Air Base; as follows: In the third whereas clause, strike ``Staff Sergeant Daniel B. Cafourek'' and insert ``Technical Sergeant Daniel B. Cafourek''. In the third whereas clause, strike ``Fenning'' and insert ``Fennig''. ____________________