S.Amdt.667 to S.Amdt.267 to H.R.1628 - 115th Congress (2017-2018) - Amendment Text
Amendment Text: S.Amdt.667 — 115th Congress (2017-2018)

There are 2 versions of the amendment: Amendment as Proposed (07/27/2017) Amendment as Submitted (07/27/2017)

Shown Here:

Amendment as Proposed (07/27/2017)

This Amendment appears on page S4399-4400 in the following article from the Congressional Record.

[Congressional Record Volume 163, Number 127 (Thursday, July 27, 2017)] [Pages S4389-S4415] From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov] AMERICAN HEALTH CARE ACT OF 2017--Continued The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Young). The Senator from Wyoming. Amendment No. 502 to Amendment No. 267 Mr. ENZI. Mr. President, I call up amendment No. 502, the Heller amendment. [[Page S4390]] The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will report. The senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Wyoming [Mr. Enzi] for Mr. Heller, proposes an amendment numbered 502 to amendment No. 267. Mr. ENZI. I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: (Purpose: To strike the sunset of the repeal of the tax on employee health insurance premiums and health plan benefits) Strike subsection (c) of section 109. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Missouri. Mr. BLUNT. Mr. President, we are talking today, obviously, as we move into the final hours of this debate, about the two mandates in the original Affordable Care Act, the individual mandate and the employee mandate--certainly, the individual mandate but both of these mandates. First, I want to talk about the individual mandate. It was unprecedented in Federal law. The idea that the Federal Government could tell somebody they had to buy a product, tell them what that product had to look like, and have very little input on the price or competition is just something the Federal Government had never done before. They didn't just set guidelines, they didn't even just set subsidies but actually a requirement to buy a product or pay a penalty. Now, when this case got to the Supreme Court, the government was still arguing it was a penalty and there was nothing wrong with that penalty, until apparently they figured out the Court wanted to look at this as a tax because a penalty wouldn't have been constitutional. Now, we all know this is a penalty. The Supreme Court can call it a tax, the Obama lawyers could at that moment decide, well, even though we set up the law as a penalty, we really think it must be a tax, and that 5-to-4 decision decided that because it was a tax, not a penalty, that part of the law was upheld. Nobody ever thought this was a tax before that day, nobody has ever seriously thought it was a tax after that day. It was a penalty you pay if you decide you don't want to do something the Federal Government tells you that you have to do. There is no constitutional basis that gives the government the authority to make that kind of decision, and families and individuals have been hurt by that decision. There is only one place to go on the individual market, the exchange. Remember that? We have almost forgotten the total disaster of the exchange. States tried to operate exchanges, almost none of them worked. States spent millions and tens of millions, and I think a time or two maybe even more than that to put an exchange together. It didn't work. That part of the law didn't work so you wind up mostly with one big exchange. Even with one big exchange, you have to think about whether the policies available in the county you live in--most of the debate over the past several years, a lot of the debate has been we ought to expand the marketplace, we ought to buy across State lines, we should have more choices and more places to go. Somehow we managed to define in this law, the law that is currently the law of the land, a marketplace that is about as small as it could possibly be. In our State, in Missouri, we have counties that have a million people. We have a county that has a million people. We have a county that has 4,000 people. The county that has 4,000 people has its own buying unit when it comes to looking at how the marketplace is set up. It just doesn't make sense. The deductibles are so high, the choice is so low. Some defenders of the law will say that costs will go up if the amendment passes. That is possible, but we know the costs will go up if the amendment fails. We know the costs will go up if we stay where we are. Costs, since 2013, have increased an average of over 100 percent in the country--105 percent. This was the law that was going to reduce family costs by $2,500 a year. Families are generally relieved if their insurance didn't increase by $2,500 a year, let alone fail to reduce by $2,100 a year. So a 105-percent increase in 4 years--in Missouri, where I live, 145 percent is the increase. I think at least three States have had an increase of more than 200 percent, and even with an increase of more than 200 percent, nobody wants to sell insurance there. Not only is there no competition, I think about one-third of the counties in America this year don't have more than one company that will even offer a product. Some have had no companies that would offer a product, and 40 percent is the estimate for next year. There are places where no more than one company will offer a product. What kind of competitive marketplace is that? The government, with the mandate, says you have to buy a product and you have to buy it in that marketplace and you have to buy it from that one company at whatever rate some other level of government has finally approved to keep the company there that probably didn't want to be there, but if you don't buy it, you pay a penalty. This is not working. Millions of people have chosen to pay the current penalty, which was $695, rather than to participate in a system that didn't work for them. Families can't continue to pay more and get less. Remember former President Clinton's observation on this: What a crazy system. The costs keep going up and the coverage keeps going down. We have forced people to be in a system that according to President Clinton, the costs keep going up, the coverage keeps going down, and if you don't participate in that, you pay a penalty. We have to move in a different direction. Eliminating these mandates helps to do that. There are some Congressional Budget Office numbers out there that estimate what is about to happen. They certainly totally misestimated the current law. I believe, under the current law, there would be 25 million people, roughly, or some big number like that on the exchange today. There are 10 million instead of 25 million, 22 million, whatever the projection was for this date in 2017. There are about 10 million. CBO is notoriously wild with their projections. They projected, for instance, that 15 million people would drop out of the individual market if one of the many burdens of this bill or these amendments passed. There are only 10 million people in the market. How do 15 million people drop out if there are only 10 million people there? They said that 7 million people who get Medicaid and pay nothing for it wouldn't take that if the government didn't force them to. There must be something wrong with the insurance product and Medicaid both if people don't take it even if it is available to them. The current system isn't working. The other mandate, the employer mandate, is telling employers what they have to do. One of the great benefits of health insurance in this country since World War II has been insurance at work. It was pretty much an accident in 1946. The war was over, and no one wanted to heat up the economy too quickly so it was decided to have wage and price controls. Somebody asked the price control person: If we add insurance at work, does that count toward wages? They wanted to compete for more and better employees they could get coming back into that economy from the war. So they asked, if we add insurance to work, does that count as wages? The wage and price control person said, no, it wouldn't count. So they went to the IRS person and said: If it doesn't count toward the wage, is it taxable if they get it at work? That person said, no, it wouldn't be taxable either. So we have this unique system that developed. We need to figure out how more people can get insurance at work, more people can get insurance as a part of bigger groups. There are things that work and things that don't. The government requiring you to do something and thinking there is a constitutional right to do that just simply doesn't work. In fact, with the employer mandate, there are all kinds of unintended consequences. People with 50 employees didn't want to get more than 50 employees. The 30-hour workweek became a problem. In fact, Ms. Collins, the Senator from Maine, from almost day one has said: Why do we want to enshrine the 30-hour workweek? Let's have a 40-hour workweek. Her amendment was offered and filed over and over again. Companies were reluctant to hire new employees. These are the [[Page S4391]] unintended consequences of the employer mandate. Too many people have two 26-hour jobs now who need a 40-hour job with good benefits instead of two 26-hour jobs with no benefits. More choices and the kind of access to healthcare people need is where we ought to be focused, a solution that provides healthcare and not just coverage. It is great to have insurance coverage. It is great to have even a government insurance coverage like Medicaid, unless no doctor wants to take any new Medicaid patients or if your insurance coverage deductible is so high. The averages on the bronze plan is $6,000 per individual, $12,000 per family. If your deductible is so high you can't go to the doctor, you don't have the kind of access to healthcare you need. You only have access to catastrophic sickness care. This system needs to change, and I believe one of the fundamental flaws in the system from day one was the government believing it could force people to purchase a product that didn't meet their needs and didn't meet what their family could afford to do. I am glad we are having this debate. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Oklahoma. Mr. LANKFORD. Mr. President, I would like to tell my colleagues a couple of stories. We are going to talk about what is happening in healthcare right now. There is the healthcare that is happening here in this room in the debate that is ongoing that started months ago, continuing to try to figure out the solutions to what we face with the Affordable Care Act. Then there are the healthcare issues happening at home. Sometimes we get caught up in this conversation and think this is what the center of the healthcare conversation is about. It is not. The center of the healthcare conversation in America is around dinner tables. Let me tell my colleagues what that conversation sounds like. This comes from one of my constituents who just wrote to me. He said: My premium increases from $1,308 per month to $2,489 per month. This is for just my wife and I. We are self-employed small business owners and simply cannot afford to pay nearly $30,000 per year for health insurance. We will have to pay the penalty for not having healthcare, but we have to eat and pay our bills. Sadly, we are both in our late 50s, and we probably need healthcare more now than ever. Mr. Lankford, this is not the America that I grew up in, the America my father fought to preserve in World War II. That is the healthcare debate happening in America right now-- individuals who used to be able to afford their healthcare coverage, but now they cannot and no longer have healthcare. The Affordable Care Act did cover a new group of people who were not covered before, but it also pushed out another whole group who used to have coverage and now does not. This is an extremely personal issue. This is not a political issue. These are families and lives and children. These are individuals who have cancer and diabetes and a history of genetic diseases in their families, and they are very concerned about what happens politically in this room because it affects their families and their real lives. Congress needs to act on this. What is happening right now with the status quo is untenable for families all across the country. Insurance carriers have left the market. Rates have gone up dramatically. We have fewer choices and more control but less control for families. What does that look like in my State? Well, in my State, premiums went up last year 76 percent--last year--a 1-year increase. I have folks all the time who say to me that their great complaint is about the rising cost of college tuition. Let me give my colleagues a glimpse. College tuition has increased 76 percent in 15 years. Insurance in my State went up 76 percent in 1 year. In fact, since ObamaCare fully rolled out in 2013 until now, insurance in my State has gone up 201 percent. That is not the Affordable Care Act; that is a recipe to be able to push people out of insurance and keep them out. ObamaCare was designed to force healthy people to buy insurance to increase the risk pools for those insurance companies. But when you can't afford the premiums, you are forced to pay this big tax. Now, the question is, Who is paying the tax? Originally, ObamaCare said: Well, people who didn't buy into the insurance who want to just take the risk on their own, these wealthy individuals, they would have to pay the extra tax. Really? What did that end up looking like? Again, coming back to my State, 96,000 Oklahomans are currently paying the tax to the IRS because they don't have healthcare insurance. Who are they? Eighty- one percent of the people who pay the penalty make less than $50,000 a year. These are individuals who cannot afford the insurance, and they also can't afford the fine that is coming from the IRS. It is a poverty tax that the Affordable Care Act created to try to force these people into insurance they cannot afford, and when they can't afford that, then they get a big hit on their taxes as well. It is literally a no- win situation for them. One of the major goals of the Affordable Care Act was to provide affordable coverage. It was to be able to help people get into insurance. It was to be able to help improve the safety net. Those are not irrational goals. Those are good goals, but the execution of it was terrible, and the implementation has caused more problems than it has solved. In my State, many physicians in rural areas used to be independent. Now they have all been forced into working for big hospitals because they can't afford the compliance costs to keep their office moving anymore. So independent doctors and independent clinics are now part of big conglomerate hospital companies. I am glad they are there, or we would have no access to care at all. My State used to have four insurance carriers in the State. Now it has one, and that one is discussing leaving. I hear all the time people who are mad at Republicans saying: Why haven't you solved this yet? Quite frankly, this is an incredibly difficult issue. But I also want to be able to respond back to people: Don't gripe at the firefighters fighting the wildfire. They didn't start it. We are trying to put it out. Yes, I know the fire line is big, and, yes, I know it is difficult to put it out, but we are doing our best to resolve a fire we did not start. We will resolve this. So what is happening right now with our trying to resolve it? What are we trying to accomplish? We are trying to do several specific things dealing with the Affordable Care Act. This is not about resolving everything in healthcare. There are, quite frankly, lots of issues on which we have bipartisan agreement that we should work on in the days ahead, things like prescription drugs and so many other things we can do to help bring down the cost of healthcare itself, but in the meantime, we do have a dispute. Our Democratic colleagues have said to us that they want to be able to cooperate with us on healthcare, but the parameters are that we have to keep the individual mandate--that tax penalty on people in my State for people who make $50,000 or less to pay this giant tax; they want to keep that. They want to keep the employer mandate, which is dramatically driving up the cost of insurance for employers and decreasing wages. The initial estimates are that people in my State are making about $2,500 a year less now than they would be because of the employer mandate that is on them. So we can't negotiate and say ``Let's form a bipartisan agreement on this'' if they want to keep the individual mandate and the employer mandate. Those things hurt people at home. So here is what we are trying to do. This is a budget bill. It is called reconciliation. We are limited to only budget-related items to be able to deal with. So we are working on some of the basics of what needs to be repealed in the Affordable Care Act. We do want to get rid of the individual mandate. We do want to get rid of the employer mandate. We do want to deal with how we can take control of healthcare out of Washington, DC, and get it back to the States, where it used to be. Prices are much cheaper when there is local control on healthcare than when there is Federal, centralized control. We would also like to find a way to get some of the bureaucracy out of this. You see, when there is a healthcare dollar paid and it first has to pay the Federal bureaucracy, then it goes to the State bureaucracy, then it [[Page S4392]] pays an insurance company bureaucracy, and then it pays a hospital bureaucracy, there is not much of that dollar left to finally get to patient care at the end. If we can take out one of those bureaucracies, we can actually get more dollars to patients rather than having them just feeding the bureaucracy of another layer. We are simply trying to deal with the mandates that are there, who actually makes the healthcare decisions for regulations and policy, whether it is the State or the Federal Government, and how we are going to balance out coverage for individuals who desperately need it in the safety net. I have heard a lot of folks talking about CBO scores. I will tell you, I am in the middle, and I am very frustrated with CBO right now. Every policy we want to float to say this is something we think will be very effective to be able to help people in the safety net or to be able to help people purchase insurance, CBO responds back to us: That sounds like an interesting idea; it will take us about 4 weeks to study it. When we are in the legislative process, when we are doing amendments, we can't wait 4 weeks between each amendment. We have to be able to get answers from them. So we are stuck in this spot, so our resolution is--we have a House version that has been scored, and we have a Senate version. We have a lot of changes we want to make, even to our latest version. The best answer we have while we wait on CBO scoring--another month to get us an answer--is to be able to get an interim bill, get into a conference between the House and the Senate, allow CBO the month that they need to score this, and for us to be able to pass a better bill in September. So that is where we are stuck right now. This is not a final bill that is coming out. This is still an interim process that is moving. But we need to be able to keep this process moving because there are people at home who are counting on this actually getting better for them in the future. Their words to me are: This cannot get worse, because I can't afford what we currently have, and I can't afford that access I have been given to healthcare. In the middle of all of this debate, a lot of people on the outside look at it and say: How come the Senate can't move faster? I respond back to them: We can't get a score from CBO, so we can't move any faster. We are stuck waiting on them. They typically will call me and say: Well, just run over CBO. We are not going to ignore the law, and we are not going to ignore the rules of the Senate, but we are going to work to actually get this right. In the meantime, I have heard an awful lot of scare tactics coming out. It usually circles around, there will be 22 million people who will suddenly not have insurance. That is a fascinating number to me since only 9 million people have ObamaCare right now. Nine million are actually on the exchange. So it seems difficult to me for 22 million people to lose what only 9 million people have. But if you are an economist, they look at, on the horizon, people who may one day join in at some point, and then those people who may have joined in then might have lost their insurance. It makes total sense to an economist, but to all of us who just look at math, it becomes very difficult. CBO also believes that without a Federal mandate and a tax penalty on individuals, they will not buy this insurance product. People do not want to buy it and will not buy it unless they are made to buy it. The problem is, there are 6.5 million people in the country who are also required to buy it who are just paying the tax rather than buying the insurance. We need to allow people to make decisions on their own lives, but we need to also make sure there is actually an insurance product they can afford. And all the scare tactics about how we are going to throw out preexisting conditions and people who have preexisting conditions will be on their own--that is not true. Every single one that we have debated has included protection for preexisting conditions. We all are still honoring things like lifetime caps, annual caps. We have all included 26 and under. If you want to stay on your parents' insurance, you can still do that. There have been all of these scare tactics, like this will throw senior adults out on the street, and Medicaid is going to have these dramatic cuts. I looked at one of the proposals that was put out by the Senate and one of the drafts that we went through, and it said ``dramatic cuts.'' Here are the ``dramatic cuts'' we had in Medicaid: Every year for the next 8 years, Medicaid increased at twice the rate of inflation. Every year for 8 years in a row, twice the rate of inflation, Medicaid went up. That is twice as fast as Medicare goes up--twice as fast as Medicare. So Medicaid was accelerating twice as fast as Medicare, and then 8 years from now, Medicaid went back to growing at the same speed as Medicare--at the rate of inflation. That was the ``dramatic cut'' in Medicaid. Every year going up twice as fast as inflation is a cut? Nine years from now, only growing as fast as inflation is a cut? But it is being portrayed that people are going to be thrown out on the streets and Medicaid is going away. I would encourage Americans to understand that the conversation has been a lot about political rhetoric. This body really is committed to the safety net. This body really is committed to allowing people to have choices again that they can actually afford for insurance. We are really committed to taking control of healthcare out of Washington, DC, and pushing it back to the States and to families so they can control healthcare decisions again. That is the real debate that is happening here. I know it is boisterous, and I know it is much easier just to have bumper sticker comments, but at the end of this, we have to realize there really are people who are involved in this, who are deeply affected by it. A couple more stories. A gentleman recently sent me an email saying that he received word that his premiums are rising from $1,229 a month to $2,205 a month to cover just him and his wife. His deductible is rising to $4,000 a person. His out-of-pocket maximum is rising to $13,000. That is under ObamaCare now. Another person who wrote me is currently enrolled in ObamaCare now. He is 62 years old, and his wife is 61. Our monthly health insurance premium increased by 71 percent to $2,900 last year. My wife and I are healthy with no major problems, so my health insurance is the size of my mortgage payment. That is under ObamaCare now. Under ObamaCare now, a lady from my State wrote me and said that for her first year, her monthly premium was $1,200. This year, she will pay $1,900 a month. She just got a letter from the one insurance company left in her State--the one opportunity she has to get insurance--saying that her monthly premium next year will be $3,540. That is an increase of 84 percent, or $42,000 a year, for insurance under ObamaCare now. Her simple statement to me is, How is this possible? I speak to some of my colleagues, and they say: Those stories aren't true. I say: Let me introduce you to some real-life people outside of this political debate who are debating around their kitchen table about how they are going to make it with the rates that have been put on them. What we have now has to be addressed. I know this is a boisterous, loud process. But as we walk through the process, the end solutions are for these families, so that our noise helps them to actually move back to thinking about their kids and what they are going to do next in their retirement, and not to say: How in the world am I going to pay for my health insurance anymore? Let's get this finished. Let's move to the next stage. Let's get to conference and try to resolve the differences between the House and the Senate. By September, when we finally get a score back from CBO on all of our scoring and they finally get us information on the things we have asked for, let's get this passed so we can actually get this done. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Mississippi. Mr. WICKER. Mr. President, let me congratulate my colleague from Oklahoma for a very fine statement, and let me associate myself with each and every word and each and every fact he outlined in his very fine statement, and also with the remarks of my friend from Missouri who went before him. I appreciate their leadership on this issue. [[Page S4393]] Let me, at this point, also give a salute to the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States, to the right of freedom of speech, which we have seen exercised in this building and in this Nation during the course of this debate, and the freedom granted to petition the government for address of grievances. We have seen examples of that. They have been on full display in this healthcare debate, a phase of which will come to a close I hope this evening. Let me give a shout out to our staff members. They have fielded thousands, if not tens of thousands, of phone calls, letters, emails, and visits from Americans exercising their rights under the First Amendment. Americans have come to their Capital City, almost all of them in an appropriate and nondisruptive way--sometimes intense, for sure--expressing their opinions but also in display of their First Amendment rights. After all the debate, all the conversation, and all the exhortation on this issue, we have seen a lot of things said from the floor and a lot of things said on the news media that have amounted to a matter of opinion. But here is one thing I know for a fact. For four straight elections--2010, 2012, 2014, and 2016--Republicans ran on a promise to repeal and replace ObamaCare. We ran on that platform, and for four straight elections Republicans prevailed at the ballot box on the strength of that platform. I know that for a fact, and this I believe. Millions of Americans are at work today or at home or getting home from their offices, from their shops, from their factories. They are turning on the media. They are checking online. They are turning on the radio. They are wondering if a campaign promise is going to be kept by this party to which they have given the reins of government in four straight elections. We are close to keeping that promise. We are closer than we have ever been, and we can take a big step tonight on making good on that promise. That is not just a matter of keeping a promise, but I will say to my colleagues that it is important this platform be honored. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to speak for 10 additional minutes if there are no other people on the other side asking for consent. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. WICKER. So we are keeping a promise, but there is a lot more to it, as my friend from Oklahoma outlined, not only in fact but also in stories from honest-to-goodness Americans. This debate is about keeping Americans from hurting, about relieving the pain that this 2009 ACA has caused people to have. They were told they could keep their doctors. They wanted to keep their doctors, and it turns out they lost their doctors. They were told they could keep their healthcare plans. They liked their healthcare plans, and, in fact, they were not able to keep their healthcare plans. They were told their premiums would go down, and we have seen chapter and verse--as the gentleman from Oklahoma so forcefully outlined--of the dramatic, drastic, unspeakable increase in premiums that Americans have undergone. They were told they would have choice when it came to health insurance, and they have not had that choice. They have lost their freedom to make their own healthcare decisions, and that has been sacrificed in favor of a big government approach. So people are hurting, as has been explained on the floor tonight. Families in my State who do not have employer-based health insurance are paying nearly $3,000 more per year in premiums than they did 4 years ago. In my State, it is a 116-percent increase in premiums under the Affordable Care Act over this short period of time. I guess we should be thankful we are not the 201-percent increase in premiums that our neighbors from Oklahoma have, or the 223-percent increase in healthcare premiums that our neighbors across the line in the State of Alabama have. But still, it is pretty bad wherever you go, and they were told and this program was sold on a promise of reducing healthcare premiums. As has also been pointed out, 6 million independent-minded Americans have just said: I will not purchase this required insurance. I will pay the penalty, instead. The Supreme Court says it is a tax. We know it is a penalty. It comes right out of their pockets. They are doing that many times because they are independent-minded but many times because it is the only thing they can afford. So Americans are hurting. Americans from Missouri, Oklahoma, and Mississippi are hurting, and they are hurting all across America. My Republican colleagues know this. My Democratic colleagues know this. They say: Well, the ACA needs adjustment. It needs some help. But what is their solution? I think we are beginning to know, based on statements made and based on information coming forward, that our Democratic friends really want a single-payer system. That is their solution to the failed ObamaCare system we have now--a British-style, European-style, government-run insurance-for-all program. I don't think we need that in America. I don't think that is what Americans thought they were getting. My wife and I have never moved our family to Washington, DC. We have kept our home on the same street in Tupelo, MS, the whole time. We raised our kids in Mississippi. When the last bell rings this weekend, I will be on a plane back home to my State, moving around the State, talking to Mississippians, speaking to people who gave me this great opportunity to serve in this great body and this great system of government. I want to be able to tell them when I go home after this vote that I have taken a big step in keeping the Federal Government out of the business of deciding healthcare for their families. I want to be able to tell them that they are now going to have more options to choose the plan that works for them. I want to tell people back home who put me in office that we put more power in the hands of the States, not unelected Washington, DC, bureaucrats. I want to be able to tell them we passed a bill that, as my friend from Oklahoma says, answers their concerns about preexisting conditions and takes care of those people with low incomes who need assistance in buying insurance. I want to assure the people back in my home State and all across America, as my friend from Oklahoma just did so eloquently, that the Medicaid Program will continue. As a matter of fact, it will continue to grow, but at a rate that is more sustainable, so we can afford it today and so we can afford the Medicaid Program in future generations. This has taken long hours of give and take. It may take more long hours in debates tonight and in a conference with the House, but we can get there. I see the solution formulating, and I am as optimistic as I have ever been that we will be able to keep this four-election promise we made. These reforms are now within reach. We should take advantage tonight of this opportunity to deliver on what was promised to the American people, to relieve Americans who are hurting from the current ObamaCare system, and to give them a better opportunity for affordable and accessible healthcare. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from North Carolina. Mr. TILLIS. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the time until 8:30 p.m. be equally divided between the managers or their designees and that at 8:30 p.m., the Senate vote in relation to the Schumer or designee motion to commit, which is at the desk, followed by a vote in relation to the Heller amendment No. 502. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The Senator from Nevada. Amendment No. 502 Mr. HELLER. Mr. President, I rise today to talk about my amendment, Heller amendment No. 502. It addresses one of the most onerous taxes enacted as part of the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as the Cadillac tax. The Cadillac tax is a 40-percent excise tax set to take effect in 2020 on employer-sponsored health insurance plans. In Nevada, 1.3 million workers are covered by an employer-sponsored health insurance plan. These are public employees in Carson City and service industry workers that work on the Las Vegas Strip. They are small business owners, and they are retirees across my State. Hardly anyone in Nevada will be shielded from the devastating effects of [[Page S4394]] this Cadillac tax. Across America, 54 percent of employers and almost 151 million workers who currently enjoy employer-sponsored healthcare benefits will experience massive changes to their healthcare by the year 2020. We are talking about reduced benefits, we are talking about increased premiums, and we are also talking about higher deductibles. Hard-working Americans will suffer. That is why I joined Senator Heinrich from New Mexico in introducing what was called the Middle Class Health Benefits Tax Repeal Act earlier this year, with the support of over 75 organizations. Some of those organizations include unions, chambers of commerce, small business owners, State and local government employees, and retirees. They are all saying the same thing--that the Cadillac tax needs to be repealed. From unions to small businesses, employers are proposing sweeping changes to employee benefits today--right now--to avoid this onerous tax later. First, over 33 million Americans who use flexible spending accounts and 13.5 million Americans who use health savings accounts may see these accounts vanish in the coming years as companies scramble to avoid the law's 40-percent excise tax. HSAs and FSAs are used for things like hospital and maternity services, dental care, physical therapy, and access to mental health services. Access to these lifesaving services could all be gone for millions of Americans if the Cadillac tax is not fully repealed. Second, I have heard from employers, large and small, from all over Nevada, saying that they will inevitably have to eliminate services their workers currently enjoy, dramatically increase deductibles and premiums, and will have to cut certain doctors out of their networks. This goes right at the heart of ObamaCare's broken promise: If you like your healthcare, you can keep it; if you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor. This onerous tax targets Americans who already have high quality healthcare, and Nevadans have reached out to tell me how this tax will affect them. One of the stories that hit me the hardest was hearing from a school teacher in Las Vegas. As the son of a cafeteria worker, I know the sacrifices that these educators make each day. Cynthia, who works in the Clark County School District, sacrificed a higher paycheck to ensure that a quality health plan would be there when she retired. The Cadillac tax would place a 40-percent excise tax on her retiree benefits and cause her to deplete her savings to cover the loss. Seniors have worked their entire lives for these benefits, and the Cadillac tax puts at risk the sacrifices they have made for decades to have a safe and stable retirement. That is why I am committed to repealing this very bad tax. Many are in the service industry, like Michael from Las Vegas, who wrote to my office and explained how he is worried that the cost of his union-sponsored health insurance premium will now skyrocket. He is already seeing his deductibles increase and understands that next year there will be more increases to his healthcare premiums. Michael also shares his concerns about an imposed fine from the Internal Revenue Service, should he not have health insurance. He makes a valid point. If he loses his job, then how can he be expected to pay for his healthcare? Norm, a city employee from Southern Nevada, shared a concern with me recently: The last thing a self-insured provider wants to do is reduce benefits for his employees. Back in 2015, 90 Senators voted on the record in support of repealing the Cadillac tax, and I hope all 90 will join me again today. They recognize it will hurt middle-class families who, for reasons outside of their control, have health plans that already or soon will reach the Cadillac tax's cost limits. The tax will force many employers to pay steep taxes on their employees' health plans, flexible spending accounts, and possibly eliminate some employer-provided health coverage plans altogether. Under this tax, deductibles will be higher and benefits will be reduced even more, putting a strain on middle-class families trying to make ends meet. The short-term success of this was pushing the delay through 2020. Now it needs to be fully repealed. So I encourage all my colleagues to join me today in voting to support Heller amendment No. 502 to fully repeal this bad tax and send a message that Congress is serious about lowering costs for all Americans. Mr. President, I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Who yields time? If no one yields time, time will be charged equally to both sides. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Hawaii. Mr. SCHATZ. Mr. President, you know, late this afternoon, around 5 o'clock, a number of Republican Senators indicated their unwillingness to support the so-called skinny bill, which would rip healthcare from 16 million people, according to CBO, and increase health insurance premiums by 20 percent--and not 20 percent over several years, 20 percent per year for the next several years, doubling health insurance premiums over the next 4 or 5 years. That is the bill we are talking about. They said that they don't like this bill, but they are willing to vote for it if they are provided assurances that this is just sort of a procedural vote. We just had a motion to proceed that was procedural in nature, according to them. We think it is the vote on healthcare. Now, this second vote, which is actually a vote to enact legislation--they are saying they are going to vote for it but only on the condition that we go to conference committee. Something just happened over the last couple of hours that is actually pretty astonishing. The House Rules Committee adopted what they call martial law. Now, it is not quite as bad as it sounds, but it is pretty bad. What that means is it gives total control over the procedures to the House majority. The House majority now is in a position to enact the skinny bill right away. There are a lot of Members of the Senate who want to talk about this, but I will just give you my little indicators that they are going to enact this into law by Sunday. They are going to enact this into law by Sunday. No. 1, the White House already has a name for it, the President has indicated a willingness to sign it sight unseen, and Paul Ryan just issued a statement that was not at all reassuring. There were lots of words, but none of them included ``We will not enact anything that comes from the Senate. We will go to conference committee, and if we don't have an agreement, we will not enact the Senate version of the bill.'' They are desperate to enact a bill before the summertime starts, and that is why we are all terrified here. There are a lot of people on the Republican side who hate the bill that they are going to be asked to vote for, and the only reason they are entertaining the possibility is that they want to go to conference. But they are not going to end up in a conference committee; they are going to end up in a signing ceremony over the weekend. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Virginia. Mr. KAINE. Mr. President, if I could just pick up on the comments of my colleague from Hawaii, we had a comical discussion 2 days ago in the Democratic caucus lunch. Comedy isn't that unusual in a caucus with Al Franken, but the comic discussion was about how we would describe to the American public what a skinny repeal is. It was kind of phraseology that we might understand; how do we describe that to the American public? We took about half an hour to try to figure out how to do it, but about 2 hours ago, one of our Republican colleagues did it in 5 seconds. He said--and this is the Senator from South Carolina--that the skinny repeal is a fraudulent disaster. That is what Senator Graham said--the skinny repeal is a fraudulent disaster. He did such a better job than we did of describing what the bill is, and it is a fraudulent disaster because it hurts people. It takes health insurance away, according to the CBO, from 16 million people, and it would jack up premiums in a compounding 20 percent this year, then an additional 20 percent--40 percent the next year. That is why it is a fraudulent disaster. But some Members, as was described by my colleague from Hawaii, are entertaining that: Even though we call it a fraudulent disaster, we can vote on it because, don't worry, the House will [[Page S4395]] create an opportunity for us to fix it and make it better. But the comments of the Speaker, which had to be clarified a few minutes later by his press spokesperson, have made absolutely plain that if this bill passes out of the Senate, it is intended to be passed by the House ASAP, and the President's spokesperson has said: We like this bill, and the pen is in hand--we are ready to sign it. So no one in this body should have any illusions: If the skinny repeal--otherwise known as the fraudulent disaster--passes, it is not to continue a process; it is to take health insurance away from 16 million people, and it will raise premiums dramatically. And that is what the intent of this vote would be. With that, Mr. President---- Mr. WYDEN. Mr. President, will my colleague yield for a question? Mr. KAINE. I will yield the floor for a question. Mr. WYDEN. Mr. President, just very quickly, the Senator pointed out this analysis we have gotten where the premiums go into the stratosphere. Senator Murray and I worked a long time on it. Wages for working people are going up about as fast as a snail trying to climb uphill. I am curious what you think that means for working- class families in Virginia, because I know in my home State--and Senator Merkley and I have talked about this--we have working families right now who every single month are walking on an economic tightrope, balancing their food bill against the fuel bill, the fuel bill against the rent bill. Because my colleague was correct with respect to the fact that this would start, by the way, in January--this is not some kind of far- removed thing--people are going to feel the hit of these skyrocketing premiums right away. What does my colleague think that is going to mean for working-class families in his home State? Mr. KAINE. Well, to respond, Mr. President, to my colleague from Oregon, one of the things we have seen in the first half year of this administration is, whatever job report comes out month to month--comes out at the beginning of each month, we are not seeing wage growth. We are not seeing wage growth. So imagine that continuing forward-- essentially no wage growth and 20 percent increases in premiums that then compound to 40 percent next year, 60 percent the year after that. This will be devastating. So if you put together the CBO consequences--16 million losing insurance, the 20 percent compounding increases in premiums, a likely dramatic destabilization of the insurance market, and then other features that we hear are in the skinny bill--for example, if you take funding away from Planned Parenthood--and 3 million women have decided that is their choice, that is where they are going to get healthcare, including many working women and women in working-class families--the premium effect is going to be absolutely dramatic, and it will be devastating to Virginians and Oregonians. With that, Mr. President, I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Connecticut. Mr. BLUMENTHAL. Mr. President, we are here at a historic moment, and we listened to a historic speech just within the last 48 hours from our colleague, Senator John McCain. All of us welcomed him back and were inspired and overjoyed by his return and then by his speech asking that we go back to the regular order, that we have committee consideration of a bill, with hearings and markup and the democratic process really working. What threatens us tonight is the democratic process being brought to new lows. If this bill is passed with the assurance that it won't go to conference--and there are conservatives, and I could quote them. Senator Lindsey Graham said earlier today: There's increasing concern on my part and others that what the House will do is take whatever we pass--the so called ``skinny bill''--not take it to conference, go directly to the House floor, vote on it, and that goes to the President's desk with the argument, ``This is better than doing nothing.'' Here's my response. The ``skinny bill'' as policy is a disaster. The ``skinny bill'' as a replacement for Obamacare is a fraud. The ``skinny bill'' is a vehicle to get in conference to find a replacement. It is not a replacement in and of itself. The policy is terrible because you eliminate the individual and employer mandate which we all want eliminated but we actually want to have an overall solution to the problem of Obamacare, so you're going to have increased premiums and most of Obamacare stays in place if the ``skinny bill'' becomes law. Not only do we not replace Obamacare, we politically own the collapse of healthcare. I'd rather get out of the way and let it collapse than have a half-assed approach where it is now our problem. Senator John McCain said earlier today: I'm not supportive of the legislation as it stands today. I am in close consultation with Arizona governor over the so- called ``skinny repeal.'' Senator Ron Johnson said earlier today: Virtually nothing we're doing in these bills and the proposal are addressing the problems and challenges and the damage done to people. We will see, in effect, a betrayal of our trust, and I say that very seriously. I hope this body will keep faith with our democracy and make sure that a bill that is regarded as a bad bill--and rightly so because it will eliminate insurance for 16 million people, it will raise premiums by 20 percent in less than a year, it will drive up costs, and it will bring down the number of people who are insured by catastrophic numbers. We owe it to the American people to vote against this so- called skinny bill, which is really a sham repeal. It is a skeletal version of TrumpCare 2.0, 3.0, 5.0, 7.0. We can do that. With that, I yield the floor to my distinguished colleague from the State of Delaware. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Delaware. Mr. COONS. Mr. President, I want to speak for a few minutes on the floor to answer the calls I am getting into my office, the texts and the emails I am getting with people asking: What is going on? What is happening in the U.S. Senate? They can't keep track of what it is we have moved to. We don't know either. We are here probably all night waiting for the majority to finally produce the bill that they will use to attempt to repeal and maybe replace--or not--the Affordable Care Act. All we know is, every single proposal that has been brought forward in recent days has two features: It reduces coverage, and it raises costs. It may be that 16 million Americans will lose healthcare coverage. It might be 20 million, might be 32 million. Those are different scores for different proposed bills. It may raise costs by 15 percent, 20 percent, or 30 percent. Sometime later tonight, we will see the final bill presented on this floor, and hopefully we will get some score so we know what we are voting on before we finally get there, but what is so scary to families I am hearing from, is that after 7 months of majority rule, where the Republican Party controls the Senate, House, and White House, we don't have a finished bill for us to debate tonight in detail, and we don't know yet exactly what we will vote on later tonight. We just know a simple theme--every proposal that has been brought forward when scored by the CBO, the independent scorekeeper, offers less coverage and higher costs. Folks, I want to remind you about something because I just ran into a family out on the steps of the Capitol, outside the building, not inside the building--a family who is raising two typical children and one child with Down syndrome, a family where the father of the family is Active-Duty U.S. military. They asked me: ``Why can't we be heard?'' The process that brought us here tonight did not include committee hearings, where doctors, nurses, patient advocates, folks who run hospitals, or folks who are specialists on insurance were heard. In a press conference earlier this evening, four of our colleagues said they are going to vote for this bill later tonight so it can go to conference and get fixed. They said the current expected skinny repeal bill is a fraudulent disaster, to paraphrase a colleague. Well, what I really think we should do is heed the advice that Senator McCain laid out on the floor a few days ago and go back to regular order. Just earlier today, there was an inspiring moment when we took up and passed by a vote of 97 to 2 the Russia [[Page S4396]] sanctions bill. We heard the chair and ranking Republican and Democrat of the Foreign Relations Committee speak positively of each other and positively of the process and they said the outcome is in the best interest of our country. As we have seen, we don't always follow regular order. Both parties have responsibility for moving things over the years without fully consulting each other and without going through the committee process. I think this is the moment where we should look at what happened earlier today on this very floor and follow that process, where the committees are included and consulted, and where we find a bipartisan resolution to what ails America. I am afraid that is not what is going to happen, and later tonight we will be forced to vote for or against a bill that raises healthcare costs for Americans and lowers the number of Americans who get healthcare coverage. If that is the case, this Senator will vote no. Thank you. With that, I yield the floor to my colleague from Connecticut. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Connecticut. Mr. MURPHY. Thank you, Mr. President. We are starting to hear rumors of what is in the so-called skinny bill, and it is not skinny. It is humongous. It is filled with all sorts of conservative priorities, whether it be--these are rumors--the end to the individual mandate, the elimination that insurance companies are required to include certain coverages, the denial of funding to Planned Parenthood. This is not a bill that is designed to go to conference. This is a bill that is designed to become law. I just want to put all of the pieces together for folks what we are hearing tonight, because you are hearing, if you are following this all across America, different pieces of news emerging from different parts of this city. Let me try to put it together for you for a minute. First, you are seeing this skinny bill get fatter and fatter, which all of a sudden looks like a piece of legislation that is not designed to go to conference. It looks like a piece of legislation designed to become law. It is healthcare arson. It sets the insurance markets on fire. It immediately takes insurance from 16 million people and drives rates up by 20 percent on a compounding basis. This is insanity. It is getting bigger and bigger, which makes you wonder, wait a second, is this about going to conference or becoming law? Then we got another piece of information. The White House doesn't support the conference. The White House likes the skinny bill and wants it to become law. Then we got another piece of information. The House of Representatives tomorrow morning will declare what is called martial law. That is a procedural move that will allow the House to pass the bill that comes from the Senate as quickly as possible. This isn't going to conference, this is becoming law. Then the icing on the cake is the most curious piece of news: a statement from the Speaker of the House in which he says, not ``we will go to conference,'' he says, ``I am willing to go to conference.'' Why ``I am willing to go to conference'' and not ``we will go to conference''? Well, maybe you got the clarification from his spokesman who said: ``Conference committee is one option under consideration, and something we are taking steps to prepare for should we choose that route, after first discussing with the members of our conference.'' Can you see what is happening here? Can you see what is happening here? This is a bill that is being sold as just a procedural step to get to conference, but everything else that is happening around it suggests this is becoming law. Even if I am not right, let's also be clear about the process. Even if there is a conference, how on Earth is the conference going to come to a conclusion that the Senate could not? Right? You are going to introduce the Freedom Caucus to the U.S. Senate and think you are going to get more functionality and not less functionality? Even if you get to that conference, it will last for a couple days, maybe a couple weeks. They will come to no conclusion, and then guess what. The skinny bill, which is not so skinny any longer, is there for the U.S. House of Representatives to pass and put into law. All the while, the President of the United States is cheering that on. That is the signal he gave you. The President of the United States does not support a conference. He supports a bill that we are going to have unveiled later tonight and passed. He supports that bill going into law. So even if you get to conference, with the President chiding the conference to give us and pass the Senate bill, which is available to the House for passage, that is what the outcome will be. So for our Senate friends who want assurances that this bill will not become law, you are getting exactly the opposite tonight. With that, I yield the floor to the Senator from Minnesota. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Minnesota. Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Mr. President, I thank my colleague from Connecticut for that really good and detailed description of how we got to where we are because I think it is really hard to explain to Americans at home who are watching this what a debate really is. I don't see my friends from the other side of the aisle right now, but watch what is happening here today because what I have seen in my State the last few months is extraordinary. Families are coming up in the middle of a Fourth of July parade with their child with Down syndrome, bringing him over and saying: He is not just a preexisting condition. He is our child whom we love. This last weekend, I was with a family with two identical twins, Mariah and Evelyn. One is the catcher and one is the pitcher on their 11-year-old softball team. Just in the last few years, one of them found out that she has a severe case of juvenile diabetes. The other one is perfectly healthy. What the mom told me is that they can hardly make it, paying for the cost of the insulin that has gone up astronomically over the years, paying for the testing strips and everything involved in this. Yet, now, instead of seeing a bill which reduces the cost of prescription drugs by including some of the provisions I have long advocated for--from ending pay for delay, where big pharmaceutical companies are paying off generic companies to keep their products off the market, or bringing in less expensive drugs from other countries or allowing for negotiation under Medicare Part D--instead of doing some of those innovative things we need to bring costs down for regular Americans, what we see here is going to make it worse. When I met with these two girls, I told them and their family that I had their back and that I would tell their story on the floor of the U.S. Senate. Never once did I think I would be saying it, even this last week, when we are facing this kind of onslaught to this family-- because what I would tell these girls now is that this bill, from what we have learned--we have not seen it, we don't know exactly what is in it--but from what we have heard, what would happen is, according to the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, it would kick 16 million people off of healthcare. I would ask those girls: Do you know how many people that is, girls? It is 14 States' worth of people. It is the combined population of 14 States in the United States of America. What we have learned about this bill is that it would increase premiums by over 20 percent, again, according to the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office. What I would tell them is that is more than their school clothes, it is more than their softball clothes, it is a good chunk of their college education. This is real money for real people and this reduces coverage and it makes it more expensive. We can do so much better. A few months ago, we went to that baseball game where the Republican men's team played the Democratic team. I was there in the stands, and I watched at the end this beautiful scene when the Democratic team won and they took the trophy and they gave it to the Republicans' team, and they said to put it in Representative Scalise's office. Why did they do that? Because they were saying we are all on one team. That is what this should be. [[Page S4397]] When we are dealing with one-sixth of the American economy, we shouldn't be at night passing a bill that one of our most trusted colleagues on the other side of the aisle, a Republican, has just called ``a fraudulent disaster.'' That is not what we should be doing. We should be working on the fixes that so many people have been working on for so many years--bringing drug prices down, making the exchanges stronger with reinsurance and cost sharing. These are things we actually can do together. I ask my colleagues to work with us. We have opened the door. We want to work together on these changes and not to pass this fraudulent disaster. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Colorado. Mr. BENNET. Thank you, Mr. President. I appreciate so much my colleagues being out here on the floor. We are debating a bill that relates to 16 percent of our gross domestic product, almost 20 percent of our economy. I wish there were folks on the other side of the aisle who were out here tonight having this debate. I thank my colleague from Minnesota for the point she made. I want to state that I am really discouraged about where we are in our political system right now, and part of that is because politicians seem to think they can say one thing when they are running for office and do another thing when they get here and that somehow there is not a consequence. I guess one of the reasons people think there is no consequence is that we have begun to treat edited content--journalism--as though somehow it is inferior to somebody just shooting their mouth off on the internet. We hear the President verbally assaulting journalists who have covered terrorism and who have tried to bring the story in Syria to the United States. Some have lost their lives. The President says they are not covering terrorism; then he attacks them as fake news. He goes to places like Youngstown and gets people to attack CNN or the New York Times or the Wall Street Journal--anything that is actually edited content. I think it is because he thinks, A, he will not withstand the scrutiny of real journalists, but I think, B, he thinks it will help with this anything-goes style of politics, which says you can say one thing in the election and do something else. The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Kennedy). The time of the Senator has expired. Mr. BENNET. I ask for an additional 3 minutes. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Democratic time has expired. Mr. BENNET. I ask unanimous consent for an additional 5 minutes. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. BENNET. Mr. President, I just don't think this Republic will work very well if we don't have a free press that is respected and if we don't hold people accountable for their campaign promises. Here is one of the things Donald Trump said during the campaign about what he was going to produce for the American people with respect to healthcare. He said that it was going to be beautiful, terrific--a beautiful and terrific plan to provide such great healthcare at a tiny fraction of the cost, and it is going to be so easy. That is what he said, in rally after rally across the United States of America, and a lot of people believed it. He talked about how much he hated the Affordable Care Act, or ObamaCare, whatever you want to call it, and all the reasons why; many of the reasons he talked about were manufactured. But that doesn't really matter anymore. He is the President. The Republicans are in the majority of the Senate, and the Republicans have a majority of the House. Their characterization--or mischaracterization--of the Affordable Care Act is not the issue anymore; the issue is what are they going to do for people living in the State of Colorado who are dealing with a healthcare system that is not supporting them terribly well. My colleagues heard that right. People who support the Affordable Care Act or oppose it, in my State, are deeply discouraged about the way our healthcare system works. And I think that if the President were keeping his promise, we would see 100 people support the bill because it is actually consistent with what people at home want. They want more transparency when it comes to healthcare. They want more affordability. They want more predictability. That is what they want. If I set out to write a bill less responsive to that aspiration of the people I represent, who are critics of the Affordable Care Act-- Republicans in my State--I couldn't write a bill less responsive than the one the House of Representatives has passed and the one that was introduced by the majority leader after he wrote it in secret. It is 8:20 on the night we are going to have this vote, and we haven't seen the bill. After a year and a half of almost countless committee hearings, after adopting almost 200 Republican amendments on the Affordable Care Act, and then going to townhall after townhall, being accused of being a Bolshevik who hadn't read the bill, my question is, Why aren't people being held to that standard tonight? Maybe they are not asking us to read the bill because there is no bill at 8:20 on the night that we are supposed to take away 16 million Americans' healthcare, or 20 million Americans' healthcare--on the night we are supposed to vote for a bill that the Congressional Budget Office says will jack up insurance rates by 20 percent. They wrote the bill in secret. They didn't have a single hearing in the Senate--not one hearing in the Senate. Now it is 8:20 at night, and there are people in my State who think they are going to lose their health insurance because they might be one of those 16 million people or they might have a kid or a parent who has a preexisting condition, like the thousands of people who have contacted my office. They are terrified, and they are not even on the floor, and they can't read the bill. Read the bill. Now we are told there is going to be a procedural trick that is going to allow the House of Representatives to just pass this through over the weekend. That is a shameful way to run the Senate. It is exactly the opposite of what the majority leader promised he would do when he was the minority leader in the Senate. He is the one who said: If you can't get a vote from the other side--if you can't get one vote from the other side--you maybe should acknowledge that the American people aren't behind your bill. They can't even get all of the Republicans to vote for this. They had to have Mike Pence, who is the Vice President, come here to break a tie. What a disgrace to ask the executive branch to come here and save your bacon because you can't get the votes. And there is not a Democratic vote for this bill tonight because it doesn't meet the test that the minority leader himself had. I see my colleague from Michigan is here. I will yield the floor by just saying that we should stop this catastrophe. The only thing we know about this catastrophe is if it passes, there will be 16 million people who lose their health insurance and a bunch of rates go up. If we don't do it, that will not happen. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The time of the Democrats has expired. Ms. STABENOW. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent for 5 minutes. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. Ms. STABENOW. Mr. President, I want to support what my colleagues have been saying on this floor. The reason we haven't seen a bill, the reason we have no idea what is coming is that this is a political exercise by the Republicans. It is about winning and losing. But for people in the country, for people in Michigan, it is personal. This is not a political game. This is personal. For everyone who cares about their children and wants to make sure they can take them to the doctor; if you have a mom with Alzheimer's and you might lose the ability to have nursing home care; if you have cancer and know you may not be able to get the full treatments that you need, this is personal. And, as has been said, every single proposal of theirs is higher costs and less coverage. So we voted on what was behind door No. 1, which would gut Medicaid healthcare. Three out of five Michigan [[Page S4398]] seniors get their nursing home care from Medicaid. Half of the people we see with Medicaid healthcare are children. All of the funds in the first proposal would go to tax cuts for the wealthy few and pharmaceutical companies and destabilize and undermine and raise costs for everybody else. So that is door No. 1: higher costs, less coverage. Then, when that didn't go forward, it was door No. 2. Door No. 2: Repeal everything that was passed under the Affordable Care Act and then say to folks somewhere down the road, we will figure out how to replace it. That is higher costs and less coverage. Now we are at door No. 3, and we don't know what is behind door No. 3. All we know for sure is that it will be higher costs and less coverage. Now, we as Democrats want just the opposite. We want to work together with our Republican colleagues to lower costs--by the way, starting with the outrageous increases in prescription drug costs. And we want to increase coverage options, increase health insurance. That is what we are all about. I believe--I know in Michigan--that is what people want me to be focused on. Are there problems in the current system? Of course, and we should fix those, but we don't have to rip away healthcare and raise everybody's costs 20 percent a year as is being talked about now in order to fix the problems that are there. I want to quote Senator McCain, who said that it is time to ``return to regular order,'' work to reduce ``out-of-pocket costs,'' and learn to ``trust each other'' again. It is pretty tough to trust colleagues, to trust the majority, when we aren't even given the respect of knowing what we are going to be voting on. And it is not just--it is not about us. It is not about us as individuals; it is about the fact that every person who is getting cancer treatments right now needs to know what the U.S. Senate is going to be voting on and have a chance to respond. Every person who cares about their child, who cares about their parent in a nursing home, who cares about their future has the right to know and to read a bill and know what is going on. I want to say in conclusion--I want to close with the words of Margo, who manages a health clinic in Kent County in the western part of Michigan. Margo knows the benefits of increased access to healthcare because she sees it every day. She knows it is not political; it is personal. There is nothing more personal than being able to take your child to the doctor and get the healthcare you need or care for your parents. Margo wrote: Seeing working people who have struggled all of their adult lives to manage their chronic health conditions finally have access to regular doctor visits, health education, and prescription medications has been a tremendous relief. It is amazing how different the lives of our patients are today compared to what they were a few years ago. She added: ``You can't imagine the sense of dignity the people I see feel.'' The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator's time has expired. Ms. STABENOW. It is time to bring back some dignity to the U.S. Senate. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Wyoming. Mr. ENZI. Mr. President, I heard somebody say that nobody was listening. Well, I was listening. I have read a little bit from this book before on the floor about healthcare. It is called ``Demystifying ObamaCare'' by David G. Brown, who is a doctor. He does a marvelous job of going through the history of how we got to where we are. He says, maybe we need to answer the question: ``What does ObamaCare do? What does ObamaCare purport to do? What does ObamaCare not do?'' He says that those answers are relatively simple. ObamaCare is not a system of healthcare, nor is it a healthcare reform. It is a system of healthcare control. ObamaCare was supposed to significantly reduce healthcare costs, but instead it has dramatically increased costs for even those who are not directly within the ObamaCare program. ObamaCare was supposed to increase access to care, but instead it can actually reduce access (availability) of care. ObamaCare reduces the effectiveness of the safety net program, which is so very important to economically poor Americans. The quality of healthcare in America was derided when ObamaCare was passed, but ObamaCare instead reduces the quality of U.S. healthcare by reducing innovation. And then he says: ObamaCare removes a person's ability to make his own decisions about his healthcare and that of his family. It does so by removing the freedom to make those decisions. He continues that what we are trying to do is correct those problems and get back to a system of healthcare where the patient and the doctor get to make some of the decisions, where we encourage more people to be in the system, where we expand the use of HSAs, refundable tax credits, where we also allow people to buy insurance across State lines. We could put money back into State high-level risk pools. In fact, I really like the invisible risk pools that allow people to continue to pay what they were paying before, but to get the unique care. We could ``pass Medicaid to the States in terms of `block grants' or `per capita allotments,' '' and we could ``partially privatize Medicare starting in 2024 with the premium support system.'' That is not in the bill; I am reading suggestions that he gives, including ``cap the amount for tax exclusions in higher cost employer- based plans.'' Now, you need to know that in the proposals that we have been putting out, in spite of what I have been hearing on this side, kids under 26 still get to be on their parents' insurance. We are not taking that off. I keep hearing we are eliminating the preexisting conditions. We are not. There hasn't been a proposal to eliminate the preexisting conditions. So quit saying that. That is just fearmongering. As to eliminating the lifetime caps on insurance, I haven't heard a proposal for that. Also, allowing people to continue to be insured even if they change jobs--that is what this guy wrote in the book, and I would like for everybody to read it. He said there are five factors that drive up healthcare costs. One is taxes, another is mandates. Another is regulations. Another is lack of competition and flexibility within the marketplace. As to the fifth one, I don't know of anybody addressing yet, but it is the medical liability system that encourages defensive medicine and drives the costs up. Seniors need to be protected. There needs to be an effective and viable safety net system. Nobody is trying to work against that, regardless of what you are hearing here. I understand my time has expired. I have a lot more of the book I would like to share, but I am not sure it is productive, anyway. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Democratic leader. Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that before the next amendment each side be given 2 minutes. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. Motion to Commit Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, I have a motion to commit at the desk. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will report the motion. The senior assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from New York [Mr. Schumer] moves to commit the bill H.R. 1628 to the Committee on Finance with instructions to report the same back to the Senate within 3 days, not counting any day on which the Senate is not in session, with changes that-- (1) are within the jurisdiction of such committee; and (2) strike the subsequent effective date in the repeal of the tax on employee health insurance premiums and health plan benefits, which reinstates the tax in later years. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The question is on the Schumer motion to commit. Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, I ask for the yeas and nays. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a sufficient second? There appears to be a sufficient second. The clerk will call the roll. The senior assistant legislative clerk called the roll. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Are there any other Senators in the Chamber desiring to vote? The result was announced--yeas 43, nays 57, as follows: [[Page S4399]] [Rollcall Vote No. 176 Leg.] YEAS--43 Baldwin Bennet Blumenthal Booker Brown Cantwell Cardin Carper Casey Coons Cortez Masto Donnelly Duckworth Feinstein Franken Harris Hassan Heinrich Heitkamp Hirono King Klobuchar Leahy Manchin Markey McCaskill Menendez Merkley Murray Nelson Peters Reed Sanders Schatz Schumer Shaheen Stabenow Tester Udall Van Hollen Warren Whitehouse Wyden NAYS--57 Alexander Barrasso Blunt Boozman Burr Capito Cassidy Cochran Collins Corker Cornyn Cotton Crapo Cruz Daines Durbin Enzi Ernst Fischer Flake Gardner Gillibrand Graham Grassley Hatch Heller Hoeven Inhofe Isakson Johnson Kaine Kennedy Lankford Lee McCain McConnell Moran Murkowski Murphy Paul Perdue Portman Risch Roberts Rounds Rubio Sasse Scott Shelby Strange Sullivan Thune Tillis Toomey Warner Wicker Young The motion was rejected. Amendment No. 502 The PRESIDING OFFICER. There is now 2 minutes equally divided prior to the vote on the Heller amendment. The Senator from Nevada. Mr. HELLER. Mr. President, my amendment at the desk, Heller amendment No. 502, repeals the Cadillac Tax, plain and simple. No gimmicks. It repeals the Cadillac Tax, plain and simple. This is a bipartisan issue with bipartisan support. Under these circumstances, it is probably appropriate that we have a bipartisan issue that is here in front of us. I would like to thank Senator Heinrich, my friend from New Mexico, for his hard work and effort on behalf of this particular issue. He has worked hard. This is an issue that is well-endorsed. We have the endorsement of organized labor, chambers of commerce, local and State governments, and small business organizations. They all supported repealing this very bad and onerous tax. Over 83 groups have endorsed full repeal. They are saying the same thing--that the Cadillac tax needs to be fully repealed, or employees will experience massive changes in their healthcare. Previously, this Chamber has voted nearly unanimously to support this full repeal. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator's time has expired. Mr. HELLER. Thank you, Mr. President. I would ask support from my colleagues on this Heller amendment. Thank you. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Democratic leader. Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, first on the issue before us, most Democrats--the vast majority--are for repeal of the Cadillac tax. We are not for many of the other provisions being put forward. This requires the two to be tied together. We are for repealing the Cadillac tax but not harming the healthcare of millions of Americans. I want to make another point, especially to my friends, Senators McCain, Graham, Johnson, and Cassidy, who said correctly that the skinny bill was totally inadequate and they would require assurances from the House. Let me first read what Mr. Ryan said: ``If moving forward requires a conference committee, that is something the House is willing to do.'' That is not worth anything--only if moving forward is required. But I make another point that makes the case proof positive that this bill could pass and there is no assurance from the House. The House Rules Committee. There was a motion to limit the waiver of clause 6(a) of rule XIII-- The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator's time has expired. Mr. SCHUMER. I ask unanimous consent for 30 seconds. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. SCHUMER. To limit it just for motions to go to conference; rejected 4 to 9. If the House was intent on going to conference, they would have voted for this rule. It means they want to pass this bill, this skinny repeal, and send it to the President. I would urge my four colleagues and all the others to vote no until they get that assurance. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The question is on agreeing to the amendment. Mr. HELLER. Mr. President, I ask for the yeas and nays. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a sufficient second? There appears to be a sufficient second. The clerk will call the roll. The bill clerk called the roll. The result was announced--yeas 52, nays 48, as follows: [Rollcall Vote No. 177 Leg.] YEAS--52 Alexander Barrasso Blunt Boozman Burr Capito Cassidy Cochran Collins Cornyn Cortez Masto Cotton Crapo Cruz Daines Enzi Ernst Fischer Flake Gardner Graham Grassley Hatch Heinrich Heller Hoeven Inhofe Isakson Johnson Kennedy Lankford Lee McCain McConnell Moran Murkowski Paul Perdue Portman Risch Roberts Rounds Rubio Scott Shelby Strange Sullivan Thune Tillis Toomey Wicker Young NAYS--48 Baldwin Bennet Blumenthal Booker Brown Cantwell Cardin Carper Casey Coons Corker Donnelly Duckworth Durbin Feinstein Franken Gillibrand Harris Hassan Heitkamp Hirono Kaine King Klobuchar Leahy Manchin Markey McCaskill Menendez Merkley Murphy Murray Nelson Peters Reed Sanders Sasse Schatz Schumer Shaheen Stabenow Tester Udall Van Hollen Warner Warren Whitehouse Wyden The amendment (No. 502) was agreed to. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The majority leader. Amendment No. 667 to Amendment No. 267 (Purpose: Of a perfecting nature.) Mr. McCONNELL. Mr. President, I call up amendment No. 667. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will report. The legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Kentucky [Mr. McConnell] proposes an amendment numbered 667 to amendment No. 267. Strike all after the first word and insert the following: SHORT TITLE. This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care Freedom Act of 2017''. TITLE I SEC. 101. INDIVIDUAL MANDATE. (a) In General.--Section 5000A(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)(B)(iii), by striking ``2.5 percent'' and inserting ``Zero percent'', and (2) in paragraph (3)-- (A) by striking ``$695'' in subparagraph (A) and inserting ``$0'', and (B) by striking subparagraph (D). (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to months beginning after December 31, 2015. SEC. 102. EMPLOYER MANDATE. (a) In General.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 4980H(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting ``($0 in the case of months beginning after December 31, 2015, and before January 1, 2025)'' after ``$2,000''. (2) Paragraph (1) of section 4980H(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting ``($0 in the case of months beginning after December 31, 2015, and before January 1, 2025)'' after ``$3,000''. (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to months beginning after December 31, 2015. SEC. 103. EXTENSION OF MORATORIUM ON MEDICAL DEVICE EXCISE TAX. (a) In General.--Section 4191(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``December 31, 2017'' and inserting ``December 31, 2020''. (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to sales after December 31, 2017. SEC. 104. MAXIMUM CONTRIBUTION LIMIT TO HEALTH SAVINGS ACCOUNT INCREASED TO AMOUNT OF DEDUCTIBLE AND OUT-OF-POCKET LIMITATION. (a) In General.--Subsection (b) of section 223 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) Increased limitation.--In the case of any month beginning after December 31, 2017, and before January 1, 2021-- ``(A) paragraph (2)(A) shall be applied by substituting `the amount in effect under subsection (c)(2)(A)(ii)(I)' for `$2,250', and ``(B) paragraph (2)(B) shall be applied by substituting `the amount in effect under subsection (c)(2)(A)(ii)(II)' for `$4,500'.''. (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2017. [[Page S4400]] SEC. 105. FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO STATES. (a) In General.--Notwithstanding section 504(a), 1902(a)(23), 1903(a), 2002, 2005(a)(4), 2102(a)(7), or 2105(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 704(a), 1396a(a)(23), 1396b(a), 1397a, 1397d(a)(4), 1397bb(a)(7), 1397ee(a)(1)), or the terms of any Medicaid waiver in effect on the date of enactment of this Act that is approved under section 1115 or 1915 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1315, 1396n), for the 1-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, no Federal funds provided from a program referred to in this subsection that is considered direct spending for any year may be made available to a State for payments to a prohibited entity, whether made directly to the prohibited entity or through a managed care organization under contract with the State. (b) Definitions.--In this section: (1) Prohibited entity.--The term ``prohibited entity'' means an entity, including its affiliates, subsidiaries, successors, and clinics-- (A) that, as of the date of enactment of this Act-- (i) is an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from tax under section 501(a) of such Code; (ii) is an essential community provider described in section 156.235 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on the date of enactment of this Act), that is primarily engaged in family planning services, reproductive health, and related medical care; and (iii) provides for abortions, other than an abortion-- (I) if the pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest; or (II) in the case where a woman suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the woman in danger of death unless an abortion is performed, including a life-endangering physical condition caused by or arising from the pregnancy itself; and (B) for which the total amount of Federal and State expenditures under the Medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act in fiscal year 2014 made directly to the entity and to any affiliates, subsidiaries, successors, or clinics of the entity, or made to the entity and to any affiliates, subsidiaries, successors, or clinics of the entity as part of a nationwide health care provider network, exceeded $1,000,000. (2) Direct spending.--The term ``direct spending'' has the meaning given that term under section 250(c) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 U.S.C. 900(c)). TITLE II SEC. 201. THE PREVENTION AND PUBLIC HEALTH FUND. Subsection (b) of section 4002 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-11) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (3), by striking ``each of fiscal years 2018 and 2019'' and inserting ``fiscal year 2018''; and (2) by striking paragraphs (4) through (8). SEC. 202. COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTER PROGRAM. Effective as if included in the enactment of the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (Public Law 114- 10, 129 Stat. 87), paragraph (1) of section 221(a) of such Act is amended by inserting ``, and an additional $422,000,000 for fiscal year 2017'' after ``2017''. SEC. 203. WAIVERS FOR STATE INNOVATION. Section 1332 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18052) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(3)-- (A) in the first sentence, by inserting ``or would qualify for a reduction in'' after ``would not qualify for''; (B) by adding after the second sentence the following: ``A State may request that all of, or any portion of, such aggregate amount of such credits or reductions be paid to the State as described in the first sentence.''; (C) in the paragraph heading, by striking ``Pass through of funding'' and inserting ``Funding''; (D) by striking ``With respect'' and inserting the following: ``(A) Pass through of funding.--With respect''; and (E) by adding at the end the following: ``(B) Additional funding.--There is authorized to be appropriated, and is appropriated, to the Secretary of Health and Human Services, out of monies in the Treasury not otherwise obligated, $2,000,000,000, to remain available until the end of fiscal year 2019. Such amounts shall be used to provide grants to States that request financial assistance for the purpose of-- ``(i) submitting an application for a waiver granted under this section; or ``(ii) implementing the State plan under such waiver.''; (2) in subsection (b)(1), in the matter preceding subparagraph (A)-- (A) by striking ``may'' and inserting ``shall''; and (B) by striking ``only''; (3) in subsection (d)(1), by striking ``180'' and inserting ``45''; and (4) in subsection (e), by striking ``No waiver'' and all that follows through the period at the end and inserting the following: ``A waiver under this section-- ``(1) shall be in effect for a period of 8 years unless the State requests a shorter duration; ``(2) may be renewed for unlimited additional 8-year periods upon application by the State; and ``(3) may not be cancelled by the Secretary before the expiration of the 8-year period (including any renewal period under paragraph (2)).''. The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Toomey). The majority leader. Mr. McCONNELL. Mr. President, the legislation I just laid down is called the Health Care Freedom Act, and it restores freedom to Americans that ObamaCare took away. It does so in a number of ways. First, the Health Care Freedom Act repeals the core pillars of ObamaCare. It eliminates the so-called individual mandate that forces many Americans to buy ObamaCare insurance they don't want, can't afford, or can't use, and taxes those who don't. It also repeals the employer mandate that cuts hours, take-home pay, and job opportunities for workers. Second, the Health Care Freedom Act provides significant new flexibility to States. The Health Care Freedom Act gives States just the kind of flexibility they need to implement reforms that provide more options for consumers to buy the health insurance they actually want. These reforms also help make insurance more affordable and flexible so it is something Americans actually want to buy. Finally, the Health Care Freedom Act frees Americans from ObamaCare in several other ways too. It provides 3 years of relief from the medical device tax, which increases costs, hurts innovation, and has drawn significant criticism from both sides of the aisle. It expands, for 3 years, the contribution limits to health savings accounts so Americans can better manage their health costs and pay down more of their medical expenses like prescriptions with pretax dollars. Also, the legislation will prioritize funding for women's health through community health centers instead of large abortion providers and political organizations. The American people have suffered under ObamaCare for too long. It is time to end the failed status quo. It is time to send legislation to the President which will finally move our country beyond the failures of ObamaCare. Passing this legislation will allow us to work with our colleagues in the House toward a final bill that could go to the President, repeal ObamaCare, and undo its damage. I urge everyone to support it. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that Senator Murray or her designee be recognized to offer a motion to commit; further, that the remaining time be equally divided between the managers or their designees. The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Kennedy). Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. The Senator from Washington. Motion to Commit Mrs. MURRAY. Mr. President, I move to commit H.R. 1628 to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions with instructions to report the same back to the Senate within 3 days, not counting any day on which the Senate is not in session, with changes that are within the jurisdiction of such committee. Mr. President, after months of secret negotiations and backroom deals and shutting out patients and families and women and Democrats and even many Republicans from the process, Republican leaders continue to say they are planning to force a vote on this latest TrumpCare bill tonight--a bill even Republicans admit would throw our markets into turmoil. It is going to kick millions of people off of care, it is going to raise premiums for millions of families, it will eliminate healthcare for women across the country, and so much more--none of it good. It does not have to be this way. In fact, Republicans can still reverse this course. They can drop this once and for all and join with Democrats to get to work to actually improve healthcare, to reduce costs, to increase access, and to improve quality. We can start over with an open, transparent process, in which both sides--Democrats and Republicans--have a voice and one in which patients and families can make sure their priorities are being addressed. Now, I know many of our Republican colleagues prefer this bipartisan route. We have heard them say it. They have said it over and over in their votes to reject the partisan TrumpCare bill and [[Page S4401]] full repeal bills this week, in their discussions of hearings we should be holding, and in their comments even over the past few hours, laying out how devastating this bill would be for patients and healthcare markets and making it clear they do not trust the House to not simply pass whatever moves through the Senate. So I call on Republicans now to join us. Let's do what my colleague, the senior Senator from Arizona, and so many others have bravely called for. With this motion, we will send it back to the committee, where we can debate it, where we can work together, where we can do what is right for the people we represent. I urge my colleagues to support this motion to commit in the way that Republicans and Democrats have been talking about. I can personally assure every one of you that I will work with you--and I know other Democrats will as well--if we reject this process and send it back with this motion to commit to do it the right way, the respectful way. Mr. President, I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Connecticut. Mr. MURPHY. Mr. President, this process is an embarrassment. This is nuclear-grade bonkers what is happening here tonight. We are about to reorder one-fifth of the American healthcare system, and we are going to have 2 hours to review a bill which, at first blush, stands essentially as healthcare system arson. This bill is lighting the American healthcare system on fire with intentionality. To use the word ``freedom'' at its center--there is freedom in this bill. There is the freedom to go bankrupt, there is the freedom to get sick and not be able to find a doctor, and there is freedom in this bill to die early. That is not hyperbole. That is what happens when, overnight, 16 million people lose insurance. Don't tell us that is because people all of a sudden will not be mandated to buy it. This is a vicious cycle that happens. When you get rid of the mandate, every insurance company will tell you that rates skyrocket because you are not getting rid of the provision that requires insurance companies to price sick people the same as healthy people. CBO says that rates go up immediately by 20 percent and then 20 percent after that and then 20 percent after that. So all of a sudden you can't have the individual mandate because nobody can afford to buy the product. There is a lot of freedom in this bill, it is just not the kind of freedom we all thought was at the heart of this reform measure. This is real life. It is not a game. I know lots of Members on the Republican side are voting for this because they have some promise that even though this bill is terrible-- and everybody admits it doesn't solve any problems--it will get to a forum in which the problems can be truly solved. That is gamesmanship. That is not senatorial. That is not what this place was supposed to be. This was supposed to be the great deliberative body where we solved big problems, and this bill surrenders to the House of Representatives. Let's just be honest about what is going to happen when this bill gets to the House. Maybe there will be a conference committee, but it will not resolve any of the problems which have been inherent in the Republican conference here in the Senate. In fact, those problems will get worse because you will inject the Freedom Caucus into a Republican conference here that alone wasn't able to come to a conclusion. They will argue for a couple weeks, maybe a month, and then the House will decide to proceed with a vote on this bill. There is nothing in the rules that locks this bill into the conference committee once it is there. The House can pick it up out of that conference committee and move it to a vote--and they will do that because none of the problems that were solved here will be solved there. We have seen this happen before. Remember the budget stalemate in which this hammer of sequestration was created, and the supercommittee was supposed to solve all the problems the House and the Senate couldn't? They didn't, and now we are stuck with sequestration-- something nobody thought would happen. This is the same thing. This will not be a hammer sufficient enough to solve the dysfunction which has always been present in this process. Thus, the conference will be doomed, and this bill will become law--raising rates for everyone, locking millions of people out of the system of insurance, with no answer for the parents of those disabled kids who have been begging to get into Senators' offices. This isn't a game. This is real life. If this bill becomes law, real people will be hurt. We are begging our colleagues to vote for the motion to commit. Take us at our word. We want to work with you. We acknowledge there are still problems that need to be solved, though we maintain there are parts of the Affordable Care Act that are working. What if we owned the problem and the solution together? What if this wasn't a perpetual political football? There is still time for us to work this out together if you support us and vote for the motion to commit. This process is an embarrassment to the U.S. Senate. This isn't why we all came here--and don't delude yourself into thinking that this bill you are voting on will not become law. There is a very good chance that it will, and the end result will be absolute devastation and humanitarian catastrophe visited upon this country. It doesn't have to be this way. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Montana. Mr. TESTER. Mr. President, it has been an amazing process. I have been here a little over 10 years, and I have never seen anything like this. We voted cloture a few days ago to move to debate. Nothing. Now we have a bill here today that as Senator Murphy has already pointed out, will rip healthcare away from millions of people, increase premiums by 20 percent a year, and basically solve none of the problems that are out there that need to be solved that affect Americans every day, especially rural Americans. I must thank the Senator from Washington, Mrs. Murray, for the motion to take this back to committee. This is where we should have started. We should have started in the committee process like our forefathers had designed this place to work, the greatest deliberative body in the world, but it didn't. Every bill has been drafted by a select few in a backroom, with no input from anybody, especially people from rural America. So it is really time, folks, to open this process up. As I have gone around the State of Montana--and I have for the last 8 months--talking to folks about healthcare in rural America, they are very nervous. I am going to tell you something. If people cannot pay their bills because they don't have health insurance or they don't have the money, it is going to put these small hospitals at risk, these rural hospitals at risk. I will tell you a little bit about the town I grew up in. This is a town where my grandparents homesteaded over 100 years ago. From the time of the homestead era until the midsixties, they didn't have a hospital. Their hospital was the top floor of a place that sold dry goods. In the midsixties, they finally scratched up enough money, and they built a hospital. Big Sandy is not near as big today as it was back then. I am going to tell you, the hospital administrators from these small hospitals, the folks in the Montana Hospital Association have told me that if charity care goes up, they could close and at a bare minimum change their metho