H.R.4871 - 106th Congress (1999-2000): Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2001
Array ( [actionDate] => 2000-07-20 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in House: On passage Passed by the Yeas and Nays: 216 - 202 (Roll no. 428). [externalActionCode] => 8000 [description] => Passed House )

There are 2 summaries for H.R.4871. Passed House amended (07/20/2000) Introduced in House (07/18/2000) Bill summaries are authored by CRS

Shown Here:

Passed House amended (07/20/2000)

Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2001 - Makes appropriations for FY 2001 for the Treasury Department, the U.S. Postal Service, the Executive Office of the President, and certain independent agencies.

Title I: Department of the Treasury - Treasury Department Appropriations Act, 2001 - Makes appropriations for the Department of the Treasury for: (1) departmental offices; (2) department-wide systems and capital investments programs for development and acquisition of automatic data processing equipment, software, and services; (3) the Office of Inspector General; (4) the Inspector General for Tax Administration; (5) repair and restoration of the Treasury building and annex; (6) a demonstration project to expand access to financial services for low-income individuals; (7) the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network; (8) the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, including amounts for maintenance and facility improvements; (9) interagency crime and drug enforcement; (10) the Financial Management Service; (11) the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; (12) the U.S. Customs Service, including amounts for operations and maintenance of marine vessels and aircraft, collection of the Harbor Maintenance Fee, and automation modernization; (13) the Bureau of the Public Debt; (14) the Internal Revenue Service, including amounts for tax law enforcement, earned income tax credit compliance and error reduction initiatives, and information systems and telecommunications support; and (15) the Secret Service, including an amount for construction and improvement of facilities.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

(Sec. 122) Bars the obligation or expenditure of funds appropriated to the Department of the Treasury in any Act for establishment of a new law enforcement training facility until an assessment of the need for, and cost-effectiveness of, such facility has been carried out by the Comptroller General and approved by the Appropriations Committees.

Title II: Postal Service - Postal Service Appropriations Act, 2001 - Makes appropriations for payments to the Postal Service Fund for revenue foregone on free and reduced rate mail.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

Title III: Executive Office of the President and Funds Appropriated to the President - Executive Office Appropriations Act, 2001 - Makes appropriations for: (1) compensation of the President and the White House office; (2) operating, maintenance, and reimbursable expenses of the Executive Residence at the White House; (3) White House repair and restoration; (4) special assistance to the President and the official residence of the Vice President; (5) the Council of Economic Advisers; (6) the Office of Policy Development; (7) the National Security Council; (8) the Office of Administration; (9) the Office of Management and Budget (OMB); (10) the Office of National Drug Control Policy; (11) the Counterdrug Technology Assessment Center; and (12) Federal drug control programs, including amounts for the High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas Program and for a national anti-drug campaign for youth.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

Title IV: Independent Agencies - Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 2001 - Makes appropriations for the: (1) Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled; (2) Federal Election Commission; (3) Federal Labor Relations Authority; and (4) General Services Administration (GSA), including amounts for the Federal Buildings Fund, Government-wide policy and operations, Office of Inspector General, and allowances and office staff for former Presidents.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

(Sec. 408) Amends the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2000 to extend to April 30, 2002, the date through which the GSA Administrator is authorized to offer voluntary separation incentives to specified employees to provide for the closing of the Federal Supply Service distribution centers, forward supply points, and associated programs.

Makes appropriations for: (1) the Merit Systems Protection Board; (2) the Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental Policy Foundation; (3) the Environmental Dispute Resolution Fund to carry out activities authorized in the Environmental Policy and Conflict Resolution Act of 1998; (4) the National Archives and Records Administration, including amounts for repairs and restoration of archives; (5) the National Historical Publications and Records Commission; (6) the Office of Government Ethics; (7) the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), including an amount for the Office of Inspector General; (8) Government contributions for health and life insurance benefits for annuitants; (9) the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund; (8) the Office of Special Counsel; and (9) the U.S. Tax Court.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

Title V: General Provisions - Sets forth authorized and prohibited uses of funds made available under this Act.

(Sec. 506) Sets forth Buy American provisions.

(Sec. 509) Prohibits funds appropriated by this Act from being available for an abortion or the administrative expenses of any Federal employee health plan which provides benefits for abortions. Makes such prohibition inapplicable if the mother's life would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term or in cases of rape or incest.

(Sec. 514) Directs the Archivist of the United States to transfer certain Federal land located in Grand Rapids, Michigan, to the Gerald R. Ford Foundation in trust for the purpose of supporting the facilities and programs of the Gerald R. Ford Museum in Grand Rapids and the Gerald R. Ford Library in Ann Arbor.

(Sec. 515) Requires the Director of OMB to issue guidelines under the Paperwork Reduction Act that provide policy and procedural guidance to Federal agencies for ensuring and maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information disseminated by agencies in fulfillment of such Act.

(Sec. 516) Prohibits the use of funds made available in this Act to implement a preference for the acquisition of a firearm or ammunition based on whether the manufacturer or vendor of the firearm or ammunition is a party to an agreement with a Federal agency regarding codes of conduct, operating practices, or product design specifically related to the business of importing, manufacturing, or dealing in firearms or ammunition under the Federal criminal code.

(Sec. 517) Prohibits the use of funds appropriated by this Act to propose or issue rules or orders for implementing the Kyoto Protocol.

(Sec. 519) Bars the use of funds made available in this Act to pay the salary of any OMB employee who makes apportionments under Federal provisions regarding appropriation accounting that prevent the expenditure or obligation by December 31, 2000, of at least 75 percent of the appropriations made for FY 2001 to carry out the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, the Food for Progress Act of 1985, and a specified agricultural assistance provision of the Agricultural Act of 1949.

(Sec. 520) Requires the Inspector General of each agency funded under this Act to report to Congress any agency activity related to: (1) the collection or review of singular data, or the creation of aggregate lists that include personally identifiable information about individuals who access any Internet site of the agency; and (2) entering into agreements with third parties to collect, review, or obtain such lists or data relating to any individual's access or viewing habits to nongovernmental Internet sites.

Title VI: General Provisions - Sets forth authorized and prohibited uses of funds appropriated for Federal departments, agencies, and corporations.

(Sec. 619) Bars the use of funds made available for the Customs Service in this Act to allow the importation of any good produced or manufactured by forced or indentured child labor.

(Sec. 624) Requires the OMB Director to report to Congress: (1) estimates of annual costs and benefits of Federal rules and paperwork; (2) impacts of Federal regulation on State, local, and tribal government, small business, wages, and economic growth; and (3) recommendations for reform. Requires the Director to issue guidelines to agencies to standardize measures of costs and benefits and the format of accounting statements.

(Sec. 631) Bars the use of funds appropriated by this Act to enter into or renew a contract which includes a provision providing prescription drug coverage, except where the contract also includes a provision for contraceptive coverage. Makes exceptions to such prohibition for religious health plans.

(Sec. 634) Authorizes the use of appropriated funds by executive agencies to provide child care services for Federal civilian employees. Permits amounts paid to licensed or regulated child care providers to be paid in advance of services rendered, covering agreed upon periods.

(Sec. 635) Authorizes a woman to breastfeed her child on Federal property if the woman and child are otherwise authorized to be present at the location.

(Sec. 637) Amends the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 to provide for election cycle reporting of certain expenditures.

Adds provisions to such Act authorizing the use of facsimile devices or electronic mail for reporting certain contributions or expenditures.

Excludes from the definition of "contribution" under such Act any loan of money derived from an advance on a line of credit available to a candidate if such loan is made in accordance with applicable law under commercially reasonable terms and if the person making such loan makes loans in the normal course of business.

Changes the deadline for reporting contributions exceeding $1,000 received after the 20th day before an election to require notification of such contribution within 24 (currently, 48) hours of receipt.

Requires filing (currently, reporting) of independent expenditure statements for certain expenditures aggregating $1,000 within 24 hours of the expenditure being made. Considers the receipt date (in lieu of the postmark date) to be the date of filing.

Applies this section's amendments to elections occurring after January 2001.

(Sec. 638) Authorizes qualified Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority (MWAA) police officers, upon written election, to be treated as law enforcement officers for purposes of Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) or Federal Employees' Retirement System (FERS) provisions and to have prior service similarly treated. Defines a "qualified MWAA police officer" as any individual who is currently so employed and is subject to CSRS or FERS by virtue of Federal transportation provisions governing certain Federal employees who transferred to the MWAA. Describes prior service as service as an MWAA or Federal Aviation Administration police officer prior to the effective date of such election.

(Sec. 639) Authorizes the President's pay agent, for purposes of determining appropriate pay localities and making comparability payment recommendations, to make comparisons of General Schedule (GS) and non-Federal pay within metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) within the continental United States that have a high level of nonfarm employment and at least 2,500 GS employees using data from Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) surveys and salary data sets from any entity that regularly compiles similar data for businesses in the private sector. Permits the pay agent to make further determinations or recommendations based on such comparisons for purposes of payments becoming payable between January 1, 2002, and 2007, respectively.

Requires the pay agent, based on such comparisons, to determine whether any of the five MSAs with the highest levels of nonfarm employment that have not been previously surveyed by the BLS as discrete pay localities for purposes of provisions governing locality-based comparability payments for Federal employees warrants designation as a discrete pay locality and if so, make recommendations as to the level of payments appropriate during 2002. Requires any MSA that warrants such designation to be designated as a discrete pay locality in time for 2002 comparability payments.

Directs the pay agent to report to specified congressional committees on the ongoing efforts of OPM, OMB, and the BLS to revise the methodology currently used by the BLS in performing surveys related to comparability payments.

(Sec. 640) Amends Federal retirement provisions to reduce to seven percent after December 31, 2000, the required retirement contribution by Federal employees participating under CSRS (such contribution currently is scheduled to be 7.5 percent for calendar years 2001 and 2002 and 7 percent after 2002). Reduces similarly the required percentage contribution under CSRS for Members of Congress and congressional employees, law enforcement and firefighting personnel, certain judges and magistrates, the Capitol police, and nuclear materials couriers. Makes similar reductions for participants in FERS. Makes conforming reductions with respect to military and volunteer service under FERS.

Amends the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement Act, and the Foreign Service Act of 1980 to make similar employee retirement contribution reductions under the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System, the Foreign Service Retirement and Disability System, and the Foreign Service Pension System.

Prescribes agency contributions for October 1 through December 31, 2002, in lieu of those required under current law, under CSRS, the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System, and the Foreign Service Retirement and Disability System.

(Sec. 641) Amends the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 to require certain information to be filed with the Federal Election Commission in cases where the principal campaign committee of a candidate for the House of Representatives or the Senate uses any Federal Government aircraft for purposes that include carrying out the candidate's election campaign. Makes this section applicable to elections occurring after December 31, 2000.

(Sec. 644) Amends the Treasury, Postal Service and General Government Appropriations Act, 1988 to require all existing and newly hired workers in any child care center located in an executive facility to undergo a criminal history background check. Defines an "executive facility" as a facility owned or leased by an office or entity within the executive branch (including one owned or leased by the GSA on behalf of an office or entity within the judicial branch).

(Sec. 645) Bars the use of funds made available in this Act to allow the importation into the United States of any product that is the growth, product, or manufacture of Iran.

(Sec. 646) Prohibits the use of funds made available in this Act for use of a Federal Internet site to collect information about an individual as a consequence of the individual's use of a site.

(Sec. 647) Amends Federal civil service provisions to set forth provisions regarding pay for certain administrative appeals judges.

(Sec. 650) Directs OPM to study and report to Congress on developing alternative means for providing Federal employees with at least six weeks of paid parental leave in connection with the birth or adoption of a child (apart from any other paid leave).

(Sec. 651) Prohibits the use of funds appropriated in this Act to carry out amendments to the Federal Acquisition Regulation contained in a certain proposed rule relating to responsibility considerations of Federal contractors and the allowability of certain contractor costs.

(Sec. 652) Bars the use of funds made available in this Act to administer or enforce Federal regulations regarding Cuban assets control with respect to any travel or travel-related transaction. Makes such limitation inapplicable to certain business travel.

(Sec. 653) Prohibits the use of funds made available in this Act to implement any U.S.-imposed sanction on private commercial sales of agricultural commodities or medicine or medical supplies to Cuba (other than a sanction imposed pursuant to agreement with one or more other countries).