H.R.2590 - 107th Congress (2001-2002): Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2002
Array ( [actionDate] => 2001-07-25 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in House: On passage Passed by the Yeas and Nays: 334 - 94 (Roll no. 274). [externalActionCode] => 8000 [description] => Passed House )

There are 5 summaries for H.R.2590. Conference report filed in House (10/26/2001) Passed Senate amended (09/19/2001) Passed House amended (07/25/2001) Reported to House without amendment (07/23/2001) Introduced in House (07/23/2001) Bill summaries are authored by CRS

Shown Here:

Conference report filed in House (10/26/2001)

Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2002 - Makes appropriations for FY 2002 for the Treasury Department, the U.S. Postal Service, the Executive Office of the President, and certain independent agencies.

Title I: Department of the Treasury - Treasury Department Appropriations Act, 2002 - Makes appropriations to the Department of the Treasury for FY 2002 for: (1) departmental offices; (2) department-wide systems and capital investments programs for development and acquisition of automatic data processing equipment, software, and services; (3) the Office of Inspector General; (4) Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration; (5) repair, alteration, and improvement of the Treasury building and annex; (6) programs to expand access to financial services for low- and moderate-income individuals; (7) the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network; (8) counterterrorism measures; (9) the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, including amounts for acquisitions, maintenance, and facility improvements; (10) interagency crime and drug enforcement; (11) the Financial Management Service; (12) the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; (13) the U.S. Customs Service, including amounts for collection of the Harbor Maintenance Fee, operation and maintenance of marine vessels and aircraft, and automation modernization; (14) the Bureau of the Public Debt; (15) the Internal Revenue Service, including amounts for tax law enforcement, the earned income tax credit compliance and error reduction initiatives, information systems and telecommunications support, and the capital asset acquisition of information technology systems; and (16) the U.S. Secret Service. Sets the aggregate amount of new liabilities and obligations incurred during FY 2002 for circulating coinage and protective service capital investments of the United States Mint. Directs the Secretary of the Treasury to reimburse the Comptroller General from amounts in the United States Mint Public Enterprise Fund for the cost of a study on changes necessary to maximize public interest and acceptance and to achieve a better balance in the numbers of coins of different denominations in circulation, with particular attention to increasing the number of $1 coins in circulation.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

(Sec. 120) Amends the Department of Justice Appropriations Act, 1998 to extend for an additional year the period for a personnel management demonstration project for designated critical positions in the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.

(Sec. 121) Prohibits funds made available by this Act from being used: (1) by the United States Mint to construct or operate any museum without the explicit approval of specified congressional committees; or (2) for the production of Customs Declarations that do not inquire whether the passenger had been in the proximity of livestock.

(Sec. 123) Authorizes the Secretary to transfer, subject to a specified limit, such sums as are necessary to meet financial statement audit requirements of the United States Customs Service and the Financial Management Service.

Title II: Postal Service - Postal Service Appropriations Act, 2002 - Makes FY 2002 appropriations for payments to the Postal Service Fund for revenue foregone on free and reduced rate mail.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

Title III: Executive Office of the President and Funds Appropriated to the President - Executive Office Appropriations Act, 2002 - Makes FY 2002 appropriations for: (1) the Executive Office of the President, including compensation of the President; (2) expenses of the Executive Residence at the White House; (3) expenses of the Vice President; (4) the Council of Economic Advisers; (5) the Office of Policy Development; (6) the National Security Council; (7) the Office of Administration; (8) the Office of Management and Budget (OMB); (9) the Office of National Drug Control Policy, including amounts for the Counterdrug Technology Assessment Center; and (10) Federal drug control programs, including amounts for the High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas (HIDTA) Program and for a national anti-drug campaign for youth.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

Title IV: Independent Agencies - Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 2002 - Makes FY 2002 appropriations for: (1) the Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled; (2) the Federal Election Commission; (3) the Federal Labor Relations Authority; (4) the General Services Administration (GSA), including amounts for the Federal Buildings Fund, Government-wide policy and operations, the Office of Inspector General, the Electronic Government Fund, and allowances and office staff for former Presidents; (5) the Merit Systems Protection Board; (6) the Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental Policy Foundation; (7) the Environmental Dispute Resolution Fund to carry out activities authorized in the Environmental Policy and Conflict Resolution Act of 1998; (8) the National Archives and Records Administration, including an amount for repairs and restoration of archives; (9) the National Historical Publications and Records Commission; (10) the Office of Government Ethics; (11) the Office of Personnel Management, including an amount for the Office of Inspector General; (12) Government contributions for health and life insurance benefits for annuitants; (13) the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund; (14) the Office of Special Counsel; and (15) the U.S. Tax Court.

(Sec. 408) Requires GSA to: (1) increase by at least $5 million for FY 2002 (over FY 2001 amounts) the amount expended for the purchase of alternative fuel vehicles; and (2) maintain rental and per mile rates for buses used by schools and dormitories funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) that were in effect on April 30, 2001, until appropriations for BIA funding of the Student Transportation Program for such purposes equals or exceeds three dollars per mile.

(Sec. 410) Designates the Federal building and courthouse located at 100 1st Street, SW, Minot, North Dakota, as the Judge Bruce M. Van Sickle Federal Building and United States Courthouse.

(Sec. 411) Revises conditions for construction of a road in Luna County, New Mexico.

(Sec. 412) Directs the U.S. Government to deed a specified area of the LOCH HAVEN REPLAT, back to the city of Orlando, Florida, in accordance with specified requirements.

(Sec. 413) Designates the Federal building and courthouse located at 315 S. McDuffie Street, Anderson, South Carolina, as the G. Ross Anderson, Jr. Federal Building and United States Courthouse.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

Title V: General Provisions (This Act) - Sets forth authorized and prohibited uses of funds made available under this Act.

(Sec. 506) Sets forth Buy American provisions, including those providing that in the case of any equipment or products that may be authorized to be purchased with financial assistance provided by this Act, it is the sense of Congress that entities receiving such assistance should, in expending it, purchase only American-made equipment and products.

(Sec. 509) Prohibits funds appropriated by this Act from being available for an abortion or the administrative expenses of any Federal employee health plan which provides benefits for abortions. Makes such prohibition inapplicable if the mother's life would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term or in cases of rape or incest.

(Sec. 512) Prohibits funds made available in this Act from being used by the Executive Office of the President to request from the Federal Bureau of Investigation any official background investigation report on any individual except when: (1) such individual has given his or her express written consent for such a request not more than six months prior to the date of such request and during the same presidential administration; and (2) such request is required due to extraordinary circumstances involving national security.

(Sec. 513) Exempts contracts under the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program from standards promulgated under the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act by the Cost Accounting Standards Board.

Title VI: General Provisions (Departments, Agencies, and Corporations) - Sets forth authorized and prohibited uses of funds appropriated for Federal departments, agencies, and corporations.

(Sec. 619) Bars the use of funds made available for the Customs Service in this Act to allow the importation of any good produced or manufactured by forced or indentured child labor or the release of any good subject to a detention order on the basis that it may have been so produced.

(Sec. 621) Prohibits funds made available in this or any other Act from being obligated or expended for any employee training that: (1) does not meet identified needs for knowledge, skills, and abilities bearing directly upon the performance of official duties; (2) contains elements likely to induce high levels of emotional response or psychological stress in some participants; (3) does not require prior employee notification of the content and methods to be used in the training and written end of course evaluation; (4) contains any methods or content associated with religious or quasi-religious belief systems or "new age" belief systems; or (5) is offensive to, or designed to change, participants' personal values or lifestyle outside the workplace.

(Sec. 630) Authorizes the use of appropriated funds by executive agencies to provide child care services for Federal civilian employees.

(Sec. 631) Permits a woman to breastfeed her child at any location in a Federal building or on Federal property if the woman and her child are otherwise authorized to be present at this location.

(Sec. 632) Makes funds available for interagency funding of efforts to carry out the purposes of the National Science and Technology Council which benefit multiple Federal entities.

(Sec. 634) Amends the Government Management Reform Act of 1994 to extend franchise fund pilot programs.

(Sec. 635) Amends Federal law to: (1) require the Department of the Navy to provide and pay for utilities for the official residence of the Vice President without reimbursement; and (2) authorize the Secretary of the Navy to accept gifts of consumable items, or funds for them, to be accepted for use at official functions at the Vice President's residence.

(Sec. 638) Requires each executive agency covered by telecommuting provisions of the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 1999 to report to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 60 days after the close of FY 2001 concerning its efforts to implement the intent of such provisions.

(Sec. 639) Prohibits funds made available in this or any other Act from being used by any Federal agency to do the following with specified exceptions: (1) collect, review, or create any aggregate list, derived from any means, that includes the collection of any personally identifiable information relating to an individual's access to or use of any Federal Government Internet site of the agency; or (2) enter into any agreement with a third party to collect, review, or obtain any aggregate list, derived from any means, that includes the collection of any personally identifiable information relating to an individual's access to or use of any nongovernmental Internet site.

(Sec. 640) Revises requirements for mandatory separation of air traffic controllers to extend the deadline for such separation to the date of completion of age and service requirements for an annuity under immediate retirement provisions.

(Sec. 641) Requires agencies to annually submit recommendations to OPM for awarding of ranks recognizing accomplishment to individuals serving in certain senior career positions classified above GS-15.

(Sec. 643) Bars funds appropriated by this Act from being used to enter into or renew a contract which provides for prescription drug coverage, except where the contract also includes a provision for contraceptive coverage. Provides that nothing in this section shall apply to a contract with any of two specified religious plans and any existing or future plan whose carrier objects to such coverage on the basis of religious beliefs.

(Sec. 644) Recognizes the United States Anti-Doping Agency as the official anti-doping agency for Olympic, Pan American, and Paralympic sport in the United States.

(Sec. 645) Amends the Floyd D. Spence National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2001 (Spence Act) to deem the Executive Director and employees of the United States-China Security Review Commission to be Federal employees for purposes of leave and insurance and annuities.

(Sec. 646) Mandates a 4.6 percent increase in rates of basic pay for the statutory pay systems in FY 2002 with respect to pay schedules and locality-based comparability payments under Federal civil service law. States that such increase shall be paid from appropriations made to each applicable department or agency for salaries and expenses for FY 2002.

(Sec. 647) Directs each agency Inspector General to report to the Committee on Appropriations (sic) on policies and procedures in place to give first priority to the location of new offices and facilities in rural areas.

(Sec. 648) Amends the Spence Act to extend the deadline for submission of annual reports to Congress by the United States-China Security Review Commission.

(Sec. 650) Breast Cancer Research Stamp Act of 2001 - Amends Federal postal law to reauthorize the issuance of the breast cancer research postage stamp at a special rate of postage.

(Sec. 651) Amends Federal law to authorize the U.S. Postal Service, in the exercise of its authority to contract with an air carrier for the transportation of mail by aircraft, to require an air carrier to accept as mail any shipments of day-old poultry and such other live animals as postal regulations allow to be transmitted as mail matter. Authorizes the U.S. Postal Service to assess a reasonable surcharge as postage to compensate air carriers for any additional expense incurred in handling such shipments.

(Sec. 652) 9/11 Heroes Stamp Act of 2001 - Directs the U.S. Postal Service to issue a semipostal at a specified postage rate in order to provide assistance to the families of emergency relief personnel killed or permanently disabled in the line of duty in connection with the terrorist attacks against the United States on September 11, 2001. Requires transfer of all proceeds to the Federal Emergency Management Agency under arrangements with the Postal Service.

Expresses the sense of Congress that such stamp should depict the efforts of emergency relief personnel at the site of the World Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon in Arlington, Virginia.

(Sec. 653) Stamp Out Domestic Violence Act of 2001 - Directs the U.S. Postal Service to issue a semipostal in order to provide funding for domestic violence programs. Requires transfer of all proceeds to the Department of Health and Human Services under arrangements with the Postal Service.