H.R.1105 - 111th Congress (2009-2010): Omnibus Appropriations Act, 2009
Array ( [actionDate] => 2009-02-25 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in House: On passage Passed by the Yeas and Nays: 245 - 178 (Roll no. 86).(text: CR H2657-2789) [externalActionCode] => 8000 [description] => Passed House )

There are 4 summaries for H.R.1105. Public Law (03/11/2009) Passed Senate without amendment (03/10/2009) Passed House amended (02/25/2009) Introduced in House (02/23/2009) Bill summaries are authored by CRS

Shown Here:

Public Law No: 111-8 (03/11/2009)

(This measure has not been amended since it was passed by the House on February 25, 2009. The summary of that version is repeated here.)

Omnibus Appropriations Act, 2009 - (Sec. 4) Declares that the explanatory statement regarding this Act printed in the House of Representatives section of the Congressional Record on or about February 23, 2009, by the Chairman of the Committee on Appropriations of the House shall have the same effect with respect to the allocation of funds and implementation of this Act as if it were a joint explanatory statement of a committee of conference.

(Sec. 5) Makes the following appropriations for FY2009.

Division A: Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2009 - Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2009 - Title I: Agricultural Programs - Appropriates FY2009 funds for the following Department of Agriculture (Department) programs and services: (1) Office of the Secretary of Agriculture (Secretary); (2) Office of the Chief Economist; (3) National Appeals Division; (4) Office of Budget and Program Analysis; (5) Office of Homeland Security; (6) Office of the Chief Information Officer; (7) Office of the Chief Financial Officer; (8) Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights; (9) Office of Civil Rights; (10) Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration; (11) agriculture buildings and facilities and rental payments; (12) hazardous materials management; (13) departmental administration; (14) Office of the Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations; (15) Office of Communications; (16) Office of the Inspector General; (17) Office of the General Counsel; (18) Office of the Under Secretary for Research, Education, and Economics; (19) Economic Research Service; (20) National Agricultural Statistics Service; (21) Agricultural Research Service; (22) Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service; (23) Native Americans Institutions Endowment Fund; (24) extension and integrated activities; (25) Office of the Under Secretary for Marketing and Regulatory Programs; (26) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service; (27) Agricultural Marketing Service; (28) Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration; (29) Office of the Under Secretary for Food Safety; (30) Food Safety and Inspection Service; (31) Office of the Under Secretary for Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services; (32) Farm Service Agency; (33) Risk Management Agency; (34) Federal Crop Insurance Corporation Fund; and (35) Commodity Credit Corporation Fund.

Title II: Conservation Programs - Appropriates funds for the following: (1) Office of the Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment; and (2) Natural Resources Conservation Service.

Title III: Rural Development Programs - Appropriates funds for the following: (1) Office of the Under Secretary for Rural Development; (2) rural development salaries and expenses; (3) Rural Housing Service; (4) Rural Business-Cooperative Service; and (5) Rural Utilities Service.

Title IV: Domestic Food Programs - Appropriates funds for the following: (1) Office of the Under Secretary for Food, Nutrition and Consumer Services; and (2) Food and Nutrition Service.

Title V: Foreign Assistance and Related Programs - Appropriates funds for the following: (1) Foreign Agricultural Service; (2) Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 (P.L. 480) program account, title I ocean freight differential grants, and title II grants; (3) Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) export loans program account; and (4) McGovern-Dole international food for education and child nutrition program grants.

Title VI: Related Agencies and Food and Drug Administration - Appropriates funds for the following: (1) Food and Drug Administration (FDA); and (2) Farm Credit Administration.

Title VII: General Provisions - Specifies certain uses and limits on or prohibitions against the use of funds appropriated by this Act.

(Sec. 703) Authorizes the Secretary to transfer unobligated balances to the Working Capital Fund for plant and capital equipment acquisition.

(Sec. 704) States that appropriations under this Act shall not remain available for obligation beyond the current fiscal year unless expressly provided for.

(Sec. 705) Limits negotiated indirect costs on cooperative agreements between the Department and nonprofit organizations to 10%.

(Sec. 708) Prohibits the use of funds under this Act for the Safe Meat and Poultry Inspection Panel.

(Sec. 709) Requires that Department agencies reimburse each other for employees detailed for longer than 30 days.

(Sec. 712) Prohibits, without congressional notification, funds available under this Act or under previous appropriations Acts from being used through a reprogramming of funds to: (1) eliminate or create a new program; (2) relocate or reorganize an office or employees; (3) privatize federal employee functions; or (4) increase funds or personnel for a project for which funds have been denied or restricted.

Prohibits, without congressional notification, funds available under this Act or under previous appropriations Acts from being used through a reprogramming of funds in excess of $500,000 or 10%, whichever is less: (1) to augment an existing program; (2) to reduce by 10% funding or personnel for any existing program; or (3) that results from a reduction in personnel which would result in a change in existing programs.

(Sec. 713) Prohibits the use of funds for user fee proposals that fail to provide certain budget impact information.

(Sec. 714) Prohibits the use of funds to close or relocate a Rural Development office unless the Secretary determines the cost effectiveness and/or enhancement of program delivery.

(Sec. 715) Prohibits funds made available by this Act from being used to close or relocate the FDA Division of Pharmaceutical Analysis in St. Louis, Missouri, outside the city or county limits.

(Sec. 716) Appropriates funds to the Denali Commission to address solid waste disposal problems which threaten to contaminate rural drinking water supplies.

(Sec. 717) Limits funds to carry out the environmental quality incentives program under the Food Security Act of 1985.

(Sec. 718) Limits funds made available in FY2009 or preceding fiscal years under PL 480 to reimburse CCC for the release of certain commodities under the Bill Emerson Humanitarian Trust Act.

(Sec. 719) Prohibits the use of CCC funds for dam rehabilitation under the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act.

(Sec. 720) Makes funds available in the current fiscal year for agricultural management assistance under the Federal Crop Insurance Act and for specified conservation programs under the Food Security Act of 1985 until expended for obligations made in the current fiscal year.

(Sec. 721) Prohibits fund use under this Act by any executive branch entity to produce a prepackaged news story for U.S. broadcast or distribution unless it contains audio or text notice that it was produced or funded by such executive entity.

(Sec. 722) Makes eligible for economic development and job creation assistance under the Rural Electrification Act in the same manner as a borrower under such Act any former Rural Utilities Service borrower that has repaid or prepaid an insured, direct or guaranteed loan under such Act, or any not-for-profit utility that is eligible to receive an insured or direct loan under such Act.

(Sec. 723) Lowers the FY2009 threshold amount before certain agricultural funds under the Act of 1935 may be transferred to the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act.

Rescinds certain unobligated amounts under the Act of 1935.

Limits funds for free fresh fruits and vegetables in elementary schools under the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act until October 1, 2009.

(Sec. 724) Authorizes the Secretary to: (1) make funding and other assistance available through the emergency watershed protection program to repair and prevent damage to nonfederal land in watersheds that have been impaired by fires initiated by the federal government; and (2) waive related cost sharing requirements.

(Sec. 725) Appropriates funds for a grant to the National Center for Natural Products Research for construction or renovation to carry out the research objectives of the FDA natural products research grant.

(Sec. 726) Appropriates funds for construction of an agriculture pest facility in Hawaii.

(Sec. 727) Prohibits fund use under this Act to establish or implement a rule allowing U.S. importation of poultry products from the People's Republic of China (PRC).

(Sec. 728) Appropriates funds to the Farm Service Agency for a pilot program to demonstrate the use of new technologies that increase the growth rate of reforested hardwood trees on private non-industrial forests lands on the Gulf of Mexico coast that were damaged by Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

(Sec. 729) Prohibits the Department from using funds under this Act to implement the risk-based inspection program in any location until the Office of Inspector General of the Department has reported to the Food Safety and Inspection Service and the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations regarding the data used in the program's development.

(Sec. 730) Directs the Secretary, until receipt of the 2010 decennial Census, to consider: (1) Palmview, Texas, Pharr, Texas, Hidalgo, Texas, Alton, Texas, La Joya, Texas, Penitas, Texas, Schertz, Texas, Converse, Texas, Cibolo, Texas, and the Township of Bern, Pennsylvania, eligible for rural business program loans and grants; (2) the County of Nueces, Texas, eligible for the purposes of financing a beef processing facility under the business and industry loan guarantee program; (3) Asheboro, North Carolina, eligible for rural community facilities program loans and grants; (4) Healdsburg, California, Imperial, California, Havelock, North Carolina, and Newton, North Carolina, eligible for rural water and waste disposal program loans and grants; and (5) Aptos, California, eligible for rural housing service loans and grants.

(Sec. 731) Appropriates funding for the Bill Emerson National Hunger Fellows and Mickey Leland International Hunger Fellows.

(Sec. 732) Appropriates funds for grants to: (1) the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade, and Consumer Protection; (2) the Vermont Agency of Agriculture, Foods, and Markets; and (3) the Graham Avenue Business Improvement District, New York.

(Sec. 733) Amends the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act to repeal certain Delta Regional Authority recordkeeping requirements.

(Sec. 734) Directs the Natural Resources Conservation Service to provide financial and technical assistance through the watershed and flood prevention operations program for the: (1) Pocasset River Floodplain Management Project in Rhode Island; (2) East Locust Creek Watershed Plan Revision in Missouri, including up to 100% of the engineering assistance and 75% cost share for construction cost of site RW1; (3) Little Otter Creek Watershed project in Missouri; (4) Churchill Woods Dam Removal project in DuPage County, Illinois; (5) Dunloup Creek Watershed Project in Fayette and Raleigh Counties, West Virginia; (6) Alameda Creek Watershed Project in Alameda County, California; (7) Colgan Creek Restoration project in Sonoma County, California; (8) Hurricane Katrina-Related Watershed Restoration project in Jackson County, Mississippi; (9) Lake George Watershed Protection project in Warren County, New York; and (10) Pidcock-Mill Creeks Watershed project in Bucks County, Pennsylvania.

(Sec. 735) Amends the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act regarding the program for at-risk school children to: (1) make Vermont and Maryland program participants; and (2) increase the total number of program states from 8 to 10.

(Sec. 736) Prohibits, regarding the specialty crop research initiative, funds from being used to prohibit the provision of certain in-kind support from nonfederal sources.

(Sec. 737) Prohibits the U.S. Importation of any ruminant or swine, or any fresh (including chilled or frozen) meat or product of any ruminant or swine, that is born, raised, or slaughtered in Argentina until the Secretary has reviewed the domestic animal health aspects of the proposal to allow such products' importation and has reported to the appropriate congressional committees.

(Sec. 738) Makes unobligated balances from appropriations under this Act for the Farm Service Agency and the Rural Development mission area available through September 30, 2010, for information technology expenses.

(Sec. 739) Prohibits funds under this Act from being used to inspect horses for slaughter purposes.

Division B: Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2009 - Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2009 - Makes appropriations for FY2009 for the Departments of Commerce and Justice, for science-related programs, and related agencies.

Title I: Department of Commerce - Department of Commerce Appropriations Act, 2009 - Makes appropriations for the Department of Commerce for FY2009 for: (1) the International Trade Administration; (2) the Bureau of Industry and Security; (3) the Economic Development Administration; (4) the Minority Business Development Agency; (5) economic and statistical analysis programs; (6) the Bureau of the Census; (7) the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, including for grants for public telecommunications facilities planning and construction; (8) the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO); (9) the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), including amounts for the Hollings Manufacturing Extension Partnership and for construction of new research facilities; (10) the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), including an amount for procurement, acquisition, and construction of capital assets; (11) restoration of Pacific salmon populations; (12) the Coastal Zone Management Fund; (13) the fisheries finance program account; and (14) departmental management, including for the Office of Inspector General and the renovation and modernization of the Herbert C. Hoover Building.

(Sec. 105) Prohibits funding under this Act, or any other Act, to register, issue, transfer, or enforce any trademark of the phrase "Last Best Place."

(Sec. 106) Authorizes the Secretary of Commerce to promulgate safety and health standards or regulations for scientific and occupational diving within NOAA.

(Sec. 107) Incorporates certain legal requirement pertaining to NOAA contracts for development of a major program (an activity approved to proceed to implementation that has an estimated life-cycle cost of more than $250 million).

(Sec. 109) Provides for a transfer of funds for the Southern New England Cooperative Research Initiative for conservation activities in Rhode Island.

(Sec. 110) Includes the state of Nevada in the program for Pacific Coastal salmon recovery.

(Sec. 111) Designates the Secretary of Commerce as the representative of the United States in negotiating and monitoring international agreements regarding fisheries, marine mammals, or sea turtles.

Title II: Department of Justice - Department of Justice Appropriations Act, 2009 - Makes appropriations for the Department of Justice (DOJ) for 2009 for: (1) general administration, including for information sharing technology, a nationwide Integrated Wireless Network to support federal law enforcement and the costs of existing Land Mobile Radio legacy systems, administration of pardon and clemency petitions and immigration-related activities, the Federal Detention Trustee, and the Office of Inspector General; (2) the U.S. Parole Commission; (3) legal activities, including for reimbursement from the Vaccine Injury Compensation Trust Fund for processing cases under the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986, antitrust enforcement, the Offices of the U.S. Attorneys, the U.S. Trustee Program, the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission, fees and expenses of witnesses, the Community Relations Service, and the Assets Forfeiture Fund; (4) the U.S. Marshals Service, including for courthouse security equipment and construction; (5) the National Security Division; (6) interagency crime and drug enforcement; (7) the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI); (8) the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA); (9) the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF); (10) the federal prison system, including for the construction of new buildings and facilities and the Federal Prison Industries, Incorporated (subject to certain limitations on administrative expenses); (11) the Office on Violence Against Women for violence against women prevention and prosecution programs; and (12) the Office of Justice Programs, including for state and local law enforcement assistance, necessary expenses to implement the "Weed and Seed" program, community-oriented policing service, juvenile justice programs, and public safety officers benefits.

(Sec. 202) Prohibits funding to: (1) pay for an abortion, except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term or in the case of rape; or (2) require any person to perform or facilitate an abortion.

(Sec. 204) Reaffirms the obligation of the Director of the Bureau of Prisons to provide escort services necessary for a female inmate to receive an abortion outside a federal facility.

(Sec. 206) Authorizes the Attorney General to extend through FY2010 the Personnel Management Demonstration Project without limitation on the number of employees or the positions covered.

(Sec. 207) Extends certain authorities for FBI and DEA undercover investigative operations to ATF.

(Sec. 208) Prohibits funding to transport a maximum or high security prisoner other than to a prison or facility certified by the Bureau of Prisons as appropriately secure.

(Sec. 209) Prohibits funding by federal prisons to purchase cable television services or equipment used primarily for recreational purposes. Allows such services for equipment for inmate training or for religious or educational programs.

(Sec. 210) Restricts funding for the FBI Sentinel project, or for any other new or enhanced information technology programs having estimated development costs in excess of $100 million.

(Sec. 212) Prohibits funding for private-public competitions for work performed by employees of the Bureau of Prisons or of Federal Prison Industries, Incorporated.

(Sec. 213) Prohibits funding for U.S. Attorneys who are assigned dual or additional responsibilities by the Attorney General that exempt such U.S. Attorneys from applicable residency requirements.

(Sec. 214) Restricts funding for future phases of the FBI's Sentinel program until the Attorney General certifies to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations that the majority of work on existing phases for the program have been completed in accordance with a performance measurement baseline.

Title III: Science - Science Appropriations Act, 2009 - Makes appropriations for FY2009 for: (1) the Office of Science and Technology Policy; (2) the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for science, aeronautics, exploration research and development activities, and education and the Office of Inspector General; and (3) the National Science Foundation (NSF) for research, equipment and facilities construction, education and human resources, agency operations and award management, the Office of the National Science Board, and the Office of Inspector General.

Requires the NASA Administrator to report to Congress by February 2, 2009, on Space Shuttle retirement and transition activities for FY2006-FY2015.

Title IV: Related Agencies - Makes appropriations for FY2009 for: (1) the Commission on Civil Rights; (2) the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC); (3) the International Trade Commission (ITC); (4) the Legal Services Corporation; (5) the Marine Mammal Commission; (6) the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative; and (7) the State Justice Institute.

Prohibits EEOC from taking any action to implement any workforce repositioning, restructuring, or reorganization until notice of such actions is given to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations.

Title V: General Provisions - (Sec. 501) Prohibits funding for publicity or propaganda purposes not authorized by Congress.

(Sec. 506) Prohibits funding to implement, administer, or enforce certain EEOC guidelines covering harassment based on religion.

(Sec. 507) Renders any person who mislabels a product sold in or shipped to the United States as "Made in America" ineligible to receive any contract or subcontract funded by this Act.

(Sec. 510) Prohibits funding to promote the sale or export of tobacco or tobacco products or to seek the removal of restrictions on marketing of such products by foreign countries.

(Sec. 511) Prohibits funding for the implementation of: (1) any user fee for background checks under the Brady Handgun Control Act of 1993; and (2) any background check system that does not require and result in the destruction of information submitted by an individual certified as eligible to possess or receive a firearm.

(Sec. 513) Prohibits the use of DOJ funds to discriminate against or denigrate the religious or moral beliefs of students who participate in DOJ programs or of the parents or legal guardians of such students.

(Sec. 516) Requires ATF to make certain disclosures in its data releases about the limitations of trace data in making conclusions about firearms-related crime.

(Sec. 517) Requires the Inspectors General of the Departments of Commerce and Justice, NASA, and NSF to conduct and report to Congress on audits of grants or contracts funded by this Act Prohibits the use of funds for banquets and conferences not directly related to a grant or contract purpose. Requires a grant or contract recipient to submit a conflict of interest statement.

(Sec. 518) Prohibits the use of funds under this Act to: (1) issue patents on claims directed to or encompassing a human organism; (2) support or justify the use of torture by any official or contract employee of the U.S. government; (3) require certain licenses for the export of firearms to Canada, except when the President determines that Canada has not maintained adequate import controls such that there is a significant diversion of such firearms for use in international terrorism or in armed conflict in another nation; (4) deny certain import applications for curios or relics, firearms, parts, or ammunition; (5) include certain provisions of the United States-Singapore Free Trade Agreement, the United States-Australia Free Trade Agreement, or the United States-Morocco Free Trade Agreement in any new bilateral or multilateral trade agreement; or (6) authorize or issue a national security letter in contravention of certain laws authorizing the FBI to issue such letters.

(Sec. 525) Authorizes funding for DOJ intelligence activities during FY2008 until the enactment of the Intelligence Authorization Act for FY2009.

(Sec. 526) Requires the departments, agencies, and commissions funded under this Act to establish and maintain on their websites: (1) a direct link to their Offices of Inspectors General; and (2) a mechanism on the Offices of Inspectors General website for anonymously reporting waste, fraud, or abuse.

(Sec. 528) Prohibits funding for: (1) purposes inconsistent with certain U.S. objectives relating to trade remedy laws; (2) the purchase of first class or premium airline travel that is inconsistent with federal regulations; or (3) the attendance of more than 50 federal employees at any single conference outside the United States.

Division C: Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2009 - Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2009 - Title I: Department of Defense - Civil - Makes FY2009 appropriations to: (1) the Department of the Army, Corps of Engineers-Civil for functions pertaining to rivers and harbors, flood and storm damage reduction, shore protection, and aquatic ecosystem restoration; (2) general investigations and construction; (3) flood damage reduction for the Mississippi River alluvial valley below Cape Girardeau, Missouri; (4) operation and maintenance expenses; (5) administration of laws pertaining to regulation of navigable waters and wetlands; (6) cleanup of contamination from sites in the United States resulting from work performed as part of the early atomic energy program; (7) general administration of the civil works program in the headquarters of the Corps; and (8) the Office of Assistant Secretary of the Army (Civil Works).

(Sec. 101) Specifies reprogramming allowances.

Directs the Corps of Engineers to report to the congressional appropriations committees and establish the baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for the current fiscal year.

(Sec. 102) Prohibits the use of funds to implement any pending or future competitive sourcing actions under OMB Circular A-76 or High Performing Organizations for the Corps of Engineers.

(Sec. 105) Prohibits the use of funds available under this Act to carry out any water reallocation project or component under the Wolf Creek Project, Lake Cumberland, Kentucky, except a water reallocation for Lake Cumberland, Kentucky, under an existing agreement or payment schedule.

(Sec. 106) Amends the Energy and Water Development Appropriations Act, 2006 to increase from 75% to 100% the federal expense incurred for planning studies, watershed surveys and assessments, or technical studies of the Secretary of the Army (the Secretary under this title) to accomplish the purposes of the 2003 Biological Opinion (including any related subsequent biological opinion) and the collaborative program long-term plan.

Requires the Secretary, in carrying out a study, survey, or assessment, to consult with federal, state, tribal and local governmental entities, as well as entities participating in the Middle Rio Grande Endangered Species Collaborative Program. Authorizes the Secretary also to provide that Collaborative Program with planning and administrative assistance, which shall not be subject to cost sharing requirements with nonfederal interests.

(Sec. 107) Prohibits the use of funds to award a continuing contract for any project for which funds are derived from the Inland Waterways Trust Fund.

(Sec. 108) Authorizes the Secretary to study the Missouri River Projects located within the Missouri River basin, at full federal expense, with the express purpose of reviewing the original project purposes based on the Flood Control Act of 1944, as amended.

(Sec. 109) Amends the Energy and Water Development Appropriations Act, 2004, as amended, to increase the authorization of appropriations for construction of the permanent bridge as part of the project for flood damage reduction and environmental restoration, American River Watershed, California.

(Sec. 110) Amends the Water Resources Development Act of 1996 to direct the Secretary to credit toward the nonfederal share of the flood control project, San Lorenzo River, California, up to $2 million of the costs expended by nonfederal interests for the replacement and reconstruction of the Soquel Avenue Bridge.

(Sec. 111) Modifies the Missouri River Levee System (MRLS) Unit L-385 Project, Riverside, Missouri, to direct the Secretary, acting through the Chief of Engineers, to take necessary action to correct deficiencies in the L-385 levee system in Riverside, Missouri, at full federal expense.

(Sec. 112) Directs the Secretary, acting through the Chief of Engineers, to transfer to the Secretary of Health and Human Services, instead of the Secretary of the Interior, upon completion, of the rural health care facility being built on the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation of the Three Affiliated Tribes, North Dakota.

(Sec. 113) Amends the Water Resources Development Act of 1992 to increase the authorization of appropriations for the Lower Mississippi River Museum and Riverfront Interpretive Site, Vicksburg, Mississippi.

(Sec. 114) Amends the Water Resources Development Act of 2007 to modify the Middle Rio Grande, New Mexico, restoration project to require it to be carried out in accordance with the plans recommended in the feasibility report for the Middle Rio Grande Bosque, New Mexico, scheduled for completion in December 2008.

Limits any requirement for nonfederal participation in a project carried out in the bosque of Bernalillo County, New Mexico, to the provision of lands, easements, rights-of-way, relocations, and dredged material disposal areas necessary for project construction, operation, and maintenance.

(Sec. 115) Authorizes the nonfederal interest for the flood control project, San Antonio Channel, Texas, under the Water Resources Development Act of 2007 to: (1) carry out design and construction work in advance of federal appropriations; or (2) provide funds directly to the Secretary for the Secretary to carry out such work.

Requires the Secretary to reimburse the nonfederal interest for any costs incurred by it in excess of the nonfederal share of total project costs, subject to the availability of appropriations.

(Sec. 116) Authorizes the Colorado Department of Natural Resources to perform modifications of the Chatfield Reservoir and any required mitigation resulting from project implementation. Requires the Secretary, in carrying out the reassignment of storage space in the Reservoir, to collaborate with the Colorado Department of Natural Resources and local interests to determine costs to be repaid for storage that reflects the limited reliability of the resources and the capability of nonfederal interests to make use of such reallocated storage space.

(Sec. 117) Amends the Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2005, as contained in division C of Public Law 108-447, to repeal the Secretary's authorization to carry out, at full federal expense, structural and nonstructural projects for storm damage prevention and reduction, coastal erosion, and ice and glacial damage in Alaska, including relocation of affected communities and construction of replacement facilities.



(Sec. 118) Directs the Secretary, acting through the Chief of Engineers, to reassign the regulatory boundaries of the Chicago District to align with the existing civil works boundaries of the Chicago District.

Title II: Department of the Interior - Makes FY2009 appropriations to the Department of the Interior for: (1) the Central Utah Project; and (2) the Bureau of Reclamation, including for management, development, and restoration of water and related natural resources, the Central Valley Project Restoration Fund, California Bay-Delta restoration, and policy and administration in the Office of the Commissioner, the Denver office, and offices in the five regions of the Bureau of Reclamation.

(Sec. 201) Specifies reprogramming allowances.

Directs the Bureau of Reclamation to report quarterly to the congressional appropriations committees on all the funds reprogrammed between programs, projects, activities, or categories of funding.

(Sec. 202) Prohibits the use of funds to determine the final point of discharge for the interceptor drain for the San Luis Unit until development by the Secretary of the Interior (the Secretary under this title) and the state of California of a plan to minimize any detrimental effect of the San Luis drainage waters.

Requires the costs of the Kesterson Reservoir Cleanup Program and the San Joaquin Valley Drainage Program to be classified as reimbursable or nonreimbursable and collected until fully repaid. Makes any future US obligations relating to drainage for that Unit fully reimbursable by Unit beneficiaries.

(Sec. 203) Prohibits the use of any funds to pay the salaries and expenses of personnel to purchase or lease water in the Middle Rio Grande or the Carlsbad Projects in New Mexico, except in compliance with specified purchase requirements.

(Sec. 204) Declares that funds under this title for Drought Emergency Assistance shall be made available primarily for leasing of water for specified drought-related purposes from willing lessors, in compliance with existing state laws and administered under state water priority allocation.

(Sec. 205) Authorizes the Secretary, acting through the Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation, to enter into grants, cooperative agreements, and other agreements with irrigation or water districts and states to fund up to 50% of the cost of planning, designing, and constructing improvements that will conserve water, increase water use efficiency, or enhance water management through measurement or automation, at existing water supply projects within specified states.

(Sec. 206) Amends the Energy and Water Development Appropriations Act, 2004 to repeal the requirement that the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation and the Director of the Fish and Wildlife Service, establish an executive committee to improve the efficiency and expediting the efforts of the Endangered Species Act Collaborative Program Workgroup.

Directs the Secretary, instead, to establish an Executive Committee of the Middle Rio Grande Endangered Species Collaborative Program.

Authorizes the Secretary (acting through the Commissioner of Reclamation), in collaboration with the Executive Committee, to enter into any grants, contracts, cooperative agreements, interagency agreements, or other agreements deemed necessary to comply with the 2003 Biological Opinion, or any related subsequent biological opinion, or in furtherance of the objectives in the collaborative program long-term plan.

Sets the nonfederal share of such activities at 25%, to be determined on a programmatic, rather than a project-by-project basis.

(Sec. 207) Amends the Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2008 to: (1) require that protection of the native fishery and water quality of Independence Lake (Nevada), for which specified funds are allocated to a nonprofit conservation organization, be determined by the organization; (2) repeal the requirement that the retirement of water rights, for which specified other funds are allocated the Newlands Project Water Rights Fund for a Federal-State-Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe program in Nevada, be pursuant to the Truckee-Carson-Pyramid Lake Water Rights Settlement Act; and (3) extend from June 30, 2010, through June 30, 2012, the deadline for compliance with all applicable federal laws and regulations relating to the conveyance of the Carson Lake and Pasture to the state of Nevada.

(Sec. 208) Directs the Secretary, acting through the Commissioner of Reclamation, to allocate certain funds made available under the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 with respect to at-risk natural desert terminal lakes. Specifies such allocations to: (1) the Desert Research Institute for LIDAR acquisition data in the Walker River Basin to supplement water rights research and data; and (2) the Director of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to monitor the ability of west central Nevada lakes to support migratory loons, and identify wintering areas and annual range of loons using Walker Lake during migration.

Title III: Department of Energy - Makes appropriations for FY2009 to the Department of Energy (DOE) for: (1) Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy: (2) Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability; (3) Nuclear Energy; (4) Fossil Energy Research and Development, including clean coal technology; (5) Naval Petroleum and Oil Shale Reserves; (6) the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR); (7) the Northeast Home Heating Oil Reserve; (8) the Energy Information Administration; (9) Non-defense Environmental Cleanup; (10) the Uranium Enrichment Decontamination and Decommissioning Fund; (11) Science; (12) Nuclear Waste disposal; (13) the Title 17 Innovative Technology Loan Guarantee Program; (14) departmental administration; (15) the Office of the Inspector General; (16) the National Nuclear Security Administration, including Weapons Activities, Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation, Naval Reactors, and the Office of the Administrator; (17) Defense Environmental Cleanup and other defense activities; and (18) Defense Nuclear Waste Disposal.

Approves certain expenditures from the Bonneville Power Administration Fund. Prohibits new direct loan obligations during FY2009.

Makes appropriations for: (1) operation and maintenance for the Southeastern, Southwestern, and Western Area Power Administrations; (2) the Falcon and Amistad Operating and Maintenance Fund; and (3) the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC).

(Sec. 301) Prohibits the use of appropriated funds for certain noncompetitive management and operating contracts, unless such contracts are awarded using competitive procedures or the Secretary of Energy grants a waiver on a case-by-case basis.

(Sec. 302) Prohibits the use of funds appropriated under this Act to: (1) prepare or initiate Requests For Proposals (RFPs) for a program that has not been funded by Congress; (2) provide enhanced severance payments to DOE employees; or (3) develop or implement a workforce restructuring plan that covers DOE employees.

Prohibits the use of funds appropriated under this Act to augment funds for severance payments and other benefits and community assistance grants unless DOE submits a reprogramming request to the appropriate congressional committees.

(Sec. 305) States that unless the Administrator of the Bonneville Power Administration certifies in advance that energy efficiency services are not available from private sector businesses, appropriated funds may not be used to enter into any agreement to perform energy efficiency services outside the legally defined Bonneville service territory (except services provided internationally).

(Sec. 306) Requires DOE to ensure broad public notice when it makes a user facility available to potential users, or when it seeks certain input regarding such facility.

(Sec. 307) States that funds appropriated for intelligence activities are deemed to be specifically authorized by the Congress for purposes of the National Security Act of 1947 during FY2009 until the enactment of the Intelligence Authorization Act for FY2009.

(Sec. 308) Permits the Secretary of Energy (Secretary under this title) to authorize up to 8% of appropriated funds for laboratory-directed research and development at government-owned, contractor-operated laboratories.

(Sec. 309) Prohibits the availability of funds provided in this Act for the Reliable Replacement Warhead (RRW).

(Sec. 310) States that, for certain purposes of the Bob Stump National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2003, plant or construction projects with a current estimated cost of less than $10 million are considered as: (1) a plant project for which the approved total estimated cost does not exceed the minor construction threshold; and (2) a construction project with a current estimated cost of less than a minor construction threshold.

(Sec. 311) Directs the Secretary to provide funding to the National Academy of Sciences to inventory and report on the energy development potential on all lands currently managed by DOE.

(Sec. 312) States that the nonfederal share of the Reno Hydrogen Fuel Project shall be 20%.

(Sec. 313) Instructs the Secretary, along with the Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration and the Chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), to establish an Integrated University Program. Authorizes appropriations to each agency for this purpose for FY2009-FY2019.

Requires such agencies to use specified amounts to support: (1) university research and development in areas relevant to their respective agency's mission; and (2) a jointly implemented Nuclear Science and Engineering Grant Program that will support multiyear research projects that do not align with programmatic missions but are critical to maintaining the discipline of nuclear science and engineering.

Title IV: Independent Agencies - Makes appropriations for FY2009 to: (1) the Appalachian Regional Commission; (2) the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board; (3) the Delta Regional Authority; (4) the Denali Commission; (5) the NRC; (6) the Office of Inspector General; (7) the Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board; and (8) the Office of the Federal Coordinator for Alaska Natural Gas Transportation Projects.

Title V: General Provisions - (Sec. 501) Prohibits the use of funds appropriated under this Act to influence congressional action on any legislation or appropriation matters pending before Congress.

(Sec. 502) Prohibits the transfer of any funds made available in this Act to any federal department, agency, or instrumentality, except as provided in this or another appropriation Act.

Division D: Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 2009 - Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 2009 - Title I: Department of the Treasury - Department of the Treasury Appropriations Act, 2009 - Makes appropriations for FY2009 to the Department of the Treasury for: (1) departmental offices; (2) department-wide systems and capital investments programs; (3) the Office of Inspector General; (4) the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration; (5) the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network; (6) the Treasury Forfeiture Fund; (7) the Financial Management Service; (8) the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau; (9) the U.S. Mint for the U.S. Mint Public Enterprise Fund; (10) the Bureau of the Public Debt; (11) the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund Program Account; and (12) the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).

Sets forth certain transfers of funds.

(Sec. 102) Requires the IRS to maintain a training program for IRS employees in taxpayers' rights, in dealing courteously with taxpayers, and in cross-cultural relations.

(Sec. 104) Makes funds for the IRS under any Act available for improved facilities and increased staffing to provide sufficient and effective 1-800 help line service for taxpayers.

(Sec. 105) Makes certain funds available only for tax enforcement and enhanced tax law enforcement.

(Sec. 106) Bars the use of funds made available in this Act to enter into, renew, extend, administer, implement, enforce, provide oversight of, any qualified tax collection contract.

(Sec. 111) Bars the use of funds to the Department or the Bureau of Engraving and Printing to redesign the $1 Federal Reserve note.

(Sec. 113) Extends from 10 to 11 years the authorization for the personnel management demonstration project providing for the compensation and performance management of not more than a combined total of 950 employees who fill critical scientific, technical, engineering, intelligence analyst, language translator, and medical positions in the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF).

(Sec. 115) Prohibits the use of funds appropriated by this Act or any other source to merge the U.S. Mint and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing without the approval of specified congressional committees.

(Sec. 116) Deems funds appropriated by or made available in this Act for the Department's intelligence or intelligence related activities to be specifically authorized by Congress for the purposes of the National Security Act of 1947 during FY2009 until the enactment of the Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2009.

Title II: Executive Office of the President and Funds Appropriated to the President - Executive Office of the President Appropriations Act, 2009 - Makes appropriations for FY2009 for compensation of the President and and for the White House Office, as well as: (1) the Council of Economic Advisers; (2) the Office of Policy Development; (3) the National Security Council (NSC); (4) the Office of Administration; (5) the Office of Management and Budget (OMB); (6) the Office of National Drug Control Policy; (7) the Counterdrug Technology Assessment Center; (8) various other specified federal drug control programs; (9) presidential transition administrative support; (10) special assistance to the President; and (11) the official residence of the Vice President.

Sets forth certain transfers of funds.

(Sec. 202) Requires the President to submit to the congressional appropriations committees, before the initial obligation of funds appropriated for the Office of National Drug Control Policy, a financial plan on the proposed uses of all such funds on a project-by-project basis.

Title III: The Judiciary - Judiciary Appropriations Act, 2009 - Makes appropriations for FY2009 to: (1) the U.S. Supreme Court; (2) the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit; (3) the U.S. Court of International Trade; (4) the courts of appeals, district courts, and other judicial services; (5) defender services; (6) fees of jurors and commissioners; (7) court security; (8) the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts; (9) the Federal Judicial Center; (10) judicial retirement funds; and (11) the U.S. Sentencing Commission.

Sets forth certain transfers of funds.

(Sec. 305) Provides for the mandatory or discretionary delegation, in certain circumstances, of the duties and powers of the Administrator of General Services to a federal (including judicial or legislative branch) agency instead of only to an executive agency.

(Sec. 306) Requires the U.S. Marshals Service to provide, for a pilot program, specified security services (except investigations) for courthouses which federal law authorizes the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to provide.

(Sec. 307) Authorizes the Director of the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts (Director) to pay premium rate increases in the cost of Federal Employees' Group Life Insurance (FEGLI) imposed after April 24, 1999 (including any expenses generated by such payments, as authorized by the U.S. Judicial Conference) for the following judges, age 65 or over: (1) U.S. magistrate judges; (2) bankruptcy judges; (3) judges of the District Courts of Guam, of the Northern Mariana Islands, and of the Virgin Islands; (4) retired bankruptcy and magistrate judges; and (5) retired judges in such U.S. territories and possessions.

(Sec. 308) Amends the Transportation, Treasury, Housing and Urban Development, the Judiciary, the District of Columbia, and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 2006 to repeal the September 30, 2010, termination of (thus extending indefinitely) the Director's authority to enter into certain contracts, including multiyear contracts, to the same extent as the head of an executive agency.

(Sec. 309) Amends the Judicial Improvements Act of 1990 to state that the first vacancy in the office of district judge: (1) in the district of Kansas and in the northern district of Ohio, occurring 18 years (currently 17 years) or more after the confirmation date of the judge named to fill the temporary judgeship created for such district, shall not be filled; and (2) in the District of Hawaii occurring 15 years or more after the confirmation date of the judge named to fill a certain temporary judgeship shall not be filled.

(Sec. 310) States that justices and judges of the United States are authorized to receive, during fiscal year 2009, a salary adjustment from funds appropriated in this Act.

Title IV: District of Columbia - District of Columbia Appropriations Act, 2009 - Makes appropriations to the District of Columbia for FY2009, including amounts for the federal payments for: (1) District of Columbia Resident Tuition Support; (2) Emergency Planning and Security Costs in the District; (3) District of Columbia Courts; (4) Defender Services in District of Columbia Courts; (5) the Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia; (6) the District of Columbia Public Defender Service; (7) the District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority; (8) the Criminal Justice Coordinating Council; (9) the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) of the District of Columbia; (10) school improvement; (11) jump start of public school reform; (12) construction of a consolidated bioterrorism and forensics laboratory; (13) the Central Library and Branch Locations; (14) the Executive Office of the Mayor of the District of Columbia; and (15) other specified uses.

Title V: Independent Agencies - Makes appropriations for FY2009 to independent agencies, including: (1) the Administrative Conference of the United States; (2) the Christopher Columbus Fellowship Foundation; (3) the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC); (4) the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC); (5) the Election Assistance Commission (EAC) for election reform programs; and (6) the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).

(Sec. 502) Prohibits the FCC from using funds appropriated by this Act to modify or amend its rules or regulations for universal service support payments to implement the February 27, 2004, recommendations of the Federal-State Joint Board on Universal Service regarding single connection or primary line restrictions on universal service support payments.

Makes appropriations for FY2009 to: (1) the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), for its Office of Inspector General; (2) the Federal Election Commission (FEC); (3) the Federal Labor Relations Authority (FLRA); (4) the Federal Trade Commission (FTC); (5) the General Services Administration (GSA) for real property activities and the federal buildings fund; (6) the GSA Office of Inspector General; (7) allowances and office staff for former presidents; (8) presidential transition expenses; and (9) Office of Citizens Services Fund.

(Sec. 516) Renames the GSA Consumer Information Center Fund the GSA Federal Citizen Services Fund to disseminate, as under current law, federal government information (currently, federal consumer information) to the public.

(Sec. 517) Authorizes the Administrator of GSA to provide for the use of the GSA federal supply schedules by relief and disaster assistance organizations.

(Sec. 518) Transforms the GSA working capital fund for the operation of a central blue-printing, photostating, and duplicating service into a working capital fund for: (1) administrative support services (including accounting, budget, personnel, legal support and other related services), as well as the printing and reproduction facilities in support of GSA, other federal agencies, and other entities; and (2) other administrative and management services that the GSA Administrator deems appropriate and advantageous.

Permits transfer and merger of unobligated balances appropriated or otherwise made available for GSA operating expenses and salaries into the major equipment acquisitions and development activity of the GSA working capital fund for agency-wide acquisition of capital equipment, automated data processing systems, and financial management and management information systems.

Makes appropriations for FY2009 to: (1) the Harry S Truman Scholarship Foundation Trust Fund; (2) the Merit Systems Protection Board; (3) the Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental Policy Foundation; (4) the Environmental Dispute Resolution Fund; (5) the National Archives and Records Administration; (6) the National Historic Publications and Records Commission Grants Program; (7) the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA); (8) the Community Development Credit Union Revolving Loan Fund; (9) the Office of Government Ethics; (10) the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), including the Office of Inspector General; (11) the government payment for annuitants, employee health benefits, employee life insurance, and the civil service retirement and disability fund; (12) the Office of Special Counsel; (13) the Postal Regulatory Commission; (14) the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board; (15) the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC); (16) the Selective Service System; (17) the Small Business Administration (SBA), including the Office of Inspector General; (18) the U.S. Postal Service, including the Office of Inspector General; and (19) the U.S. Tax Court.

(Sec. 520) Permits limited transfers between funds made available for the SBA for the current fiscal year.

(Sec. 521) Requires all disaster loans issued in Alaska or North Dakota to be administered by the SBA. Prohibits the sale of such loans during FY2009.

(Sec. 522) Prohibits SBA use of funds made available under this Act to implement a specified rule published in the Federal Register pertaining to women-owned small business federal contract assistance procedures.

(Sec. 523) Transfers specified funds to the SBA for designation for the Mingo County Redevelopment Authority.

(Sec. 524) States that specified funds previously designated for the Alabama Small Business Institute of Commerce, Small Business Incubator, Rainbow City, Alabama, shall be made available to the Alabama Small Business Institute of Commerce, Rainbow City, Alabama.

(Sec. 525) Makes specified additional funds available to the SBA through FY2010 for initiatives related to small business development and entrepreneurship, including programmatic and construction activities.

Sets forth certain transfers of funds.

Title VI: General Provisions - This Act - Sets forth permissions for and restrictions upon the use of funds under this Act.

(Sec. 606) Prohibits the expenditure of funds under this Act by an entity unless it agrees that such expenditure will comply with the Buy American Act.

(Sec. 607) Prohibits the availability of funds under this Act to any person or entity that has been convicted of violating the Buy American Act.

(Sec. 610) Prohibits the use of funds under this Act by the Executive Office of the President to request from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) any official background investigation report on any individual, except when: (1) such individual has given his or her express written consent for such request within six months before the date of such request and during the same presidential administration; or (2) such request is required due to extraordinary circumstances involving national security.

(Sec. 611) Makes certain cost accounting standards promulgated under the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act inapplicable to the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program contract.

(Sec. 612) Authorizes OPM to accept and utilize (without regard to any restriction on unanticipated travel expenses) funds made available to OPM pursuant to court approval for resolving litigation and implementing any settlement agreements regarding the nonforeign area cost-of-living allowance program.

(Sec. 613) Denies the availability of funds appropriated by this Act to pay either abortion expenses, or administrative expenses in connection with any health plan under the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program which provides benefits or coverage for abortions (unless the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term, or the pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest).

(Sec. 615) Makes the restriction on purchasing nondomestic articles, materials, and supplies set forth in the Buy American Act inapplicable to the federal acquisition of commercial information technology.

(Sec. 617) Prohibits officers or employees of any regulatory agency or commission funded by this Act from accepting on behalf of that agency, or the agency or commission from accepting, payment or reimbursement from a nonfederal entity for travel, subsistence, or related expenses to enable an officer or employee to participate in any meeting or similar function relating to such individual's official duties, when the entity offering payment or reimbursement is subject to regulation by such agency or commission, or represents such person or entity, unless the person or entity is a nonprofit tax-exempt charitable organization.

(Sec. 618) Authorizes the U.S. Tax Court to pay on behalf of its judges, age 65 or over, any increase in the cost of FEGLI imposed after April 24, 1999, that is incurred after the enactment of the Pension Protection Act of 2006.

(Sec. 619) Authorizes the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board to obligate funds for the merit scholarship program for undergraduate and graduate students enrolled in accredited accounting degree programs, established by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, up to the aggregate amount of funds collected by the Board through FY2008, including accrued interest, as a result of the assessment of monetary penalties. Requires funds available for obligation in FY2009 to remain available until expended.

(Sec. 620) Amends the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 to direct the Secretary of the Treasury to promulgate regulations authorizing by general license certain travel-related transactions for travel to, from, or within Cuba for the marketing and sale of agricultural and medical goods.

(Sec. 621. Prohibits the use of funds made available in this Act to administer, implement, or enforce certain amendments made to the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), related to travel to visit relatives in Cuba.

(Sec. 622) Prohibits the use of funds made available in this Act to administer, implement, or enforce the amendment made to specified federal regulations with respect to the Cuban Assets Control Regulations regarding transactions incident to U.S. exportations and reexportations of U.S. origin items to Cuba, including negotiation of executory contracts.

(Sec. 623) Amends the Christopher Columbus Fellowship Act to authorize appropriations to the Christopher Columbus Fellowship Foundation.

(Sec. 624) Prohibits the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Secretary of the Treasury from determining, for purposes of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 or the Revised Statutes of the United States, that real estate brokerage activity or real estate management activity is an activity financial in nature, or is incidental or complementary to such activity.

(Sec. 625) Amends the Help America Vote Act of 2002 to require certain state recipients of federal funds designated to replace punch card voting systems or lever voting systems to ensure that such voting systems will be replaced in time for the first election for federal office held after November 1, 2010 (currently, the first election after March 1, 2008).

(Sec. 626) Directs the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to initiate a rulemaking proceeding governing mortgage loans. Treats any violation of such rules as a violation of the Federal Trade Commission Act regarding unfair or deceptive acts or practices.

Authorizes a state civil action to enforce the Truth in Lending Act, or any mortgage loan rule promulgated by the FTC, to obtain penalties and relief whenever the state attorney general has reason to believe that the interests of the residents of the state have been or are being threatened or adversely affected by a violation of such Act or rule.

Title VII: General Provisions - Government-Wide - Sets forth requirements for the use of appropriations by designated departments, agencies, and corporations.

(Sec. 727) Prohibits the use of funds by federal agencies to collect, review, create, or contract for any aggregation of data by any means of any personally identifiable information relating to an individual's access to or use of any federal government Internet site.

(Sec. 728) Prohibits the use of funds to enter into or renew a contract for a federal employee health plan which includes a provision providing prescription drug coverage, except where the contract also includes a provision for contraceptive coverage. Exempts specified religious plans from such prohibition. Prohibits a federal employee health plan, however, from discriminating against an individual on the basis that the individual refuses to prescribe or otherwise provide for contraceptives because such activities would be contrary to his or her religious beliefs or moral convictions.

(Sec. 729) Recognizes the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency (USADA) as the official anti-doping agency for Olympic, Pan American, and Paralympic sport in the United States.

(Sec. 730) Allows the use of funds appropriated for official travel by federal departments and agencies, if consistent with OMB Circular A-126 regarding official travel for government personnel, to participate in the fractional aircraft ownership pilot program.

(Sec. 731) Bars the use of funds to implement or enforce restrictions or limitations on the Coast Guard Congressional Fellowship Program, or to implement certain proposed OPM regulations (relating to the detail of executive branch employees to the legislative branch).

(Sec. 732) Prohibits an executive branch agency from purchasing, constructing, and/or leasing any additional facilities, except within or contiguous to existing locations, to conduct federal law enforcement training without advance approval of congressional appropriations committees. Authorizes the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center to obtain the temporary use of additional facilities by lease, contract, or other agreement for training which cannot be accommodated in existing Center facilities.

(Sec. 733) Bars the availability of funds during FY2009 for transfers or reimbursements to the E-Government Initiatives sponsored by OMB before 15 days following an OMB report to the congressional appropriations committees and receipt of their approval of such transfer. Prohibits the obligation or expenditures of such funds for new E-Government initiatives without such committees' explicit approval.

(Sec. 734) Requires the head of an executive department or agency to transfer to or reimburse the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) certain appropriated funds in order to ensure uninterrupted, continuous FAA operation of the Midway Atoll Airfield for the entirety of FY2009 and any period thereafter that precedes the enactment of the Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 2010.

(Sec. 735) Amends the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008, to revise the prohibition on the use of funds for conversion to contractor performance of any executive agency activity or function performed by more than 10 federal employees unless certain public-private competition requirements are met. Repeals the limitation to activities or functions performed by more than 10 federal employees (thus extending the prohibition to conversion of any such activity or function performed by even one federal employee).

(Sec. 736) Amends the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008 to repeal the prohibition on the use of the OMB Circular A-76 to prevent the head of an executive agency from conducting a public-private competition to evaluate the benefits of converting work from contract performance to performance by federal employees in appropriate instances.

Requires the heads of executive agencies, subject to the Federal Activities Inventory Reform Act, to devise and implement guidelines and procedures to ensure that consideration is given to using, on a regular basis, federal employees (insourcing) to perform new functions and functions performed by contractors that could be performed by federal employees.

Prohibits the guidelines and procedures from including any specific limitation or restriction on the number of functions or activities that may be converted to performance by such employees.

Requires such guidelines and procedures to provide that special consideration be given to using federal employees to perform any function that: (1) is a new requirement; or (2) is performed currently by a contractor that has been performed by federal employees at any time during the previous 10 years, and meets other specified criteria.

Excludes from public-private competition under OMB Circular A-76 or any other law or regulation: (1) a new agency function with performance assigned to federal employees; (2) any agency function converting to performance by federal employees; or (3) expansion of an agency function already performed by federal employees.

(Sec. 737) Prohibits the use of funds to begin or announce a study or public-private competition regarding the conversion to contractor performance of any function performed by federal employees pursuant to OMB Circular A-76 or any other administrative regulation, directive, or policy.

(Sec. 738) Amends the Consolidated Security, Disaster Assistance, and Continuing Appropriations Act, 2009, governing military reservists, to make certain basic pay rate adjustments applicable to civilian employees in the Department of Defense who are represented by a labor organization.

(Sec. 739) Bars the use of funds by an executive branch agency, unless otherwise authorized by existing law, to produce any prepackaged news story intended for broadcast or distribution in the United States, unless the story includes a clear notification within its text or audio that it was prepared or funded by that agency.

(Sec. 740) Bars the use of funds in contravention of the Privacy Act or regulations implementing the privacy of records maintained on individuals.

(Sec. 741) Requires each executive department and agency to evaluate the creditworthiness of an individual before issuing him or her a government travel charge card. Prohibits issuance of such a card, except in specified circumstances, to individuals who either lack a credit history or are found to have an unsatisfactory credit history.

Requires such evaluation to include an assessment of the individual's consumer report from a consumer reporting agency.

(Sec. 742) Requires the Director of OMB, in coordination with the governor of each Great Lakes State and the Great Lakes Interagency Task Force, to submit to the appropriate authorizing and appropriating congressional committees a financial report containing: (1) an interagency crosscut report that displays the budget proposed, including any planned interagency or intra-agency transfer, for each of the federal agencies that carries out Great Lakes restoration activities in the upcoming fiscal year; (2) a detailed accounting of all funds received and obligated by all federal agencies and, to the extent available, state agencies using federal funds, for such activities during the current and previous fiscal years; (3) a budget for the proposed projects; and (4) a listing of all projects to be undertaken in the upcoming fiscal year with the federal portion of funds.

(Sec. 743) Prohibits the use of funds for any federal government contract with any foreign incorporated entity which is treated as an inverted domestic corporation under the Homeland Security Act of 2002, or any subsidiary of such an entity.

Requires any Secretary to waive such prohibition if so required in the interest of national security.

(Sec. 744) Requires each executive department and agency to establish on the homepage of its website an obvious, direct link to the website of its respective Inspector General.

Requires each Office of Inspector General to: (1) post on its website any public report or audit (or portion of it) issued within one day of its release; (2) provide a website service to allow an individual to request automatic receipt of related information and receive its electronic transmittal, or notice of its availability without further request; and (3) establish a direct website link for individuals to report waste, fraud, and abuse anonymously.

(Sec. 745) Bars the use of funds to implement, administer, enforce, or apply the rule entitled "Competitive Area" published by OPM in the Federal Register on April 15, 2008.

(Sec. 746) Bars the use of funds to implement, administer, or enforce the provision of Executive Order 13422 which requires each agency head to designate one of the agency's Presidential Appointees to be its Regulatory Policy Officer.

(Sec. 747) Directs OMB to submit a status report on a certain pilot program to develop and implement an inventory to track the cost and size of service contracts that: (1) have been performed poorly by a contractor because of excessive costs or inferior quality, as determined by a contracting officer within the last 5 years; (2) involve inherently governmental functions; or (3) were undertaken without competition.

(Sec. 748) States that Executive Order 13423 ("Strengthening Federal Environmental, Energy, and Transportation Management") remains in effect unless amended after enactment of this Act.

(Sec. 749) Prohibits the use of any appropriated funds for payment of services to any individual carrying out the responsibilities of any position requiring Senate advice and consent in an acting or temporary capacity after the second submission of a nomination for that individual to that position has been withdrawn or returned to the President.

(Sec. 751) Entitles to nonreduction in pay any federal employee who is absent from work in order to perform active duty in the uniformed services pursuant to a call or order to active duty while serving in the uniformed services or National Guard.

Requires the FAA Administrator to prescribe procedures to apply such rights to FAA employees.

(Sec. 752) Requires: (1) each executive department and agency to submit to the OMB Director a report stating the total size of its workforce, differentiated by number of civilian, military, and contract workers as of December 31, 2008; and (2) OMB to delineate the workforce data by individual department and agency, as well as aggregate totals of civilian, military, and contract workers.

Title VIII: General Provisions - District of Columbia - Sets forth authorized or prohibited uses of funds appropriated by this Act identical or similar to corresponding provisions of the District of Columbia Appropriations Act, 2008.

(Sec. 804) Prohibits the use of federal funds provided in this Act for publicity or propaganda purposes or implementation of any policy including boycott designed to support or defeat legislation pending before Congress or any state legislature.

Allows the District of Columbia to use local funds provided in this title to carry out lobbying activities on any matter.

(Sec. 807) Bars the use of federal funds to: (1) implement or enforce the Health Care Benefits Expansion Act of 1992 (also known as the District Domestic Partner Act); or (2) otherwise implement or enforce any system of registration of unmarried, cohabiting couples, including but not limited to registration for the purpose of extending employment, health, or governmental benefits to such couples on the same basis that such benefits are extended to legally married couples.

(Sec. 808) Amends the District of Columbia Home Rule Act to make permanent the Mayor's authority under current law to accept, obligate, and expend federal, private, and other grants received by the District government that are reflected in its budget approved by an Act of Congress.

(Sec. 809) Prohibits the District of Columbia from using funds provided in this Act for any costs associated with the offices of United States Senator or United States Representative under the District of Columbia Statehood Constitutional Convention Initiatives of 1979.

(Sec. 811) Prohibits the use of federal funds contained in this Act by the District of Columbia Attorney General of the District government to provide assistance for any petition drive or civil action which seeks to require Congress to provide for voting representation in Congress for the District.

Declares that nothing in this section bars the Attorney General from reviewing or commenting on briefs in private lawsuits, or from consulting with officials of the District government regarding such lawsuits.

(Sec. 812) Prohibits the use of federal funds contained in this Act for any program of distributing sterile needles or syringes for the hypodermic injection of any illegal drug.

(Sec. 813) Declares that nothing in this Act may be construed to prevent the Council or the Mayor from addressing the issue of the provision of contraceptive coverage by health insurance plans. Expresses the intent of Congress that any legislation enacted on such issue should include a "conscience clause" which provides exceptions for religious beliefs and moral convictions.

(Sec. 814) Prohibits the availability of appropriations for the District government to pay: (1) the fees in excess of $4,000 of an attorney who represents a party or defends an action, including an administrative proceeding, brought against the DC Public Schools under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA); or (2) the fees of an attorney or firm whom the CFO determines to have a pecuniary interest, either through an attorney, officer, or employee of the firm, in any special education diagnostic services, schools, or other special education service providers.

(Sec. 815) Instructs the District of Columbia to report to specified congressional committees on: (1) crime; (2) access to substance and alcohol abuse treatment; (3) management of parolees and pretrial violent offenders; (4) education; (5) improvement in basic District services; (6) application for and management of federal grants; (7) indicators of child and family well-being; and (8) employment.

(Sec. 816) Beginning in FY2009, allows the amount appropriated to the District of Columbia every fiscal year to be increased by up to $100 million from funds identified in the annual comprehensive annual financial report as the District's immediately preceding fiscal year's unexpended general fund surplus.

Limits the use of such funds to specified kinds of expenditures.

(Sec. 817) Authorizes an increase, up to specified amounts, every fiscal year beginning FY2009 in the amount appropriated to the District of Columbia, subject to certain restrictions.

(Sec. 818) Authorizes the CFO, beginning in FY2009, to conduct short-term borrowing from the emergency and contingency reserve funds, subject to specified conditions.

(Sec. 819) Prohibits the use of funds contained in this Act to enact or carry out any law, rule, or regulation to legalize or otherwise reduce penalties associated with the possession, use, or distribution of any schedule I substance under the Controlled Substances Act or any tetrahydrocannabinols (THC) derivative.

Provides that the Legalization of Marijuana for Medical Treatment Initiative of 1998, also known as Initiative 59, approved by the electors of the District on November 3, 1998, shall not take effect.

(Sec. 820) Prohibits the expenditure of funds appropriated under this Act for abortions except where the mother's life would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term, or in cases of rape or incest.

(Sec. 821) Allows the transfer of amounts appropriated in this Act as operating funds to the District's enterprise and capital funds. Requires such transferred amounts to retain appropriation authority consistent with this Act.

(Sec. 822) Amends the District of Columbia Official Code to increase from $80 to $90 the hourly rate for attorneys representing indigent defendants in the District of Columbia courts.

Increases the current cap on maximum compensation paid to an attorney in neglect and termination of parental rights proceedings from: (1) $1,760 to $1,980 for all proceedings from initial hearing through disposition and for all subsequent proceedings other than termination of parental rights; (2) $2,400 to $2,700 for proceedings to terminate parental rights; and (3) $1,200 to $1,350 for appeals of trial court orders.

(Sec. 823) Amends specified law regarding the control of wharf property in the District of Columbia to repeal the wharfage fee.

Division E: Department of the Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2009 - Department of the Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2009 - Makes appropriations for the Department of the Interior, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and related agencies for FY2009.

Title I: Department of the Interior - Makes appropriations for FY2009 to the Department of the Interior for Bureau of Land Management (BLM) for: (1) land and resource management; (2) construction; (3) land acquisition; (4) Oregon and California grant lands; (5) range improvements; (6) service charges, deposits, and forfeitures with respect to public lands; and (7) miscellaneous trust funds. Rescinds unobligated amounts available from proceeds from: (1) the sale of water; and (2) receipts from mineral leasing activities on certain naval oil shale reserves. Requires BLM to collect mining law administration fees in FY2009 and thereafter.

Appropriates funds to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) for: (1) resource management; (2) construction; (3) land acquisition; (4) the National Wildlife Refuge Fund; (5) financial assistance for projects to promote the conservation of neotropical migratory birds; (6) expenses related to carrying out the Endangered Species Act of 1973, the North American Wetlands Conservation Act, the African Elephant Conservation Act, the Asian Elephant Conservation Act of 1997, the Rhinoceros and Tiger Conservation Act of 1994, the Great Ape Conservation Act of 2000, and the Marine Turtle Conservation Act of 2004; and (7) wildlife conservation grants.

Rescinds: (1) unobligated balances made available in the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1991 to carry out the Anadromous Fish Conservation Act; (2) a specified amount of unobligated balances available for endangered species; and (3) unobligated balances available for the Wildlife Conservation and Appreciation Fund from prior year appropriations.

Makes appropriations to the National Park Service (NPS) for: (1) the National Park System (including expenses for carrying out programs of the U.S. Park Police); (2) expenses for national recreation and preservation programs; (3) expenses related to carrying out the Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and the Omnibus Parks and Public Lands Management Act of 1996; (4) construction; and (5) land acquisition and state assistance from the Land and Water Conservation Fund.

Rescinds: (1) unobligated balances in the Historic Preservation Fund; (2) unobligated balances in the Federal Infrastructure Improvement Fund; (3) specified contract authority to obligate funds from the Land and Water Conservation Fund for FY2009; and (4) specified amounts of unobligated balances under the Land and Water Conservation Fund for state assistance and the Urban Park and Recreation Fund.

Makes appropriations for: (1) the U.S. Geological Survey for surveys, investigations, and research; (2) the Minerals Management Service for royalty and offshore minerals management and oil spill research; (3) the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement for regulation and technology and the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund; (4) the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) for operation of Indian programs, construction, Indian land and water claim settlements and miscellaneous payments to Indians, and Indian guaranteed loans; (5) the Office of the Secretary for departmental offices; (6) assistance to U.S. Territories and to carry out the Compacts of Free Association with respect to the Marshall Islands, Palau, and Micronesia; (7) the Office of the Solicitor; (8) the Office of Inspector General; (9) the Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians for the operation of trust programs for Indians; (10) the Department of the Interior for wildland fire management; (11) the Central Hazardous Materials Fund; and (12) the Department of the Interior for natural resource damage assessment and restoration.

Rescinds: (1) a specified amount of unobligated balances available under the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund; and (2) unobligated balances for management of federal lands for subsistence uses.

Sets forth authorized and prohibited uses of funds.

(Sec. 108) Requires the FWS, in carrying out its responsibilities to protect threatened and endangered species of salmon, to implement a system of mass marking of salmonid stocks, intended for harvest, that are released from federally operated or financed hatcheries, including fish releases of coho, chinook, and steelhead species. Requires marked fish to have a visible mark that can be readily identified by commercial and recreational fishers.

(Sec. 109) Prohibits the use of appropriated funds to study or implement any plan to drain Lake Powell or reduce the water level below the range required for operation of the Glen Canyon Dam.

(Sec. 111) Authorizes the Minerals Management Service to accept in FY2009 contributions of money and services to conduct work in support of the orderly exploration and development of Outer Continental Shelf resources.

(Sec. 115) Applies penalties under the Federal Oil and Gas Royalty Management Act to specified leases authorizing exploration for or development of coal, any other solid mineral, or any geothermal resource on federal or Indian lands and any lease, easement, right of way, or other agreement for use of the Outer Continental Shelf or specified resources under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act.

Title II: Environmental Protection Agency - Makes appropriations for FY2009 to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for: (1) science and technology; (2) environmental programs and management; (3) the Office of Inspector General; (4) buildings and facilities; (5) the Hazardous Substance Superfund; (6) the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund Program; (7) expenses to carry out EPA 's responsibilities under the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 concerning oil spill response; and (8) state and tribal assistance grants for environmental programs and infrastructure assistance.

Sets forth authorized and prohibited uses of funds.

Rescinds a specified amount from unobligated balances for carrying out projects and activities funded through the State and Tribal Assistance Grants Account.

Title III: Related Agencies - Makes appropriations for FY2009 to the Department of Agriculture for the Forest Service for: (1) forest and rangeland research; (2) state and private forestry; (3) the National Forest System; (4) capital improvement and maintenance; (5) land acquisitions, including specified National Forest areas in Utah, Nevada, and California; (6) range rehabilitation, protection, and improvement; (7) gifts, donations, and bequests for forest and rangeland research; (8) federal land management in Alaska; and (9) wildland fire management.

Rescinds a specified amount of unobligated balances in the National Forest System.

Makes appropriations for FY2009 to the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) for: (1) the Indian Health Service (IHS); and (2) the National Institutes of Health (NIH) for the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences and the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). Prohibits ATSDR from using funds appropriated for toxic substances and environmental public health to issue in excess of 40 toxicological profiles pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 during FY2009. Allows existing profiles to be updated as necessary.

Makes appropriations to the: (1) Council on Environmental Quality and Office of Environmental Quality; (2) Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board; (3) Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation; (4) Institute of American Indian and Alaska Native Culture and Arts Development; (5) Smithsonian Institution, including the Legacy Fund for major restoration, renovation, and rehabilitation of existing Smithsonian facilities; (6) National Gallery of Art; (7) John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts; (8) Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars; (9) National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities, including the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA), and the National Endowment for the Humanities; (10) Commission of Fine Arts, including expenses for National Capital Arts and Cultural Affairs; (11) Advisory Council on Historic Preservation; (12) National Capital Planning Commission; (13) U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum; (14) Presidio Trust Fund; and (15) the Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Commission.

Title IV: General Provisions - Sets forth limitations on the use of funds under this Act.

(Sec. 405) Requires: (1) estimated overhead charges, deductions, reserves or holdbacks from programs, projects, activities, and subactivities to support government-wide, departmental, agency, or bureau administrative functions or headquarters, regional, or central operations to be presented in annual budget justifications and to be subject to approval by the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations; and (2) changes to such estimates to be presented to such Committees for approval.

(Sec. 407) Prohibits funds from being: (1) used for the sale of timber from giant sequoias located on National Forest System or BLM lands in a manner different than how such sales were conducted in FY2006; (2) obligated or expended to accept or process applications for a patent for any mining or mill site claim located under the general mining laws, with specified exemptions; or (3) expended to conduct leasing and related activities under either the Mineral Leasing Act or the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act within the boundaries of specified National Monuments.

(Sec. 412) Permits the Secretaries of Agriculture and of the Interior to make reciprocal agreements in which the individuals furnished to provide fire management services are considered employees of the foreign country receiving the services for purposes of tort liability. Prohibits the Secretaries from making any agreement in which a foreign country does not assume responsibility for acts or omissions of American firefighters in such country.

(Sec. 414) Prohibits funds from being used: (1) for competitive sourcing studies and any related activities involving Forest Service personnel; or (2) to promulgate or implement EPA's proposed regulations concerning national emission standards for hazardous air pollutants.

(Sec. 418) Authorizes the Secretaries of the Interior and Agriculture to continue the Service First initiative through 2011.

(Sec. 424) Requires the Administrator of the EPA, no later than June 30, 2009, to reconsider, and confirm or reverse the decision to deny California's request to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from new motor vehicles.

(Sec. 425) Prohibits funding from being used to implement the final rule promulgated by the Administrator of EPA entitled "Toxics Release Inventory Burden Reduction Final Rule." Nullifies such rule.

(Sec. 429) Authorizes the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Commerce to withdraw or reissue the final rule relating to "Interagency Cooperation under the Endangered Species Act" issued by the FWS and the National Marine Fisheries Service, and authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to withdraw or reissue the rule relating to "Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants: Special Rule for Polar Bear" issued by the Department of the Interior, within 60 days and without regard to any provision of law that establishes a requirement for such withdrawal.

Division F: Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2009 - Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2009 - Title I: Department of Labor - Department of Labor Appropriations Act, 2009 - Makes appropriations for FY2009 to the Department of Labor, including for: (1) the Employment and Training Administration, including training and employment services; (2) community service employment for older Americans; (3) federal unemployment benefits and allowances; (4) state unemployment insurance and employment service operations; (5) advances to the Unemployment Trust Fund and to the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund; (6) administering employment and training programs; (7) the Employee Benefits Security Administration; (8) the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation; (9) the Employment Standards Administration; (10) certain special benefits, including benefits for disabled coal miners; (11) the Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Fund; (12) the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund; (13) the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA); (14) the Mine Safety and Health Administration; (15) the Bureau of Labor Statistics; (16) the Office of Disability Employment Policy; (17) departmental management; (18) the Office of Job Corps; (19) veterans employment and training; and (20) the Office of Inspector General.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, funds and transfers of funds appropriated under this title.

(Sec. 101) Prohibits use of Job Corps funds under this title to pay individual compensation at a rate in excess of Executive Level I.

(Sec. 102) Allows not more than 1% of discretionary funds for the current fiscal year for the Department of Labor in this Act to be transferred between a program, project, or activity. Prohibits any increase of any such program, project, or activity by more than 3% by any such transfer.

(Sec. 103) Prohibits funds under this Act from being obligated or expended to procure goods mined, produced, manufactured, or harvested or services rendered, in whole or in part, by forced or indentured child labor in industries and host countries already identified by the Department of Labor prior to enactment of this Act, in accordance with a specified executive order.

(Sec. 104) Directs the Secretary of Labor, after September 30, 2008, to issue a monthly transit subsidy to Department of Labor employees in the National Capital Region in an amount of not less than $115.

(Sec. 105) Prohibits the obligation of funds appropriated in this title for demonstration and pilot (including dislocated worker demonstration and pilot), multiservice, research, and multistate projects under the Workforce Investment Act prior to the Secretary of Labor's submission to Congress of a plan detailing the uses of such funds.

(Sec. 106) Authorizes appropriations to the Denali Commission to conduct job training of the local workforce where Denali Commission projects will be constructed.

(Sec. 107) Prohibits the use of funds made available to the Department of Labor for job training grants under the American Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement Act of 1998 for any purpose other than training in the occupations and industries for which employers are using H-1B visas to hire foreign workers.

(Sec. 108) Prohibits the obligation of funds for the award of community-based and other specified job training grants on a noncompetitive basis.

(Sec. 110) Prohibits the use of funds made available in this or any other Act to finalize or implement regulations under the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, the Wagner-Peyser Act of 1933, or the Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act of 2002, until legislation reauthorizing the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 or the Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act is enacted.

(Sec. 111) Prohibits recipients of employment and training funds from using them to pay the salary and bonuses of an individual at a rate in excess of Executive Level II, with an exception for specified vendors.

Title II: Department of Health and Human Services - Department of Health and Human Services Appropriations Act, 2009 - Makes appropriations for FY2009 to the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) for: (1) the Health Resources and Services Administration; (2) the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); (3) the National Institutes of Health (NIH); (4) the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration; (5) the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; (6) the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; (7) the Administration for Children and Families; (8) the Administration on Aging; and (9) the Office of the Secretary.

(Sec. 209) Prohibits the use of funds for voluntary family planning projects unless the applicant certifies that it encourages family participation in the decision of minors to seek family planning services and that it provides counseling to minors on how to resist attempts to coerce minors into engaging in sexual activities.

(Sec. 210) Prohibits any provider of voluntary planning services under the Public Health Service Act from being exempt from any state law requiring notifications or the reporting of child abuse, child molestation, sexual abuse, rape, or incest.

(Sec. 211) Prohibits the use of funds to carry out the Medicare Advantage program if the Secretary of Health and Human Services denies participation in such program to an otherwise eligible entity because it will not provide, pay for, provide coverage of, or provide referrals for abortions.

(Sec. 212) Prohibits the use of funds to withhold substance abuse funding from a state that fails to enforce state laws prohibiting the sale of tobacco products to individuals under the age of 18 if such state certifies to the Secretary that it will commit additional funds to ensure compliance with such laws. Sets forth requirements for states that miss the retailer compliance rate goal established by the Secretary.

(Sec. 213) Allows the Secretary to exercise certain authority in order to carry out international health activities, including HIV/AIDS and other infectious disease, chronic and environmental disease, and other health activities, during FY2009.

(Sec. 217) Directs the Director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to require in the current fiscal year and thereafter that all investigators funded by the NIH submit or have submittted for them to the National Library of Medicine's PubMed Central an electronic version of their final peer-reviewed manuscripts upon acceptance for publication. Requires the NIH to implement the public access policy in a manner consistent with copyright law.

(Sec. 219) Makes available: (1) 1% of the amount made available for National Research Service Awards (NRSA) to the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration to make NSRA awards for research in primary medical care to individuals affiliated with entities who have received certain grants or contracts under the Public Health Service Act; and (2) another 1% of such amount to the Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality to make NRSA awards for health service research.

(Sec. 221) Amends title XIX (Medicaid) with respect to the Medicaid drug rebate program to revise the limitation on sales at a nominal price (which calculation of the best price for rebate purposes shall not take into account) to include sales of certain drugs at nominal prices to specified tax-exempt charitable organizations.

(Sec. 222) Raises the ceiling on the number of regular commissioned Public Health Service Regular Corps officers.

(Sec. 223) Requires the Secretary of Health and Human Services to issue an advance notice of proposed rulemaking regarding conflicts of interest among extramural investigators receiving grant support from NIH.

(Sec. 224) Names hearing screening programs authorized under the Public Health Service Act as the James T. Walsh Universal Newborn Hearing Screening Program.

(Sec. 225) Rescinds a specified amount of funding under the Ticket to Work and Work Incentives Improvement Act of 1999 and places a limit on the aggregate amount of payments made by the Secretary to states under such Act.

Title III: Department of Education - Department of Education Appropriations Act, 2009 - Makes appropriations for FY2009 to the Department of Education for: (1) education for the disadvantaged; (2) impact aid; (3) school improvement programs; (4) Indian education; (5) innovation and improvement activities; (6) safe schools and citizenship education; (7) English language acquisition and language enhancement; (8) special education; (9) rehabilitation services and disability research; (10) special institutions for persons with disabilities, including the American Printing House for the Blind, the National Technical Institute for the Deaf, and Gallaudet University; (11) career, technical, and adult education; (12) certain student financial assistance programs (including deferral of funds), as well as federal administrative expenses for such programs (setting a maximum individual Pell Grant amount); (13) specified higher education programs; (14) Howard University; (15) the college housing and academic facilities loans program; (16) the historically Black college and university capital financing program account; (17) the Institute of Education Sciences; and (18) departmental management, including program administration, the Office for Civil Rights, and the Office of the Inspector General.

Sets the maximum individual Pell Grant amount at $4,860 during award year 2009-2010.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, funds appropriated under this title.

(Sec. 301) Prohibits the use of funds to transport teachers or students in order to: (1) overcome racial imbalance in any school; or (2) carry out a racial desegregation plan.

(Sec. 302) Prohibits the use of funds to require, directly or indirectly, the transportation of any student to a school other than the school nearest the student's home, except, for a student requiring special education, to the school offering such special education, in order to comply with title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Declares that such a prohibited indirect requirement of transportation of students includes the transportation of students to carry out a plan involving the reorganization of the grade structure of schools, the pairing of schools, or the clustering of schools, or any combination of grade restructuring, pairing or clustering. Exempts the establishment of magnet schools from such prohibition.

(Sec. 303) Prohibits the use of funds to prevent the implementation of programs of voluntary prayer and meditation in public schools.

(Sec. 304) Allows the transfer between appropriations of not more than 1% of discretionary funds for the current fiscal year for the Department of Education in this Act. Prohibits any increase of any such appropriation by more than 3% by any such transfer.

(Sec. 305) States that the signature pages submitted by Heart School District in Pondera County, Montana, as part of its application for Impact Aid under title VIII of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, shall be considered to have been timely and complete in order to receive funding under such program for FY 2009.

(Sec. 306) Allows Outlining Areas to consolidate funds received under title V of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.

Title IV: Related Agencies - Makes appropriations for FY2009 to: (1) the Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled; (2) the Corporation for National and Community Service, for domestic volunteer service programs and t