H.R.2996 - 113th Congress (2013-2014): Revitalize American Manufacturing and Innovation Act of 2014
Array ( [actionDate] => 2014-09-15 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in House: On motion to suspend the rules and pass the bill, as amended Agreed to by voice vote.(text: CR H7515-7518) [externalActionCode] => 8000 [description] => Passed House )

Here are the steps for Status of Legislation:

There are 2 summaries for H.R.2996. Passed House amended (09/15/2014) Introduced in House (08/02/2013) Bill summaries are authored by CRS

Shown Here:

Passed House amended (09/15/2014)

Revitalize American Manufacturing and Innovation Act of 2014 - (Sec. 3) Amends the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act to direct the Secretary of Commerce to establish within the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) a Network for Manufacturing Innovation Program to:

improve the competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing and increase production of goods manufactured predominately within the United States;

stimulate U.S. leadership in advanced manufacturing research, innovation, and technology;

accelerate the development of an advanced manufacturing workforce; and

create and preserve jobs.

Requires the Secretary to establish a network of centers for manufacturing innovation (CMIs), to be known as the Network for Manufacturing Innovation.

Names as key advanced manufacturing technologies:

nanotechnology,

advanced ceramics,

photonics and optics,

composites,

biobased and advanced materials,

flexible hybrid technologies, and

tool development for microelectronics.

Considers to be CMIs the National Additive Manufacturing Innovation Institute and other manufacturing centers formally recognized as manufacturing innovation centers pursuant to federal law or executive actions, or under pending interagency review for such recognition; but prohibits them from receiving any financial assistance under this Act.

Allows a manufacturing center substantially similar to a CMI but not receiving such financial assistance to be recognized as a CMI, upon its request, in order to participate in the Network.

Directs the Secretary to award financial assistance to a person or group of persons to assist the organization in planning, establishing, or supporting such CMIs.

Prescribes requirements for awarding assistance, including an open process for soliciting applications and a competitive merit-review selection process that includes peer review by a diverse group of individuals with relevant expertise from both private and public sectors.

Prohibits political appointees from participating on a peer review panel. Requires the Secretary to implement a conflict of interest policy, with full disclosure of any real or potential conflicts of interest on the parts of individuals that participate in the merit selection process.

Discontinues financial assistance seven years after a CMI first receives an award. Specifies federal matching funds requirements. Authorizes the Secretary to: (1) make an exception to these requirements for large capital facilities or equipment purchases, and (2) give a weighted preference to applicants seeking less than the maximum federal share of funds allowed.

Requires the amount of financial assistance to a CMI to decrease after its second year of funding and in each year thereafter, unless the Secretary determines that:

the CMI is otherwise meeting its stated goals and metrics,

unforeseen circumstances have altered its anticipated funding, and

the CMI can identify future non-federal funding sources that would warrant a temporary exemption from certain limitations.

Authorizes the Secretary, to the extent provided for in advance by appropriations to the NIST Industrial Technical Services Account, to use up to $5 million from such amounts for each of FY2015-FY2024 to carry out this Act.

Authorizes the Secretary of Energy (DOE), to the extent provided for in advance by appropriations Acts for advanced manufacturing research and development within the departmental Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy account, to transfer to NIST up to $250 million from such amounts for FY2015-FY2024 for the Secretary of Commerce to carry out this Act.

Directs the Secretary to establish within NIST the National Office of the Network for Manufacturing Innovation Program to: (1) oversee the Program, (2) develop and periodically update a strategic plan for the Program, (3) establish a clearinghouse of public information related to Program activities, and (4) act as a convener of the Network.

Requires the Secretary to ensure that the Office incorporates the Hollings Manufacturing Extension Partnership into Program planning to ensure that the results of the Program reach small- and medium-sized entities.

Directs the Comptroller General (GAO) to assess the Program's operation biennially.

(Sec. 4) Amends the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 to revise the Committee on Technology's duties under the National Science and Technology Council.

Directs the Committee to develop and update, in coordination with the National Economic Council, a strategic plan to improve government coordination and provide long-term guidance for federal programs and activities in support of U.S. manufacturing competitiveness, including advanced manufacturing research and development.

Requires the President to submit this plan as well as quadrennial updates to Congress, and publish it on an Internet website accessible to the public.

Directs the Advanced Manufacturing Partnership Steering Committee of the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology to provide input, perspective, and recommendations to assist in the development and updates of the strategic plan.

(Sec. 5) Amends the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 to modify the Regional Innovation Program (RIP).

Requires the Secretary of Commerce to conduct outreach to public and private sector entities in rural communities to encourage their participation in RIP's regional innovation cluster activities.

Authorizes the Secretary to accept funds from other federal agencies to support in RIP's grants and activities.

Eliminates science and research park development grants and loan guarantees for science park infrastructure.

Postpones until three years after enactment of this Act the deadline for the Secretary to enter into a contract with an independent entity, such as the National Academy of Sciences to evaluate RIP.

Denies any authorization of appropriations by this Act to carry out in RIP. Authorizes the Secretary instead, to the extent provided for in advance by appropriations for economic development assistance programs, to use up to $10 million from such amounts for each of FY2015-FY2019 to carry out in RIP.