H.R.83 - 113th Congress (2013-2014): Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015
Array ( [actionDate] => 2014-12-13 [displayText] => Resolving differences -- Senate actions: Senate agreed to the House amendment to the Senate amendment to H.R. 83 by Yea-Nay Vote. 56 - 40. Record Vote Number: 354.(consideration: CR S6813-6814) [externalActionCode] => 20500 [description] => Resolving Differences )

Array ( [actionDate] => 2014-09-18 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in Senate: Passed Senate with an amendment by Unanimous Consent. [externalActionCode] => 17000 [description] => Passed Senate )

Array ( [actionDate] => 2014-09-15 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in House: On motion to suspend the rules and pass the bill, as amended Agreed to by voice vote.(text: CR H7462) [externalActionCode] => 8000 [description] => Passed House )

Here are the steps for Status of Legislation:

There are 6 summaries for H.R.83. Public Law (12/16/2014) House agreed to Senate amendment with amendment (12/11/2014) Passed Senate amended (09/18/2014) Passed House amended (09/15/2014) Reported to House with amendment(s) (06/19/2014) Introduced in House (01/03/2013) Bill summaries are authored by CRS

Shown Here:

House agreed to Senate amendment with amendment (12/11/2014)

Highlights:

The Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015 provides appropriations for most of the federal government through the end of FY2015 and continuing appropriations for the Department of Homeland Security through February 27, 2015.

The Act includes eleven of the twelve regular appropriations bills. Compared to FY2014 levels, the Act increases total funding for seven bills and decreases funding for four bills.

The Act increases total funding above FY2014 levels for:

Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015;

Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015;

Department of Labor, Health, and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015;

Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 2015;

Military Construction and Veterans Affairs, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015;

Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 2015; and

Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015.

It decreases total funding below FY2014 levels for:

Commerce, Justice, Science and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015;

Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2015;

Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 2015; and

Department of the Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015

The Act includes a continuing resolution that funds the Department of Homeland Security at current levels through February 27, 2015, or enactment of homeland security appropriations legislation.

It also includes Overseas Contingency Operations and emergency funding for activities related to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the spread of the Ebola virus.

In addition to providing appropriations, the Act includes provisions that:

permit multiemployer defined benefit pension plans expected to become insolvent to reduce benefits to participants,

increase limits for campaign contributions to national political party committees,

exempt expatriate health care plans from provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010,

require the Department of the Interior to establish a team of experts to develop an energy action plan for the Insular Areas and Freely Associated States, and

exempt specified divisions of the bill from Pay-As-You-Go (PAYGO) and other budget enforcement rules.

Also included in the Act is a provision that amends the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act to expand the permissible derivatives activities of financial institutions receiving federal assistance such as deposit insurance.

Full Summary:

Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015 - (Sec. 3) Provides that references to "this Act" included in any division refer only to the provisions of the division unless the Act expressly provides otherwise.

(Sec. 4) Provides that the explanatory statement printed in the Congressional Record regarding this Act shall have the same effect as a joint explanatory statement of a committee of conference.

(Sec. 5) Provides that the sums in this Act are appropriated for FY2015.

(Sec. 6) Provides that amounts designated by this Act as an emergency requirement or for Overseas Contingency Operations/ Global War on Terrorism pursuant to the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 shall only be available (or rescinded, if applicable) if the President subsequently designates the amounts and transmits the designations to Congress.

(Sec. 7) Permits the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to make specified adjustments to discretionary spending limits to account for estimating differences with the Congressional Budget Office (CBO).

(Sec. 8) Prohibits cost of living adjustments for Members of Congress during FY2015.

(Sec. 9) Requires the Department of the Interior to establish a team of experts to: (1) develop an energy action plan for each of the insular areas (American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Virgin Islands) and Freely Associated States (the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palau); and (2) assist in implementing the plan.

Requires the plan to include: (1) recommendations to reduce reliance on fuel from outside the United States, to develop and utilize domestic fuel energy sources, and to improve performance of energy infrastructure and efficiency; (2) a schedule for implementing the recommendations; (3) a financial and engineering plan for implementing and sustaining projects; and (4) benchmarks for measuring progress.

Establishes reporting requirements. Requires Interior to approve the plan prior to implementation.

(Sec. 10) Extends the transition period for establishing, administering, and enforcing a program to regulate immigration in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands through December 31, 2019, including the annual reduction in the allocation of permits for admission of nonimmigrant workers during the period.

(Sec. 11) Provides funding for the Department of the Interior's Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILT) program to compensate local governments for lost tax revenue due to the presence of federal land.

Division A: Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015 - Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015 - Provides FY2015 appropriations to the Department of Agriculture (USDA), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and related agencies.

Title I: Agricultural Programs - Makes FY2015 appropriations for the following Department of Agriculture programs and services:

Office of the Secretary;

Executive Operations, including the Office of the Chief Economist, the National Appeals Division, and the Office of Budget and Program Analysis;

Office of the Chief Information Officer;

Office of the Chief Financial Officer;

Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights;

Office of Civil Rights;

Agriculture Buildings and Facilities;

Hazardous Materials Management;

Office of Inspector General;

Office of the General Counsel;

Office of Ethics;

Office of the Under Secretary for Research, Education, and Economics;

Economic Research Service;

National Agricultural Statistics Service;

Agricultural Research Service;

National Institute of Food and Agriculture;

Office of the Under Secretary for Marketing and Regulatory Programs;

Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service;

Agricultural Marketing Service;

Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration;

Office of the Under Secretary for Food Safety;

Food Safety and Inspection Service;

Office of the Under Secretary for Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services;

Farm Service Agency;

Risk Management Agency;

Federal Crop Insurance Corporation Fund; and

Commodity Credit Corporation Fund.

Title II: Conservation Programs - Provides FY2015 appropriations for: (1) the Office of the Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment, and (2) the Natural Resources Conservation Service.

Title III: Rural Development Programs - Provides FY2015 appropriations for: (1) Office of the Under Secretary for Rural Development, (2) Rural Development Salaries and Expenses, (3) Rural Housing Service, (4) Rural Business-Cooperative Service, and (5) Rural Utilities Service.

Title IV: Domestic Food Programs - Provides FY2015 appropriations for: (1) Office of the Under Secretary for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services; and (2) Food and Nutrition Service, including Child Nutrition Programs; the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC); the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP, formerly known as food stamps); the Commodity Assistance Program; and Nutrition Programs Administration.

Title V: Foreign Assistance and Related Programs - Provides FY2015 appropriations for the Foreign Agricultural Service, including the Food for Peace Act (P.L. 480) and the McGovern-Dole International Food for Education and Child Nutrition Program.

Title VI: Related Agencies and Food and Drug Administration - Provides FY2015 appropriations to: (1) the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) for the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and (2) the Farm Credit Administration (FCA).

Title VII: General Provisions - Sets forth permissible, restricted, and prohibited uses for funds provided by this Act and other appropriations Acts.

(Sec. 701) Permits USDA to use funds provided by this Act for the purchase, replacement, and hire of passenger motor vehicles.

(Sec. 702) Permits USDA to transfer unobligated balances to the Working Capital Fund for the acquisition of plant and capital equipment for financial, administrative, and information technology services. Permits the transferred funds to remain available until expended and specifies restrictions on the use of the funds.

(Sec. 703) Prohibits appropriations provided by this Act from remaining available for obligation beyond the current fiscal year unless the Act expressly provides otherwise.

(Sec. 704) Limits negotiated indirect costs on cooperative agreements between USDA and nonprofit institutions to 10% of the total direct cost of the agreement.

(Sec. 705) Permits appropriations for direct and guaranteed loans to remain available until expended to disburse obligations made in the current fiscal year for: (1) the Rural Development Loan Fund program account, (2) the Rural Electrification and Telecommunication Loans program account, and (3) the Rural Housing Insurance Fund program account.

(Sec. 706) Prohibits USDA from using funds provided by this Act to acquire or upgrade information technology systems without approval of the Chief Information Officer (CIO) and the Executive Information Technology Investment Review Board.

Restricts the transfer of funds made available by this Act to the CIO without prior approval of Congress. Requires the CIO to approve information technology projects over $25,000. Permits the CIO to authorize the obligation of funds without written approval for projects up to $250,000.

(Sec. 707) Permits FY2015 funds provided to USDA under specified conservation programs to remain available until expended to disburse obligations made in the current fiscal year.

(Sec. 708) Makes a former Rural Utility Service borrower that has repaid or prepaid a loan under the Rural Electrification Act of 1936 or any not-for profit utility qualified to receive a loan under the Act eligible for rural economic development and job creation assistance in the same manner as a borrower.

(Sec. 709) Rescinds $125 million of the unobligated balances provided for supplemental agricultural disaster assistance pursuant to the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008.

(Sec. 710) Permits up to $20 million of the unobligated balances from appropriations by this Act for salaries and expenses of the Farm Services Agency to remain available through FY2016 for information technology expenses.

Permits unobligated balances from appropriations by this Act for salaries and expenses for the Rural Development mission area to remain available for information technology expenses through FY2016.

(Sec. 711) Permits USDA to authorize a state agency to exceed the maximum amount of liquid infant formula that regulations permit to be issued to participants in the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC).

(Sec. 712) Prohibits first-class travel by employees of agencies funded by this Act.

(Sec. 713) Provides that Commodity Credit Corporation funds authorized or required to be used for specified programs: (1) shall be available for salaries and administrative expenses without regard to allotment and transfer limits, and (2) shall not be considered to be a fund transfer or allotment for purposes of applying the limits.

(Sec. 714) Limits funds available for USDA advisory committees, panels, commissions, and task forces.

(Sec. 715) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to pay indirect costs charged against any agricultural research, education, or extension grant awards issued by the National Institute of Food and Agriculture that exceed 30% of total federal funds provided under each award.

(Sec. 716) Limits funds appropriated by this or any other Act that may be used for the following programs:

the Watershed Rehabilitation Program,

the Environmental Quality Incentives Program,

the Conservation Stewardship Program,

the Biomass Crop Assistance Program, and

the Biorefinery, Renewable Chemical and Biobased Product Manufacturing Assistance Program.

(Sec. 717) Limits funds for the following domestic food assistance categories: (1) Child Nutrition Programs Entitlement Commodities, (2) State Option Contracts, and (3) Removal of Defective Commodities.

Limits FY2015 funds for the Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program that provides fruit and vegetables to students in participating elementary schools.

Prohibits USDA from using funds for payments authorized by Section 32 of the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1935 to increase purchasing power of agricultural producers or for surplus removal or price support activities authorized by the Commodity Credit Corporation Charter Act.

Rescinds $203 million in unobligated balances provided for domestic food assistance programs.

(Sec. 718) Prohibits the use of funds to prepare proposals for the President's budget that assume savings from certain user fee proposals without identifying additional spending reductions that should occur if the proposals are not enacted.

(Sec. 719) Prohibits funds from being used through a reprogramming or transfer of funds to: (1) create new programs; (2) eliminate a program, project, or activity; (3) relocate an office or employees; (4) reorganize offices, programs, or activities; (3) privatize federal employee functions; or (5) increase funds or personnel for any project for which funds have been denied or restricted unless Congress is notified.

Prohibits, without congressional notification, funds from being used through a reprogramming of funds in excess of $500,000 or 10%, whichever is less: (1) to augment existing programs, projects, or activities; (2) to reduce by 10% funding or personnel for any existing program, or (3) that results from a reduction in personnel which would change existing programs.

Prohibits, without congressional notification, funds from being used for: (1) modifying funding levels for major capital investments in excess of $500,000 or 10% of the total cost, whichever is less; (2) realigning or reorganizing positions or agency activities to establish a center, office, or branch with five or more personnel; or (3) or carrying out activities or functions that were not described in the budget request.

(Sec. 720) Permits USDA to assess a one-time fee for any guaranteed business and industry loan in an amount that does not exceed 3% of the guaranteed principal portion of the loan.

(Sec. 721) Prohibits funds from being used to make questions or responses to questions requested for the appropriations hearing process available to anyone not employed by USDA, HHS, or the FCA.

(Sec. 722) Prohibits any executive branch agency from using funds provided by this Act to produce a prepackaged news story for U.S. broadcast or distribution unless it includes clear notification that it was produced or funded by the agency.

(Sec. 723) Prohibits USDA employees from being detailed to any other USDA agency or office for more than 60 days unless the individual's employing agency is reimbursed by the receiving agency for the salary and expenses of the employee.

(Sec. 724) Prohibits the use of funds provided by this Act to provide nonrecourse marketing assistance loans for mohair.

(Sec. 725) Appropriates funds for direct reimbursement payments for geographically disadvantaged farmers or ranchers to transport agricultural commodities.

(Sec. 726) Appropriates funds for a pilot program to demonstrate new technologies that increase growth of re-forested hardwood trees on private nonindustrial forests lands on the coast of the Gulf of Mexico that were damaged by Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

(Sec. 727) Directs the USDA, FDA, and FCA to submit to Congress a plan for spending funds provided by this Act.

(Sec. 728) Provides that funds for title II of the Food for Peace Act may only be used to assist nations if the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) determines that adequate monitoring and controls exist to ensure that food aid is received by the intended beneficiaries in areas affected by food shortages and not diverted for unauthorized purposes.

(Sec. 729) Directs USDA to: (1) continue the pilot program in effect for FY2013 for packaging and reviewing direct loans for single family rural housing, and (2) enter into additional agreements to increase the number of participating organizations to at least 10.

(Sec. 730) Permits USDA to increase the program level by up to 25% for certain loans and loan guarantees that do not require budget authority and have program levels established by this Act. Requires congressional notification prior to implementing any increase.

(Sec. 731) Prohibits the use of funds to advance or enforce specified proposed and existing Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyard Administration rules establishing criteria to determine whether conduct in the livestock and poultry industries violates provisions of the Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921 intended to ensure a fair marketplace.

Prohibits advancing the proposed rule entitled "Implementation of Regulations Required Under Title XI of the Food, Conservation and Energy Act of 2008; Conduct in Violation of the Act" unless the combined annual cost to the economy of the rules does not exceed $100 million.

(Sec. 732) Provides that certain credit card refunds or rebates transferred to the Working Capital Fund: (1) shall not be available for obligation without congressional approval; and (2) shall only be available for acquisition of plant and capital equipment for USDA financial, administrative, and information technology services.

(Sec. 733) Provides that, beginning with FY2014, losses under the supplemental agricultural disaster assistance program shall not be considered the "same loss" for purposes of the noninsured crop assistance program and the crop insurance program to make a loss eligible for benefits under the disaster assistance program and the other programs.

(Sec. 734) Prohibits the FDA from using specified funds for salaries and expenses until the draft guidance entitled "Guidance for Industry: Abuse-Deterrent Opioids- Evaluation and Labeling" is finalized. (Opioids are a type of medication that relieves pain and include hydrocodone, oxycodone, morphine, codeine, and related drugs.)

Requires the funds to be made available to FDA's Office of Criminal Investigation for assisting federal, state, and local agencies to combat the diversion and illegal sales of controlled substances if the guidance is not finalized by June 30, 2015.

(Sec. 735) Prohibits funds from being used to develop a plan to provide for repair or replacement of bulk fuel storage tanks in Alaska that are not in compliance with applicable federal or state laws.

(Sec. 736) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to procure processed poultry products from China for the National School Lunch Program, the Child and Adult Food Care Program, the Summer Food Service Program, or the School Breakfast Program.

(Sec. 737) Provides appropriations to remain available until expended for implementing non-renewable agreements for wetlands preservation on eligible lands, including flooded agricultural lands.

(Sec. 738) Permits HHS to: (1) relinquish to Arkansas the U.S. jurisdiction over lands and properties encompassing the Jefferson Labs campus that are under HHS supervision; and (2) enter into an agreement with Arkansas, an agency of the state, or a public or private entity for a technology research and commercialization center in Jefferson County, Arkansas, near the Jefferson Labs campus.

(Sec. 739) Directs USDA to set aside specified additional funds for Rural Economic Area Partnership (REAP) Zones.

(Sec. 740) Permits USDA to respond to a community with inadequate drinking water supplies due to a natural disaster by providing potable water through the Emergency Community Water Assistance Grant Program for up to 120 days beyond the time period established in the program.

(Sec. 741) Prohibits funds from being used for the Safe Meat and Poultry Inspection Panel.

(Sec. 742) Establishes the Nonrecurring Expenses Fund in the Treasury and permits certain unobligated balances of expired USDA appropriations to be transferred to the Fund. Permits the funds to be used for USDA facilities infrastructure capital acquisition if the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) approves, and Congress is notified in advance.

(Sec. 743) Appropriates funds to remain available until expended for: (1) the Emergency Watershed Protection Program, (2) the Emergency Forestry Restoration Program, and (3) the Emergency Conservation Program. Designates the funds as being for disaster relief pursuant to the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.

(Sec. 744) Limits funds appropriated for an assessment of the scope of domestic hunger and food insecurity that may be used for administrative purposes.

(Sec. 745) Rescinds $1.5 million in unobligated balances appropriated to the Agricultural Research Service for the Buildings and Facilities account.

(Sec. 746) Rescinds unobligated balances appropriated for expenses for ocean freight differential grants under title I of the Food for Peace Act (P.L. 480).

(Sec. 747) Amends provisions of the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 related to USDA programs to promote organic agricultural commodities.

(Sec. 748) Rescinds $8 million in unobligated balances appropriated for repowering assistance to encourage biorefineries to replace fossil fuels with systems that use or produce energy from renewable biomass.

(Sec. 749) Specifies the matching requirements that apply to funds appropriated for the Agriculture and Food Research Initiative.

(Sec. 750) Prohibits funds from being used to inspect horses for slaughter purposes.

(Sec. 751) Requires USDA to permit states to grant exemptions from whole grain requirements for the National School Lunch Program and the School Breakfast Program that took effect on or after July 1, 2014.

Requires states to establish a process for responding to exemption requests, provided that school food authorities demonstrate hardship in procuring whole grain products compliant with new standards and comply with whole grain standards in effect prior to July 1, 2014.

(Sec. 752) Prohibits funds from being used to implement regulations requiring a specified reduction in sodium in federally reimbursed meals, foods, and snacks sold in schools until the latest scientific research establishes that the reduction is beneficial for children.

(Sec. 753) Prohibits funds from being used to exclude or restrict any variety of fresh vegetable without added sugars, fats, or oils from the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC).

Title VIII: Ebola Response and Preparedness - Provides appropriations for Food and Drug Administration (FDA) activities related to the response to the Ebola virus and the development of necessary medical countermeasures and vaccines. Designates the funding provided as an emergency requirement pursuant to the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.

Division B: Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015 - Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015 - Title I: Department of Commerce - Department of Commerce Appropriations Act, 2015 - Makes appropriations for the Department of Commerce for FY2015 for:

the International Trade Administration;

the Bureau of Industry and Security;

the Economic Development Administration;

the Minority Business Development Agency;

economic and statistical analysis programs;

the Bureau of the Census;

the National Telecommunications and Information Administration;

the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO);

the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST);

the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), including expenses for restoration of Pacific salmon populations; and

departmental management, including for the Office of Inspector General.

(Sec. 104) Adopts by reference and makes applicable to FY2015 requirements of the Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2012, that prohibit NOAA from entering into a contract for development of a major program (a program with an estimated life-cycle cost of more than $250 million) unless the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere makes specified determinations, including that: (1) the technical, cost, and schedule risks are clearly identified and the program has developed a plan to manage those risks; and (2) the technologies required for the program have been demonstrated in a relevant laboratory or test environment. Specifies the life cycle costs for the Joint Polar Satellite System and for the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite R-Series Program.

(Sec. 105) Authorizes the Secretary of Commerce to furnish services to facilitate the use or occupancy of the Herbert C. Hoover Building, Washington, D.C., or other buildings for which the Secretary is responsible.

(Sec. 106) Declares that nothing in this Act shall be construed to prevent a grant recipient from deterring child pornography, copyright infringement, or any other unlawful activity over its networks.

(Sec. 107) Authorizes the Administrator of NOAA to use the resources of federal, state, local, or tribal agencies and other entities to carry out the responsibilities of any statute administered by NOAA.

(Sec. 108) Requires the Department of Commerce to provide a monthly report to the House and Senate Appropriations Committees on any official travel to China by any Department of Commerce employee.

(Sec. 109) Prohibits NIST from charging for a copy of any report or document generated by the legislative branch unless it has provided information on how an electronic copy of such report or document may be accessed and downloaded for free online.

(Sec. 110) Expands the authority of the Administrator of NOAA to enter into transactions and receive and expend funds made available on a consensual basis to carry out agency responsibilities.

(Sec. 111) Authorizes the Secretary of Commerce to waive the requirement for bonds with respect to contracts for the construction, alternation, or repair of vessels when the contract is made under the Coast and Geodetic Survey Act of 1947.

Title II: Department of Justice - Department of Justice Appropriations Act, 2015 - Makes appropriations for the Department of Justice (DOJ) for FY2015 for:

general administration, including for information sharing technology, the administration of pardon and clemency petitions and immigration-related activities, and the Office of the Inspector General;

the United States Parole Commission;

legal activities, including for the antitrust division, the Offices of the U.S. Attorneys, the U.S. Trustee Program, the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission, fees and expenses of witnesses, the Community Relations Service, and the Assets Forfeiture Fund;

the United States Marshals Service;

Federal Prisoner Detention;

the National Security Division;

interagency law enforcement activities relating to drug trafficking and money laundering;

the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI);

the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA);

the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF);

the Federal Prison System, including for the Federal Prison Industries, Incorporated;

the Office on Violence Against Women;

Office of Justice Programs, including for criminal justice statistics programs, state and local law enforcement assistance, juvenile justice programs, and public safety officers benefits; and

community-oriented policing services programs.

(Sec. 202) Prohibits the use of funds under this Act to: (1) pay for an abortion, except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term or in the case of rape; or (2) require any person to perform or facilitate the performance of an abortion.

(Sec. 204) Reaffirms the obligation of the Director of the Bureau of Prisons to provide escort services necessary for a female inmate to receive an abortion outside a federal facility.

(Sec. 206) Authorizes the Attorney General to extend through FY2015 the Personnel Management Demonstration Project without limitation on the number of employees or the positions covered.

(Sec. 207) Prohibits the use of funds made available under this Act to: (1) transport a maximum or high security prisoner other than to a prison or facility certified by the Bureau of Prisons as appropriately secure; (2) purchase cable television services or rent equipment used primarily for recreational purposes in federal prisons, except for inmate training, religious, or educational purposes; (3) purchase a new or enhanced information technology program having estimated development costs in excess of $100 million without appropriate program management controls and oversight mechanisms in place; (4) begin, continue, finish, process, or approve a public-private competition under the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-76 for work performed by employees of the Bureau of Prisons or of Federal Prison Industries, Inc.; (5) facilitate the transfer of an operable firearm to an individual known or suspected to be an agent of a drug cartel, unless U.S. law enforcement personnel continuously monitor or control the firearm at all times; or (6) deny the DOJ Inspector General timely access to all records, documents, and other materials in the custody or possession of DOJ.

(Sec. 217) Prohibits income retained in the DOJ Working Capital Fund from being available for obligation in FY2015, except for amounts to implement a unified DOJ financial management system.

(Sec. 219) Permits discretionary funds made available in this Act for the Office of Justice Programs to be used to participate in Performance Partnership Pilots authorized under the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2014.

Title III: Science - Science Appropriations Act, 2015 - Makes appropriations for FY2015 for: (1) the Office of Science and Technology Policy; and (2) the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), including for the Office of the Inspector General; and (3) the National Science Foundation (NSF), including for the Office of the National Science Board and the Office of the Inspector General.

Title IV: Related Agencies - Makes appropriations for FY2015 for: (1) the Commission on Civil Rights, (2) the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), (3) the International Trade Commission, (4) the Legal Services Corporation, (5) the Marine Mammal Commission, (6) the Office of the United States Trade Representative, and (7) the State Justice Institute.

Title V: General Provisions - (Sec. 501) Sets forth restrictions and prohibitions on the use of funds under this Act, including prohibitions against the use of funds to:

promote the sale or export of tobacco or tobacco products or to seek the reduction or removal by any foreign country of restrictions on marketing of such products, except for restrictions that are not applied equally to all tobacco products of the same type;

discriminate against or denigrate the religious or moral beliefs of students who participate in DOJ financial assistance programs or their parents or legal guardians;

acquire a high-impact or moderate-impact information system for the Departments of Commerce and Justice, NASA, or NSF unless such agencies have conducted risk-related reviews;

justify the use of torture by any U.S. official or contract employee;

pay administrative expenses or compensate any U.S. officer or employee in connection with requiring licenses for exporting certain firearms components to Canada with a total value not exceeding $500 wholesale in any transaction;

include in any new bilateral or multilateral trade agreement the text of certain provisions of the United States-Singapore, Australia, or Morocco Free Trade Agreements;

authorize or issue a national security letter in contravention of specified laws authorizing the FBI to issue national security letters;

purchase first class or premium airline travel in contravention of federal regulations;

pay for the attendance of more than 50 federal agency employees at a conference outside the United States, unless such conference is for the training of law enforcement personnel;

permit NASA or the Office of Science and Technology Policy to partner with China or any Chinese-owned company unless specifically authorized by law;

pay salaries of personnel to deny, or fail to act on, an application for the importation of any model of shotgun if legal requirements for such importation are met and no application for the importation of such model of shotgun had been denied prior to January 1, 2011;

maintain or establish a computer network unless such network blocks the viewing, downloading, and exchanging of pornography;

implement the Arms Trade Treaty until the Senate approves a resolution of ratification for such treaty; or

prevent specified states from implementing their own laws that authorize the use, distribution, possession, or cultivation of medical marijuana.

(Sec. 506) Renders any person who mislabels a product sold in or shipped to the United States as "Made in America" ineligible to receive any contract or subcontract funded by this Act. Requires funds made available by this Act to be used for the purchase of items that are manufactured, produced, or assembled in the United States or its territories or possessions.

(Sec. 514) Requires the Inspectors General of the Department of Commerce, DOJ, NASA, NSF, and the Legal Services Corporation to conduct audits of grants or contracts under this Act and to make the results of such audits available, with appropriate redaction of confidential information.

(Sec. 521) Requires program managers of projects of the Departments of Commerce or Justice, NASA, or the NSF totaling more than $75 million to notify such agencies if project costs have increased by 10%.

(Sec. 522) Authorizes funding for intelligence-related activities during FY2015 until the enactment of the Intelligence Authorization Act for FY2015.

(Sec. 523) Prohibits contracting with or awarding grants in excess of $5 million to a contractor or grantee unless such contractor or grantor certifies compliance with tax return requirements and has not been convicted of a criminal tax offense.

(Sec. 524) Rescinds unobligated balances available for Department of Commerce, Departmental Management, Franchise Fund and for economic development assistance programs. Requires the rescission, not later than September 30, 2015, of specified unobligated balances available for certain DOJ programs.

(Sec. 527) Prohibits the use of funds under this Act in a manner that is inconsistent with the principal negotiating objective of the United States with respect to trade remedy laws to preserve the ability of the United States to: (1) enforce vigorously its trade laws, (2) avoid agreements that lessen the effectiveness of domestic and international disciplines on unfair trade or safeguards to protect competition, and (3) address and remedy market distortions that lead to dumping and subsidization.

(Sec. 528) Prohibits the use of funds under this Act to: (1) transfer or release to or within the United States or its territories and possessions Khalid Sheikh Mohammed or any other detainee who is not a U.S. citizen or a member of the U.S. Armed Forces and who is or was held on or after June 24, 2009, at the U.S. Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, by the Department of Defense (DOD); or (2) construct, acquire, or modify any facility in the United States or its territories or possessions to detain or imprison such a detainee.

(Sec. 530) Directs that funds made available in this Act be used to purchase light bulbs that are "Energy Star" qualified or have the "Federal Energy Management Program" designation.

(Sec. 537) Prohibits the use of funds made available by this Act under the heading "Pacific Coastal Salmon Recovery" for grant guidelines or requirements to establish minimum riparian buffers.

(Sec. 540) Continues through FY2015 the responsibility of the National Telecommunications and Information Administration with respect to Internet domain system functions.

(Sec. 541) Continues during calendar year 2015 the application of provisions of the Trade Act of 1974 relating to adjustment assistance.

Title VI: Travel Promotion, Enhancement, and Modernization Act of 2014 - Travel Promotion, Enhancement, and Modernization Act of 2014 - (Sec. 602) - Amends the Travel Promotion Act of 2009 (TPA) to revise qualification requirements for members of the Board of Directors of the Corporation for Travel Promotion.

(Sec. 603) Revises requirements for the Corporation's annual report to the Secretary of Commerce to require a description of and rationales for: (1) the Corporation's efforts to focus on specific countries and populations; and (2) the Corporation's combination of media channels employed in meeting the promotional objectives of its marketing campaign, the ratio in which such channels are used, and a justification for such use and ratio.

(Sec. 604) Directs the Corporation and the Secretary to meet biannually to review procedures to determine the fair market value of goods and services received by the Corporation from non-federal sources. Reduces from 80 to 70 the percentage of the fair market value of those goods and services the Corporation may receive from non-federal sources each fiscal year, increasing the federal matching rate from 20% to 30%.

Requires the Secretary, in coordination with the Corporation, to establish formal, publicly available procedures specifying time frames and conditions for: (1) making and agreeing to revisions of the Corporation's in-kind contributions policy; and (2) addressing and resolving disagreements between the Corporation and its partners, including the Secretary, regarding the in-kind contribution policy.

(Sec. 605) Includes U.S. territories among the states and the District of Columbia whose benefit the Corporation's international travel promotion plan must ensure.

Extends the TPA and the Corporation through FY2020.

Amends the Immigration and Nationality Act to extend through FY2020 the authority of the Secretary of Homeland Security (DHS) to charge a fee for use of the electronic travel authorization system to determine, in advance, an alien's eligibility to travel to the United States.

(Sec. 606) Amends the TPA to lower from $5 million to $500,000 the threshold in the Corporation's budget for a forthcoming fiscal year expenditures above which require an explanation from the Board to the Secretary.

Requires the Corporation to establish performance metrics including, time frames, evaluation methodologies, and data sources for measuring:

the effectiveness of its marketing efforts, including its progress in achieving the long-term goals of increased traveler visits to, and spending in, the United States;

whether increases in visitation and spending have occurred in response to external influences, such as economic conditions or exchange rates, rather than in response to the Corporation's efforts; and

any cost or benefit to the U.S. economy.

Requires the Corporation to: (1) conduct periodic program evaluations in response to the data resulting from such measurements, and (2) report to Congress on actions it has taken in response to Government Accountability Office (GAO) recommendations.

Directs the Corporation to: (1) establish a competitive procurement process, and (2) certify, in its annual report to Congress, that any contracts it has entered into were in compliance with that process.

(Sec. 607) Repeals the Corporation's authority to impose an annual assessment on certain U.S. members of the international travel and tourism industry represented on the Board.

Title VII: Revitalize American Manufacturing And Innovation Act of 2014 - Revitalize American Manufacturing and Innovation Act of 2014 - (Sec. 703) Amends the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act to direct the Secretary of Commerce to establish within the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) a Network for Manufacturing Innovation Program to:

improve the competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing and increase production of goods manufactured predominately within the United States;

stimulate U.S. leadership in advanced manufacturing research, innovation, and technology;

accelerate the development of an advanced manufacturing workforce; and

create and preserve jobs.

Requires the Secretary to establish a network of centers for manufacturing innovation (CMIs), to be known as the Network for Manufacturing Innovation.

Identifies as key advanced manufacturing technologies:

nanotechnology,

advanced ceramics,

photonics and optics,

composites,

biobased and advanced materials,

flexible hybrid technologies, and

tool development for microelectronics.

Considers the National Additive Manufacturing Innovation Institute and other manufacturing centers formally recognized as manufacturing innovation centers pursuant to federal law or executive actions, or under pending interagency review for such recognition, to be CMIs but prohibits them from receiving any financial assistance under this Act.

Allows a manufacturing center substantially similar to a CMI but not receiving such financial assistance to be recognized as a CMI, upon its request, in order to participate in the Network.

Directs the Secretary to award financial assistance to a person or group of persons to assist the organization in planning, establishing, or supporting such CMIs.

Prescribes requirements for awarding assistance, including an open process for soliciting applications and a competitive merit-review selection process that includes peer review by a diverse group of individuals with relevant expertise from private and public sectors.

Prohibits political appointees from participating on a peer review panel. Requires the Secretary to implement a conflict of interest policy, with full disclosure of any real or potential conflicts of interest on the parts of individuals that participate in the merit selection process.

Discontinues financial assistance seven years after a CMI first receives an award. Specifies federal matching fund requirements. Authorizes the Secretary to: (1) make an exception to these requirements for large capital facilities or equipment purchases, and (2) give a weighted preference to applicants seeking less than the maximum federal share of funds allowed.

Requires the amount of financial assistance to a CMI to decrease after its second year of funding and in each year thereafter, unless the Secretary determines that:

the CMI is otherwise meeting its stated goals and metrics,

unforeseen circumstances have altered its anticipated funding, and

the CMI can identify future non-federal funding sources that would warrant a temporary exemption from certain limitations.

Authorizes the Secretary, to the extent provided for in advance by appropriations to the NIST Industrial Technical Services Account, to use up to $5 million from such amounts for each of FY2015-FY2024 to carry out this Act.

Authorizes the Secretary of Energy (DOE), to the extent provided for in advance by appropriations Acts for advanced manufacturing research and development within the departmental Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy account, to transfer to NIST up to $250 million from such amounts for FY2015-FY2024 for the Secretary of Commerce to carry out this Act.

Directs the Secretary to establish within NIST the National Office of the Network for Manufacturing Innovation Program to: (1) oversee the Program, (2) develop and periodically update a strategic plan for the Program, (3) establish a clearinghouse of public information related to Program activities, and (4) act as a convener of the Network.

Requires the Secretary to ensure that the Office incorporates the Hollings Manufacturing Extension Partnership into Program planning to ensure that the results of the Program reach small- and medium-sized entities.

Directs the Comptroller General (GAO) to assess the Program's operation biennially.

(Sec. 704) Amends the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 to revise the Committee on Technology's duties under the National Science and Technology Council.

Directs the Committee to develop and update, in coordination with the National Economic Council, a strategic plan to improve government coordination and provide long-term guidance for federal programs and activities in support of U.S. manufacturing competitiveness, including advanced manufacturing research and development.

Requires the President to submit such plan, as well as quadrennial updates, to Congress and to publish it on an Internet website accessible to the public.

Directs the Advanced Manufacturing Partnership Steering Committee of the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology to provide input, perspective, and recommendations to assist in the development and updates of the strategic plan.

(Sec. 705) Amends the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 to modify the Regional Innovation Program (RIP).

Requires the Secretary of Commerce to conduct outreach to public and private sector entities in rural communities to encourage their participation in RIP regional innovation cluster activities.

Authorizes the Secretary to accept funds from other federal agencies to support in RIP grants and activities.

Eliminates science and research park development grants and loan guarantees for science park infrastructure.

Postpones until three years after enactment of this Act the deadline for the Secretary to enter into a contract with an independent entity, such as the National Academy of Sciences, to evaluate RIP.

Authorizes the Secretary, to the extent provided for in advance by appropriations Acts, to use not to exceed $10 million from amounts appropriated for economic development assistance programs for each of FY2015-FY2019 to carry out RIP.

Division C: Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2015 - Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2015 - Provides appropriations to the Department of Defense (DOD) for FY2015.

Title I: Military Personnel - Provides appropriations for active-duty and reserve personnel in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force (the military departments), and for National Guard personnel in the Army and Air Force.

Title II: Operation and Maintenance - Provides appropriations for Operation and Maintenance (O&M) for the military departments, other agencies of the DOD, the reserve components, and the Army and Air National Guard. Appropriates funds for: (1) the United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces; (2) Environmental Restoration for the military departments, DOD, and at formerly used defense sites; (3) Overseas Humanitarian, Disaster, and Civic Aid; (4) the Cooperative Threat Reduction Account; and (5) the Department of Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Fund.

Title III: Procurement - Provides appropriations for procurement by the military departments, including for the procurement of aircraft, missiles, weapons, tracked combat vehicles, ammunition, and for shipbuilding and conversion by the Navy. Appropriates funds for: (1) DOD Procurement, and (2) Defense Production Act Purchases.

Title IV: Research, Development, Test and Evaluation - Provides appropriations for Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation (RDT&E) by the military departments and defense agencies. Appropriates funds for the independent activities of the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation.

Title V: Revolving and Management Funds - Provides appropriations for the Defense Working Capital Funds and the National Defense Sealift Fund.

Title VI: Other Department of Defense Programs - Provides appropriations for: (1) the Defense Health Program, (2) Chemical Agents and Munitions Destruction, (3) Drug Interdiction and Counter-Drug Activities, (4) the Office of the Inspector General, and (5) Support for International Sporting Competitions.

Title VII: Related Agencies - Provides appropriations for the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System Fund, and the Intelligence Community Management Account.

Title VIII: General Provisions - Sets forth permissible, restricted, and prohibited uses of funds appropriated by this Act.

(Sec. 8001) Prohibits appropriations contained in this Act from being used for publicity or propaganda purposes not authorized by Congress.

(Sec. 8002) Provides that during the current fiscal year, provisions of law prohibiting compensating or employing foreign nationals shall not apply to DOD if certain conditions are met.

(Sec. 8003) Prohibits funding provided by this Act from remaining available for obligation beyond the current fiscal year unless this Act expressly provides otherwise.

(Sec. 8004) Prohibits more than 20% of the appropriations provided by this Act for the current fiscal year from being obligated during the last two months of the fiscal year.

(Sec. 8005) Permits specified Working Capital Funds provided by this Act for military functions (except military construction) to be transferred between appropriations or funds available for the same purposes, subject to specified restrictions and the approval of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). Requires DOD to notify Congress of all transfers made pursuant to this section.

(Sec. 8006) Requires tables included in the explanatory statement regarding this Act to be treated as if they were included in the text of this Act.

(Sec. 8007) Requires DOD to submit a report to Congress to establish the baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for FY2015.

(Sec. 8008) Prohibits cash balances in DOD Working Capital Funds from exceeding the level necessary for cash disbursements to be made from the funds.

Permits transfers between Working Capital Funds; the Foreign Currency Fluctuations, Defense account; and the Operation and Maintenance account. Requires OMB approval and congressional notification prior to the transfers.

Prohibits Working Capital Funds from being used to procure or increase the value of war reserve material inventory unless Congress is notified in advance.

(Sec. 8009) Prohibits the initiation of a special access program without notifying Congress in advance.

(Sec. 8010) Establishes limitations and conditions on the use of funds to initiate or terminate certain multi-year contracts.

(Sec. 8011) Appropriates O&M funds for the costs of humanitarian and civic assistance provided in conjunction with military operations.

(Sec. 8012) Prohibits the management of DOD civilian personnel on the basis of any end-strength during FY2015.

(Sec. 8013) Prohibits funds made available by this Act from being used to directly or indirectly influence congressional action on legislation or appropriation matters pending before Congress.

(Sec. 8014) Prohibits compensation from being paid to any member of the Army participating as a full-time student and receiving benefits from the Defense Education Benefits Fund if the time spent as a student is counted toward the member's service commitment.

(Sec. 8015) Permits funds appropriated in title III of this Act for the Department of Defense Pilot Mentor-Protege Program to be transferred to any other account to implement a developmental assistance agreement under the program.

(Sec. 8016) Prohibits DOD from purchasing certain anchor and mooring chains unless they are manufactured in the United States.

(Sec. 8017) Provides appropriations for construction, renovation, repair, and expansion of elementary and secondary public schools on military installations.

(Sec. 8018) Prohibits funds from being used to demilitarize or dispose of certain small firearms or small arms ammunition.

(Sec. 8019) Limits funding for the relocation of any DOD entity into or within the National Capital Region. Permits DOD to waive the limitation by certifying to Congress that a relocation is required in the best interest of the government.

(Sec. 8020) Provides appropriations for incentive payments for federal contracts involving contractors, subcontractors, or suppliers that are Indian organizations or Indian-owned economic enterprises.

(Sec. 8021) Prohibits funds for the Defense Media Activity from being used for national or international political or psychological activities.

(Sec. 8022) Permits DOD to incur obligations of up to $350 million for DOD military compensation, construction projects, and supplies and services in anticipation of contributions from the government of Kuwait.

(Sec. 8023) Provides appropriations from specified accounts for the Civil Air Patrol Corporation to support operation and maintenance, readiness, counterdrug activities, and drug demand reduction activities involving youth programs.

(Sec. 8024) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to establish a new DOD federally-funded research and development center (FFRDC). Limits compensation for FFRDC members or consultants.

Prohibits a defense FFRDC from using FY2015 DOD funds for new building construction, cost-sharing payments for projects funded by government grants, absorption of contract overruns, or certain charitable contributions.

Limits the staff years that may be funded for FFRDCs from FY2015 funds, and requires DOD to submit a report on the allocation of FY2016 staff years with the budget request.

Reduces the total amount appropriated by this Act for FFRDCs by $40 million.

(Sec. 8025) Prohibits DOD from procuring carbon, alloy, or armor steel plating not melted and rolled in the United States or Canada. Permits DOD to waive the prohibition if adequate domestic supplies are not available and an acquisition is necessary for national security purposes.

(Sec. 8026) Specifies that "congressional defense committees" include the Senate and House Armed Services Committees and Appropriations Subcommittees on Defense.

(Sec. 8027) Permits DOD to acquire the modification, depot maintenance, and repair of aircraft, vehicles, and vessels; and production of components through competition between DOD activities and private firms.

(Sec. 8028) Revokes blanket waivers of the Buy American Act if DOD determines that a country has violated the terms of a specified agreement by discriminating against products produced in the United States.

(Sec. 8029) Permits funds in the Department of Defense Overseas Military Facility Investment Recovery Account to remain available until expended.

(Sec. 8030) Permits the Air Force to convey to Indian tribes located in Nevada, Idaho, North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Oregon, Minnesota, and Washington relocatable military housing units currently located at Grand Forks, Malmstrom, Mountain Home, Elllsworth, and Minot Air Force Bases that are excess to the needs of the Air Force. Requires the Operation Walking Shield Program to resolve any housing unit conflicts arising among requests of Indian tribes for these conveyances.

(Sec. 8031) Permits DOD O&M appropriations to be used to purchase items with an investment unit cost of not more than $250,000.

(Sec. 8032) Prohibits the use of DOD Working Capital Funds from being used to purchase specified investment items.

(Sec. 8033) Provides restrictions on the availability of certain funds appropriated by this Act to the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).

(Sec. 8034) Permits funds made available by this Act to the Defense Intelligence Agency to be used for the design, development, and deployment of General Defense Intelligence Program intelligence communication and intelligence information systems for the Services, the Unified and Specified Commands, and the component commands.

(Sec. 8035) Provides appropriations for the mitigation of environmental impacts on Indian lands resulting from DOD activities.

(Sec. 8036) Requires DOD to comply with the Buy American Act.

(Sec. 8037) Prohibits funds appropriated by this Act from being used for contracts for studies, analysis, or consulting services entered into without competition on the basis of an unsolicited proposal unless specified conditions are met.

(Sec. 8038) Prohibits funds in this Act from being used to: (1) establish a field operating agency, or (2) pay a member of the Armed Forces or civilian employee transferred or reassigned from a headquarters activity if the employee's place of duty remains at headquarters. Specifies exceptions, and permits waivers that will reduce personnel or financial requirements of the department.

(Sec. 8039) Prohibits funds in this Act from being used to convert a function performed by DOD civilian employees to performance by a contractor unless specific requirements are met.

(Sec. 8040) Rescinds funds provided to specified accounts and programs in prior defense appropriations Acts.

(Sec. 8041) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to reduce authorized positions for military technicians (dual status) of the Army National Guard, Air National Guard, Army Reserve, and Air Force Reserve unless the reductions are a direct result of a reduction in military force structure.

(Sec. 8042) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used for assistance to North Korea unless specifically appropriated for that purpose.

(Sec. 8043) Permits O&M funds provided by this Act to be used to reimburse the National Guard and Reserve for providing intelligence or counterintelligence support to the combatant commands, defense agencies, and joint intelligence activities.

(Sec. 8044) Permits specified funds for Working Capital Fund, Army to be used to maintain competitive rates at the arsenals.

(Sec. 8045) Prohibits the transfer of DOD or Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) drug interdiction or counter-drug activity funds to any other department or agency except as specifically provided in an appropriations law.

(Sec. 8046) Requires ball and roller bearings purchased using funds provided by this Act to be produced by a domestic source. Permits DOD to waive the prohibition if adequate domestic supplies are not available and an acquisition is necessary for national security.

(Sec. 8047) Appropriates funds to DOD for grants to the United Service Organizations and the Red Cross.

(Sec. 8048) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to purchase any supercomputer not manufactured in the United States unless it is unavailable from U.S. manufacturers and is necessary for national security.

(Sec. 8049) Requires the Small Business Innovation Research program and the Small Business Technology Transfer program set-asides to be taken proportionately from all programs, projects, or activities that contribute to the extramural budget.

(Sec. 8050) Prohibits DOD funds from being used to transfer defense articles or services to another nation or international organization for international peacekeeping, peace-enforcement, or humanitarian assistance operations unless Congress is notified in advance.

(Sec. 8051) Prohibits funds in this Act from being used for contractor bonuses being paid due to a business restructuring.

(Sec. 8052) Permits the transfer of specified O&M funds to pay military personnel for support and services for eligible organizations and activities outside DOD.

(Sec. 8053) Permits DOD to dispose of negative unliquidated or unexpended balances for expired or closed accounts by charging an obligation to a current account for the same purpose as the expired or closed account.

(Sec. 8054) Permits the National Guard to allow the use of equipment of the National Guard Distance Learning Project by any person or entity on a space-available, reimbursable basis.

(Sec. 8055) Permits the Air Force to use funds to implement cost effective agreements for required heating facility modernization in the Kaiserslautern Military Community, Landstuhl Army Regional Medical Center, and Ramstein Air Base in Germany subject to specified requirements.

(Sec. 8056) Requires specified O&M funds to be used for the Sexual Assault Special Victims' Counsel Program and high priority Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Program requirements and activities.

(Sec. 8057) Prohibits the use of funds provided in title IV to procure end-items for delivery to military forces for operational training, operational use, or inventory requirements. Includes exceptions and permits a waiver for national security purposes.

(Sec. 8058) Permits DOD to waive limitations on the procurement of defense items from a foreign country if: (1) the limitations would invalidate cooperative programs or reciprocal trade agreements, and (2) the country does not discriminate against the same or similar items procured in the United States. Provides exceptions.

(Sec. 8059) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used for training, equipment, or other assistance for a unit of a foreign security force that has committed a gross violation of human rights. Includes exceptions if DOD determines that the government of the country has taken all necessary corrective steps, or the assistance is necessary for disaster relief operations or other humanitarian or national security emergencies.

Permits a waiver if DOD determines it is required by extraordinary circumstances. Requires DOD to report to Congress on waivers and exceptions.

(Sec. 8060) Prohibits funds from being used for repairs or maintenance for military family housing units.

(Sec. 8061) Requires DOD to submit a report to Congress before obligating specified RDT&E funds appropriated by this Act for any new start advanced concept technology demonstration project or joint capability demonstration project. Permits DOD to waive the restriction by certifying to Congress that it is in the national interest.

(Sec. 8062) Requires DOD to provide a classified quarterly report to Congress on matters specified in the classified annex accompanying this Act.

(Sec. 8063) Prohibits DOD from using funds to support another U.S. department or agency that is more than 90 days late in paying DOD for goods or services previously provided. Includes an exception if DOD is authorized to support the agency on a nonreimbursable basis. Permits a waiver for national security.

(Sec. 8064) Permits members of the National Guard serving on full-time duty to support ground-based elements of the National Ballistic Missile Defense System.

(Sec. 8065) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to transfer specified armor-piercing ammunition to any nongovernmental entity, except for demilitarization purposes.

(Sec. 8066) Permits the Chief of the National Guard Bureau to waive payment for the lease of personal property to certain youth, social, charitable, or fraternal nonprofit organizations.

(Sec. 8067) Requires the President's budget to include funding requests for the Army for Arlington National Cemetery in the Cemeterial Expenses, Army account and not in the O&M, Army account.

(Sec. 8068) Prohibits the use of funds appropriated in this Act to support the procurement of malt beverages and wine with nonappropriated funds for resale on a military installation located in the United States unless the beverages are procured within the state in which the installation is located and specified conditions are met.

(Sec. 8069) Permits specified O&M, Army funds to remain available until expended. Permits DOD to: (1) transfer the funds to other activities of the federal government; and (2) contract for the acquisition of real property, construction, personal services, and operations related to projects carrying out the purpose of this section.

(Sec. 8070) Prohibits funds from being used to make specified modifications to the National Intelligence Program's budget and appropriations process.

(Sec. 8071) Permits the transfer of specified O&M funds to the Global Security Contingency Fund if Congress is notified in advance.

(Sec. 8072) Provides appropriations to remain available until expended for grants for the construction and furnishing of additional Fisher Houses to meet the needs of military family members confronted with the illness or hospitalization of an eligible military beneficiary.

(Sec. 8073) Requires DOD to issue regulations to: (1) prohibit the sale of tobacco or tobacco-related products in military resale outlets in the United States, its territories, and possessions at a price below the most competitive price in the local community; and (2) require the prices in overseas military retail outlets to be within the range of prices established for military retail systems stores in the United States.

(Sec. 8074) Provides specified Procurement and RDT&E funds for the Israeli Cooperative Programs for the Iron Dome defense system to counter short-range rocket threats, the Short Range Ballistic Missile Defense program, and related programs.

(Sec. 8075) Permits specified Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy funds to remain available through FY2015 to fund prior year shipbuilding cost increases. Requires the funds to be transferred to specified accounts.

(Sec. 8076) Deems funds provided by this Act for intelligence activities to be authorized by Congress during FY2015 until the enactment of the Intelligence Authorization Act for FY2015.

(Sec. 8077) Prohibits fund appropriated by this Act from being used for a reprogramming of funds that creates or initiates a new program, project, or activity unless it must be undertaken immediately for national security and Congress is notified in advance.

(Sec. 8078) Requires the FY2016 budget to include separate budget justification documents for costs of the Armed Forces' participation in contingency operations for the Military Personnel, O&M, Procurement, and RDT&E accounts.

(Sec. 8079) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used for RDT&E, procurement, or deployment of nuclear armed interceptors of a missile defense system.

(Sec. 8080) Reduces the total amount appropriated in this Act by approximately $386 million to reflect savings due to favorable foreign exchange rates.

(Sec. 8081) Prohibits funds appropriated in this Act from being used to reduce or disestablish the operation of the 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron of the Air Force Reserve if the actions reduce the WC-130 Weather Reconnaissance mission below the levels funded in this Act. Permits the Squadron to perform other missions in support of national defense requirements during the non-hurricane season.

(Sec. 8082) Prohibits funds from being used for integrating foreign intelligence information unless the information has been lawfully collected and processed during authorized foreign intelligence activities.

(Sec. 8083) Requires reserve members called or ordered to active duty to be notified in writing of their expected mobilization period. Permits DOD to waive the requirement for a national security emergency or to meet dire operational requirements.

(Sec. 8084) Provides specified Air Force military procurement funds for the acceleration of a competitively awarded Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle mission. Requires competitions be open to all certified providers and consider bids from two or more providers.

(Sec. 8085) Permits DOD to transfer funds from any Department of the Navy appropriation to any Navy ship construction appropriation for liquidating necessary changes resulting from inflation, market fluctuations, or rate adjustments for any ship construction program. Specifies limits and requirements for the transfers.

(Sec. 8086) Prohibits funds in this Act from being used to transfer research and development, acquisition, or other program authority related to current tactical unmanned aerial vehicles from the Army. Requires the Army to retain responsibility for and operational control of the MQ-1C Gray Eagle Unmanned Aerial Vehicle.

(Sec. 8087) Provides specified Navy O&M funds for the Asia Pacific Regional Initiative Program for enabling the Pacific Command to execute theater security cooperation activities such as humanitarian assistance and the payment of incremental and personnel costs of training and exercising with foreign security forces.

(Sec. 8088) Prohibits funds appropriated by this Act for programs of the Office of the Director of Intelligence from being obligated beyond the current fiscal year except for research and technology, which remains available through FY2016.

(Sec. 8089) Provides for the adjustment of obligations within the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy appropriation.

(Sec. 8090) Requires the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) to submit a report to Congress establishing the baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for FY2015. Prohibits funds provided by this Act for the National Intelligence Program from being transferred or reprogrammed until the report is submitted unless the action is necessary for an emergency.

(Sec. 8091) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to eliminate, restructure, realign, or make disproportionate personnel reductions at Army Contracting Command-New Jersey sites without notifying Congress in advance.

(Sec. 8092) Prohibits the use of funds to support any military training or operation that includes child soldiers unless the assistance is permitted by the Child Soldiers Prevention Act of 2008.

(Sec. 8093) Makes specified Intelligence Community Management Account funds available for transfer by the DNI to other departments and agencies for government-wide information sharing activities, subject to the approval of OMB.

(Sec. 8094) Provides specific restrictions on the reprogramming or transfer of funds provided to the National Intelligence Program.

(Sec. 8095) Directs the DNI to submit annually to Congress a future-years intelligence program reflecting estimated expenditures and proposed appropriations included in the President's budget.

(Sec. 8096) Specifies committees included in "congressional intelligence committees" for the purposes of this Act.

(Sec. 8097) Requires DOD to continue to report incremental contingency operations costs for Operation Inherent Resolve (operations in Iraq and Syria against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant or ISIL), Operation Enduring Freedom (war in Afghanistan) on a monthly basis, and other operations identified by DOD on a semiannual basis.

(Sec. 8098) Permits specified O&M funds provided in title II to be transferred by the military department concerned to its central fund established for Fisher Houses and Suites.

(Sec. 8099) Permits O&M funds to be used for payments and transfers to the Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Fund.

(Sec. 8100) Requires agencies receiving funds in this Act to post reports required to be submitted to Congress on the public web site of the agency if it serves the national interest. Provides exceptions for national security or proprietary information.

(Sec. 8101) Prohibits the use of funds for federal contracts in excess of $1 million unless the contractor meets specific requirements regarding the resolution of claims under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, or national origin). Allows DOD to waive the requirements to avoid harm to national security.

(Sec. 8102) Provides specified O&M funds for operations of the integrated Captain James A. Lovell Federal Health Care Center in Chicago, Illinois. Permits additional funds to be transferred to the Joint Department of Defense-Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Facility Demonstration Fund if Congress is notified.

(Sec. 8103) Prohibits the Office of the Director of National Intelligence from employing more Senior Executive employees than are specified in the classified annex.

(Sec. 8104) Prohibits funds appropriated by this Act from being used to pay a retired general or flag officer to serve as a senior mentor advising DOD unless the retired officer files a public financial disclosure form with the Office of Government Ethics.

(Sec. 8105) Allows DOD funds to be used to purchase armored vehicles for the physical security of personnel or force protection and limits the cost to $250,000 per vehicle.

(Sec. 8106 ) Prohibits the use of funds for providing certain missile defense information to the Russian Federation.

(Sec. 8107) Prohibits DOD from using funds made available by this Act to occupy more than 3,000 parking spaces (other than handicap-reserved spaces) provided by the Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) 133 project in Alexandria, Virginia. Permits a waiver of the limitation if certain conditions are met.

(Sec. 8108) Requires DOD to provide quarterly reports to Congress including the numbers of civilian personnel end strength by appropriation account.

(Sec. 8109) Permits the transfer of up to $2 billion of funds made available by this Act to the National Intelligence Program if OMB approves and the Director of National Intelligence determines it is necessary and in the national interest. Requires transfer authority be used for higher priority items based on unforeseen intelligence requirements. Prohibits transfer authority from being used when the item for which funds are requested has been denied by Congress.

(Sec. 8110) Appropriates specified funds for the Ship Modernization, Operations and Sustainment Fund to remain available through FY2021. Specifies restrictions and requirements for transfers from the Fund to other specified accounts.

(Sec. 8111) Prohibits funds appropriated by this Act from being used in contravention of provisions of the National Defense Authorization Act for FY2014 to adopt any new camouflage pattern design or uniform fabric for any combat or camouflage utility uniform.

(Sec. 8112) Prohibits funds from being used to transfer or release any individual detained at U.S. Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba (Guantanamo) who is not a U.S. citizen or member of the Armed Forces into the United States, its territories, or possessions.

(Sec. 8113) Prohibits funding to modify any United States facility (other than the facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba) to house any individual detained at Guantanamo.

(Sec. 8114) Prohibits funds provided in this Act from being used to transfer any individual detained at Guantanamo to the custody or control of the individual's country of origin, or any other foreign country or entity, except in accordance with the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2014.

(Sec. 8115) Prohibits the use of DOD funds in contravention of federal laws against human trafficking or forced labor.

(Sec. 8116) Prohibits funds from being used in violation of the Wars Powers Resolution.

(Sec. 8117) Prohibits funds made available by this Act from being used to lease or purchase new light duty vehicles for any executive fleet inventory except in accordance with a specific Presidential Memorandum related to federal fleet performance.

(Sec. 8118) Prohibits funds from being used to enter into specified agreements and transactions with Russian arms supplier Rosoboronexport. Permits DOD to waive the restriction if specific conditions are met.

(Sec. 8119) Prohibits the use of funds for the purchase or manufacture of U.S. flags unless they are treated as covered items under Buy American requirements.

(Sec. 8120) Prohibits the use of funds for the personal benefit of the President of Afghanistan.

(Sec. 8121) Permits funds provided by this Act to be used for payments to local military commanders for damage, personal injury, or death that is incident to combat operations in a foreign country.

(Sec. 8122) Prohibits funds made available in this Act from being used to reduce strategic delivery vehicles and launchers below levels necessary to implement the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START), as set forth in a report provided to Congress pursuant to the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012.

(Sec. 8123) Require DOD to post grant awards on a public web site in a searchable format.

(Sec. 8124) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to cancel the avionics modernization program of record for the C-130 aircraft. Permits the Air Force to proceed with a reduced scope program to address safety and airspace compliance requirements.

(Sec. 8125) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to reduce the force structure at Lajes Field, Azores, Portugal.

(Sec. 8126) Prohibits O&M funds made available in this Act from being used in contravention of laws requiring air carriers providing airlift services to hold air carrier certificates and meet other specified requirements.

(Sec. 8127) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used for flight demonstration teams outside of the United States if flight demonstration teams in the United States have been canceled due to insufficient funding.

(Sec. 8128) Prohibits the National Security Agency (NSA) from using funds provided by this Act to target a U.S. person under authorities granted by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (FISA).

(Sec. 8129) Permits the transfer of specified Navy O&M funds to the John C. Stennis Center for Public Service Training and Development Trust Fund.

(Sec. 8130) Provides additional funding for the basic housing allowance for military personnel.

(Sec. 8131) Prohibits the use of funds provided by this Act to divest E-3 airborne warning and control system aircraft or disestablish any units of the active or reserve component associated with the aircraft.

(Sec. 8132) Prohibits the use of funds provided by this Act to implement the Arms Trade Treaty regulating international trade in conventional arms until it is ratified by the Senate.

(Sec. 8133) Prohibits the use of funds provided by this Act to transfer or divest AH-64 Attack helicopters from the Army National Guard to the Army.

(Sec. 8134) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to initiate or expand support for foreign forces, irregular forces, groups, or individuals supporting U.S. Special Operations Forces activities to combat terrorism unless Congress is notified in advance in accordance with the classified annex of this Act.

(Sec. 8135) Requires DOD to submit a report to Congress assessing the justification and approval requirements for sole-source contracts. Requires the Government Accountability Office (GAO) to analyze the DOD report and review the justification and approval requirements.

(Sec. 8136) Requires the Air Force to designate a facility located on Scott Air Force Base, Illinois to be named after Senator Alan J. Dixon.

(Sec. 8137) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to require that seafood procured for DOD from sustainably managed fisheries in the United States, as determined by the National Marine Fisheries Service, be required to also meet the sustainability certification criteria of third-party nongovernmental organizations.

(Sec. 8138) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to disestablish, close, downgrade from host to extension center, or place on probation any Senior Reserve Officers' Training Corps program.

(Sec. 8139) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to retire, divest, or transfer the entire KC-10 fleet during FY2015.

(Sec. 8140) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used for activities in Iraq in contravention of the War Powers Resolution.

(Sec. 8141) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used to divest, retire, transfer, or place in storage any A-10 aircraft, or to disestablish any units of the active or reserve components associated with the aircraft.

Title IX: Overseas Deployments and Other Activities - Provides appropriations for FY2015 for overseas contingency operations directly related to the Global War on Terrorism. Designates the funds provided in this title as for Overseas Contingency Operations/ Global War on Terrorism pursuant to the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.

Provides appropriations for active-duty and reserve personnel in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force (the military departments), and for National Guard personnel in the Army and Air Force.

Provides appropriations for Operation and Maintenance (O&M) for the military departments, other agencies of DOD, the reserve components, and the Army and Air National Guard.

Provides appropriations for: (1) the Afghanistan Security Forces Fund, (2) the Iraq Train and Equip Fund, (3) the Counterterrorism Partnerships Fund, (4) and the European Reassurance Initiative.

Provides appropriations for procurement by the military departments, other DOD agencies, reserve components, and National Guard, including for the procurement of aircraft, missiles, weapons, tracked combat vehicles, and ammunition.

Provides appropriations for Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation (RDT&E) for the Army, Navy, Air Force, and other DOD agencies.

Provides appropriations for the Defense Working Capital Funds.

Provides appropriations for: (1) the Defense Health Program; (2) Drug Interdiction and Counter-Drug Activities, Defense; (3) the Joint Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Fund; and (4) the Office of the Inspector General.

Sets forth permissible, restricted, and prohibited uses of funds appropriated by this title.

(Sec. 9001) Provides that funds made available in this title are in addition to amounts appropriated to DOD for FY2015.

(Sec. 9002) Permits DOD to transfer up to $3.5 billion between the appropriations in this title if it is in the national interest, OMB approves, and Congress is notified.

(Sec. 9003) Permits supervision, administration, and design costs for a construction project funded with O&M or the Afghanistan Security Forces Fund in direct support of overseas contingency operations in Afghanistan to be obligated when a construction contract is awarded.

(Sec. 9004) Permits DOD to use funds appropriated in this title to purchase motor vehicles for use by military and civilian DOD employees in the U.S. Central Command area of responsibility. Limits the cost of each passenger and armored vehicle.

(Sec. 9005) Permits the use of a limited amount of O&M funding to be used for the Commander's Emergency Response Program for humanitarian relief and reconstruction assistance in Afghanistan.

(Sec. 9006) Allows DOD O&M funds to be used to provide supplies, services, transportation, and other logistical support to coalition forces supporting military and stability operations in Afghanistan. Requires DOD to report quarterly to Congress regarding the support.

(Sec. 9007) Prohibits funds from being used to: (1) establish any military installation or base for providing for the permanent stationing of Armed Forces in Iraq or Afghanistan, or (2) exercise U.S. control over any oil resource of Iraq.

(Sec. 9008) Prohibits funds provided by this Act from being used in contravention of specified laws or regulations implementing the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.

(Sec. 9009) Prohibits funds provided for the Afghanistan Security Forces Funds from being obligated prior to the approval of a financial and activity plan by the Afghanistan Resources Oversight Council of DOD.

(Sec. 9010) Permits O&M funds provided in this title to be used to purchase items with an investment unit cost of up to $250,000. Permits the purchase of items with an investment cost of up to $500,000 if DOD determines that it is necessary to meet the operational requirements of a Commander of a Combatant Command engaged in contingency operations overseas.

(Sec. 9011) Permits a limited amount of O&M funding to be used to support U.S. transition activities in Iraq by funding the Office of Security Cooperation in Iraq and security assistance teams.

(Sec. 9012) Prohibits DOD O&M funds from being used for payments to Pakistan as reimbursement for support provided to U.S. military operations unless DOD certifies to Congress that the government of Pakistan has met specific conditions. Permits DOD to waive the restriction for national security.

(Sec. 9013) Rescinds specified amounts appropriated to the Army for procurement and the Afghanistan Security Forces Fund.

(Sec. 9014) Prohibits the use of funds for Syria in contravention of the War Powers Resolution.

(Sec. 9015) Appropriates funds to conduct surface and subsurface clearance of unexploded ordnance at closed training ranges used by the Armed Forces in Afghanistan and makes the funds available through FY2016.

(Sec. 9016) Authorizes DOD to provide assistance to elements of the Syrian opposition and other Syrian groups for: (1) defending the Syrian people from attacks by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and securing territory controlled by the Syrian opposition; (2) protecting the United States, its friends and allies, and the Syrian people from the threats posed by terrorists in Syria; and (3) promoting the conditions for a negotiated settlement to end the conflict in Syria.

Permits specified funds appropriated for the Counterterrorism Partnerships Fund to be used for activities authorized by this section. Permits DOD to accept and retain contributions, including assistance in-kind, from foreign governments to carry out activities authorized by this section subject to specified restrictions. Prohibits funds accepted from being obligated until a reprogramming action is submitted to Congress.

Requires the President and DOD to comply with reporting requirements specified in the Continuing Appropriations Resolution, 2015. Terminates the authority provided by this section at the end of FY2015.

(Sec. 9017) Prohibits funds appropriated by this Act from being used to transfer additional C-130 cargo aircraft to the Afghan National Security Forces until DOD provides Congress with a review of the Afghanistan Air Force's requirements.

(Sec. 9018) Provides additional appropriations to DOD and permits the funding to be transferred to O&M accounts for the purpose of improving military readiness.

Title X: Ebola Response and Preparedness - Provides FY2015 appropriations for Defense-Wide Procurement for expenses related to the Ebola outbreak.

Appropriates Defense-Wide Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation funds for expenses related to developing technologies relevant to the Ebola outbreak.

Designates the amounts provided in this title as emergency requirements pursuant to the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.

Division D: Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015 - Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015 - Provides FY2015 appropriations for the energy and water development programs of the Army Corps of Engineers, the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Reclamation and Central Utah Project, the Department of Energy (DOE), and independent agencies such as the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).

Title I: Corps of Engineers-Civil - Provides appropriations to the Department of the Army, Corps of Engineers-Civil, for authorized civil functions pertaining to river and harbor, flood and storm damage reduction, shore protection, aquatic ecosystem restoration, and related efforts.

Provides appropriations to the Corps of Engineers for: (1) Investigations; (2) Construction; (3) Mississippi River and Tributaries, including flood damage reduction projects and related efforts in the Mississippi River alluvial valley below Cape Girardeau, Missouri; (4) Operation and Maintenance; (5) the Regulatory Program pertaining to navigable waters and wetlands; (6) the Formerly Utilized Sites Remedial Action Program for clean-up of early atomic energy program contamination; (7) Flood Control and Coastal Emergencies, including hurricanes and other natural disasters; (8) Expenses necessary for the supervision and general administration of the civil works program; and (9) the Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works.

(Sec. 101) Establishes reprogramming guidelines and requirements. Prohibits the availability of funds for obligation or expenditure through reprogramming that would: (1) create or initiate a new program, project, or activity; (2) eliminate a program, project, or activity; (3) increase funds or personnel for any program, project, or activity for which funds are either denied or restricted by this Act; (4) use funds directed for a specific activity for a different purpose; or (5) increase or reduce funds directed for specific projects, programs, or activities by more than specified amounts.

(Sec. 102) Prohibits funds made available in this title from being used for a contract that commits funds beyond the amounts appropriated for that program, project, or activity that remain unobligated. Includes exception for funds made available through reprogramming pursuant to section 101.

(Sec. 103) Permits up to $4.7 million in operation and maintenance funds to be transferred to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to mitigate for fisheries lost due to Corps of Engineers projects.

(Sec. 104) Amends the Water Resources Development Act of 1996 to increase the authorization of appropriations for research and development to improve salmon survival.

(Sec. 105) Requires the Corps of Engineers to allocate funds made available by this Act in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the explanatory statement.

(Sec. 106) Prohibits the Corps of Engineers from using funds made available by this Act to continue the study of the Missouri River and its tributaries, authorized by the Water Resources Development Act of 2007 to determine actions required to mitigate losses of aquatic and terrestrial habitat, recover federally listed endangered species, and restore the ecosystem.

(Sec. 107) Prohibits the Corps of Engineers from using funds made available by this Act to implement or enforce the "Modified Charleston Method" methodology for calculating wetlands mitigation in Louisiana.

(Sec. 108) Rescinds specified unobligated funds previously appropriated to the Corps of Engineers.

(Sec. 109) Prohibits the Corps of Engineers from using funds to develop, adopt, implement, administer, or enforce any change to regulations in effect on October 1, 2012, pertaining to the definitions of "fill material" or "discharge of fill material" for the purposes of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (commonly known as the Clean Water Act).

(Sec. 110) Requires the limited reevaluation report initiated in FY2012 for the Mobile Harbor, Alabama navigation project to include evaluation of the full depth of the project as authorized at the same non-federal cost share as in the design agreement executed on August 14, 2012.

(Sec. 111) Prohibits funds made available by this Act from being used to require a permit for the discharge of dredged or fill material under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (commonly known as the Clean Water Act) for specified activities.

(Sec. 112) Requires the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of the Army to withdraw an interpretive rule addressing the applicability of an exemption from permitting under the Clean Water Act to discharges of dredged or filled material associated with certain agricultural practices.

Title II: Department of the Interior - Provides FY2015 appropriations to the Department of the Interior for: (1) the Central Utah Project; and (2) the Bureau of Reclamation, including for Water and Related Resources, the Central Valley Project Restoration Fund, California Bay-Delta Restoration, and Policy and Administration.

Rescinds specified unobligated balances from the Bureau of Reclamation Loan Program Account.

Permits appropriations to the Bureau of Reclamation to be used for purchasing replacements for up to five passenger motor vehicles.

(Sec. 201) Prohibits funds provided in this title for Water and Related Resources from being used for a reprogramming that would: (1) create or initiate a new program, project, or activity; (2) eliminate an existing program, project, or activity; (3) increase funds for any program, project, or activity for which funds have been denied or restricted by this Act; (4) restart or resume any program, project, or activity for which funds are not provided in this Act unless prior approval is received from Congress or (5) transfer funds in excess of specified limits or in violation of specified requirements without the approval of Congress.

(Sec. 202) Prohibits the use of funds provided by this Act to determine the final point of discharge for the interceptor drain for the San Luis Unit until Interior and California develop a plan to minimize any detrimental effect of the San Luis drainage waters. Requires the plan to conform to California water quality standards as approved by the EPA.

Directs Interior to classify the costs of the Kesterson Reservoir Cleanup Program and the San Joaquin Valley Drainage Program as either reimbursable or nonreimbursable and collected until fully repaid pursuant to specified alternative repayment plans.

Requires future federal obligations of funds regarding drainage service or drainage studies for the San Luis Unit to be fully reimbursable by San Luis Unit beneficiaries of the service or studies.

(Sec. 203) Amends the Secure Water Act of 2009 to increase the authorization of appropriations for grants and cooperative agreements for water management improvement from $200 million to $300 million.

(Sec. 204) Amends the Reclamation States Emergency Drought Relief Act of 1991 to extend the authorization through 2017.

(Sec. 205) Amends the Calfed Bay-Delta Authorization Act to extend the authorization through 2016.

(Sec. 206) Permits Interior to fund or participate in pilot projects to increase Colorado River System water in Lake Mead and the initial units of Colorado River Storage project reservoirs. Permits Interior to fund the projects through grants or other appropriate financial arrangements through FY2018. Requires Interior to submit a report to Congress evaluating the effectiveness of the pilot projects.

Title III: Department of Energy - Provides FY2015 appropriations to the Department of Energy (DOE) for energy programs, including:

Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy,

Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability,

Nuclear Energy,

Fossil Energy Research and Development,

Naval Petroleum and Oil Shale Reserves,

Elk Hills School Lands Fund,

Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR),

Northeast Home Heating Oil Reserve,

Energy Information Administration,

Non-Defense Environmental Cleanup,

Uranium Enrichment Decontamination and Decommissioning Fund,

Science,

Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E),

Title 17 Innovative Technology Loan Guarantee Loan Program,

Advanced Technology Vehicles Manufacturing Loan Program,

Departmental Administration, and

the Office of the Inspector General.

Provides appropriations to DOE for atomic energy defense activities of the National Nuclear Security Administration, including for Weapons Activities, Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation, Naval Reactors, and Federal Salaries and Expenses.

Provides appropriations to DOE for environmental and other defense activities for Defense Environmental Cleanup, Defense Uranium Enrichment Decontamination and Decommissioning, and Other Defense Activities.

Provides appropriations for Power Marketing Administration, including (1) Bonneville Power Administration Fund; (2) Southeastern Power Administration Operation and Maintenance; (3) Southwestern Power Administration Operation and Maintenance; (4) Western Area Power Administration Operation and Maintenance, Construction, and Rehabilitation; and (5) the Falcon and Amistad Operating and Maintenance Fund.

Provides appropriations for the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC).

Rescinds unobligated balances from specified DOE accounts.

(Sec. 301) Prohibits the use of funds provided in this title for programs, projects, or activities that have not been funded by Congress. Prohibits specified grants, contracts, allocations, and agreements unless Congress is notified in advance. Prohibits funds from being used for certain multiyear DOE, Energy Programs activities unless specified conditions are met and Congress is notified. Establishes requirements and restrictions for the reprogramming of funds provided in this title.

(Sec. 302) Permits unexpended balances of prior appropriations provided for activities in this Act to be transferred and merged with appropriations accounts established in this Act.

(Sec. 303) Deems funds appropriated by this Act for intelligence activities to be specifically authorized by Congress during FY2015 until the enactment of the Intelligence Authorization Act for FY2015.

(Sec. 304) Prohibits the use of funds made available in this title to construct specified high-hazard nuclear facilities unless independent oversight is conducted by the Office of Independent Enterprise Assessments to ensure compliance with nuclear safety requirements.

(Sec. 305) Prohibits the use of funds provided in this title to approve certain critical decisions for construction projects exceeding $100 million until a separate independent cost estimate has been developed.

(Sec. 306) Requires DOE determinations regarding certain uranium sales and transfers to remain valid for not more than two calendar years. Requires DOE to notify Congress prior to the provision of uranium in any form and specifies requirements for the notification.

(Sec. 307) Prohibits funds made available for Department of Energy, Energy Programs, Science from being used for a