H.R.244 - 115th Congress (2017-2018): Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2017
Array ( [actionDate] => 2017-03-21 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in Senate: Passed Senate with amendments by Unanimous Consent. [externalActionCode] => 17000 [description] => Passed Senate )

Array ( [actionDate] => 2017-02-13 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in House: On motion to suspend the rules and pass the bill, as amended Agreed to by the Yeas and Nays: (2/3 required): 409 - 1 (Roll no. 86).(text: CR H1109-1110) [externalActionCode] => 8000 [description] => Passed House )

Here are the steps for Status of Legislation:

This bill has the status Became Law

There are 4 summaries for H.R.244. Public Law (05/05/2017) Passed Senate amended (03/21/2017) Passed House amended (02/13/2017) Introduced in House (01/04/2017) Bill summaries are authored by CRS

Shown Here:

Public Law No: 115-31 (05/05/2017)

Highlights:

This bill provides FY2017 appropriations for most federal agencies for the remainder of FY2017.

It includes 11 of the 12 regular appropriations bills, excluding the Military Construction, Veterans Affairs, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2017 which was signed into law on September 29, 2016.

The bill also provides additional emergency, disaster relief, and Overseas Contingency Operations/ Global War on Terrorism funding which is exempt from discretionary spending limits.

The bill includes additional provisions that:

reauthorize intelligence programs;

permanently extend health care benefits for certain retired coal miners and their families;

reauthorize the District of Columbia's school voucher program and other educational funding for DC;

extend the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program;

provide additional Medicaid funding for Puerto Rico;

authorize additional visas for the H-2B (temporary nonagricultural workers) and the Afghan Special Immigrant Visa programs; and

establish a HIRE Vets Medallion program to recognize efforts by employers to hire veterans and provide community and charitable services supporting the veteran community.

The bill exempts specified provisions from the Statutory Pay-As-You-Go Act of 2010 (PAYGO), the Senate PAYGO rule, and other budget enforcement rules.

Full Summary:

Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2017

(Sec. 3) Provides that references to "this Act" included in any division of this bill refer only to the provisions of the division unless the bill expressly provides otherwise.

(Sec. 4) Provides that the explanatory statement printed in the Congressional Record regarding this bill has the same effect as a joint explanatory statement of a committee of conference.

(Sec. 5) Provides that the sums in this bill are appropriated for FY2017.

(Sec. 6) Provides that amounts designated by this bill for Overseas Contingency Operations/ Global War on Terrorism or emergency requirements pursuant to the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 are only available (or rescinded, if applicable) if the President subsequently designates the amounts and transmits the designations to Congress.

(Sec. 7) Permits the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to make specified adjustments to discretionary spending limits to account for estimating differences with the Congressional Budget Office (CBO).

(Sec. 8) Amends the Further Continuing and Security Assistance Appropriations Act, 2017 to change the title to read "Making further continuing appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2017, and for other purposes."

Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2017

DIVISION A--AGRICULTURE, RURAL DEVELOPMENT, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2017

The Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2017 provides FY2017 appropriations for the Department of Agriculture (USDA), except for the Forest Service which is included in the Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies division of this bill.

It also provides appropriations for the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Farm Credit Administration.

This division includes both discretionary and mandatory funding. The mandatory funding levels are generally set by authorizing legislation such as the farm bill and are frequently limited in the agriculture appropriations bill.

The division decreases discretionary funding for Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies below FY2016 levels.

TITLE I--AGRICULTURAL PROGRAMS

Provides appropriations for the following agricultural programs and services:

the Office of the Secretary;

Executive Operations;

the Office of the Chief Information Officer;

the Office of the Chief Financial Officer;

the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights;

the Office of Civil Rights;

Agriculture Buildings and Facilities;

Hazardous Materials Management;

the Office of Inspector General;

the Office of the General Counsel;

the Office of Ethics;

the Office of the Under Secretary for Research, Education, and Economics;

the Economic Research Service;

the National Agricultural Statistics Service;

the Agricultural Research Service;

the National Institute of Food and Agriculture;

the Office of the Under Secretary for Marketing and Regulatory Programs;

the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service;

the Agricultural Marketing Service;

the Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration;

the Office of the Under Secretary for Food Safety;

the Food Safety and Inspection Service;

the Office of the Under Secretary for Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services;

the Farm Service Agency;

the Risk Management Agency;

the Federal Crop Insurance Corporation Fund; and

the Commodity Credit Corporation Fund.

TITLE II--CONSERVATION PROGRAMS

Provides appropriations for the Office of the Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment.

Provides appropriations to the Natural Resources Conservation Service for:

Conservation Operations,

Watershed and Flood Prevention Operations, and

the Watershed Rehabilitation Program.

TITLE III--RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

Provides appropriations for Rural Development Programs including:

the Office of the Under Secretary for Rural Development,

Rural Development Salaries and Expenses,

the Rural Housing Service,

the Rural Business--Cooperative Service, and

the Rural Utilities Service.

TITLE IV--DOMESTIC FOOD PROGRAMS

Provides appropriations for the Office of the Under Secretary for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services.

Provides appropriations to the Food and Nutrition Service for:

Child Nutrition Programs;

the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC);

the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP, formerly known as food stamps);

the Commodity Assistance Program; and

Nutrition Programs Administration.

TITLE V--FOREIGN ASSISTANCE AND RELATED PROGRAMS

Provides appropriations for the Foreign Agricultural Service, including:

the Food for Peace Act (P.L. 480),

the McGovern-Dole International Food for Education and Child Nutrition Program, and

the Commodity Credit Corporation Export (loans) Credit Guarantee Program Account.

TITLE VI--RELATED AGENCY AND FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION

Provides appropriations to the Department of Health and Human Services for the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

Provides appropriations to the Farm Credit Administration.

TITLE VII--GENERAL PROVISIONS

(Sec. 701) Permits USDA to use funds provided by this division for the purchase, replacement, and hire of passenger motor vehicles.

(Sec. 702) Permits USDA to transfer unobligated balances to the Working Capital Fund for the acquisition of plant and capital equipment for financial, administrative, and information technology services. Permits the transferred funds to remain available until expended and specifies restrictions on the use of the funds.

(Sec. 703) Prohibits appropriations provided by this division from remaining available for obligation beyond the current fiscal year unless the division expressly provides otherwise.

(Sec. 704) Limits negotiated indirect costs on cooperative agreements between USDA and nonprofit institutions to 10% of the total direct cost of the agreement when the purpose of the agreement is to carry out programs of mutual interest between the two parties.

(Sec. 705) Permits appropriations for direct and guaranteed loans to remain available until expended to disburse obligations made in the current fiscal year for: (1) the Rural Development Loan Fund program account, (2) the Rural Electrification and Telecommunication Loans program account, and (3) the Rural Housing Insurance Fund program account.

(Sec. 706) Prohibits USDA from using funds provided by this division to acquire or upgrade information technology systems without approval of the Chief Information Officer (CIO) and the Executive Information Technology Investment Review Board. Restricts the transfer of funds made available by this division to the CIO without prior approval of Congress. Prohibits funds from being used for specified information technology projects without the approval of the CIO.

(Sec. 707) Permits specified FY2017 funds provided under the Federal Crop Insurance Act for agricultural management assistance to remain available until expended to disburse obligations made in the current fiscal year.

(Sec. 708) Makes a former Rural Utility Service borrower that has repaid or prepaid a loan under the Rural Electrification Act of 1936 or any not-for-profit utility qualified to receive a loan under the Act eligible for rural economic development and job creation assistance in the same manner as a borrower.

(Sec. 709) Permits specified unobligated balances of appropriations provided by this division for salaries and expenses of the Farm Service Agency and the Rural Development mission area to remain available through FY2018 for information technology expenses.

(Sec. 710) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for first-class travel by employees of agencies funded by this division.

(Sec. 711) Provides that Commodity Credit Corporation funds authorized or required to be used for specified programs included in the Agricultural Act of 2014: (1) shall be available for salaries and administrative expenses associated with the programs without regard to allotment and transfer limits, and (2) shall not be considered to be a fund transfer or allotment for purposes of applying the limits.

(Sec. 712) Limits funds available for USDA advisory committees, panels, commissions, and task forces, except for panels used to comply with negotiated rulemaking or to evaluate competitively awarded grants.

(Sec. 713) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to pay indirect costs charged against any agricultural research, education, or extension grant awards issued by the National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) that exceed 30% of total federal funds provided under each award.

Permits funds provided by this division for grants awarded competitively by NIFA to be used to pay full allowable indirect costs for specified research and development grants awarded under the Small Business Act.

(Sec. 714) Limits funds that may be used for the following programs:

the Watershed Rehabilitation Program;

the Environmental Quality Incentives Program;

the Biomass Crop Assistance Program;

the Biorefinery, Renewable Chemical, and Biobased Product Manufacturing Assistance Program; and

agricultural management assistance programs authorized by the Federal Crop Insurance Act.

(Sec. 715) Limits funds for the following domestic food assistance categories:

Child Nutrition Programs Entitlement Commodities,

State Option Contracts,

Removal of Defective Commodities, and

Administration of Section 32 Commodity Purchases.

Limits FY2017 funds for the Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program that provides fruit and vegetables to students in participating elementary schools.

Prohibits USDA from using funds for payments authorized by Section 32 of the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1935 to increase purchasing power of agricultural producers or for surplus removal or price support activities authorized by the Commodity Credit Corporation Charter Act.

(Section 32 is a program created to assist agricultural producers of non-price-supported commodities and is funded by a permanent appropriation of a portion of the previous year's customs receipts less certain mandatory transfers to child nutrition and other programs. This provision effectively prohibits the use of Section 32 for emergency disaster payments.)

Rescinds specified unobligated balances provided for domestic food assistance programs.

(Sec. 716) Prohibits funds from being used to prepare proposals for the President's budget that assume savings from certain user fee proposals without identifying additional spending reductions that should occur if the proposals are not enacted.

(Sec. 717) Sets forth procedures, requirements, and restrictions for reprogramming and transferring funds provided by this division.

(Sec. 718) Permits USDA to assess a one-time fee for any guaranteed business and industry loan and limits the fee to 3% of the guaranteed principal portion of the loan.

(Sec. 719) Prohibits funds from being used to provide reports, questions, or responses to questions that are a result of information requested for the appropriations hearing process to anyone not employed by USDA, the Department of Health and Human Services, or the Farm Credit Administration.

(Sec. 720) Prohibits any executive branch agency from using funds provided by this division to produce a prepackaged news story for U.S. broadcast or distribution unless it includes clear notification that it was produced or funded by the agency.

(Sec. 721) Prohibits USDA employees from being detailed or assigned from an agency funded by this division to any other USDA agency or office for more than 60 days in a fiscal year unless the individual's employing agency is reimbursed by the receiving agency for the salary and expenses of the employee.

(Sec. 722) Provides appropriations to remain available until expended for implementing non-renewable agreements for wetlands preservation on eligible lands, including flooded agricultural lands.

(Sec. 723) Directs the agencies funded by this division to submit spending plans to Congress.

(Sec. 724) Provides that funds for title II of the Food for Peace Act may only be used to assist nations if adequate monitoring and controls exist to ensure that emergency food aid is received by the intended beneficiaries in areas affected by food shortages and not diverted for unauthorized or inappropriate purposes.

(Sec. 725) Requires USDA to establish an intermediary loan packaging program based on the FY2013 pilot program for packaging and reviewing section 502 single family direct loans. (The loan program assists low-income applicants in purchasing homes in rural areas. Funds may also be used to build, repair, or renovate a house, including providing water and sewage facilities.)

(Sec. 726) Permits USDA to increase the program level by up to 25% for certain loans and loan guarantees that do not require budget authority and have program levels established by this division. Requires congressional notification prior to implementing any increase.

(Sec. 727) Provides that certain credit card refunds or rebates transferred to the Working Capital Fund: (1) shall not be available for obligation without congressional approval; and (2) shall only be available for the acquisition of plant and capital equipment for USDA financial, administrative, and information technology services.

(Sec. 728) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to procure processed poultry products from China for the National School Lunch Program, the Child and Adult Food Care Program, the Summer Food Service Program, or the School Breakfast Program.

(Sec. 729) Permits USDA to respond to a community with inadequate drinking water supplies due to a natural disaster by providing potable water through the Emergency Community Water Assistance Grant Program for up to 120 days beyond the time period established in the program.

(Sec. 730) Specifies the matching requirements that apply to funds appropriated for the Agriculture and Food Research Initiative.

(Sec. 731) Appropriates funds for direct reimbursement payments for geographically disadvantaged farmers or ranchers to transport agricultural commodities.

(Sec. 732) Prohibits the Food and Nutrition Service from using funds provided by this division for any new research and evaluation projects until after a research and evaluation plan is submitted to Congress.

(Sec. 733) Sets forth the authorities that apply for USDA to provide loans for housing and buildings on adequate farms.

(Sec. 734) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for regulations to allow or require information intended for a prescribing health care professional, in the case of a drug or biological product, to be distributed electronically (in lieu of in paper form) until a federal law is enacted to allow or require electronic distribution.

(Sec. 735) Requires any funds transferred pursuant to section 149 of the Continuing Appropriations Act, 2017 that are not necessary for the cost of direct telecommunications loans authorized by the Rural Electrification Act of 1936 to be transferred back to the accounts to which they were originally appropriated to be used for the original purpose.

(Sec. 736) Prohibits the FDA from acknowledging applications for an exemption for investigational use of a drug or biological product in research in which a human embryo is intentionally created or modified to include a heritable genetic modification. Provides that any submission is deemed not to have been received, and the exemption may not go into effect.

(Sec. 737) Prohibits funds from being used to carry out provisions of the final FDA rule entitled "Current Good Manufacturing Practice and Hazard Analysis and Risk-Based Preventive Controls for Food for Animals" with respect to certain requirements that apply to the production, distribution, sale, or receipt of dried spent grain by-products of the alcoholic beverage production process.

(Sec. 738) Requires the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) to conduct audits in a manner that evaluates the following factors in the country or region being audited, as applicable:

veterinary control and oversight,

disease history and vaccination practices,

livestock demographics and traceability,

epidemiological separation from potential sources of infection,

surveillance practices,

diagnostic laboratory capabilities, and

emergency preparedness and response.

Requires APHIS to make reports regarding the audits publicly available.

(Sec. 739) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to issue or renew licenses under the Animal Welfare Act for certain dealers who sell dogs and cats for research, experiments, teaching, or testing.

(Sec. 740) Prohibits the FDA from deeming partially hydrogenated oils to be unsafe or any food containing a partially hydrogenated oil to be adulterated prior to June 18, 2018.

(Sec. 741) Permits USDA to charge a fee for lenders to access USDA loan guarantee systems in connection with participation in the loan guarantee programs of the Rural Housing Service.

(Sec. 742) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for a computer network unless pornography is blocked, with the exception of law enforcement, prosecution, or adjudication activities.

(Sec. 743) Provides additional funds to APHIS to remain available until expended for fruit fly rearing facilities.

(Sec. 744) Requires a household that is certified to participate in SNAP to report when it no longer resides in the state in which it is certified.

(Sec. 745) Rescinds specified unobligated balances from the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC).

(Sec. 746) Prohibits funds provided for the rural water, waste water, waste disposal, and solid waste management programs authorized by the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act from being used for the construction, alteration, maintenance, or repair of a public water or wastewater system unless all of the iron and steel products used in the project are produced in the United States. Specifies exceptions and waiver procedures.

(Sec. 747) Requires USDA to permit states to grant exemptions from whole grain requirements for the National School Lunch Program and the School Breakfast Program that took effect on or after July 1, 2014.

Requires states to establish a process for responding to exemption requests, provided that school food authorities demonstrate hardship in procuring whole grain products compliant with new standards and comply with whole grain standards in effect prior to July 1, 2014.

Prohibits funds from being used to implement regulations requiring a specified reduction in sodium in federally reimbursed meals, foods, and snacks sold in schools.

Requires USDA to allow states to grant special exemptions for the service of flavored, low-fat fluid milk in the School Lunch Program and the School Breakfast Program and as a competitive food available on campus during the school day, to schools which demonstrate a reduction in student milk consumption or an increase in school milk waste.

(Sec. 748) Provides additional funds for the purchase of commodities for the Emergency Food Assistance Program (TEFAP).

(Sec. 749) Permits USDA to conduct a pilot program to use specified funds from rural electrification loans made by the Federal Financing Bank that are guaranteed under the Rural Electrification Act of 1936 to be used for refinancing debt pursuant to the Act. Requires the refinancing to benefit the ratepayers of the borrower and meet other specified requirements.

(Sec. 750) Requires at least 10% of the funds provided by this division for specified Rural Development programs to be allocated for assistance in persistent poverty counties. Defines a "persistent poverty county" as county that has had at least 20% of its population living in poverty over the past 30 years, as measured by the decennial censuses.

(Sec. 751) Prohibits USDA from including incarcerated prison populations to determine eligibility or the level of program assistance for Rural Development programs.

(Sec. 752) Provides funds to the FDA to remain available until expended to prevent, prepare for, and respond to emerging health threats, including the Ebola and Zika viruses, domestically and internationally, to develop necessary medical countermeasures and vaccines, and for related administrative activities.

(Sec. 753) Provides funds for the Emergency Conservation Program for emergencies not declared as a major disaster or emergency under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act.

(Sec. 754) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to influence congressional action on any legislation or appropriation matters pending before Congress, other than to communicate with Congress as permitted under current law.

(Sec. 755) Provides additional funds for Food for Peace Title II Grants.

(Sec. 756) Requires the FDA to issue final regulations to revise federal drug regulations with respect to medical gases by July 15, 2017.

(Sec. 757) Provides additional funds to APHIS to remain available through FY2018 for one-time control and management and associated activities directly related to the multiple-agency response to citrus greening.

(Sec. 758) Rescinds specified unobligated balances of funds provided to USDA for the Rural Housing and Community Development Service, the Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative Service, and the Rural Utilities Service.

(Sec. 759) Rescinds specified unobligated balances resulting from offsetting collections for the Rural Housing and Community Development Service, the Rural Housing Service, the Rural Business-Cooperative Service, and the Rural Utilities Service.

(Sec. 760) Provides funds to the National Institute for Food and Agriculture for a pilot program to provide grants to nonprofit organizations for programs and services to establish and enhance farming and ranching opportunities for military veterans.

(Sec. 761) Prohibits the FDA from allowing any food that contains genetically engineered salmon until the FDA publishes final labeling guidelines for informing consumers of the content.

Requires specified FDA funds to be used to develop labeling guidelines and implement a program to disclose to consumers whether salmon offered for sale is genetically engineered.

(Sec. 762) Prohibits funds from being used to inspect horses for slaughter purposes.

(Sec. 763) Directs USDA to set aside specified additional funds for Rural Economic Area Partnership (REAP) Zones.

(Sec. 764) Appropriates funds for the pilot program to demonstrate new technologies that increase growth of re-forested hardwood trees on private nonindustrial forests lands on the coast of the Gulf of Mexico that were damaged by Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

(Sec. 765) Prohibits funds provided by this division from be used for the variety requirements of the final USDA rule entitled "Enhancing Retailer Standards in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)" until USDA amends the definition of "variety" to increase the number of items that qualify as acceptable varieties in each staple food category so that the total number of such items in each staple food category exceeds the number of such items in each staple food category included in the final rule.

Specifies that, until the amendments are promulgated, USDA must apply the requirements regarding acceptable varieties and breadth of stock to SNAP retailers that were in effect on the day before the enactment of the Agricultural Act of 2014.

(Sec. 766) Prohibits the FDA from using funds provided by this division to develop, issue, promote, or advance any regulations applicable to food manufacturers for population-wide sodium reduction actions or to develop, issue, promote or advance final guidance applicable to food manufacturers for long term population-wide sodium reduction actions until the dietary reference intake report with respect to sodium is completed.

(Sec. 767) Provides additional funds to USDA for loans and grants that are consistent with the Healthy Food Financing Initiative and that support projects to provide access to healthy food in underserved areas, create and preserve quality jobs, and revitalize low-income communities.

(Sec. 768) Provides additional funds for the development of an implementation plan for increasing access to education in the fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics in rural communities through the Distance Learning and Telemedicine program.

(Sec. 769) Provides additional funds for the Rural Energy Savings Program. (The program helps rural families and small businesses achieve cost savings by providing loans to consumers to implement durable cost-effective energy efficiency measures.)

(Sec. 770) Rescinds specified unobligated balances of FY2016 funds that were provided to the Rural Development Salaries and Expenses account for the Comprehensive Loan Accounting System. Provides an equivalent amount of additional funding to remain available through FY2018 for Information Technology modernization activities.

(Sec. 771) Requires UDA to modify the pilot program designed to preserve affordable rental housing through non-profit transfer or acquisition of Section 515 (rural rental housing) properties with expiring mortgages. Requires the program to study effective means to transfer Section 515 properties exiting the program due to mortgage maturity to qualified nonprofit organizations to preserve the properties in the Rural Housing Service (RHS) multi-family program.

Provides appropriations for USDA to award grants to non-profit organizations and public housing authorities to provide technical assistance to RHS multi-family housing borrowers to facilitate the acquisition of RHS multi-family housing properties in areas where there is a risk of loss of affordable housing.

(Sec. 772) Requires USDA to establish a pilot program to permit state Farm Service Agency offices to make county-level payments to agricultural producers under the Agriculture Risk Coverage Program using an alternate calculation method if it is necessary to ensure that there are not significant yield calculation disparities between comparable counties in the state. Specifies requirements for the alternative calculation method and provides appropriations for the program.

(Sec. 773) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used: (1) in contravention of a provision of the Agricultural Act of 2014 that permits an institution of higher education or a state department of agriculture to grow or cultivate industrial hemp for research purposes; or (2) to prohibit the transportation, processing, sale, or use of industrial hemp that is grown or cultivated in accordance with the Agricultural Act of 2014, within or outside the state in which it is grown or cultivated.

(Sec. 774) Specifies that, for the purposes of applying the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the acceptable market name of Lithodes aequispinus is "golden king crab."

Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2017

DIVISION B--COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2017

The Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2017 provides FY2017 appropriations to the Department of Commerce, the Department of Justice, science agencies, and several related agencies.

This division funds agencies with a wide range of responsibilities for issues such as:

addressing violent crime, drug trafficking, financial fraud, terrorism, espionage, and cybercrime;

conducting the census;

forecasting the weather;

managing fisheries;

exploring space;

advancing science;

providing legal services for the poor;

enforcing employment discrimination laws; and

overseeing patents, trademarks, and trade policy.

The division increases FY2017 discretionary funding for Commerce, Justice, Science and Related Agencies above FY2016 levels.

Department of Commerce Appropriations Act, 2017

TITLE I--DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Provides appropriations to the Department of Commerce for:

the International Trade Administration,

the Bureau of Industry and Security,

the Economic Development Administration,

the Minority Business Development Agency,

Economic and Statistical Analysis,

the Bureau of the Census,

the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, and

the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.

Provides appropriations to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) for:

Scientific and Technical Research and Services,

Industrial Technology Services, and

Construction of Research Facilities.

Provides appropriations to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for:

Operations, Research, and Facilities;

Procurement, Acquisition, and Construction;

Pacific Coastal Salmon Recovery;

the Fishermen's Contingency Fund; and

the Fisheries Finance Program Account.

Provides appropriations for Departmental Management, including:

Salaries and Expenses,

Renovation and Modernization, and

the Office of Inspector General.

(Sec. 101) Permits funds provided by this division to be used for advanced payments (prior to the receipt of goods, services, or other assets) that are not otherwise authorized only if designated Commerce officials certify that the payments are in the public interest.

(Sec. 102) Permits funds provided by this division to be used for hiring passenger motor vehicles, employment of temporary or intermittent experts and consultants, and the purchase of uniforms.

(Sec. 103) Permits the transfer of funds between Commerce accounts, subject to specified limitations and requirements. Requires Commerce to notify Congress prior to the acquisition or disposal of any capital asset not provided for in an Act providing appropriations to Commerce.

(Sec. 104) Extends requirements for NOAA to make and report to Congress on determinations regarding the identification and management of technical, cost, and schedule risk; the reliance on demonstrated technologies; and compliance with relevant policies, prior to entering into a contract for a major program with a life cycle cost of more than $250 million.

Specifies the life cycle costs for the Joint Polar Satellite System and the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite R-Series Program.

(Sec. 105) Permits Commerce to: (1) furnish services to facilitate the use or occupancy of Department of Commerce buildings, and (2) credit specified reimbursements received for the services to the appropriation or fund which bears the cost of the services.

(Sec. 106) Specifies that grant recipients may continue to deter child pornography, copyright infringement, or any other unlawful activity over their networks.

(Sec. 107) Permits NOAA to use, with consent and reimbursement, resources of other federal, state, local, and international entities to carry out the responsibilities of any statute administered by NOAA.

(Sec. 108) Prohibits the National Technical Information Service from charging for copies of reports or documents generated by the legislative branch unless the service has provided information on how a copy may be obtained for free online. Requires any charge to be limited to the service's cost.

(Sec. 109) Permits Commerce to waive the requirement for bonds with respect to contracts for the construction, alteration, or repair of vessels under the Coast and Geodetic Survey Act of 1947.

(Sec. 110) Prohibits Commerce from using funds for management activities pursuant to the Fishery Management Plan for the Reef Fish Resources of the Gulf of Mexico unless the management is conducted beyond a seaward boundary that is nine nautical miles seaward from the baseline from which the territorial sea of the United States is measured.

(Sec. 111) Permits NOAA to work with federal and non-federal agencies and governments by entering into agreements; using land, services, equipment, personnel, and facilities provided by the entities; or receiving and expending funds made available on a consensual basis.

(Sec. 112) Permits the Economic and Statistics Administration, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and the U.S. Census Bureau to use funds to enter into cooperative agreements to assist in improving statistical methodology and research.

(Sec. 113) Prohibits any person from conducting any research, exploration, salvage, or other activity that would physically alter or disturb the wreck or wreck site of the RMS Titanic unless the activity is authorized by Commerce per the provisions of the Agreement Concerning the Shipwrecked Vessel RMS Titanic.

Department of Justice Appropriations Act, 2017

TITLE II--DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Provides FY2017 appropriations to the Department of Justice (DOJ).

Provides appropriations to DOJ for General Administration, including:

Salaries and Expenses,

Justice Information Sharing Technology,

the Executive Office for Immigration Review, and

the Office of Inspector General.

Provides appropriations to the U.S. Parole Commission.

Provides appropriations for Legal Activities, including:

General Legal Activities,

the Antitrust Division,

the U.S. Attorneys,

the U.S. Trustee System Fund,

the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission,

Fees and Expenses of Witnesses,

the Community Relations Service, and

the Assets Forfeiture Fund.

Provides appropriations to the U.S. Marshals Service for:

Salaries and Expenses,

Construction, and

Federal Prisoner Detention.

Provides appropriations to DOJ for:

the National Security Division;

Interagency Law Enforcement;

the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI);

the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA);

the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF); and

the Federal Prison System.

Provides appropriations to the Office On Violence Against Women for Violence Against Women Prevention and Prosecution Programs.

Provides appropriations to the Office of Justice Programs for:

Research, Evaluation, and Statistics;

State and Local Law Enforcement Assistance;

Juvenile Justice Programs; and

Public Safety Officer Benefits.

Provides appropriations for Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) programs.

(Sec. 201) Provides additional funds to the Attorney General for official reception and representation expenses.

(Sec. 202) Prohibits funds provided by this title from being used to pay for an abortion, except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term, or in the case of rape or incest.

(Sec. 203) Prohibits funds provided by this title from being used to require any person to perform or facilitate the performance of an abortion.

(Sec. 204) Specifies that: (1) section 203 of this division does not remove the obligation of the Bureau of Prisons to provide escort services to an inmate receiving an abortion outside of a federal facility, and (2) nothing in this section diminishes the effect of section 203 intended to address the philosophical beliefs of individual employees of the Bureau of Prisons.

(Sec. 205) Sets forth requirements and procedures for transferring and reprogramming DOJ funds provided by this division.

(Sec. 206) Prohibits the FBI or the U.S. Marshals Service from using funds provided by this title to transport prisoners classified as maximum or high security, other than to a facility certified by the Bureau of Prisons as appropriately secure.

(Sec. 207) Prohibits federal prisons from using funds provided by this division to purchase cable television services, or to rent or purchase audiovisual or electronic media or equipment used primarily for recreational purposes. Includes exceptions for inmate training, religious, or educational programs.

(Sec. 208) Prohibits funds provided by this title from being used for a new or enhanced information technology program with estimated development costs exceeding $100 million unless the Deputy Attorney General and the Department Investment Review Board certify to Congress that the program: (1) has appropriate program management controls and contractor oversight mechanisms in place, and (2) is compatible with DOJ enterprise architecture.

(Sec. 209) Requires DOJ to follow reprogramming procedures for any deviation from the program amounts specified in this division or the explanatory statement or for any use of deobligated funds provided by this title in previous years.

(Sec. 210) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for a public-private competition for work performed by employees of the Bureau of Prisons or Federal Prison Industries, Incorporated.

(Sec. 211) Prohibits U.S. Attorneys from holding dual or additional responsibilities that exempt them from statutory residency requirements.

(Sec. 212) Specifies percentages of grant and reimbursement funds provided to the Office of Justice Programs that may be used for: (1) training and technical assistance; and (2) criminal justice research, evaluation and statistics.

(Sec. 213) Permits DOJ to use specified funds made available for grant and reimbursement programs for tribal criminal justice assistance without regard to the authorizations for the grant or reimbursement programs.

(Sec. 214) Permits the Attorney General to waive matching requirements for Second Chance Act adult and juvenile reentry demonstration projects; state, tribal, and local reentry courts; drug treatment programs; and grants to protect inmates and safeguard communities.

(Sec. 215) Waives the requirement that DOJ reserve certain funds provided for offender incarceration for payments for incarceration on tribal lands.

(Sec. 216) Prohibits funds provided by this division, other than funds for the National Instant Criminal Background Check System established under the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act, from being used to transfer an operable firearm to a known or suspected agent of a drug cartel if law enforcement personnel do not continuously monitor or control the firearm.

(Sec. 217) Establishes limitations and requirements for the obligation of specified funds from the Department of Justice Working Capital Fund and the Assets Forfeiture Fund. Requires DOJ to submit to Congress a spending plan including the planned distribution of Assets Forfeiture Fund joint law enforcement operations funding during FY2017.

(Sec. 218) Permits funds provided by this division for the Office of Justice Programs to be used to participate in Performance Partnership Pilot collaboration programs.

(Sec. 219) Permits DOJ to transfer specified unobligated balances from the Working Capital Fund to the FBI Construction account for the construction of the new FBI headquarters in the National Capital Region.

Science Appropriations Act, 2017

TITLE III--SCIENCE

Provides appropriations to the Office of Science and Technology Policy.

Provides appropriations to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for:

Science;

Aeronautics;

Space Technology;

Exploration;

Space Operations;

Education;

Safety, Security, and Mission Services;

Construction and Environmental Compliance and Restoration; and

the Office of Inspector General.

Includes administrative provisions for NASA that establish requirements and procedures for the availability of funds for an announced prize, the reprogramming and transfer of funds provided by this division, and NASA's spending plan.

Provides appropriations to the National Science Foundation (NSF) for:

Research and Related Activities,

Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction,

Education and Human Resources,

Agency Operations and Award Management,

the Office of the National Science Board, and

the Office of Inspector General.

Establishes requirements for the transfer or reprogramming of funds provided by this division to the NSF.

TITLE IV--RELATED AGENCIES

Provides appropriations for related agencies, including:

the Commission on Civil Rights,

the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,

the U.S. International Trade Commission,

the Legal Services Corporation,

the Marine Mammal Commission,

the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, and

the State Justice Institute.

Specifies restrictions, terms, and conditions on the use of funds by the Legal Services Corporation.

TITLE V--GENERAL PROVISIONS

(Sec. 501) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for publicity or propaganda purposes that are not authorized by Congress.

(Sec. 502) Prohibits funds provided by this division from remaining available for obligation beyond the current fiscal year, unless expressly permitted in the division.

(Sec. 503) Limits expenditures for consulting services to contracts where the expenditures are a matter of public record and available for public inspection, unless otherwise provided by law or executive order.

(Sec. 504) Provides that if any provision of this division or the application of the provision is held invalid, the remainder of the division is not affected.

(Sec. 505) Establishes restrictions and requirements for the reprogramming of funds provided by this division.

(Sec. 506) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to award contracts or subcontracts to a person who has been found to have intentionally affixed a ''Made in America'' label to any product that was not made in America. Requires promotional items purchased using funds provided by this division to be manufactured, produced, or assembled in the United States or its territories or possessions, to the extent it is practicable.

(Sec. 507) Requires Commerce, DOJ, the NSF, and NASA to provide quarterly reports to Congress regarding the status of balances of appropriations at the account level.

(Sec. 508) Requires costs incurred by agencies for personnel actions due to funding reductions in this division to be absorbed within the budgetary resources available to the department or agency. Provides transfer authority between appropriation accounts to carry out this provision, subject to reprogramming procedures. Specifies that this section applies to Commerce actions taken for the care and protection of loan collateral or grant property.

(Sec. 509) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to promote the sale or export of tobacco or tobacco products or to seek the reduction or removal of foreign restrictions on the marketing of tobacco products, except for restrictions which are not applied equally to all products of the same type.

(Sec. 510) Establishes obligation limits for funds from the Crime Victims Fund.

(Sec. 511) Prohibits DOJ from using funds provided by this division to discriminate against or denigrate the religious or moral beliefs of students who participate in programs for which financial assistance is provided, or of the parents or legal guardians of the students.

(Sec. 512) Prohibits the transfer of funds provided by this division to a department, agency, or instrumentality of the U.S. government, unless the transfer is pursuant to an appropriations Act.

(Sec. 513) Specifies that funds included in this this division to implement E-Government Initiatives are subject to reprogramming procedures and requirements.

(Sec. 514) Establishes timetables and procedures for specified audits by Inspectors General of the departments and agencies funded in this division.

Requires recipients of grants or contracts funded by this division to certify that no grant or contract funds will be provided to anyone with a financial interest in the recipient.

(Sec. 515) Prohibits Commerce, DOJ, NASA, or the NSF from using funds provided by this division to acquire certain information systems unless the agency has:

reviewed the supply chain risk for the information systems against criteria developed by NIST and the FBI,

reviewed the supply chain risk from the presumptive awardee against available and relevant threat information provided by the FBI and other agencies,

conducted an assessment of any risk of cyber-espionage or sabotage associated with the acquisition of the system,

developed a mitigation strategy for any identified risks, and

determined that the acquisition is in the national interest.

(Sec. 516) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to support or justify the use of torture by any official or contract employee of the U.S. government.

(Sec. 517) Prohibits funds from being used to require export licenses for exporting components, parts, or attachments for certain firearms to Canada.

(Sec. 518) Prohibits funds from being used to deny certain import applications for firearms, parts, or ammunition that are curios or relics. (Curios or relics are firearms which are of special interest to collectors by reason of some quality other than is associated with firearms intended for sporting use or as offensive or defensive weapons.)

(Sec. 519) Prohibits the use of funds provided by this division to include specified patent provisions from the United States-Singapore Free Trade Agreement, the United States-Australia Free Trade Agreement, or the United States-Morocco Free Trade Agreement in any new bilateral or multilateral trade agreement.

(Sec. 520) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to authorize or issue a National Security Letter (NSL) in violation of specified laws authorizing the FBI to issue an NSL. (An NSL is a written directive, comparable to an administrative subpoena, used by law enforcement and intelligence agencies to demand certain information from third parties such as telecommunication providers, financial institutions, and consumer credit reporting agencies.)

(Sec. 521) Requires congressional notification regarding Commerce, DOJ, NSF, or NASA projects that total more than $75 million and are expected to have cost increases of at least 10%.

(Sec. 522) Deems funds provided by this division for intelligence or intelligence related activities as authorized by Congress during FY2017 until the enactment of the Intelligence Authorization Act for FY2017.

(Sec. 523) Prohibits contracts or grant awards above $5 million unless the prospective contractor or grantee certifies that the organization has filed all federal tax returns, has not been convicted of a criminal offense under the Internal Revenue Code, and has no unpaid federal tax assessment.

(Sec. 524) Rescinds specified unobligated balances from prior appropriations to DOJ and Commerce and requires the departments to submit reports to Congress regarding the rescissions.

(Sec. 525) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to purchase first class or premium airline travel in violation of specified federal travel regulations.

(Sec. 526) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to pay for the attendance of more than 50 department or agency employees at any single conference outside the United States, unless it is a law enforcement training or operational event where the majority of federal attendees are law enforcement personnel stationed outside the United States.

(Sec. 527) Prohibits funds from being used to transfer or release any individual detained at U.S. Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba (Guantanamo) who is not a U.S. citizen or member of the Armed Forces into the United States, its territories, or possessions.

(Sec. 528) Prohibits funding from being used to construct, acquire, or modify any U.S. facility (other than the facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba) to house any individual detained at Guantanamo.

(Sec. 529) Requires the Office of Management and Budget to direct departments, agencies, and instrumentalities funded by this division to track undisbursed balances in expired grant accounts and include specified details in annual performance and accountability reports.

(Sec. 530) Prohibits NASA or the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) from using funds provided by this division to: (1) engage in bilateral activities with China or a Chinese-owned company unless the activities are authorized by a law enacted after enactment of this division, or (2) host official Chinese visitors at NASA facilities. Includes an exception if NASA or OSTP have made a specified certification to Congress regarding an activity.

(Sec. 531) Prohibits funds provided this division from being used to deny or fail to act on application for the importation of any shotgun model if: (1) all other requirements of law with respect to the proposed importation are met, and (2) no application for the importation of models in the same configuration had been denied by DOJ prior to January 1, 2011, on the basis that the shotgun was not particularly suitable for or readily adaptable to sporting purposes.

(Sec. 532) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for a computer network that does not block pornography, except for law enforcement purposes.

(Sec. 533) Requires specified agencies funded by this division to submit spending plans to Congress.

(Sec. 534) Prohibits the use of funds provided by this division to implement the Arms Trade Treaty regulating international trade in conventional arms until it is ratified by the Senate.

(Sec. 535) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to pay award or incentive fees for contractors with performance that is below satisfactory or does not meet the basic requirements of the contract.

(Sec. 536) Requires Commerce, NASA, NSF, and the OSTP to report monthly to Congress on official travel of employees to China.

(Sec. 537) Prohibits DOJ from using funds provided by this division to prevent specified states, the District of Columbia, Guam, or Puerto Rico from implementing their own laws authorizing the use, distribution, possession, or cultivation of medical marijuana.

(Sec. 538) Prohibits DOJ or the DEA from using funds provided by this division in contravention of a provision of the Agricultural Act of 2014 that permits an institution of higher education or a state department of agriculture to grow or cultivate industrial hemp for research purposes.

(Sec. 539) Requires at least 10% of the funds provided by this division for specified programs to be allocated for assistance in persistent poverty counties. Defines a "persistent poverty county" as county that has had at least 20% of its population living in poverty over the past 30 years, as measured by the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses and the most recent Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates.

(Sec. 540) Provides emergency funding for repairs at NASA owned facilities that directly support NASA's mission and were damaged as a result of recent natural disasters.

(Sec. 541) Establishes an exception to the law that prohibits a person who has directly represented, aided, or advised a foreign entity in any trade negotiation, or trade dispute, with the United States from being appointed as U.S. Trade Representative or as a Deputy U.S. Trade Representative. Specifies that the exception applies only to the first person appointed as U.S. Trade Representative after the enactment of this division who served as Deputy U.S. Trade Representative prior to the enactment of the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995.

(Sec. 542) Provides additional appropriations to DOJ for emergency law enforcement assistance for events occurring during FY2016 and FY2017.

Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2017

DIVISION C--DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2017

The Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2017 provides FY2017 appropriations to the Department of Defense (DOD) for military activities, including appropriations for Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO)/ Global War on Terrorism.

This division does not include funding for military construction, military family housing, civil works projects of the Army Corps of Engineers, and nuclear warheads, which are included in other divisions.

The division increases discretionary funding for DOD compared to FY2016 levels.

TITLE I--MILITARY PERSONNEL

Provides appropriations for active-duty and reserve personnel in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force (the military departments), and for National Guard personnel in the Army and Air Force.

TITLE II--OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

Provides appropriations for Operation and Maintenance (O&M) for the military departments, other DOD agencies, the Reserve Components, and the Army and Air National Guard.

Provides appropriations for:

the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces;

Environmental Restoration for the military departments, DOD, and at Formerly Used Defense Sites;

Overseas Humanitarian, Disaster, and Civic Aid; and

the Cooperative Threat Reduction Account.

TITLE III--PROCUREMENT

Provides appropriations for Procurement by the military departments, including:

Aircraft;

Missiles;

Weapons and Tracked Combat Vehicles;

Ammunition;

Spacecraft, Rockets, and Related Equipment; and

Shipbuilding and Conversion by the Navy.

Provides appropriations for Defense-Wide Procurement and Defense Production Act Purchases.

TITLE IV--RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND EVALUATION

Provides appropriations for Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation (RDT&E) by the military departments and defense agencies.

Provides appropriations for Operational Test and Evaluation.

TITLE V--REVOLVING AND MANAGEMENT FUNDS

Provides appropriations for the Defense Working Capital Funds.

TITLE VI--OTHER DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE PROGRAMS

Provides appropriations for other DOD programs, including:

the Defense Health Program,

Chemical Agents and Munitions Destruction,

Drug Interdiction and Counter-Drug Activities, and

the Office of the Inspector General.

TITLE VII--RELATED AGENCIES

Provides appropriations for the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System Fund and the Intelligence Community Management Account.

TITLE VIII--GENERAL PROVISIONS

(Sec. 8001) Prohibits appropriations provided by this division from being used for publicity or propaganda purposes not authorized by Congress.

(Sec. 8002) Exempts DOD from laws prohibiting the compensation or employment of foreign nationals if specified conditions are met.

(Sec. 8003) Prohibits funding provided by this division from remaining available for obligation beyond the current fiscal year unless this division expressly provides otherwise.

(Sec. 8004) Prohibits more than 20% of the appropriations provided by this division for the current fiscal year from being obligated during the last two months of the fiscal year, with an exception for support of active duty training of reserve components or summer camp training of the Reserve Officers' Training Corps.

(Sec. 8005) Permits specified Working Capital Funds provided by this division for military functions (except military construction) to be transferred between appropriations or funds available for the same purposes, subject to specified restrictions and the approval of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). Requires DOD to notify Congress of all transfers made pursuant to this section.

(Sec. 8006) Requires tables included in the report accompanying this division to be treated as if they were included in the text of this division.

(Sec. 8007) Requires DOD to submit a report to Congress to establish the baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for FY2017. Prohibits funds provided by this division from being reprogrammed or transferred until the report is provided or DOD certifies to Congress that the reprogramming or transfer is necessary as an emergency requirement. Includes exceptions for: (1) the Environmental Restoration accounts, and (2) Drug Interdiction and Counter-drug activities.

(Sec. 8008) Prohibits cash balances in DOD Working Capital Funds from exceeding the level necessary for cash disbursements to be made from the funds. Sets forth requirements and limitations for transfers of balances in the funds to specified accounts.

(Sec. 8009) Prohibits the initiation of a special access program without notifying Congress in advance.

(Sec. 8010) Establishes limitations and conditions on the use of funds provided by this division to initiate or terminate certain multi-year contracts.

Permits funds provided by title III of this division to be used for a multiyear procurement contract for the AH-64E Apache Helicopter and the UH-60M Blackhawk Helicopter.

(Sec. 8011) Appropriates O&M funds for the costs of humanitarian and civic assistance provided in conjunction with military operations.

(Sec. 8012) Prohibits DOD from managing civilian personnel on the basis of any end-strength or subjecting civilian personnel to any end-strength limitations.

(Sec. 8013) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to support the procurement of malt beverages and wine with nonappropriated funds for resale on a military installation located in the United States unless the beverages are procured within the state in which the installation is located and specified conditions are met.

(Sec. 8014) Prohibits funds made available by this division from being used to directly or indirectly influence congressional action on legislation or appropriation matters pending before Congress.

(Sec. 8015) Prohibits compensation from being paid to any member of the Army participating as a full-time student and receiving benefits paid by the Department of Veterans Affairs from the DOD Education Benefits Fund if the time spent as a student is counted toward the member's service commitment. Applies the restriction only to active components of the Army and exempts members that have reenlisted with this option prior to October 1, 1987.

(Sec. 8016) Permits funds appropriated in title III of this division for the Department of Defense Pilot Mentor-Protege Program to be transferred to any other account to implement a developmental assistance agreement under the program.

(Sec. 8017) Prohibits DOD from purchasing certain anchor and mooring chains unless they are manufactured in the United States.

(Sec. 8018) Requires specified appropriations for the Working Capital Fund--Army account to be used to maintain competitive rates at the arsenals.

(Sec. 8019) Prohibits funds from being used to demilitarize or dispose of certain small firearms, small arms ammunition, or ammunition components that are not otherwise prohibited from commercial sale under federal law, unless the Army has certified that the small arms, ammunition, or components are unserviceable or unsafe for further use.

(Sec. 8020) Limits funding for the relocation of any DOD entity into or within the National Capital Region. Permits DOD to waive the limitation by certifying to Congress that a relocation is required in the best interest of the government.

(Sec. 8021) Provides specified funds for incentive payments for federal contracts involving contractors, subcontractors, or suppliers that are Indian organizations or Indian-owned economic enterprises.

(Sec. 8022) Prohibits funds provided by this division for the Defense Media Activity from being used for national or international political or psychological activities.

(Sec. 8023) Permits DOD to incur obligations of up to $350 million for DOD military compensation, construction projects, and supplies and services in anticipation of contributions from the government of Kuwait.

(Sec. 8024) Provides appropriations from specified accounts for the Civil Air Patrol Corporation to support operation and maintenance, procurement, readiness, counterdrug activities, and drug demand reduction activities involving youth programs.

(Sec. 8025) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to establish a new DOD federally-funded research and development center (FFRDC). Limits compensation for FFRDC members or consultants.

Prohibits a defense FFRDC from using FY2017 DOD funds for new building construction, cost-sharing payments for projects funded by government grants, absorption of contract overruns, or certain charitable contributions.

Limits the staff years that may be funded for FFRDCs from FY2017 funds, and requires DOD to submit a report on the allocation of staff years with the FY2018 budget request.

Reduces the total amount appropriated by this division for FFRDCs.

(Sec. 8026) Prohibits DOD from procuring carbon, alloy, or armor steel plating not melted and rolled in the United States or Canada. Permits DOD to waive the prohibition if adequate domestic supplies are not available and an acquisition is necessary for national security purposes.

(Sec. 8027) Specifies that "congressional defense committees" includes the Senate and House Armed Services Committees and Appropriations Subcommittees on Defense.

(Sec. 8028) Permits DOD to acquire the modification, depot maintenance, and repair of aircraft, vehicles, and vessels; and production of components through competition between DOD activities and private firms.

(Sec. 8029) Revokes blanket waivers of the Buy American Act if DOD determines that a country has violated the terms of a specified agreement by discriminating against products produced in the United States.

(Sec. 8030) Permits funds in the Department of Defense Overseas Military Facility Investment Recovery Account to remain available until expended.

(Sec. 8031) Permits the Air Force to convey to Indian tribes located in Nevada, Idaho, North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Oregon, Minnesota, and Washington relocatable military housing units currently located at Grand Forks, Malmstrom, Mountain Home, Ellsworth, and Minot Air Force Bases that are excess to the needs of the Air Force. Requires the Operation Walking Shield Program to resolve any housing unit conflicts arising among requests of Indian tribes for these conveyances.

(Sec. 8032) Permits O&M appropriations to be used to purchase items with an investment unit cost of not more than $250,000.

(Sec. 8033) Prohibits the use of funds provided by this division to disestablish, close, downgrade from host to extension center, or place on probation a Senior Reserve Officers' Training Corps program.

(Sec. 8034) Requires DOD to issue regulations to: (1) prohibit the sale of tobacco or tobacco-related products in military resale outlets in the United States, its territories, and possessions at a price below the most competitive price in the local community; and (2) require the prices in overseas military retail outlets to be within the range of prices established for military retail systems stores in the United States.

(Sec. 8035) Prohibits the use of DOD Working Capital Funds to purchase specified investment items.

(Sec. 8036) Prohibits funds provided for the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) from remaining available for obligation beyond the current fiscal year, except for funds provided for the Reserve for Contingencies, the Working Capital Fund, or other specified programs.

(Sec. 8037) Permits funds made available by this division to the Defense Intelligence Agency to be used for the design, development, and deployment of General Defense Intelligence Program intelligence communication and intelligence information systems.

(Sec. 8038) Requires specified Operation and Maintenance--Defense-Wide funds to be used for the mitigation of environmental impacts on Indian lands resulting from DOD activities.

(Sec. 8039) Requires DOD to comply with the Buy American Act.

(Sec. 8040) Prohibits funds from being used to consolidate or relocate any element of a U.S. Air Force Rapid Engineer Deployable Heavy Operational Repair Squadron Engineer (RED HORSE) squadron outside of the United States until the Air Force: (1) submits to Congress an analysis and comparison of the cost and investment required to consolidate or relocate a RED HORSE squadron outside of the United States versus within the United States, and (2) certifies to Congress that the preferred site yields the greatest savings.

(Sec. 8041) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to: (1) establish a field operating agency, or (2) pay a member of the Armed Forces or civilian employee transferred or reassigned from a headquarters activity if the employee's place of duty remains at headquarters. Specifies exceptions and permits waivers that will reduce personnel or financial requirements of the department.

(Sec. 8042) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to convert a function performed by DOD civilian employees to performance by a contractor unless specific requirements are met.

(Sec. 8043) Rescinds specified funds provided by prior appropriations bills for Procurement and RDT&E.

(Sec. 8044) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to reduce authorized positions for military technicians (dual status) of the Army National Guard, Air National Guard, Army Reserve, and Air Force Reserve unless the reductions are a direct result of a reduction in military force structure.

(Sec. 8045) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for assistance to North Korea unless the funds are specifically appropriated for that purpose.

(Sec. 8046) Permits O&M funds provided by this division to be used to reimburse the National Guard and Reserve for providing intelligence or counterintelligence support to the combatant commands, defense agencies, and joint intelligence activities.

(Sec. 8047) Prohibits the transfer of DOD or CIA drug interdiction or counter-drug activity funds to any other department or agency except as specifically provided in an appropriations law.

(Sec. 8048) Requires ball and roller bearings purchased using funds provided by this division to be produced by a domestic source. Permits DOD to waive the prohibition if adequate domestic supplies are not available and an acquisition is necessary for national security.

(Sec. 8049) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to retire, divest, realign, or transfer RQ-4B Global Hawk aircraft, or to disestablish or convert units associated with the aircraft.

(Sec. 8050) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) launch service competitions unless the competitions are open to all certified providers of EELV systems. Requires the award to be made to the provider that offers the best value to the government.

(Sec. 8051) Appropriates funds to DOD for grants to the United Service Organizations and the Red Cross.

(Sec. 8052) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to purchase any supercomputer not manufactured in the United States unless it is unavailable from U.S. manufacturers and is necessary for national security.

(Sec. 8053) Requires the Small Business Innovation Research program and the Small Business Technology Transfer program set-asides to be taken proportionally from all programs, projects, or activities that contribute to the extramural budget.

(Sec. 8054) Prohibits funds in this division from being used for contractor bonuses being paid due to a business restructuring.

(Sec. 8055) Permits the transfer of specified O&M funds to pay military personnel for support and services for eligible organizations and activities outside DOD.

(Sec. 8056) Permits DOD to dispose of negative unliquidated or unexpended balances for expired or closed accounts by charging an obligation to a current account for the same purpose as the expired or closed account.

(Sec. 8057) Permits the National Guard to allow the use of equipment of the National Guard Distance Learning Project by any person or entity on a space-available, reimbursable basis.

(Sec. 8058) Prohibits DOD funds from being used to modify command and control relationships to give Fleet Forces Command operational and administrative control of U.S. Navy forces assigned to the Pacific fleet. Provides that command and control relationships that existed on October 1, 2004, shall remain in effect until a written modification has been proposed to congressional appropriations committees.

Specifies that the proposed modification: (1) may be implemented 30 days after the committees are notified unless an objection is received from the committees, and (2) may not preclude the ability of the commander of the U.S. Pacific Command to meet operational requirements.

(Sec. 8059) Requires specified O&M funds to be used for continued implementation and expansion of the Sexual Assault Special Victims Counsel Program.

(Sec. 8060) Prohibits the use of funds provided in title IV to procure end-items for delivery to military forces for operational training, operational use, or inventory requirements. Includes exceptions and permits a waiver for national security purposes.

(Sec. 8061) Permits DOD to waive limitations on the procurement of defense items from a foreign country if: (1) the limitations would invalidate cooperative programs or reciprocal trade agreements, and (2) the country does not discriminate against the same or similar items procured in the United States. Provides exceptions.

(Sec. 8062) Prohibits funds provided by this or other DOD appropriations bills from being used for repairs or maintenance for military family housing units.

(Sec. 8063) Permits the transfer of specified Navy O&M funds to the John C. Stennis Center for Public Service Training and Development Trust Fund.

(Sec. 8064) Requires DOD to submit a report to Congress before obligating specified RDT&E funds appropriated by this division for any new start advanced concept technology demonstration project or joint capability demonstration project. Permits DOD to waive the restriction by certifying to Congress that it is in the national interest.

(Sec. 8065) Requires DOD to continue to provide a classified quarterly report to Congress on matters specified in the classified annex accompanying this bill.

(Sec. 8066) Permits a Reserve who is a member of the National Guard serving on full-time duty to support ground-based elements of the National Ballistic Missile Defense System.

(Sec. 8067) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to transfer specified armor-piercing ammunition to any nongovernmental entity, except for demilitarization purposes.

(Sec. 8068) Permits the Chief of the National Guard Bureau to waive payment for the lease of personal property to certain youth, social, charitable, or fraternal nonprofit organizations.

(Sec. 8069) Permits specified O&M--Army funds to remain available until expended. Permits DOD to: (1) transfer the funds to other activities of the federal government; and (2) contract for the acquisition of real property, construction, personal services, and operations related to projects carrying out the purpose of this section.

(Sec. 8070) Prohibits funds from being used to make specified modifications to the budget and appropriations process for the National Intelligence Program.

(Sec. 8071) Provides appropriations to remain available until expended for grants for the construction and furnishing of additional Fisher Houses to meet the needs of military family members confronted with the illness or hospitalization of an eligible military beneficiary.

(Sec. 8072) Provides specified Procurement and RDT&E funds for the Israeli Cooperative Programs for the Iron Dome defense system to counter short-range rocket threats, the Short Range Ballistic Missile Defense program, and related programs.

(Sec. 8073) Permits specified Shipbuilding and Conversion--Navy funds to remain available through FY2017 to fund prior year shipbuilding cost increases. Requires the funds to be transferred to specified accounts.

(Sec. 8074) Deems funds provided by this division for intelligence activities to be authorized by Congress during FY2017 until the enactment of the Intelligence Authorization Act for FY2017.

(Sec. 8075) Prohibits fund appropriated by this division from being used for a reprogramming of funds that creates or initiates a new program, project, or activity unless it must be undertaken immediately for national security and Congress is notified in advance.

(Sec. 8076) Requires the President's budget to include separate budget justification documents for costs of the Armed Forces' participation in contingency operations for the Military Personnel, O&M, Procurement, and RDT&E accounts.

(Sec. 8077) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for research, development, test, evaluation, procurement, or deployment of nuclear armed interceptors of a missile defense system.

(Sec. 8078) Reduces the total amount appropriated in this division to reflect savings due to favorable foreign exchange rates.

(Sec. 8079) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to reduce or disestablish the operation of the 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron of the Air Force Reserve if the action would reduce the WC-130 Weather Reconnaissance mission below the levels funded in this division. Permits the Squadron to perform other missions in support of national defense requirements during the non-hurricane season.

(Sec. 8080) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for integrating foreign intelligence information unless the information has been lawfully collected and processed during authorized foreign intelligence activities. Requires information pertaining to U.S. persons to be handled in accordance with the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution as implemented through Executive Order No. 12333 (United States Intelligence Activities).

(Sec. 8081) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to transfer research and development, acquisition, or other program authority related to current tactical unmanned aerial vehicles from the Army. Requires the Army to retain responsibility for and operational control of the MQ-1C Gray Eagle Unmanned Aerial Vehicle.

(Sec. 8082) Permits specified Navy O&M funds to be used for the Asia Pacific Regional Initiative Program for enabling the Pacific Command to execute theater security cooperation activities such as humanitarian assistance and the payments of the costs of training and exercising with foreign security forces.

(Sec. 8083) Prohibits funds appropriated by this division for programs of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) from being obligated beyond the current fiscal year except for research and technology funds, which remain available through FY2018.

(Sec. 8084) Provides for the adjustment of obligations within the Shipbuilding and Conversion--Navy appropriation.

(Sec. 8085) Requires the DNI to submit a report to Congress establishing the baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for FY2017. Prohibits funds provided by this division for the National Intelligence Program from being transferred or reprogrammed until the report is submitted unless the action is necessary for an emergency.

(Sec. 8086) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to eliminate, restructure, realign, or make disproportionate personnel reductions at Army Contracting Command--New Jersey sites without notifying Congress in advance.

(Sec. 8087) Rescinds specified unobligated balances from the DOD Acquisition Workforce Development Fund.

(Sec. 8088) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to support any military training or operation that includes child soldiers unless the assistance is permitted by the Child Soldiers Prevention Act of 2008.

(Sec. 8089) Provides specified O&M funds for the Office of Economic Adjustment to make grants, conclude cooperative agreements, and supplement other federal funds to support critical military installations and missions on Guam in addressing the need for civilian water and wastewater improvements.

(Sec. 8090) Provides specific restrictions on the reprogramming or transfer of funds provided to the National Intelligence Program.

(Sec. 8091) Directs the DNI to submit annually to Congress a future-years intelligence program reflecting estimated expenditures and proposed appropriations included in the President's budget.

(Sec. 8092) Specifies committees included in "congressional intelligence committees" for the purposes of this division.

(Sec. 8093) Permits specified O&M funds provided in title II to be transferred by the military department concerned to its central fund established for Fisher Houses and Suites.

(Sec. 8094) Permits O&M funds to be used for payments and transfers to the Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Fund.

(Sec. 8095) Requires agencies receiving funds in this division to post reports required to be submitted to Congress on the public web site of the agency if it serves the national interest. Provides exceptions for national security or proprietary information.

(Sec. 8096) Prohibits the use of funds for federal contracts in excess of $1 million unless the contractor meets specific requirements regarding the resolution of claims under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, or national origin). Allows DOD to waive the requirements to avoid harm to national security.

(Sec. 8097) Provides specified funds to be transferred to the Joint Department of Defense-Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Facility Demonstration Fund.

(Sec. 8098) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to provide certain missile defense information to the Russian Federation, subject to an exception for information regarding ballistic missile early warning.

(Sec. 8099) Permits DOD funds to be used to purchase armored vehicles for the physical security of personnel or force protection and limits the cost per vehicle.

(Sec. 8100) Permits the DNI to transfer specified funds provided by this division for the National Intelligence Program with the approval of the Office of Management and Budget, subject to certain requirements and restrictions.

(Sec. 8101) Prohibits funds from being used to transfer or release any individual detained at U.S. Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba (Guantanamo) who is not a U.S. citizen or member of the Armed Forces into the United States, its territories, or possessions.

(Sec. 8102) Prohibits funding from being used to construct, acquire, or modify any U.S. facility (other than the facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba) to house any individual detained at Guantanamo.

(Sec. 8103) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to transfer any individual detained at Guantanamo to a country of origin or other foreign country or entity unless DOD makes certain certifications.

(Sec. 8104) Prohibits funds from being used to violate the Wars Powers Resolution.

(Sec. 8105) Prohibits funds from being used to enter into specified agreements and transactions with Russian arms supplier Rosoboronexport. Permits DOD to waive the restriction if specific conditions are met.

(Sec. 8106) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for the purchase or manufacture of U.S. flags unless they are treated as covered items under Buy American requirements.

(Sec. 8107) Permits funds provided by this division to be used for payments to local military commanders for damage, personal injury, or death that is incident to combat operations in a foreign country.

(Sec. 8108) Prohibits funds made available in this division from being used to reduce strategic delivery vehicles and launchers below levels necessary to implement the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START), as set forth in a report provided to Congress pursuant to the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012.

(Sec. 8109) Requires DOD to post grant awards on a public website in a searchable format.

(Sec. 8110) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for the performance of a flight demonstration team at a location outside of the United States if a performance of a flight demonstration team at a location within the United States was canceled during the year due to insufficient funding.

(Sec. 8111) Prohibits the National Security Agency (NSA) from using funds provided by this division to target a U.S. person under specified authorities granted by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (FISA).

(Sec. 8112) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for the Arms Trade Treaty until it is ratified by the Senate.

(Sec. 8113) Prohibits the transfer of administrative responsibilities or budgetary resources of any program, project, or activity financed by this division to another federal agency not financed by this division without the express authorization of Congress.

(Sec. 8114) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to initiate or expand support for foreign forces, irregular forces, groups, or individuals supporting U.S. Special Operations Forces activities to combat terrorism unless Congress is notified in advance in accordance with the classified annex of this division.

(Sec. 8115) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for activities in Iraq in contravention of the War Powers Resolution.

(Sec. 8116) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to divest, retire, transfer, or place in storage any A-10 aircraft, or to disestablish any units of the active or reserve components associated with the aircraft.

(Sec. 8117) Prohibits funds provided by this division for the T-AO(X) program from being used for a new contract that provides for the acquisition of certain components unless the components are manufactured in the United States. (The T-AO[X] program is an oiler shipbuilding program to build a new class of fleet oilers for the Navy. Navy fleet oilers transfer fuel to Navy surface ships that are operating at sea.)

(Sec. 8118) Reduces the funds provided by title II this division to the Working Capital Funds to reflect excess cash balances.

(Sec. 8119) Reduces the total amount appropriated by this division to reflect savings due to lower than anticipated fuel prices.

(Sec. 8120) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to divest or retire, or prepare to divest or retire, KC-10 aircraft.

(Sec. 8121) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to divest, retire, transfer, or place in storage or on backup aircraft inventory status or prepare to divest, retire, transfer, or place in storage or on backup aircraft inventory status, any EC-130H aircraft.

(Sec. 8122) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for Government Travel Charge Card expenses for gaming or for entertainment that includes topless or nude entertainers or participants.

(Sec. 8123) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for a new or additional Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) round.

(Sec. 8124) Permits specified Navy O&M funds to be used for the National Defense Reserve Fleet and for reimbursements to the Ready Reserve Force--Maritime Administration account of the Department of Transportation for expenses related to the National Defense Reserve Fleet.

(Sec. 8125) Permits DOD to use specified funds to develop, replace, and sustain federal government security and suitability background investigation information technology systems of the Office of Personnel Management or other federal agency responsible for conducting such investigations. Specifies reprogramming and transfer procedures for the funds.

(Sec. 8126) Prohibits funds provided by this division for the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System recapitalization program from being used for pre-milestone B activities after March 31, 2018.

(Sec. 8127) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to close or realign the U.S. Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

(Sec. 8128) Permits specified funds provided by this division to be used for activities related to the Zika virus.

(Sec. 8129) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for any computer network that does not block access to pornography websites, with exceptions for criminal investigations, prosecution, or adjudication activities; or for any activity necessary for the national defense, including intelligence activities.

(Sec. 8130) Terminates the Ship Modernization, Operations and Sustainment Fund and rescinds any unobligated balances.

(Sec. 8131) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to provide arms, training, or other assistance to the Azov Battalion.

(Sec. 8132) Specifies authorities and requirements for the transfer of funds provided by this division for the Global Engagement Center.

(Sec. 8133) Prohibits funds from being transferred from the Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Fund to the Rapid Prototyping Fund or credited to a military department-specific fund established to carry out an acquisition program under the rapid prototyping pathway.

(Sec. 8134) Requires DOD to provide an Inspector General (IG) funded by this division with timely access to records, documents, or other materials available to the department or agency over which the IG has responsibility. Requires each IG to comply with specified statutory limitations on disclosure of the information provided.

TITLE IX--OVERSEAS CONTINGENCY OPERATIONS/GLOBAL WAR ON TERRORISM

Provides appropriations for FY2017 for Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO)/ the Global War on Terrorism. Designates the funds provided in this title as for Overseas Contingency Operations/ Global War on Terrorism pursuant to the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985. (OCO funds are exempt from discretionary spending limits and other budget enforcement rules.)

Provides appropriations for Active-Duty and Reserve Personnel in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps and Air Force (the military departments), and for National Guard personnel in the Army and Air Force.

Provides appropriations for Operation and Maintenance (O&M) for the military departments, other agencies of DOD, the Reserve Components, and the Army and Air National Guard.

Provides appropriations for the Afghanistan Security Forces Fund and the Counter-the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant Train and Equip Fund.

Provides appropriations for Procurement by the military departments, other DOD agencies, Reserve Components, and National Guard, including for the procurement of aircraft, missiles, weapons, tracked combat vehicles, and ammunition.

Provides appropriations for Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation (RDT&E) for the military departments and other DOD agencies.

Provides appropriations for the Defense Working Capital Funds.

Provides appropriations for Other DOD Programs, including:

the Defense Health Program,

Drug Interdiction and Counter-Drug Activities,

the Joint Improvised Threat Defeat Fund, and

the Office of the Inspector General.

Sets forth permissible and prohibited uses of funds appropriated by this title.

(Sec. 9001) Provides that funds made available in this title are in addition to amounts appropriated to DOD for FY2017.

(Sec. 9002) Permits DOD to transfer specified funds between the appropriations in this title if it is in the national interest, OMB approves, and Congress is notified.

(Sec. 9003) Permits supervision, administration, and design costs for a construction project funded with O&M or the Afghanistan Security Forces Fund in direct support of overseas contingency operations in Afghanistan to be obligated when a construction contract is awarded.

(Sec. 9004) Permits DOD to use funds appropriated in this title to purchase motor vehicles for use by military and civilian DOD employees in the U.S. Central Command area of responsibility. Limits the cost of each passenger and armored vehicle.

(Sec. 9005) Permits specified Army O&M funds to be used for the Commander's Emergency Response Program for humanitarian relief and reconstruction assistance in Afghanistan.

(Sec. 9006) Permits DOD O&M funds to be used to provide supplies, services, transportation, including airlift and sealift, and other logistical support to allied forces participating in a combined operation with U.S. and coalition forces supporting military and stability operations in Afghanistan and to counter the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. Requires DOD to report quarterly to Congress regarding support provided under this section.

(Sec. 9007) Prohibits funds from being used to: (1) establish any military installation or base for providing for the permanent stationing of Armed Forces in Iraq or Afghanistan, or (2) exercise U.S. control over any oil resource of Iraq.

(Sec. 9008) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used in contravention of specified laws or regulations implementing the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.

(Sec. 9009) Prohibits funds provided for the Afghanistan Security Forces Fund from being obligated prior to the approval of a financial and activity plan by the Afghanistan Resources Oversight Council of DOD.

(Sec. 9010) Permits O&M funds provided in this title to be used to purchase items with an investment unit cost of up to $250,000. Permits the purchase of items with an investment cost of up to $500,000 if DOD determines that it is necessary to meet the operational requirements of a Commander of a Combatant Command engaged in contingency operations overseas.

(Sec. 9011) Permits a limited amount of O&M funding to be used to support U.S. transition activities in Iraq by funding the Office of Security Cooperation in Iraq and security assistance teams.

(Sec. 9012) Permits specified funds provided by this division for the Defense Security Cooperation Agency and Defense-Wide Operation and Maintenance to be used to provide assistance to the government of Jordan to support the armed forces of Jordan and to enhance security along its borders.

(Sec. 9013) Prohibits funds provided by this division for the Counter-ISIL Train and Equip Fund from being used to procure or transfer man-portable air defense systems.

(Sec. 9014) Provides additional funding for assistance and sustainment of the military and national security forces of Ukraine.

(Sec. 9015) Permits funds provided by this title to be used for the replacement for funds for items provided to the government of Ukraine from the U.S. inventory.

(Sec. 9016) Prohibits funds provided by this division under section 9014 for Assistance and Sustainment to the Military and National Security Forces of Ukraine from being used to procure or transfer man-portable air defense systems.

(Sec. 9017) Prohibits DOD O&M funds from being used for payments to Pakistan as reimbursement for support provided to U.S. military operations unless DOD certifies to Congress that the government of Pakistan has met specific conditions. Permits DOD to waive the restriction for national security.

(Sec. 9018) Provides additional funding to DOD to improve intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities.

(Sec. 9019) Prohibits the use of funds for Syria in contravention of the War Powers Resolution.

(Sec. 9020) Prohibits funds appropriated by this division from being used to transfer additional C-130 cargo aircraft to the Afghan National Security Forces until DOD provides Congress with a review of the Afghanistan Air Force's requirements.

(Sec. 9021) Rescinds specified funds provided by DOD appropriations bills for: the DSCA Coalition Support Fund, the Counterterrorism Partnerships Fund, the Afghanistan Security Forces Fund, and Air Force Procurement.

(Sec. 9022) Rescinds specified funds provided by Department of Defense appropriations bills for Operation and Maintenance--Defense-Wide: Coalition Support Funds.

(Sec. 9023) Terminates the Mine Resistant Ambush Protected Vehicle Fund and rescinds any unobligated balances.

Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2017

DIVISION D--ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2017

The Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2017 provides FY2017 appropriations for:

the civil works projects of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers;

the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Reclamation and Central Utah Project;

the Department of Energy (DOE); and

several independent agencies, including the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) and the Appalachian Regional Commission.

The division increases FY2017 Energy and Water Development discretionary spending above FY2016 levels.

TITLE I--CORPS OF ENGINEERS--CIVIL

Provides appropriations to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for authorized civil functions pertaining to rivers and harbors, flood and storm damage reduction, shore protection, aquatic ecosystem restoration, and related efforts.

Provides appropriations to the Corps of Engineers for:

Investigations;

Construction;

Mississippi River and Tributaries, including flood damage reduction projects in the Mississippi River alluvial valley below Cape Girardeau, Missouri;

Operation and Maintenance;

the Regulatory Program pertaining to navigable waters and wetlands;

the Formerly Utilized Sites Remedial Action Program for clean-up of early atomic energy program contamination;

Flood Control and Coastal Emergencies, including hurricanes, floods, and other natural disasters;

Expenses, necessary for the supervision and general administration of the civil works program; and

the Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works.

(Sec. 101) Prohibits the reprogramming of funds provided by this title except in specified circumstances.

(Sec. 102) Requires funds provided by this division to be allocated solely in accordance with the provisions of this division and the explanatory statement, including provisions regarding the determination and designation of new starts.

(Sec. 103) Prohibits funds provided by this title from being used for a contract that commits funds beyond the amounts appropriated for that program, project, or activity that remain unobligated. Includes exception for funds made available through reprogramming.

(Sec. 104) Permits the Corps of Engineers to transfer to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service up to $5.4 million in Operation and Maintenance funds to mitigate for fisheries lost due to Corps of Engineers projects.

(Sec. 105) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for an open lake placement of dredged material originating from Lake Erie or its tributaries, unless it is approved under a state water quality certification. Requires the Corps to continue upland placement of the dredged material until an open lake placement for dredged materials is approved under a state water quality certification.

(Sec. 106) Requires acquisitions funded by this title to comply with regulations that prohibit the Department of Defense from purchasing a certain anchor and mooring chain unless it is procured from a U.S. manufacturer.

(Sec. 107) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used for a water supply reallocation study under the Wolf Creek Dam, Lake Cumberland, Kentucky, project authorized under the Act of July 24, 1946.

(Sec. 108) Prohibits the Corps of Engineers from using funds to develop, adopt, implement, administer, or enforce any change to regulations in effect on October 1, 2012, pertaining to the definitions of "fill material" or "discharge of fill material" for the purposes of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (commonly known as the Clean Water Act).

(Sec. 109) Prohibits funds made available by this division from being used to require a permit for the discharge of dredged or fill material under the Clean Water Act for specified agricultural activities.

TITLE II--DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Provides appropriations to the Department of the Interior for the Central Utah Project.

Provides appropriations to the Bureau of Reclamation for:

Water and Related Resources,

the Central Valley Project Restoration Fund,

California Bay-Delta Restoration, and

Policy and Administration.

Permits appropriations to the Bureau of Reclamation to be used for purchasing replacements for up to five passenger motor vehicles.

(Sec. 201) Specifies the circumstances in which Reclamation may reprogram or transfer funds provided by this title.

(Sec. 202) Prohibits funds provided by this division from being used to determine the final point of discharge for the interceptor drain for the San Luis Unit until Interior and California develop a plan to minimize any detrimental effect of the San Luis drainage waters. Requires the plan to conform to California water quality standards as approved by the Environmental Protection Agency.

Directs Interior to classify the costs of the Kesterson Reservoir Cleanup Program and the San Joaquin Valley Drainage Program as either reimbursable or nonreimbursable and collected until fully repaid pursuant to specified alternative repayment plans.

Requires future federal obligations of funds regarding drainage service or drainage studies for the San Luis Unit to be fully reimbursable by San Luis Unit beneficiaries of the service or studies.

(Sec. 203) Extends the deadline for Reclamation to complete and submit to Congress feasibility studies for specified water storage projects in California.

TITLE III--DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Provides appropriations to the Department of Energy (DOE) for Energy Programs, including:

Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy,

Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability,

Nuclear Energy,

Fossil Energy Research and Dev