H.R.4796 - 115th Congress (2017-2018): USA Act of 2018
Here are the steps for Status of Legislation:

There is one summary for H.R.4796. Bill summaries are authored by CRS.

Shown Here:

Introduced in House (01/16/2018)

Uniting and Securing America Act of 2018 or the USA Act of 2018

This bill provides conditional permanent resident status for an alien meeting specified requirements, including having entered the United States when younger than 18 years old and residing in the United States since December 31, 2013.

An individual may apply to have such conditional basis removed after meeting specified eligibility requirements.

The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) shall cancel the removal of, and adjust to the status of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence on a conditional basis, an individual who was granted Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) status, unless such individual has engaged in disqualifying conduct.

The bill repeals provisions that deny an unlawful alien eligibility for higher education benefits on the basis of residence within a state unless a U.S. citizen or national is eligible for such benefits without regard to whether such citizen or national is such a resident.

DHS shall: (1) deploy the most practical and effective technology available in order to achieve situational awareness and operational control along the U.S. border; (2) submit to Congress a comprehensive southern border strategy to achieve border control; and (3) begin eradicating the carrizo cane plant and salt cedar along the Rio Grande River.

DHS may construct new ports of entry along the northern and southern borders.

The bill establishes Operation Stonegarden in DHS to provide border security grants to law enforcement agencies in border or maritime border states that are involved in U.S. Customs and Border Protection operations

DHS shall establish a two-year grant program to improve emergency communications in the southern border region for individuals who are at risk of violence and lack cellular and LTE network service.

The number of immigration judges is increased.

The President shall designate a senior official to coordinate federal and international efforts to strengthen citizen security, the rule of law, and economic prosperity in Central America.