Text - S.2372 - 115th Congress (2017-2018): VA MISSION Act of 2018
AT THE SECOND SESSION

To establish a permanent community care program for veterans, to establish a commission for the purpose of making recommendations regarding the modernization or realignment of facilities of the Veterans Health Administration, to improve construction of the Department of Veterans Affairs, to make certain improvements in the laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs relating to the home loan program of the Department of Veterans Affairs, and for other purposes.

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. Short title; table of contents.

(a) Short title.—This Act may be cited as the “John S. McCain III, Daniel K. Akaka, and Samuel R. Johnson VA Maintaining Internal Systems and Strengthening Integrated Outside Networks Act of 2018” or the “VA MISSION Act of 2018”.

(b) Table of contents.—The table of contents for this Act is as follows:

SEC. 100. Short title; references to title 38, United States Code.

(a) Short title.—This title may be cited as the “Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018”.

(b) References to title 38, United States Code.—Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this title an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of title 38, United States Code.

SEC. 101. Establishment of Veterans Community Care Program.

(a) Establishment of program.—

(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 1703 is amended to read as follows:

“§ 1703. Veterans Community Care Program

“(a) In general.— (1) There is established a program to furnish hospital care, medical services, and extended care services to covered veterans through health care providers specified in subsection (c).

“(2) The Secretary shall coordinate the furnishing of hospital care, medical services, and extended care services under this section to covered veterans, including coordination of, at a minimum, the following:

“(A) Ensuring the scheduling of medical appointments in a timely manner and the establishment of a mechanism to receive medical records from non-Department providers.

“(B) Ensuring continuity of care and services.

“(C) Ensuring coordination among regional networks if the covered veteran accesses care and services in a different network than the regional network in which the covered veteran resides.

“(D) Ensuring that covered veterans do not experience a lapse in care resulting from errors or delays by the Department or its contractors or an unusual or excessive burden in accessing hospital care, medical services, or extended care services.

“(3) A covered veteran may only receive care or services under this section upon the authorization of such care or services by the Secretary.

“(b) Covered veterans.—For purposes of this section, a covered veteran is any veteran who—

“(1) is enrolled in the system of annual patient enrollment established and operated under section 1705 of this title; or

“(2) is not enrolled in such system but is otherwise entitled to hospital care, medical services, or extended care services under subsection (c)(2) of such section.

“(c) Health care providers specified.—Health care providers specified in this subsection are the following:

“(1) Any health care provider that is participating in the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.), including any physician furnishing services under such a program.

“(2) The Department of Defense.

“(3) The Indian Health Service.

“(4) Any Federally-qualified health center (as defined in section 1905(l)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(l)(2)(B))).

“(5) Any health care provider not otherwise covered under any of paragraphs (1) through (4) that meets criteria established by the Secretary for purposes of this section.

“(d) Conditions under which care is required To be furnished through non-Department providers.— (1) The Secretary shall, subject to the availability of appropriations, furnish hospital care, medical services, and extended care services to a covered veteran through health care providers specified in subsection (c) if—

“(A) the Department does not offer the care or services the veteran requires;

“(B) the Department does not operate a full-service medical facility in the State in which the covered veteran resides;

“(C) (i) the covered veteran was an eligible veteran under section 101(b)(2)(B) of the Veterans Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014 (Public Law 113–146; 38 U.S.C. 1701 note) as of the day before the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018;

“(ii) continues to reside in a location that would qualify the veteran for eligibility under such section; and

“(iii) either—

“(I) resides in one of the five States with the lowest population density as determined by data from the 2010 decennial census; or

“(II) resides in a State not described in subclause (I) and—

“(aa) received care or services under this title in the year preceding the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018; and

“(bb) is seeking care or services within 2 years of the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018;

“(D) the covered veteran has contacted the Department to request care or services and the Department is not able to furnish such care or services in a manner that complies with designated access standards developed by the Secretary under section 1703B of this title; or

“(E) the covered veteran and the covered veteran’s referring clinician agree that furnishing care and services through a non-Department entity or provider would be in the best medical interest of the covered veteran based upon criteria developed by the Secretary.

“(2) The Secretary shall ensure that the criteria developed under paragraph (1)(E) include consideration of the following:

“(A) The distance between the covered veteran and the facility that provides the hospital care, medical services, or extended care services the veteran needs.

“(B) The nature of the hospital care, medical services, or extended care services required.

“(C) The frequency that the hospital care, medical services, or extended care services needs to be furnished.

“(D) The timeliness of available appointments for the hospital care, medical services, or extended care services the veteran needs.

“(E) Whether the covered veteran faces an unusual or excessive burden to access hospital care, medical services, or extended care services from the Department medical facility where a covered veteran seeks hospital care, medical services, or extended care services, which shall include consideration of the following:

“(i) Whether the covered veteran faces an excessive driving distance, geographical challenge, or environmental factor that impedes the access of the covered veteran.

“(ii) Whether the hospital care, medical services, or extended care services sought by the veteran is provided by a medical facility of the Department that is reasonably accessible to a covered veteran.

“(iii) Whether a medical condition of the covered veteran affects the ability of the covered veteran to travel.

“(iv) Whether there is compelling reason, as determined by the Secretary, that the veteran needs to receive hospital care, medical services, or extended care services from a medical facility other than a medical facility of the Department.

“(v) Such other considerations as the Secretary considers appropriate.

“(3) If the Secretary has determined that the Department does not offer the care or services the covered veteran requires under subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1), that the Department does not operate a full-service medical facility in the State in which the covered veteran resides under subparagraph (B) of such paragraph, that the covered veteran is described under subparagraph (C) of such paragraph, or that the Department is not able to furnish care or services in a manner that complies with designated access standards developed by the Secretary under section 1703B of this title under subparagraph (D) of such paragraph, the decision to receive hospital care, medical services, or extended care services under such subparagraphs from a health care provider specified in subsection (c) shall be at the election of the veteran.

“(e) Conditions under which care is authorized To be furnished through non-Department providers.— (1) (A) The Secretary may furnish hospital care, medical services, or extended care services through a health care provider specified in subsection (c) to a covered veteran served by a medical service line of the Department that the Secretary has determined is not providing care that complies with the standards for quality the Secretary shall establish under section 1703C.

“(B) In carrying out subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall—

“(i) measure timeliness of the medical service line at a facility of the Department when compared with the same medical service line at different Department facilities; and

“(ii) measure quality at a medical service line of a facility of the Department by comparing it with two or more distinct and appropriate quality measures at non-Department medical service lines.

“(C) (i) The Secretary may not concurrently furnish hospital care, medical services, or extended care services under subparagraph (A) with respect to more than three medical service lines described in such subparagraph at any one health care facility of the Department.

“(ii) The Secretary may not concurrently furnish hospital care, medical services, or extended care services under subparagraph (A) with respect to more than 36 medical service lines nationally described in such subparagraph.

“(2) The Secretary may limit the types of hospital care, medical services, or extended care services covered veterans may receive under paragraph (1) in terms of the length of time such care and services will be available, the location at which such care and services will be available, and the clinical care and services that will be available.

“(3) (A) Except as provided for in subparagraph (B), the hospital care, medical services, and extended care services authorized under paragraph (1) with respect to a medical service line shall cease when the remediation described in section 1706A with respect to such medical service line is complete.

“(B) The Secretary shall ensure continuity and coordination of care for any veteran who elects to receive care or services under paragraph (1) from a health care provider specified in subsection (c) through the completion of an episode of care.

“(4) The Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register, and shall take all reasonable steps to provide direct notice to covered veterans affected under this subsection, at least once each year stating the time period during which such care and services will be available, the location or locations where such care and services will be available, and the clinical services available at each location under this subsection in accordance with regulations the Secretary shall prescribe.

“(5) When the Secretary exercises the authority under paragraph (1), the decision to receive care or services under such paragraph from a health care provider specified in subsection (c) shall be at the election of the covered veteran.

“(f) Review of decisions.—The review of any decision under subsection (d) or (e) shall be subject to the Department’s clinical appeals process, and such decisions may not be appealed to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals.

“(g) Tiered network.— (1) To promote the provision of high-quality and high-value hospital care, medical services, and extended care services under this section, the Secretary may develop a tiered provider network of eligible providers based on criteria established by the Secretary for purposes of this section.

“(2) In developing a tiered provider network of eligible providers under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall not prioritize providers in a tier over providers in any other tier in a manner that limits the choice of a covered veteran in selecting a health care provider specified in subsection (c) for receipt of hospital care, medical services, or extended care services under this section.

“(h) Contracts To establish networks of health care providers.— (1) The Secretary shall enter into consolidated, competitively bid contracts to establish networks of health care providers specified in paragraphs (1) and (5) of subsection (c) for purposes of providing sufficient access to hospital care, medical services, or extended care services under this section.

“(2) (A) The Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, ensure that covered veterans are able to make their own appointments using advanced technology.

“(B) To the extent practicable, the Secretary shall be responsible for the scheduling of appointments for hospital care, medical services, and extended care services under this section.

“(3) (A) The Secretary may terminate a contract with an entity entered into under paragraph (1) at such time and upon such notice to the entity as the Secretary may specify for purposes of this section, if the Secretary notifies the appropriate committees of Congress that, at a minimum—

“(i) the entity—

“(I) failed to comply substantially with the provisions of the contract or with the provisions of this section and the regulations prescribed under this section;

“(II) failed to comply with the access standards or the standards for quality established by the Secretary;

“(III) is excluded from participation in a Federal health care program (as defined in section 1128B(f) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a–7b(f))) under section 1128 or 1128A of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a–7 and 1320a–7a);

“(IV) is identified as an excluded source on the list maintained in the System for Award Management, or any successor system; or

“(V) has been convicted of a felony or other serious offense under Federal or State law and the continued participation of the entity would be detrimental to the best interests of veterans or the Department;

“(ii) it is reasonable to terminate the contract based on the health care needs of veterans; or

“(iii) it is reasonable to terminate the contract based on coverage provided by contracts or sharing agreements entered into under authorities other than this section.

“(B) Nothing in subparagraph (A) may be construed to restrict the authority of the Secretary to terminate a contract entered into under paragraph (1) under any other provision of law.

“(4) Whenever the Secretary provides notice to an entity that the entity is failing to meet contractual obligations entered into under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs of the House of Representatives a report on such failure. Such report shall include the following:

“(A) An explanation of the reasons for providing such notice.

“(B) A description of the effect of such failure, including with respect to cost, schedule, and requirements.

“(C) A description of the actions taken by the Secretary to mitigate such failure.

“(D) A description of the actions taken by the contractor to address such failure.

“(E) A description of any effect on the community provider market for veterans in the affected area.

“(5) (A) The Secretary shall instruct each entity awarded a contract under paragraph (1) to recognize and accept, on an interim basis, the credentials and qualifications of health care providers who are authorized to furnish hospital care and medical services to veterans under a community care program of the Department in effect as of the day before the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018, including under the Patient-Centered Community Care Program and the Veterans Choice Program under section 101 of the Veterans Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014 (Public Law 113–146; 38 U.S.C. 1701 note), as qualified providers under the program established under this section.

“(B) The interim acceptance period under subparagraph (A) shall be determined by the Secretary based on the following criteria:

“(i) With respect to a health care provider, when the current certification agreement for the health care provider expires.

“(ii) Whether the Department has enacted certification and eligibility criteria and regulatory procedures by which non-Department providers will be authorized under this section.

“(6) The Secretary shall establish a system or systems for monitoring the quality of care provided to covered veterans through a network under this subsection and for assessing the quality of hospital care, medical services, and extended care services furnished through such network before the renewal of the contract for such network.

“(i) Payment rates for care and services.— (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), and to the extent practicable, the rate paid for hospital care, medical services, or extended care services under any provision in this title may not exceed the rate paid by the United States to a provider of services (as defined in section 1861(u) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(u))) or a supplier (as defined in section 1861(d) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(d))) under the Medicare program under title XI or title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.), including section 1834 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m), for the same care or services.

“(2) (A) A higher rate than the rate paid by the United States as described in paragraph (1) may be negotiated with respect to the furnishing of care or services to a covered veteran who resides in a highly rural area.

“(B) In this paragraph, the term ‘highly rural area’ means an area located in a county that has fewer than seven individuals residing in that county per square mile.

“(3) With respect to furnishing care or services under this section in Alaska, the Alaska Fee Schedule of the Department of Veterans Affairs shall be followed, except for when another payment agreement, including a contract or provider agreement, is in effect.

“(4) With respect to furnishing hospital care, medical services, or extended care services under this section in a State with an All-Payer Model Agreement under section 1814(b)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f(b)(3)) that became effective on or after January 1, 2014, the Medicare payment rates under paragraph (2)(A) shall be calculated based on the payment rates under such agreement.

“(5) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the Secretary may incorporate, to the extent practicable, the use of value-based reimbursement models to promote the provision of high-quality care.

“(6) With respect to hospital care, medical services, or extended care services for which there is not a rate paid under the Medicare program as described in paragraph (1), the rate paid for such care or services shall be determined by the Secretary.

“(j) Treatment of other health plan contracts.—In any case in which a covered veteran is furnished hospital care, medical services, or extended care services under this section for a non-service-connected disability described in subsection (a)(2) of section 1729 of this title, the Secretary shall recover or collect reasonable charges for such care or services from a health plan contract described in section 1729 in accordance with such section.

“(k) Payment by veteran.—A covered veteran shall not pay a greater amount for receiving care or services under this section than the amount the veteran would pay for receiving the same or comparable care or services at a medical facility of the Department or from a health care provider of the Department.

“(l) Transplant authority for improved access.— (1) In the case of a covered veteran described in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall determine whether to authorize an organ or bone marrow transplant for that covered veteran at a non-Department facility.

“(2) A covered veteran described in this paragraph—

“(A) requires an organ or bone marrow transplant; and

“(B) has, in the opinion of the primary care provider of the veteran, a medically compelling reason to travel outside the region of the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network, established under section 372 of the National Organ Transplantation Act (Public Law 98–507; 42 U.S.C. 274), in which the veteran resides, to receive such transplant.

“(m) Monitoring of care provided.— (1) (A) Not later than 540 days after the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018, and not less frequently than annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to appropriate committees of Congress a review of the types and frequency of care sought under subsection (d).

“(B) The review submitted under subparagraph (A) shall include an assessment of the following:

“(i) The top 25 percent of types of care and services most frequently provided under subsection (d) due to the Department not offering such care and services.

“(ii) The frequency such care and services were sought by covered veterans under this section.

“(iii) An analysis of the reasons the Department was unable to provide such care and services.

“(iv) Any steps the Department took to provide such care and services at a medical facility of the Department.

“(v) The cost of such care and services.

“(2) In monitoring the hospital care, medical services, and extended care services furnished under this section, the Secretary shall do the following:

“(A) With respect to hospital care, medical services, and extended care services furnished through provider networks established under subsection (i)—

“(i) compile data on the types of hospital care, medical services, and extended care services furnished through such networks and how many patients used each type of care and service;

“(ii) identify gaps in hospital care, medical services, or extended care services furnished through such networks;

“(iii) identify how such gaps may be fixed through new contracts within such networks or changes in the manner in which hospital care, medical services, or extended care services are furnished through such networks;

“(iv) assess the total amounts spent by the Department on hospital care, medical services, and extended care services furnished through such networks;

“(v) assess the timeliness of the Department in referring hospital care, medical services, and extended care services to such networks; and

“(vi) assess the timeliness of such networks in—

“(I) accepting referrals; and

“(II) scheduling and completing appointments.

“(B) Report the number of medical service lines the Secretary has determined under subsection (e)(1) not to be providing hospital care, medical services, or extended care services that comply with the standards for quality established by the Secretary.

“(C) Assess the use of academic affiliates and centers of excellence of the Department to furnish hospital care, medical services, and extended care services to covered veterans under this section.

“(D) Assess the hospital care, medical services, and extended care services furnished to covered veterans under this section by medical facilities operated by Federal agencies other than the Department.

“(3) Not later than 540 days after the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018 and not less frequently than once each year thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs of the House of Representatives a report on the information gathered under paragraph (2).

“(n) Prohibition on certain limitations.— (1) The Secretary shall not limit the types of hospital care, medical services, or extended care services covered veterans may receive under this section if it is in the best medical interest of the veteran to receive such hospital care, medical services, or extended care services, as determined by the veteran and the veteran’s health care provider.

“(2) No provision in this section may be construed to alter or modify any other provision of law establishing specific eligibility criteria for certain hospital care, medical services, or extended care services.

“(o) Definitions.—In this section:

“(1) The term ‘appropriate committees of Congress’ means—

“(A) the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; and

“(B) the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.

“(2) The term ‘medical service line’ means a clinic within a Department medical center.”.

(2) CLERICAL AMENDMENT.—The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 17 is amended by striking the item relating to section 1703 and inserting the following new item:

“1703. Veterans Community Care Program.”.

(b) Effective date.—Section 1703 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by subsection (a), shall take effect on the later of—

(1) the date that is 30 days after the date on which the Secretary of Veterans Affairs submits the report required under section 101(q)(2) of the Veterans Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014 (Public Law 113–146; 38 U.S.C. 1701 note); or

(2) the date on which the Secretary promulgates regulations pursuant to subsection (c).

(c) Regulations.—

(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall promulgate regulations to carry out section 1703 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by subsection (a) of this section.

(2) UPDATES.—

(A) PERIODIC.—Before promulgating the regulations required under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall provide to the appropriate committees of Congress periodic updates to confirm the progress of the Secretary toward developing such regulations.

(B) FIRST UPDATE.—The first update under subparagraph (A) shall occur no later than 120 days from the date of the enactment of this Act.

(C) APPROPRIATE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS DEFINED.—In this paragraph, the term “appropriate committees of Congress” means—

(i) the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; and

(ii) the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.

(d) Continuity of existing agreements.—

(1) IN GENERAL.—Notwithstanding section 1703 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by subsection (a), the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall continue all contracts, memorandums of understanding, memorandums of agreements, and other arrangements that were in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act between the Department of Veterans Affairs and the American Indian and Alaska Native health care systems as established under the terms of the Department of Veterans Affairs and Indian Health Service Memorandum of Understanding, signed October 1, 2010, the National Reimbursement Agreement, signed December 5, 2012, arrangements under section 405 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1645), and agreements entered into under sections 102 and 103 of the Veterans Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014 (Public Law 113–146).

(2) MODIFICATIONS.—Paragraph (1) shall not be construed to prohibit the Secretary and the parties to the contracts, memorandums of understanding, memorandums of agreements, and other arrangements described in such paragraph from making such changes to such contracts, memorandums of understanding, memorandums of agreements, and other arrangements as may be otherwise authorized pursuant to other provisions of law or the terms of the contracts, memorandums of understanding, memorandums of agreements, and other arrangements.

SEC. 102. Authorization of agreements between Department of Veterans Affairs and non-Department providers.

(a) In general.—Subchapter I of chapter 17 is amended by inserting after section 1703 the following new section:

“§ 1703A. Agreements with eligible entities or providers; certification processes

“(a) Agreements authorized.— (1) (A) When hospital care, a medical service, or an extended care service required by a veteran who is entitled to such care or service under this chapter is not feasibly available to the veteran from a facility of the Department or through a contract or sharing agreement entered into pursuant to another provision of law, the Secretary may furnish such care or service to such veteran through an agreement under this section with an eligible entity or provider to provide such hospital care, medical service, or extended care service.

“(B) An agreement entered into under this section to provide hospital care, a medical service, or an extended care service shall be known as a ‘Veterans Care Agreement’.

“(C) For purposes of subparagraph (A), hospital care, a medical service, or an extended care service may be considered not feasibly available to a veteran from a facility of the Department or through a contract or sharing agreement described in such subparagraph when the Secretary determines the veteran's medical condition, the travel involved, the nature of the care or services required, or a combination of these factors make the use of a facility of the Department or a contract or sharing agreement described in such subparagraph impracticable or inadvisable.

“(D) A Veterans Care Agreement may be entered into by the Secretary or any Department official authorized by the Secretary.

“(2) (A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall review each Veterans Care Agreement of material size, as determined by the Secretary or set forth in paragraph (3), for hospital care, a medical service, or an extended care service to determine whether it is feasible and advisable to provide such care or service within a facility of the Department or by contract or sharing agreement entered into pursuant to another provision of law and, if so, take action to do so.

“(B) (i) The Secretary shall review each Veterans Care Agreement of material size that has been in effect for at least 6 months within the first 2 years of its taking effect, and not less frequently than once every 4 years thereafter.

“(ii) If a Veterans Care Agreement has not been in effect for at least 6 months by the date of the review required by subparagraph (A), the agreement shall be reviewed during the next cycle required by subparagraph (A), and such review shall serve as its review within the first 2 years of its taking effect for purposes of clause (i).

“(3) (A) In fiscal year 2019 and in each fiscal year thereafter, in addition to such other Veterans Care Agreements as the Secretary may determine are of material size, a Veterans Care Agreement for the purchase of extended care services that exceeds $5,000,000 annually shall be considered of material size.

“(B) From time to time, the Secretary may publish a notice in the Federal Register to adjust the dollar amount specified in subparagraph (A) to account for changes in the cost of health care based upon recognized health care market surveys and other available data.

“(b) Eligible entities and providers.—For purposes of this section, an eligible entity or provider is—

“(1) any provider of services that has enrolled and entered into a provider agreement under section 1866(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)) and any physician or other supplier who has enrolled and entered into a participation agreement under section 1842(h) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395u(h));

“(2) any provider participating under a State plan under title XIX of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.);

“(3) an Aging and Disability Resource Center, an area agency on aging, or a State agency (as defined in section 102 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3002));

“(4) a center for independent living (as defined in section 702 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 796a)); or

“(5) any entity or provider not described in paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection that the Secretary determines to be eligible pursuant to the certification process described in subsection (c).

“(c) Eligible entity or provider certification process.—The Secretary shall establish by regulation a process for the certification of eligible entities or providers or recertification of eligible entities or providers under this section. Such a process shall, at a minimum—

“(1) establish deadlines for actions on applications for certification;

“(2) set forth standards for an approval or denial of certification, duration of certification, revocation of an eligible entity or provider’s certification, and recertification of eligible entities or providers;

“(3) require the denial of certification if the Secretary determines the eligible entity or provider is excluded from participation in a Federal health care program under section 1128 or section 1128A of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a–7 or 1320a–7a) or is currently identified as an excluded source on the System for Award Management Exclusions list described in part 9 of title 48, Code of Federal Regulations, and part 180 of title 2 of such Code, or successor regulations;

“(4) establish procedures for screening eligible entities or providers according to the risk of fraud, waste, and abuse that are similar to the standards under section 1866(j)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(j)(2)(B)) and section 9.104 of title 48, Code of Federal Regulations, or successor regulations; and

“(5) incorporate and apply the restrictions and penalties set forth in chapter 21 of title 41 and treat this section as a procurement program only for purposes of applying such provisions.

“(d) Rates.—To the extent practicable, the rates paid by the Secretary for hospital care, medical services, and extended care services provided under a Veterans Care Agreement shall be in accordance with the rates paid by the United States under section 1703(i) of this title.

“(e) Terms of Veterans Care Agreements.— (1) Pursuant to regulations promulgated under subsection (k), the Secretary may define the requirements for providers and entities entering into agreements under this section based upon such factors as the number of patients receiving care or services, the number of employees employed by the entity or provider furnishing such care or services, the amount paid by the Secretary to the provider or entity, or other factors as determined by the Secretary.

“(2) To furnish hospital care, medical services, or extended care services under this section, an eligible entity or provider shall agree—

“(A) to accept payment at the rates established in regulations prescribed under this section;

“(B) that payment by the Secretary under this section on behalf of a veteran to a provider of services or care shall, unless rejected and refunded by the provider within 30 days of receipt, constitute payment in full and extinguish any liability on the part of the veteran for the treatment or care provided, and no provision of a contract, agreement, or assignment to the contrary shall operate to modify, limit, or negate this requirement;

“(C) to provide only the care and services authorized by the Department under this section and to obtain the prior written consent of the Department to furnish care or services outside the scope of such authorization;

“(D) to bill the Department in accordance with the methodology outlined in regulations prescribed under this section;

“(E) to not seek to recover or collect from a health plan contract or third party, as those terms are defined in section 1729 of this title, for any care or service that is furnished or paid for by the Department;

“(F) to provide medical records to the Department in the time frame and format specified by the Department; and

“(G) to meet such other terms and conditions, including quality of care assurance standards, as the Secretary may specify in regulation.

“(f) Discontinuation or nonrenewal of a Veterans Care Agreement.— (1) An eligible entity or provider may discontinue a Veterans Care Agreement at such time and upon such notice to the Secretary as may be provided in regulations prescribed under this section.

“(2) The Secretary may discontinue a Veterans Care Agreement with an eligible entity or provider at such time and upon such reasonable notice to the eligible entity or provider as may be specified in regulations prescribed under this section, if an official designated by the Secretary—

“(A) has determined that the eligible entity or provider failed to comply substantially with the provisions of the Veterans Care Agreement, or with the provisions of this section or regulations prescribed under this section;

“(B) has determined the eligible entity or provider is excluded from participation in a Federal health care program under section 1128 or section 1128A of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a–7 or 1320a–7a) or is identified on the System for Award Management Exclusions list as provided in part 9 of title 48, Code of Federal Regulations, and part 180 of title 2 of such Code, or successor regulations;

“(C) has ascertained that the eligible entity or provider has been convicted of a felony or other serious offense under Federal or State law and determines the eligible entity or provider’s continued participation would be detrimental to the best interests of veterans or the Department; or

“(D) has determined that it is reasonable to terminate the agreement based on the health care needs of a veteran.

“(g) Quality of care.—The Secretary shall establish a system or systems for monitoring the quality of care provided to veterans through Veterans Care Agreements and for assessing the quality of hospital care, medical services, and extended care services furnished by eligible entities and providers before the renewal of Veterans Care Agreements.

“(h) Disputes.— (1) The Secretary shall promulgate administrative procedures for eligible entities and providers to present all disputes arising under or related to Veterans Care Agreements.

“(2) Such procedures constitute the eligible entities’ and providers’ exhaustive and exclusive administrative remedies.

“(3) Eligible entities or providers must first exhaust such administrative procedures before seeking any judicial review under section 1346 of title 28 (known as the ‘Tucker Act’).

“(4) Disputes under this section must pertain to either the scope of authorization under the Veterans Care Agreement or claims for payment subject to the Veterans Care Agreement and are not claims for the purposes of such laws that would otherwise require application of sections 7101 through 7109 of title 41, United States Code.

“(i) Applicability of other provisions of law.— (1) A Veterans Care Agreement may be authorized by the Secretary or any Department official authorized by the Secretary, and such action shall not be treated as—

“(A) an award for the purposes of such laws that would otherwise require the use of competitive procedures for the furnishing of care and services; or

“(B) a Federal contract for the acquisition of goods or services for purposes of any provision of Federal law governing Federal contracts for the acquisition of goods or services except section 4706(d) of title 41.

“(2) (A) Except as provided in the agreement itself, in subparagraph (B), and unless otherwise provided in this section or regulations prescribed pursuant to this section, an eligible entity or provider that enters into an agreement under this section is not subject to, in the carrying out of the agreement, any law to which providers of services and suppliers under the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) are not subject.

“(B) An eligible entity or provider that enters into an agreement under this section is subject to—

“(i) all laws regarding integrity, ethics, or fraud, or that subject a person to civil or criminal penalties; and

“(ii) all laws that protect against employment discrimination or that otherwise ensure equal employment opportunities.

“(3) Notwithstanding paragraph (2)(B)(i), an eligible entity or provider that enters into an agreement under this section shall not be treated as a Federal contractor or subcontractor for purposes of chapter 67 of title 41 (commonly known as the ‘McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act of 1965’).

“(j) Parity of treatment.—Eligibility for hospital care, medical services, and extended care services furnished to any veteran pursuant to a Veterans Care Agreement shall be subject to the same terms as though provided in a facility of the Department, and provisions of this chapter applicable to veterans receiving such care and services in a facility of the Department shall apply to veterans treated under this section.

“(k) Rulemaking.—The Secretary shall promulgate regulations to carry out this section.”.

(b) Clerical amendment.—The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1703 the following new item:



“1703A. Agreements with eligible entities or providers; certification processes.”.

SEC. 103. Conforming amendments for State veterans homes.

(a) In general.—Section 1745(a) is amended—

(1) in paragraph (1), by striking “(or agreement under section 1720(c)(1) of this title)” and inserting “(or an agreement)”; and

(2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:

“(4) (A) An agreement under this section may be authorized by the Secretary or any Department official authorized by the Secretary, and any such action is not an award for purposes of such laws that would otherwise require the use of competitive procedures for the furnishing of hospital care, medical services, and extended care services.

“(B) (i) Except as provided in the agreement itself, in clause (ii), and unless otherwise provided in this section or regulations prescribed pursuant to this section, a State home that enters into an agreement under this section is not subject to, in the carrying out of the agreement, any provision of law to which providers of services and suppliers under the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.) are not subject.

“(ii) A State home that enters into an agreement under this section is subject to—

“(I) all provisions of law regarding integrity, ethics, or fraud, or that subject a person to civil or criminal penalties;

“(II) all provisions of law that protect against employment discrimination or that otherwise ensure equal employment opportunities; and

“(III) all provisions in subchapter V of chapter 17 of this title.

“(iii) Notwithstanding subparagraph (B)(ii)(I), a State home that enters into an agreement under this section may not be treated as a Federal contractor or subcontractor for purposes of chapter 67 of title 41 (known as the ‘McNamara-O’Hara Service Contract Act of 1965’).”.

(b) Effective date.—The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to care provided on or after the effective date of regulations issued by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to carry out this section.

SEC. 104. Access standards and standards for quality.

(a) In general.—Subchapter I of chapter 17, as amended by section 102, is further amended by inserting after section 1703A the following new sections:

“§ 1703B. Access standards

“(a) (1) The Secretary shall establish access standards for furnishing hospital care, medical services, or extended care services to covered veterans for the purposes of section 1703(d).

“(2) The Secretary shall ensure that the access standards established under paragraph (1) define such categories of care to cover all care and services within the medical benefits package of the Department of Veterans Affairs.

“(b) The Secretary shall ensure that the access standards provide covered veterans, employees of the Department, and health care providers in the network established under section 1703(h) with relevant comparative information that is clear, useful, and timely, so that covered veterans can make informed decisions regarding their health care.

“(c) The Secretary shall consult with all pertinent Federal entities (including the Department of Defense, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services), entities in the private sector, and other nongovernmental entities in establishing access standards.

“(d) (1) Not later than 270 days after the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report detailing the access standards.

“(2) (A) Before submitting the report required under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall provide periodic updates to the appropriate committees of Congress to confirm the Department’s progress towards developing the access standards required by this section.

“(B) The first update under subparagraph (A) shall occur no later than 120 days from the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018.

“(3) Not later than 540 days after the date on which the Secretary implements the access standards established under subsection (a), the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report detailing the implementation of and compliance with such access standards by Department and non-Department entities or providers.

“(e) Not later than 3 years after the date on which the Secretary establishes access standards under subsection (a) and not less frequently than once every 3 years thereafter, the Secretary shall—

“(1) conduct a review of such standards; and

“(2) submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report on the findings and any modification to the access standards with respect to the review conducted under paragraph (1).

“(f) The Secretary shall ensure health care providers specified under section 1703(c) are able to comply with the applicable access standards established by the Secretary.

“(g) The Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register and on an internet website of the Department the designated access standards established under this section for purposes of section 1703(d)(1)(D).

“(h) (1) Consistent with paragraphs (1)(D) and (3) of section 1703(d), covered veterans may contact the Department at any time to request a determination regarding whether they are eligible to receive care and services from a non-Department entity or provider based on the Department being unable to furnish such care and services in a manner that complies with the designated access standards established under this section.

“(2) The Secretary shall establish a process to review such requests from covered veterans to determine whether—

“(A) the requested care is clinically necessary; and

“(B) the Department is able to provide such care in a manner that complies with designated access standards established under this section.

“(3) The Secretary shall promptly respond to any such request by a covered veteran.

“(i) (1) The term ‘appropriate committees of Congress’ means—

“(A) the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; and

“(B) the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.

“(2) The term ‘covered veterans’ refers to veterans described in section 1703(b) of this title.

“§ 1703C. Standards for quality

“(a) In general.— (1) The Secretary shall establish standards for quality regarding hospital care, medical services, and extended care services furnished by the Department pursuant to this title, including through non-Department health care providers pursuant to section 1703 of this title.

“(2) In establishing standards for quality under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consider existing health quality measures that are applied to public and privately sponsored health care systems with the purpose of providing covered veterans relevant comparative information to make informed decisions regarding their health care.

“(3) The Secretary shall collect and consider data for purposes of establishing the standards under paragraph (1). Such data collection shall include—

“(A) after consultation with veterans service organizations and other key stakeholders on survey development or modification of an existing survey, a survey of veterans who have used hospital care, medical services, or extended care services furnished by the Veterans Health Administration during the most recent 2-year period to assess the satisfaction of the veterans with service and quality of care; and

“(B) datasets that include, at a minimum, elements relating to the following:

“(i) Timely care.

“(ii) Effective care.

“(iii) Safety, including, at a minimum, complications, readmissions, and deaths.

“(iv) Efficiency.

“(4) The Secretary shall consult with all pertinent Federal entities (including the Department of Defense, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services), entities in the private sector, and other nongovernmental entities in establishing standards for quality.

“(5) (A) Not later than 270 days after the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report detailing the standards for quality.

“(B) (i) Before submitting the report required under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall provide periodic updates to the appropriate committees of Congress to confirm the Department’s progress towards developing the standards for quality required by this section.

“(ii) The first update under clause (i) shall occur no later than 120 days from the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018.

“(b) Publication and consideration of public comments.— (1) Not later than 1 year after the date on which the Secretary establishes standards for quality under subsection (a), the Secretary shall publish the quality rating of medical facilities of the Department in the publicly available Hospital Compare website through the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services for the purpose of providing veterans with information that allows them to compare performance measure information among Department and non-Department health care providers.

“(2) Not later than 2 years after the date on which the Secretary establishes standards for quality under subsection (a), the Secretary shall consider and solicit public comment on potential changes to the measures used in such standards to ensure that they include the most up-to-date and applicable industry measures for veterans.

“(c) (1) The term ‘appropriate committees of Congress’ means—

“(A) the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; and

“(B) the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.

“(2) The term ‘covered veterans’ refers to veterans described in section 1703(b) of this title.”.

(b) Clerical amendment.—The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 17, as amended by section 102, is further amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1703A the following new items:



“1703B. Access standards.



“1703C. Standards for quality.”.

SEC. 105. Access to walk-in care.

(a) In general.—Chapter 17 is amended by inserting after section 1725 the following new section:

“§ 1725A. Access to walk-in care

“(a) Procedures To ensure access to walk-In care.—The Secretary shall develop procedures to ensure that eligible veterans are able to access walk-in care from qualifying non-Department entities or providers.

“(b) Eligible veterans.—For purposes of this section, an eligible veteran is any individual who—

“(1) is enrolled in the health care system established under section 1705(a) of this title; and

“(2) has received care under this chapter within the 24-month period preceding the furnishing of walk-in care under this section.

“(c) Qualifying non-Department entities or providers.—For purposes of this section, a qualifying non-Department entity or provider is a non-Department entity or provider that has entered into a contract or other agreement with the Secretary to furnish services under this section.

“(d) Federally-Qualified health centers.—Whenever practicable, the Secretary may use a Federally-qualified health center (as defined in section 1905(l)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(l)(2)(B))) to carry out this section.

“(e) Continuity of care.—The Secretary shall ensure continuity of care for those eligible veterans who receive walk-in care services under this section, including through the establishment of a mechanism to receive medical records from walk-in care providers and provide pertinent patient medical records to providers of walk-in care.

“(f) Copayments.— (1) (A) The Secretary may require an eligible veteran to pay the United States a copayment for each episode of hospital care or medical services provided under this section if the eligible veteran would be required to pay a copayment under this title.

“(B) An eligible veteran not required to pay a copayment under this title may access walk-in care without a copayment for the first two visits in a calendar year. For any additional visits, a copayment at an amount determined by the Secretary may be required.

“(C) An eligible veteran required to pay a copayment under this title may be required to pay a regular copayment for the first two walk-in care visits in a calendar year. For any additional visits, a higher copayment at an amount determined by the Secretary may be required.

“(2) After the first two episodes of care furnished to an eligible veteran under this section, the Secretary may adjust the copayment required of the veteran under this subsection based upon the priority group of enrollment of the eligible veteran, the number of episodes of care furnished to the eligible veteran during a year, and other factors the Secretary considers appropriate under this section.

“(3) The amount or amounts of the copayments required under this subsection shall be prescribed by the Secretary by rule.

“(4) Section 8153(c) of this title shall not apply to this subsection.

“(g) Regulations.—Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations to carry out this section.

“(h) Walk-In care defined.—In this section, the term ‘walk-in care’ means non-emergent care provided by a qualifying non-Department entity or provider that furnishes episodic care and not longitudinal management of conditions and is otherwise defined through regulations the Secretary shall promulgate.”.

(b) Effective date.—Section 1725A of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date upon which final regulations implementing such section take effect.

(c) Clerical amendment.—The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1725 the following new item:



“1725A. Access to walk-in care.”.

SEC. 106. Strategy regarding the Department of Veterans Affairs High-Performing Integrated Health Care Network.

(a) In general.—Subchapter II of chapter 73 is amended by inserting after section 7330B the following new section:

“§ 7330C. Quadrennial Veterans Health Administration review

“(a) Market area assessments.— (1) Not less frequently than every 4 years, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall perform market area assessments regarding the health care services furnished under the laws administered by the Secretary.

“(2) Each market area assessment established under paragraph (1) shall include the following:

“(A) An assessment of the demand for health care from the Department, disaggregated by geographic market areas as determined by the Secretary, including the number of requests for health care services under the laws administered by the Secretary.

“(B) An inventory of the health care capacity of the Department of Veterans Affairs across the Department’s system of facilities.

“(C) An assessment of the health care capacity to be provided through contracted community care providers and providers who entered into a provider agreement with the Department under section 1703A of title 38, as added by section 102, including the number of providers, the geographic location of the providers, and categories or types of health care services provided by the providers.

“(D) An assessment obtained from other Federal direct delivery systems of their capacity to provide health care to veterans.

“(E) An assessment of the health care capacity of non-contracted providers where there is insufficient network supply.

“(F) An assessment of the health care capacity of academic affiliates and other collaborations of the Department as it relates to providing health care to veterans.

“(G) An assessment of the effects on health care capacity of the access standards and standards for quality established under sections 1703B and 1703C of this title.

“(H) The number of appointments for health care services under the laws administered by the Secretary, disaggregated by—

“(i) appointments at facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs; and

“(ii) appointments with non-Department health care providers.

“(3) (A) The Secretary shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress the market area assessments established in paragraph (1).

“(B) The Secretary also shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress the market area assessments completed by or being performed on the day before the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018.

“(4) (A) The Secretary shall use the market area assessments established under paragraph (1) to—

“(i) determine the capacity of the health care provider networks established under section 1703(h) of this title;

“(ii) inform the Department budget, in accordance with subparagraph (B); and

“(iii) inform and assess the appropriateness of the access standards established under section 1703B of this title and standards for quality under section 1703C and to make recommendations for any changes to such standards.

“(B) The Secretary shall ensure that the Department budget for any fiscal year (as submitted with the budget of the President under section 1105(a) of title 31) reflects the findings of the Secretary with respect to the most recent market area assessments under paragraph (1) and health care utilization data from the Department and non-Department entities or providers furnishing care and services to covered veterans as described in section 1703(b).

“(b) Strategic plan To meet health care demand.— (1) Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018 and not less frequently than once every 4 years thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a strategic plan that specifies a 4-year forecast of—

“(A) the demand for health care from the Department, disaggregated by geographic area as determined by the Secretary;

“(B) the health care capacity to be provided at each medical center of the Department; and

“(C) the health care capacity to be provided through community care providers.

“(2) In preparing the strategic plan under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall—

“(A) assess the access standards and standards for quality established under sections 1703B and 1703C of this title;

“(B) assess the market area assessments established under subsection (a);

“(C) assess the needs of the Department based on identified services that provide management of conditions or disorders related to military service for which there is limited experience or access in the national market, the overall health of veterans throughout their lifespan, or other services as the Secretary determines appropriate;

“(D) consult with key stakeholders within the Department, the heads of other Federal agencies, and other relevant governmental and nongovernmental entities, including State, local, and tribal government officials, members of Congress, veterans service organizations, private sector representatives, academics, and other policy experts;

“(E) identify emerging issues, trends, problems, and opportunities that could affect health care services furnished under the laws administered by the Secretary;

“(F) develop recommendations regarding both short- and long-term priorities for health care services furnished under the laws administered by the Secretary;

“(G) after consultation with veterans service organizations and other key stakeholders on survey development or modification of an existing survey, consider a survey of veterans who have used hospital care, medical services, or extended care services furnished by the Veterans Health Administration during the most recent 2-year period to assess the satisfaction of the veterans with service and quality of care;

“(H) conduct a comprehensive examination of programs and policies of the Department regarding the delivery of health care services and the demand of health care services for veterans in future years;

“(I) assess the remediation of medical service lines of the Department as described in section 1706A in conjunction with the utilization of non-Department entities or providers to offset remediation; and

“(J) consider such other matters as the Secretary considers appropriate.

“(c) Responsibilities.—The Secretary shall be responsible for—

“(1) overseeing the transformation and organizational change across the Department to achieve such high performing integrated health care network;

“(2) developing the capital infrastructure planning and procurement processes, whether minor or major construction projects or leases; and

“(3) developing a multi-year budget process that is capable of forecasting future year budget requirements and projecting the cost of delivering health care services under a high-performing integrated health care network.

“(d) Appropriate committees of Congress defined.—In this section, the term ‘appropriate committees of Congress’ means—

“(1) the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; and

“(2) the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.”.

(b) Clerical amendment.—The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7330B the following new item:



“7330C. Quadrennial Veterans Health Administration review.”.

SEC. 107. Applicability of Directive of Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs.

(a) In general.—Notwithstanding the treatment of certain laws under subsection (i) of section 1703A of title 38, United States Code, as added by section 102 of this title, Directive 2014–01 of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs of the Department of Labor (effective as of May 7, 2014) shall apply to any entity entering into an agreement under such section 1703A or section 1745 of such title, as amended by section 103, in the same manner as such directive applies to subcontractors under the TRICARE program for the duration of the moratorium provided under such directive.

(b) Applicability period.—The directive described in subsection (a), and the moratorium provided under such directive, shall not be altered or rescinded before May 7, 2019.

(c) TRICARE program defined.—In this section, the term “TRICARE program” has the meaning given that term in section 1072 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 108. Prevention of certain health care providers from providing non-Department health care services to veterans.

(a) In general.—On and after the date that is 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall deny or revoke the eligibility of a health care provider to provide non-Department health care services to veterans if the Secretary determines that the health care provider—

(1) was removed from employment with the Department of Veterans Affairs due to conduct that violated a policy of the Department relating to the delivery of safe and appropriate health care; or

(2) violated the requirements of a medical license of the health care provider that resulted in the loss of such medical license.

(b) Permissive action.—On and after the date that is 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary may deny, revoke, or suspend the eligibility of a health care provider to provide non-Department health care services if the Secretary determines such action is necessary to immediately protect the health, safety, or welfare of veterans and the health care provider is under investigation by the medical licensing board of a State in which the health care provider is licensed or practices.

(c) Suspension.—The Secretary shall suspend the eligibility of a health care provider to provide non-Department health care services to veterans if the health care provider is suspended from serving as a health care provider of the Department.

(d) Comptroller General report.—Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to Congress a report on the implementation by the Secretary of this section, including the following:

(1) The aggregate number of health care providers denied or suspended under this section from participation in providing non-Department health care services.

(2) An evaluation of any impact on access to health care for patients or staffing shortages in programs of the Department providing non-Department health care services.

(3) An explanation of the coordination of the Department with the medical licensing boards of States in implementing this section, the amount of involvement of such boards in such implementation, and efforts by the Department to address any concerns raised by such boards with respect to such implementation.

(4) Such recommendations as the Comptroller General considers appropriate regarding harmonizing eligibility criteria between health care providers of the Department and health care providers eligible to provide non-Department health care services.

(e) Non-Department health care services defined.—In this section, the term “non-Department health care services” means services—

(1) provided under subchapter I of chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, at non-Department facilities (as defined in section 1701 of such title);

(2) provided under section 101 of the Veterans Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014 (Public Law 113–146; 38 U.S.C. 1701 note);

(3) purchased through the Medical Community Care account of the Department; or

(4) purchased with amounts deposited in the Veterans Choice Fund under section 802 of the Veterans Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014.

SEC. 109. Remediation of medical service lines.

(a) In general.—Subchapter I of chapter 17 is amended by inserting after section 1706 the following new section:

“§ 1706A. Remediation of medical service lines

“(a) In general.—Not later than 30 days after determining under section 1703(e)(1) that a medical service line of the Department is providing hospital care, medical services, or extended care services that does not comply with the standards for quality established by the Secretary, the Secretary shall submit to Congress an assessment of the factors that led the Secretary to make such determination and a plan with specific actions, and the time to complete them, to be taken to comply with such standards for quality, including the following:

“(1) Increasing personnel or temporary personnel assistance, including mobile deployment teams.

“(2) Special hiring incentives, including the Education Debt Reduction Program under subchapter VII of chapter 76 of this title and recruitment, relocation, and retention incentives.

“(3) Utilizing direct hiring authority.

“(4) Providing improved training opportunities for staff.

“(5) Acquiring improved equipment.

“(6) Making structural modifications to the facility used by the medical service line.

“(7) Such other actions as the Secretary considers appropriate.

“(b) Responsible parties.—In each assessment submitted under subsection (a) with respect to a medical service line, the Secretary shall identify the individuals at the Central Office of the Veterans Health Administration, the facility used by the medical service line, and the central office of the relevant Veterans Integrated Service Network who are responsible for overseeing the progress of that medical service line in complying with the standards for quality established by the Secretary.

“(c) Interim reports.—Not later than 180 days after submitting an assessment under subsection (a) with respect to a medical service line, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the progress of that medical service line in complying with the standards for quality established by the Secretary and any other measures the Secretary will take to assist the medical service line in complying with such standards for quality.

“(d) Annual reports.—Not less frequently than once each year, the Secretary shall—

“(1) submit to Congress an analysis of the remediation actions and costs of such actions taken with respect to each medical service line with respect to which the Secretary submitted an assessment and plan under paragraph (1) in the preceding year, including an update on the progress of each such medical service line in complying with the standards for quality and timeliness established by the Secretary and any other actions the Secretary is undertaking to assist the medical service line in complying with standards for quality as established by the Secretary; and

“(2) publish such analysis on the internet website of the Department.”.

(b) Clerical amendment.—The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1706 the following new item:



“1706A. Remediation of medical service lines.”.

SEC. 111. Prompt payment to providers.

(a) In general.—Subchapter I of chapter 17 is amended by inserting after section 1703C, as added by section 104 of this title, the following new section:

“§ 1703D. Prompt payment standard

“(a) In general.— (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title or of any other provision of law, the Secretary shall pay for hospital care, medical services, or extended care services furnished by health care entities or providers under this chapter within 45 calendar days upon receipt of a clean paper claim or 30 calendar days upon receipt of a clean electronic claim.

“(2) If a claim is denied, the Secretary shall, within 45 calendar days of denial for a paper claim and 30 calendar days of denial for an electronic claim, notify the health care entity or provider of the reason for denying the claim and what, if any, additional information is required to process the claim.

“(3) Upon the receipt of the additional information, the Secretary shall ensure that the claim is paid, denied, or otherwise adjudicated within 30 calendar days from the receipt of the requested information.

“(4) This section shall only apply to payments made on an invoice basis and shall not apply to capitation or other forms of periodic payment to entities or providers.

“(b) Submittal of claims by health care entities and providers.—A health care entity or provider that furnishes hospital care, a medical service, or an extended care service under this chapter shall submit to the Secretary a claim for payment for furnishing the hospital care, medical service, or extended care service not later than 180 days after the date on which the entity or provider furnished the hospital care, medical service, or extended care service.

“(c) Fraudulent claims.— (1) Sections 3729 through 3733 of title 31 shall apply to fraudulent claims for payment submitted to the Secretary by a health care entity or provider under this chapter.

“(2) Pursuant to regulations prescribed by the Secretary, the Secretary shall bar a health care entity or provider from furnishing hospital care, medical services, and extended care services under this chapter when the Secretary determines the entity or provider has submitted to the Secretary fraudulent health care claims for payment by the Secretary.

“(d) Overdue claims.— (1) Any claim that has not been denied with notice, made pending with notice, or paid to the health care entity or provider by the Secretary shall be overdue if the notice or payment is not received by the entity provider within the time periods specified in subsection (a).

“(2) (A) If a claim is overdue under this subsection, the Secretary may, under the requirements established by subsection (a) and consistent with the provisions of chapter 39 of title 31 (commonly referred to as the ‘Prompt Payment Act’), require that interest be paid on clean claims.

“(B) Interest paid under subparagraph (A) shall be computed at the rate of interest established by the Secretary of the Treasury under section 3902 of title 31 and published in the Federal Register.

“(3) Not less frequently than annually, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on payment of overdue claims under this subsection, disaggregated by paper and electronic claims, that includes the following:

“(A) The amount paid in overdue claims described in this subsection, disaggregated by the amount of the overdue claim and the amount of interest paid on such overdue claim.

“(B) The number of such overdue claims and the average number of days late each claim was paid, disaggregated by facility of the Department and Veterans Integrated Service Network region.

“(e) Overpayment.— (1) The Secretary shall deduct the amount of any overpayment from payments due a health care entity or provider under this chapter.

“(2) Deductions may not be made under this subsection unless the Secretary has made reasonable efforts to notify a health care entity or provider of the right to dispute the existence or amount of such indebtedness and the right to request a compromise of such indebtedness.

“(3) The Secretary shall make a determination with respect to any such dispute or request prior to deducting any overpayment unless the time required to make such a determination before making any deductions would jeopardize the Secretary’s ability to recover the full amount of such indebtedness.

“(f) Information and documentation required.— (1) The Secretary shall provide to all health care entities and providers participating in a program to furnish hospital care, medical services, or extended care services under this chapter a list of information and documentation that is required to establish a clean claim under this section.

“(2) The Secretary shall consult with entities in the health care industry, in the public and private sector, to determine the information and documentation to include in the list under paragraph (1).

“(3) If the Secretary modifies the information and documentation included in the list under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall notify all health care entities and providers described in paragraph (1) not later than 30 days before such modifications take effect.

“(g) Processing of claims.— (1) In processing a claim for compensation for hospital care, medical services, or extended care services furnished by a non-Department health care entity or provider under this chapter, the Secretary may act through—

“(A) a non-Department entity that is under contract or agreement for the program established under section 1703(a) of this title; or

“(B) a non-Department entity that specializes in such processing for other Federal agency health care systems.

“(2) The Secretary shall seek to contract with a third party to conduct a review of claims described in paragraph (3) that includes—

“(A) a feasibility assessment to determine the capacity of the Department to process such claims in a timely manner; and

“(B) a cost benefit analysis comparing the capacity of the Department to a third party entity capable of processing such claims.

“(3) The review required under paragraph (2) shall apply to claims for hospital care, medical services, or extended care services furnished under section 1703 of this Act, as amended by the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018, that are processed by the Department.

“(h) Report on encounter data system.— (1) Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2018, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report on the feasibility and advisability of adopting a funding mechanism similar to what is utilized by other Federal agencies to allow a contracted entity to act as a fiscal intermediary for the Federal Government to distribute, or pass through, Federal Government funds for certain non-underwritten hospital care, medical services, or extended care services.

“(2) The Secretary may coordinate with the Department of Defense, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the Department of the Treasury in developing the report required by paragraph (1).

“(i) Definitions.—In this section:

“(1) The term ‘appropriate committees of Congress’ means—

“(A) the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; and

“(B) the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.

“(2) The term ‘clean electronic claim’ means the transmission of data for purposes of payment of covered health care expenses that is submitted to the Secretary which contains substantially all of the required data elements necessary for accurate adjudication, without obtaining additional information from the entity or provider that furnished the care or service, submitted in such format as prescribed by the Secretary in regulations for the purpose of paying claims for care or services.

“(3) The term ‘clean paper claim’ means a paper claim for payment of covered health care expenses that is submitted to the Secretary which contains substantially all of the required data elements necessary for accurate adjudication, without obtaining additional information from the entity or provider that furnished the care or service, submitted in such format as prescribed by the Secretary in regulations for the purpose of paying claims for care or services.

“(4) The term ‘fraudulent claims’ means the knowing misrepresentation of a material fact or facts by a health care entity or provider made to induce the Secretary to pay a claim that was not legally payable to that provider.

“(5) The term ‘health care entity or provider’ includes any non-Department health care entity or provider, but does not include any Federal health care entity or provider.”.

(b) Clerical amendment.—The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1703C, as added by section 104 of this title, the following new item:



“1703D. Prompt payment standard.”.

SEC. 112. Authority to pay for authorized care not subject to an agreement.

(a) In general.—Subchapter IV of chapter 81 is amended by adding at the end the following new section:

“§ 8159. Authority to pay for services authorized but not subject to an agreement

“(a) In general.—If, in the course of furnishing hospital care, a medical service, or an extended care service authorized by the Secretary and pursuant to a contract, agreement, or other arrangement with the Secretary, a provider who is not a party to the contract, agreement, or other arrangement furnishes hospital care, a medical service, or an extended care service that the Secretary considers necessary, the Secretary may compensate the provider for the cost of such care or service.

“(b) New contracts and agreements.—The Secretary shall take reasonable efforts to enter into a contract, agreement, or other arrangement with a provider described in subsection (a) to ensure that future care and services authorized by the Secretary and furnished by the provider are subject to such a contract, agreement, or other arrangement.”.

(b) Clerical amendment.—The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 8158 the following new item:



“8159. Authority to pay for services authorized but not subject to an agreement.”.

SEC. 113. Improvement of authority to recover the cost of services furnished for non-service-connected disabilities.

(a) Broadening scope of applicability.—Section 1729 is amended—

(1) in subsection (a)—

(A) in paragraph (2)(A)—

(i) by striking “the veteran’s” and inserting “the individual’s”; and

(ii) by striking “the veteran” and inserting “the individual”; and

(B) in paragraph (3)—

(i) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking “the veteran” and inserting “the individual”; and

(ii) in subparagraph (A), by striking “the veteran’s” and inserting “the individual’s”;

(2) in subsection (b)—

(A) in paragraph (1)—

(i) by striking “the veteran” and inserting “the individual”; and

(ii) by striking “the veteran’s” and inserting “the individual’s”; and

(B) in paragraph (2)—

(i) in subparagraph (A)—

(I) by striking “the veteran” and inserting “the individual”; and

(II) by striking “the veteran’s” and inserting “the individual’s”; and

(ii) in subparagraph (B)—

(I) in clause (i), by striking “the veteran” and inserting “the individual”; and

(II) in clause (ii)—

(aa) by striking “the veteran” and inserting “the individual”; and

(bb) by striking “the veteran’s” each place it appears and inserting “the individual’s”;

(3) in subsection (e), by striking “A veteran” and inserting “An individual”; and

(4) in subsection (h)—

(A) in paragraph (1)—

(i) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking “a veteran” and inserting “an individual”;

(ii) in subparagraph (A), by striking “the veteran” and inserting “the individual”; and

(iii) in subparagraph (B), by striking “the veteran” and inserting “the individual”; and

(B) in paragraph (2)—

(i) by striking “A veteran” and inserting “An individual”;

(ii) by striking “a veteran” and inserting “an individual”; and

(iii) by striking “the veteran” and inserting “the individual”.

(b) Modification of authority.—Subsection (a)(1) of such section is amended by striking “(1) Subject” and all that follows through the period and inserting the following: “(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, in any case in which the United States is required by law to furnish or pay for care or services under this chapter for a non-service-connected disability described in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the United States has the right to recover or collect from a third party the reasonable charges of care or services so furnished or paid for to the extent that the recipient or provider of the care or services would be eligible to receive payment for such care or services from such third party if the care or services had not been furnished or paid for by a department or agency of the United States.”.

(c) Modification of eligible individuals.—Subparagraph (D) of subsection (a)(2) of such section is amended to read as follows:

“(D) that is incurred by an individual who is entitled to care (or payment of the expenses of care) under a health-plan contract.”.

SEC. 114. Processing of claims for reimbursement through electronic interface.

The Secretary of Veterans Affairs may enter into an agreement with a third-party entity to process, through the use of an electronic interface, claims for reimbursement for health care provided under the laws administered by the Secretary.

SEC. 121. Education program on health care options.

(a) In general.—The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall develop and administer an education program that teaches veterans about their health care options through the Department of Veterans Affairs.

(b) Elements.—The program under subsection (a) shall—

(1) teach veterans about—

(A) eligibility criteria for care from the Department set forth under sections 1703, as amended by section 101 of this title, and 1710 of title 38, United States Code;

(B) priority groups for enrollment in the system of annual patient enrollment under section 1705(a) of such title;

(C) the copayments and other financial obligations, if any, required of certain individuals for certain services; and

(D) how to utilize the access standards and standards for quality established under sections 1703B and 1703C of such title;

(2) teach veterans about the interaction between health insurance (including private insurance, Medicare, Medicaid, the TRICARE program, the Indian Health Service, tribal health programs, and other forms of insurance) and health care from the Department; and

(3) provide veterans with information on what to do when they have a complaint about health care received from the Department (whether about the provider, the Department, or any other type of complaint).

(c) Accessibility.—In developing the education program under this section, the Secretary shall ensure that materials under such program are accessible—

(1) to veterans who may not have access to the internet; and

(2) to veterans in a manner that complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.).

(d) Annual evaluation and report.—

(1) EVALUATION.—The Secretary shall develop a method to evaluate the effectiveness of the education program under this section and evaluate the program using the method not less frequently than once each year.

(2) REPORT.—Not less frequently than once each year, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the findings of the Secretary with respect to the most recent evaluation conducted by the Secretary under paragraph (1).

(e) Definitions.—In this section:

(1) MEDICAID.—The term “Medicaid” means the Medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).

(2) MEDICARE.—The term “Medicare” means the Medicare program under title XVIII of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq.).

(3) TRICARE PROGRAM.—The term “TRICARE program” has the meaning given that term in section 1072 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 122. Training program for administration of non-Department of Veterans Affairs health care.

(a) Establishment of program.—The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall develop and implement a training program to train employees and contractors of the Department of Veterans Affairs on how to administer non-Department health care programs, including the following:

(1) Reimbursement for non-Department emergency room care.

(2) The Veterans Community Care Program under section 1703 of such title, as amended by section 101.

(3) Management of prescriptions pursuant to improvements under section 131.

(b) Annual evaluation and report.—The Secretary shall—

(1) develop a method to evaluate the effectiveness of the training program developed and implemented under subsection (a);

(2) evaluate such program not less frequently than once each year; and

(3) not less frequently than once each year, submit to Congress the findings of the Secretary with respect to the most recent evaluation carried out under paragraph (2).

SEC. 123. Continuing medical education for non-Department medical professionals.

(a) Establishment of program.—

(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall establish a program to provide continuing medical education material to non-Department medical professionals.

(2) EDUCATION PROVIDED.—The program established under paragraph (1) shall include education on the following:

(A) Identifying and treating common mental and physical conditions of veterans and family members of veterans.

(B) The health care system of the Department of Veterans Affairs.

(C) Such other matters as the Secretary considers appropriate.

(b) Material provided.—The continuing medical education material provided to non-Department medical professionals under the program established under subsection (a) shall be the same material provided to medical professionals of the Department to ensure that all medical professionals treating veterans have access to the same materials, which supports core competencies throughout the community.

(c) Administration of program.—

(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall administer the program established under subsection (a) to participating non-Department medical professionals through an internet website of the Department of Veterans Affairs.

(2) CURRICULUM AND CREDIT PROVIDED.—The Secretary shall determine the curriculum of the program and the number of hours of credit to provide to participating non-Department medical professionals for continuing medical education.

(3) ACCREDITATION.—The Secretary shall ensure that the program is accredited in as many States as practicable.

(4) CONSISTENCY WITH EXISTING RULES.—The Secretary shall ensure that the program is consistent with the rules and regulations of the following:

(A) The medical licensing agency of each State in which the program is accredited.

(B) Such medical credentialing organizations as the Secretary considers appropriate.

(5) USER COST.—The Secretary shall carry out the program at no cost to participating non-Department medical professionals.

(6) MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND REPORT.—The Secretary shall monitor the utilization of the program established under subsection (a), evaluate its effectiveness, and report to Congress on utilization and effectiveness not less frequently than once each year.

(d) Non-Department medical professional defined.—In this section, the term “non-Department medical professional” means any individual who is licensed by an appropriate medical authority in the United States and is in good standing, is not an employee of the Department of Veterans Affairs, and provides care to veterans or family members of veterans under the laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.

SEC. 131. Establishment of processes to ensure safe opioid prescribing practices by non-Department of Veterans Affairs health care providers.

(a) Receipt and review of guidelines.—The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that all covered health care providers are provided a copy of and certify that they have reviewed the evidence-based guidelines for prescribing opioids set forth by the Opioid Safety Initiative of the Department of Veterans Affairs.

(b) Inclusion of medical history and current medications.—The Secretary shall implement a process to ensure that, if care of a veteran by a covered health care provider is authorized under the laws administered by the Secretary, the document authorizing such care includes the available and relevant medical history of the veteran and a list of all medications prescribed to the veteran as known by the Department.

(c) Submittal of medical records and prescriptions.—

(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall, consistent with section 1703(a)(2)(A), as amended by section 101 of this title, and section 1703A(e)(2)(F), as added by section 102 of this title, require each covered health care provider to submit medical records of any care or services furnished, including records of any prescriptions for opioids, to the Department in the timeframe and format specified by the Secretary.

(2) RESPONSIBILITY OF DEPARTMENT FOR RECORDING AND MONITORING.—In carrying out paragraph (1) and upon the receipt by the Department of the medical records described in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall—

(A) ensure the Department is responsible for the recording of the prescription in the electronic health record of the veteran; and

(B) enable other monitoring of the prescription as outlined in the Opioid Safety Initiative of the Department.

(3) REPORT.—Not less frequently than annually, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs of the House of Representatives a report evaluating the compliance of covered health care providers with the requirements under this section.

(d) Use of opioid safety initiative guidelines.—

(1) IN GENERAL.—If the Secretary determines that the opioid prescribing practices of a covered health care provider, when treating covered veterans, satisfy a condition described in paragraph (3), the Secretary shall take such action as the Secretary considers appropriate to ensure the safety of all veterans receiving care from that health care provider, including removing or directing the removal of any such health care provider from provider networks or otherwise refusing to authorize care of veterans by such health care provider in any program authorized under the laws administered by the Secretary.

(2) INCLUSION IN CONTRACTS.—The Secretary shall ensure that any contracts, agreements, or other arrangements entered into by the Secretary with third parties involved in administering programs that provide care in the community to veterans under the laws administered by the Secretary specifically grant the authority set forth in paragraph (1) to such third parties and to the Secretary, as the case may be.

(3) CONDITIONS FOR EXCLUSION OR LIMITATION.—The Secretary shall take such action as is considered appropriate under paragraph (1) when the opioid prescribing practices of a covered health care provider when treating covered veterans—

(A) conflict with or are otherwise inconsistent with the standards of appropriate and safe care;

(B) violate the requirements of a medical license of the health care provider; or

(C) may place at risk the veterans receiving health care from the provider.

(e) Covered health care provider defined.—In this section, the term “covered health care provider” means a non-Department of Veterans Affairs health care provider who provides health care to veterans under the laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, but does not include a health care provider employed by another agency of the Federal Government.

SEC. 132. Improving information sharing with community providers.

Section 7332(b)(2) is amended by striking subparagraph (H) and inserting the following new subparagraphs:

“(H) (i) To a non-Department entity (including private entities and other Federal agencies) for purposes of providing health care, including hospital care, medical services, and extended care services, to patients or performing other health care-related activities or functions.

“(ii) An entity to which a record is disclosed under this subparagraph may not disclose or use such record for a purpose other than that for which the disclosure was made or as permitted by law.

“(I) To a third party in order to recover or collect reasonable charges for care furnished to, or paid on behalf of, a patient in connection with a non-service connected disability as permitted by section 1729 of this title or for a condition for which recovery is authorized or with respect to which the United States is deemed to be a third party beneficiary under the Act entitled ‘An Act to provide for the recovery from tortiously liable third persons of the cost of hospital and medical care and treatment furnished by the United States’ (Public Law 87–693; 42 U.S.C. 2651 et seq.; commonly known as the ‘Federal Medical Care Recovery Act’).”.

SEC. 133. Competency standards for non-Department of Veterans Affairs health care providers.

(a) Establishment of standards and requirements.—The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall establish standards and requirements for the provision of care by non-Department of Veterans Affairs health care providers in clinical areas for which the Department of Veterans Affairs has special expertise, including post-traumatic stress disorder, military sexual trauma-related conditions, and traumatic brain injuries.

(b) Condition for eligibility To furnish care.— (1) Each non-Department of Veterans Affairs health care provider shall, to the extent practicable as determined by the Secretary or otherwise provided for in paragraph (2), meet the standards and requirements established pursuant to subsection (a) before furnishing care pursuant to a contract, agreement, or other arrangement with the Department of Veterans Affairs. Non-Department of Veterans Affairs health care providers furnishing care pursuant to a contract, agreement, or other arrangement shall, to the extent practicable as determined by the Secretary, fulfill training requirements established by the Secretary on how to deliver evidence-based treatments in the clinical areas for which the Department of Veterans Affairs has special expertise.

(2) Each non-Department of Veterans Affairs health care provider who enters into a contract, agreement, or other arrangement after the effective date identified in subsection (c) shall, to the extent practicable, meet the standards and requirements established pursuant to subsection (a) within 6 months of the contract, agreement, or other arrangement taking effect.

(c) Effective date.—This section shall take effect on the day that is 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 134. Department of Veterans Affairs participation in national network of State-based prescription drug monitoring programs.

(a) In general.—Chapter 17 is amended by inserting after section 1730A the following new section:

“§ 1730B. Access to State prescription drug monitoring programs

“(a) Access to programs.— (1) Any licensed health care provider or delegate of such a provider shall be considered an authorized recipient or user for the purpose of querying and receiving data from the national network of State-based prescription drug monitoring programs to support the safe and effective prescribing of controlled substances to covered patients.

“(2) Under the authority granted by paragraph (1)—

“(A) licensed health care providers or delegates of such providers shall query such network in accordance with applicable regulations and policies of the Veterans Health Administration; and

“(B) notwithstanding any general or specific provision of law, rule, or regulation of a State, no State may restrict the access of licensed health care providers or delegates of such providers from accessing that State’s prescription drug monitoring programs.

“(3) No State shall deny or revoke the license, registration, or certification of a licensed health care provider or delegate who otherwise meets that State’s qualifications for holding the license, registration, or certification on the basis that the licensed health care provider or delegate queried or received data, or attempted to query or receive data, from the national network of State-based prescription drug monitoring programs under this section.

“(b) Covered patients.—For purposes of this section, a covered patient is a patient who—

“(1) receives a prescription for a controlled substance; and

“(2) is not receiving palliative care or enrolled in hospice care.

“(c) Definitions.—In this section:

“(1) The term ‘controlled substance’ has the meaning given such term in section 102(6) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802(6)).

“(2) The term ‘delegate’ means a person or automated system accessing the national network of State-based prescription monitoring programs at the direction or under the supervision of a licensed health care provider.

“(3) The term ‘licensed health care provider’ means a health care provider employed by the Department who is licensed, certified, or registered within any State to fill or prescribe medications within the scope of his or her practic