H.R.5484 - 99th Congress (1985-1986): Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986
See Coverage Dates for Legislative Information and learn about other sources.

Array ( [actionDate] => 1986-09-30 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in Senate: Passed Senate in lieu of S. 2878 with an amendment by Yea-Nay Vote. 97-2. Record Vote No: 302. [externalActionCode] => 17000 [description] => Passed Senate )

Array ( [actionDate] => 1986-09-11 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in House: Passed House (Amended) by Yea-Nay Vote: 392 - 16 (Record Vote No: 378). [externalActionCode] => 8000 [description] => Passed House )

Here are the steps for Status of Legislation:

This bill has the status Became Law

There are 3 summaries for H.R.5484. House agreed to Senate amendment with amendment (10/17/1986) Passed House amended (09/11/1986) Introduced in House (09/08/1986) Bill summaries are authored by CRS

Shown Here:

House agreed to Senate amendment with amendment (10/17/1986)

(House agreed to Senate amendment with an amendment (Pursuant to H. Res. 597 ) (Inserted Text of H.R. 5729 ))

Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 - Title I: Anti-Drug Enforcement - Subtitle A: Narcotics Penalties and Enforcement Act of 1986 - Narcotics Penalties and Enforcement Act of 1986 - Amends the Controlled Substances Act to modify the threshold quantities and kinds of controlled substances which trigger revised enhanced penalties.

Grants Federal courts limited authority to impose a sentence below a statutory minimum.

Subtitle B: Drug Possession Penalty Act of 1986 - Drug Possession Penalty Act of 1986 - Establishes criminal penalties for simple possession of a controlled substance.

Subtitle C: Juvenile Drug Trafficking Act of 1986 - Juvenile Drug Trafficking Act of 1986 - Establishes increased criminal penalties for employing persons under 18 years of age in drug operations.

Establishes increased criminal penalties for the manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance in or near an elementary school, vocational school, secondary school, or college. (Current law establishes such enhanced penalties only for the distribution of a controlled substance in or near an elementary or secondary school.)

Subtitle D: Assets Forfeiture Amendments Act of 1986 - Department of Justice Assets Forfeiture Fund Amendments Act of 1986 - Permits the use of funds in the Department of Justice Assets Forfeiture Fund for certain necessary program-related expenses and for equipping vessels, vehicles, and aircraft for official use by certain Government agencies.

Subtitle E: Controlled Substance Analogue Enforcement Act of 1986 - Controlled Substance Analogue Enforcement Act of 1986 - Amends the Controlled Substances Act to provide that controlled substance analogues shall be treated as a schedule I substance.

Subtitle F: Continuing Drug Enterprise Act of 1986 - Continuing Drug Enterprises Act of 1986 - Amends the Controlled Substances Act to increase the criminal penalties for continuing criminal enterprise activities.

Subtitle G: Controlled Substances Import and Export Act Penalties Enhancement Act of 1986 - Controlled Substances Import and Export Act Penalties Enhancement Act of 1986 - Amends the Controlled Substances Import and Export Act to modify the quantity and kinds of controlled substances which trigger revised enhanced penalties.

Subtitle H: Money Laundering Control Act of 1986 - Money Laundering Control Act of 1986 - Amends the Federal criminal code to establish money laundering as a Federal offense. Establishes criminal and civil penalties for such violations.

Establishes forfeiture procedures for the offense of money laundering. Makes certain changes regarding recordkeeping and reporting requirements and the disclosure of information by financial institutions.

Subtitle I: Armed Career Criminals - Career Criminals Amendment Act of 1986 - Amends the Federal criminal code to provide increased criminal penalties for any person who transports firearms or ammunition in interstate or foreign commerce if such person has multiple convictions for serious drug offenses and/or violent felonies. (Current law provides increased penalties where such person had multiple convictions for robbery and burglary.)

Subtitle J: Authorization of Appropriations for Drug Law Enforcement - Authorizes additional appropriations for FY 1987 for the Department of Justice for drug law enforcement activities.

Subtitle K: State and Local Narcotics Control Assistance - State and Local Law Enforcement Assistance Act of 1986 - Amends the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to authorize the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to make grants to State and local law enforcement agencies for narcotics assistance.

Subtitle L: Study on the Use of Existing Federal Buildings as Prisons - Requires the Secretary of Defense to provide the Attorney General with a list identifying Federal buildings under the jurisdiction of the Department of Defense which could be used as detention facilties.

Subtitle M: Narcotics Traffickers Deportation Act - Amends the Immigration and Nationality Act to provide for the exclusion or deportation of any alien for violating any law or regulation relating to a controlled substance.

Subtitle N: Freedom of Information Act - Freedom of Information Reform Act of 1986 - Amends the Freedom of Information Act with respect to access to law enforcement information and fees.

Subtitle O: Prohibition on the Interstate Sale and Transportation of Drug Paraphernalia - Mail Order Drug Paraphernalia Control Act - Makes it a Federal criminal offense for any person to: (1) use the U.S. Postal Service or any private parcel service as part of a scheme to sell drug paraphernalia; (2) offer for sale and transportation in interstate or foreign commerce drug paraphernalia; or (3) import or export drug paraphernalia.

Subtitle P: Manufacturing Operations - Amends the Controlled Substances Act to make it illegal to knowingly open, maintain, manage, or control a place for manufacturing, distributing, or using controlled substance.

Subtitle Q: Controlled Substances Technical Amendments - Drug and Alcohol Dependent Offenders Treatment Act of 1986 - Grants the Director of the Administrative Office of the United States Court authority to contract with public and private agencies for the detection and treatment of alcohol-dependent and drug-dependent offenders.

Amends the Contract Services for Drug Dependent Federal Offenders Authorization Act to authorize appropriations for contracts for the supervision of released drug offenders.

Makes technical changes to the Tariff Act of 1930, the Controlled Substance Act, and the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970.

Subtitle R: Precursor and Essential Chemical Review - Directs the Attorney General to study and recommend methods to control the diversion of legitimate precursor and essential chemicals to the production of illegal drugs. Requires the Attorney General to report all findings to the Congress.

Subtitle S: White House Conference for a Drug Free America - White House Conference for a Drug Free America - Establishes the White House Conference for a Drug Free America.

Subtitle T: Common Carrier Operation Under the Influence of Alcohol and Drugs - Amends the Federal criminal code to provide criminal penalties for operating a common carrier under the influence of alcohol or drugs.

Subtitle U: Federal Drug Law Enforcement Agent Protection Act of 1986 - Federal Drug Law Enforcement Agent Protection Act of 1986 - Allows the Attorney General to pay for information concerning the killing or kidnapping of a Federal drug law enforcement agent.

Subtitle V: Death Penalty for Certain Offenses - Amends the Controlled Substances Act to establish procedures for the imposition of the death penalty for certain continuing criminal enterprise drug offenses.

Title II: International Narcotics Control - International Narcotics Control Act of 1986 - Amends the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 to increase the FY 1987 authorization for assistance for international narcotics control.

Provides that any aircraft made available to foreign countries for narcotics-related purposes shall be provided only on a lease or loan basis. Requires the Secretary of State to maintain detailed records on the use of such aircraft.

Earmarks a specified amount of the FY 1987 international narcotics control assistance for pilot and aircraft maintenance training for narcotics control activities.

Imposes certain restrictions on the provision of U.S. assistance to illicit drug producing countries and drug-transit countries.

Earmarks a specified amount of the FY 1987 international narcotics control assistance for research, development, and testing of safe and effective herbicides for use in the aerial eradication of coca.

Requires the Comptroller General to investigate and report to the Congress on the effectiveness of the international narcotics control assistance program.

Requires the President's annual report to the Congress on the international strategy to prevent cultivation and trafficking in narcotics to include a discussion of the extent to which each source country has cooperated with U.S. narcotics control efforts through the extradition or prosecution of drug traffickers and a description of the state of negotiations on updated extradition treaties.

Amends the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 to prohibit participation by any U.S. officer or employee in direct narcotics arrests in foreign countries. Provides exceptions to such prohibition.

Commends the decision of the Secretary of State to issue diplomatic passports to officials and employees of the Drug Enforcement Administration. Requires the Secretary to report to the Congress before changing such policy.

Requires the executive branch to establish expeditiously the information sharing system that will list all drug arrests of foreign nationals in the United States as required by the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1986 and 1987. Requires the executive branch to report to the Congress when the system is established.

Amends the International Security and Development Cooperation Act of 1985 to place conditions on assistance for Bolivia.

Requires the President to transmit biannual reports to the Congress on major illicit drug producing countries and major drug-transit countries. Requires restrictions on U.S. assistance to such countries.

Earmarks a specified amount of the FY 1987 administration of justice program authorization to be used to provide Colombia (and other countries in the region) assistance to protect officials who are targets of narcoterrorism attacks.

Expresses the sense of the Congress that a reward should be established for information leading to the arrest or conviction of Jorge Luis Ochoa Vasquez.

Urges the Secretary of State to increase efforts to negotiate with relevant countries to facilitiate the interdiction of vessels suspected of carrying illicit narcotics. Directs the President to take appropriate actions against countries which refuse to negotiate. Requires the Secretary to submit semiannual reports to the Congress identifying such countries.

Requires the President to direct that an updated threat assessment of narcotics trafficking from Africa be prepared.

Requires the Secretary of the Treasury to promote the development and implementation of a drug eradication program through multinational development bank assistance.

Urges the President to explore the possibility of engaging security-oriented organizations (such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization) in cooperative drug programs.

Declares congressional support for the United Nations General Assembly decision to convene an International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking.

Calls for the conduct of a study of the effectiveness of the United Nations drug-related declarations, conventions, and entities. Requires the President to report any recommendations which result from such study to the Congress.

Urges the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs to complete work on a new draft convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.

Urges the President to direct the Secretary of State to enter into negotiations with Mexico to create the Mexico-United States Intergovernmental Commission on Narcotics and Psychotropic Drug Abuse and Control.

Urges Pakistan to adopt and implement a comprehensive narcotics control program. Requires the Secretary of State to report to the Congress with respect to the adoption and implementation of such program.

Urges the President to instruct the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations to request that the problem of illicit drug production in Iran, Afghanistan, and Laos be raised at the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Drug Trafficking.

Increases FY 1987 authorization for drug education programs abroad. Requires the Director of the U.S. Information Agency and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development to include in their annual reports to the Congress a description of the drug education programs carried out by their respective agencies.

Urges the President to take certain actions regarding narcotics control in Mexico.

Title III: Interdiction - National Drug Interdiction Improvement Act of 1986 - Subtitle A: Department of Defense Drug Interdiction Assistance - Defense Drug Interdiction Assistance Act - Requires the Secretary of Defense to use specified funds to acquire certain equipment and aircraft for drug interdiction assistance activities of the Department of Defense. Requires the Secretary of Defense to make such aircraft available to the U.S. Customs Service.

Directs the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Transportation to provide for the assignment of Coast Guard personnel to naval vessels for law enforcement purposes.

Authorizes appropriations for the installation of 360-degree radar on Coast Guard surveillance aircraft.

Requires the National Drug Enforcement Policy Board to submit a report to specified congressional committees on the manner and extent to which the Department of Defense should be involved narcotics law enforcement activities.

Requires the Secretary of Defense to submit a report to specified congressional committees containing a discussion of: (1) the extent to which students enrolled in schools operated by the Department of Defense are receiving drug and substance abuse education; and (2) the extent to which such education should include peer counseling classes.

Amends the Uniform Code of Military Justice to include driving under the influence of drugs as an offense.

Allows the Department of Defense to provide certain assistance to civilian law enforcement personnel. Provides for congressional approval of such assistance and for review by the General Accounting Office.

Increases by one the number of Marine Corps officers authorized to be on active duty in grades above major general during any period that a Marine Corps officer is serving as Director of the Department of Defense Task Force on Drug Enforcement.

Allows the Secretary of Defense to use authorized funds to acquire equipment for the Civil Air Patrol for drug interdiction surveillance and reporting missions. Requires the Secretary of the Air Force to report to specified congressional committees on the use of such funds.

Subtitle B: Customs Enforcement - Customs Enforcement Act of 1986 - Part 1: Amendments to the Tariff Act of 1930 - Amends the Tariff Act of 1930 to establish certain entry and reporting requirements for aircraft, vessels, and vehicles arriving in the United States and the Virgin Islands. Sets forth penalties for violations of such requirements.

Makes aviation smuggling illegal. Establishes civil and criminal penalties for such violations.

Authorizes the issuance of search warrants for places suspected of containing: (1) merchandise brought into the United States unlawfully; (2) property subject to forfeiture under the customs laws; or (3) evidence of customs violations.

Authorizes the seizure and forfeiture of smuggled merchandise.

Provides that compensation for informers shall not exceed 25 percent of the amount recovered. (Current law requires that such compensation equal 25 percent of such recovery.)

Authorizes the Secretary of Transportation to require the production of foreign landing certificates to comply with international obligations.

Permits the Secretary to authorize customs officials to exchange information or documents with foreign customs or law enforcement agencies under certain circumstances.

Allows the Secretary, when authorized by treaty or executive agreement, to station customs officers in foreign countries to examine persons or merchandise prior to their arrival in the United States. Provides that merchandise seized at a foreign station may be transported to the United States for customs proceedings. Permits the stationing of foreign customs officers in the United States (if similar privileges are extended to the United States). Establishes penalties for making fraudulent statements to such foreign officials.

Part 2: Undercover Customs Operations - Sets forth certain requirements with regard to undercover investigative operations of the U.S. Customs Service, including: (1) the use of authorized funds; (2) the liquidation of corporate and business entities established or acquired as part of an undercover operation; (3) the deposit of proceeds from such operations; and (4) the conduct of financial audits of each undercover operations.

Part 3: Customs Service Authorizations and Forfeiture Fund - Amends the Customs Procedural Reform and Simplification Act of 1978 to authorize FY 1987 appropriations to the Department of the Treasury for the U.S. Customs Service.

Extends the authority of the Customs Forfeiture Fund through FY 1991. Makes such Fund available for: (1) purchases by the Customs Service of evidence of smuggling of controlled substances and violations of the currency and foreign transaction reporting requirements; (2) the equipping for law enforcement functions of any vessel, vehicle, or aircraft available for use by the Customs Service; (3) the reimbursement of private citizens for certain expenses; and (4) publicizing the availability of rewards.

Authorizes appropriations for the Fund.

Part 4: Miscellaneous Customs Amendments - Subjects recreational vessels to applicable customs regulations.

Allows any customs officer needing assistance in making an arrest, search, or seizure, to demand such assistance from any person. Subjects any person who refuses such assistance to criminal penalties.

Part 5: Amendments to the Controlled Substances Import and Export Act - Amends the Controlled Substances Import and Export Act to make it unlawful for any U.S. citizen on board any aircraft, or any person on board an aircraft owned by a U.S. citizen or registered in the United States, to manufacture or distribute or possess with intent to distribute, a controlled substance.

Subtitle C: Maritime Drug Law Enforcement Prosecution Improvements Act of 1986 - Maritime Drug Law Enforcement Prosecution Improvements Act of 1986 - Makes it unlawful for any person on board a vessel of the United States, or on board a vessel subject to the jurisdiction of the United States, to manufacture or distribute, or possess with intent to manufacture or distribute, a controlled substance.

Subtitle D: Coast Guard - Authorizes additional appropriations for the Coast Guard.

Subtitle E: United States-Bahamas Drug Interdiction Task Force - Authorizes the establishment of a United States-Bahamas Drug Interdiction Task Force. Authorizes appropriations for such Task Force and for the construction of a Coast Guard-Bahamas drug interdiction docking facility.

Subtitle F: Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence Centers - Authorizes appropriations to the U.S. Customs Service for the establishment of command, control, communications, and intelligence centers.

Subtitle G: Transportation Safety - Amends the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 to allow States to establish criminal penalties for certain activities involving aircraft registration certificates. Requires the operator of an aircraft to make the aircraft's certificate of registration available for inspection by any law enforcement officer.

Establishes criminal penalties for certain violations in connection with: (1) aircraft registration; and (2) the air transportation of controlled substances.

Requires any person having an ownership interest in any aircraft to report any transfer of ownership of such aircraft.

Directs the Secretary of Transportation to conduct a study to determine the relationship between the use of controlled substances and highway safety. Requires the Secretary to report the results of such study to the Congress.

Subtitle H: Department of Justice Funds for Drug Interdiction Operations in Hawaii - Authorizes additional appropriations to the Department of Justice for drug interdiction operations in Hawaii.

Subtitle I: Federal Communications Commission - Allows the Federal Communications Commission to revoke the license of any person found to have used such license to distriute controlled substances.

Title IV: Demand Reduction- Subtitle A: Treatment and Rehabilitation - Alcohol and Drug Abuse Amendments of 1986 - Amends the Public Health Service Act to authorize FY 1987 appropriations for certain alcohol abuse and drug abuse programs.

Designates the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration (ADAMHA) an agency of the Public Health service. Makes the following entities agencies of ADAMHA: (1) the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism; (2) the National Institute on Drug Abuse; and (3) the National Institute of Mental Health.

Makes various revisions to ADAMHA, including: (1) establishing the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Advisory Board; (2) establishing advisory councils for ADAMHA agencies; and (3) establishing an Office for Substance Abuse Prevention.

Requires the Secretary of Health and Human Services to: (1) establish an Alcohol and Drug Abuse Information Clearinghouse; and (2) make grants for prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation demonstration projects for high risk youth.

Extends the authorization of appropriations for certain alcohol and drug abuse research projects through FY 1987.

Requires the Director of the National Institute of Mental Health to develop and publish information respecting the causes and means of preventing suicide.

Amends the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to require the Secretary of Health and Human Services to establish requirements for quality factors for infant formulas.

Requires the Secretary to conduct a study on alkyl nitrites and report the results of such study to specified congressional committees.

Urges the Public Health Service to take certain actions regarding the health consequences of alcohol abuse.

Expresses the sense of the Congress that the entertainment and written media industry should refrain from producing material which glamorizes the use of illegal drugs and alcohol. Urges the categorization of films which promote alcohol abuse and drug use.

Directs the Secretary to establish guidelines for the care and treatment of research animals.

Requires the Secretary to arrange for an alcoholism and alcohol abuse treatment study.

Subtitle B: Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act of 1986 - Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act of 1986 - Part 1: Financial Assistance for Drug Abuse Education and Prevention Programs - Authorizes appropriations for FY 1987 through 1990 for State and local drug abuse education and prevention programs.

Part 2: State and Local Programs - Sets forth the kinds of State and local programs for which such grants are to be used.

Part 3: National Programs - Authorizes the Secretary to make grants to institutions of higher education or consortia for drug abuse education and prevention programs.

Directs the Secretary of Education to carry out Federal education and prevention activities on drug abuse.

Authorizes various programs for drug abuse education and prevention efforts for Indians and Hawaiian natives.

Part 4: General Provisions - Sets forth provisions for program participation of children and teachers from nonprofit private schools.

Subtitle C: Indians and Alaska Natives - Indian Alcohol and Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act of 1986 - Part I: General Provisions - Sets forth the purposes of this Act.

Part II: Coordination of Resources and Programs - Directs the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Health and Human Services to develop and enter into a Memorandum of Agreement to better coordinate the provision of alcohol and substance abuse treatment and prevention services for Indians and Alaska natives.

Allows the governing body of any Indian tribe to establish a Tribal Action Plan to coordinate available resources and programs in an effort to combat alcohol and drug abuse among its members.

Establishes within the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs an Office of Alcohol and Substance Abuse.

Requires the Secretary of the Interior to publish an alcohol and substance abuse newsletter to report on Indian alcohol and substance abuse projects and programs.

Part III: Indian Youth Programs - Requires the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Health and Human Services to review Federal, tribal, State, local, and private programs: (1) providing educational services to Indian children; (2) providing family and social services for Indians; and (3) relating to youth employment, recreation, cultural, and communtiy activities.

Requires the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs to develop and implement pilot programs in selected schools funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs which further the purposes and goals of this Act.

Allows Tribal Action Plans to make provisions for the establishment, funding, licensing, and operation of emergency shelters or half-way houses for Indian youth who are alcohol or substance abusers. Urges States to require its law enforcement officers to place any Indian youth arrested for alcohol or substance abuse in such shelter or half-way house. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1987 through 1989 for the construction, renovation, and operation of such shelters and half-way houses.

Directs the Secretary of the Interior to require the compilation of data relating to the number and types of child abuse and neglect cases seen and the type of assistance provided.

Part IV: Law Enforcement and Judicial Services - Requires the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Health and Human Services to review Federal, tribal, State, and local programs providing law enforcement or judicial services for Indian tribes.

Directs the Secretary of the Interior to: (1) provide assistance to the Papago Tribe of Arizona for the investigation and control of illegal narcotics traffic on the Papago Reservation; and (2) establish and implement a program for the eradication of marijuana cultivation within Indian country. Authorizes appropriations.

Part V: Bureau of Indian Affairs Law Enforcement - Increases the maximum sentence (from six months to one year) and fine (from $500 to $5,000) which a tribal court can impose for any offense.

Directs the Secretary of the Interior to establish a training program in the investigation and prosecution of offenses relating to illegal narcotics and in alcohol and substance abuse prevention and treatment for specified personnel.

Requires the Memorandum of Agreement to include a provision for the development and implementation of a procedure for the emergency medical assessment and treatment of every Indian youth arrested or detained for alcohol or substance abuse offenses.

Directs the Secretary of the Interior to construct or renovate and staff juvenile detention centers. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1987 through 1989.

Requires the Secretary of the Interior to: (1) provide for the development of a Model Indian Juvenile Code; and (2) compile data regarding cases involving Indians where alcohol or substance abuse is determined to be a contributing factor.

Part VI: Indian Alcohol and Substance Abuse Treatment and Rehabilitation - Requires the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Health and Human Services to review health service programs for Indians. Sets forth Indian Health Service responsibilities, which includes providing a comprehensive alcohol and substance abuse treatment program.

Requires the Secretary of the Interior to develop and implement a program for acute detoxification and treatment for Indian youth who are alcohol and substance abusers. Authorizes appropriations.

Directs the Secretary of Health and Human Services to make grants to the Navajo tribe to establish a demonstration program in Gallup, New Mexico, to rehabilitate adult Navajo Indians suffering from alcoholism or alcohol abuse. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1988 through 1990.

Requires the Secretary of Health and Human Services to compile data regarding Indian Health Service involvement in cases or incidents which involved alcohol or substance abuse.

Subtitle D: Miscellaneous Provisions - Amends the Domestic Volunteer Act of 1973 to authorize a special initiative (including action grants) to increase volunteerism in preventing drug abuse. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1987 through 1989.

Establishes the National Trust for Drug Free Youth.

Directs the Secretary of Labor to collect information on the incidence of drug abuse in the workplace.

Title V: United States Insular Areas and National Parks - Subtitle A: Programs in United States Insular Areas - United States Insular Areas Drug Abuse Act of 1986 - Requires the President to report annually to the Congress on the efforts of Federal agencies in preventing the illegal entry of controlled substances into the United States.

Authorizes law enforcement officers of the Governments of American Samoa and the Northern Mariana Islands to: (1) execute and serve warrants, subpoenas, and summons issued under the authority of the United States; (2) make arrests without warrants; and (3) make seizures of property to carry out the purposes of this Act, the Controlled Substances Import and Export Act, and other applicable narcotics laws. Authorizes the Attorney General and the Secretary of Health and Human Services to train such law enforcement officers and provide certain law enforcement equipment.

Authorizes the Attorney General and the Secretary of Health and Human Services to provide technical assistance and equipment to the Governments of Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands to enforce applicable drug abuse laws.

Authorizes appropriations to the Governments of Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands for specified purposes.

Subtitle B: National Park Service Program - National Park Police Drug Enforcement Supplemental Authority Act - Authorizes additional appropriations for National Park Police for personnel, training, equipment, and facilties.

Title VI: Federal Employee Substance Abuse Education and Treatment - Federal Employee Substance Abuse Education and Treatment Act of 1986 - Makes the Office of Personnel Management responsible for developing appropriate prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation programs and services for drug and alcohol abuse among Federal employees. Requires OPM to submit annual reports to the Congress regarding such programs.

Requires the Director of OPM to establish a Government-wide drug and alcohol abuse education program.

Requires the head of each executive agency to establish employee alcohol and drug abuse assistance programs. Requires OPM to establish program guidelines.

Directs the Secretary of Health and Human Services to conduct a substance abuse insurance coverage study and report the results of such study to the Congress.

Title VII: National Antidrug Reorganization and Coordination - National Antidrug Reorganization and Coordination Act - Requires the President to submit recommendations to the Congress for legislation to reorganize the executive branch to more effectively combat drug traffic and abuse.

Title VIII: President's Media Commission on Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention - President's Media Commission on Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention Act - Establishes the President's Media Commission on Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention. Requires the Commission to transmit annual reports on its activities to the President and the Congress.

Title IX: Denial of Trade Benefits to Uncooperative Major Drug Producing or Drug-Transit Countries - Narcotics Control Trade Act - Denies the products of every major drug producing and drug-transit country most-favored-nation treatment until the President determines that significant progress has been made in remedying those policies.

Title X: Ballistic Knife Prohibition - Ballistic Knife Prohibition Act of 1986 - Amends the Federal criminal code to prohibit the possession, manufacture, sale, importation, and mailing of ballistic knives (knives with a detachable blade that are propelled by a spring-operated mechanism).

Title XI: Homeless Eligibility Clarification Act - Homeless Eligibility Clarification Act - Subtitle A: Emergency Food for the Homeless - Amends the Food Stamp Act of 1977 to include food served to homeless individuals within the definition of food. Revises the definition of household.

Subtitle B: Job Training for the Homeless - Amends the Job Training Partnership Act to make the homeless eligible for job training programs.

Subtitle C: Entitlements Eligibility - Directs the Secretary of Health and Human Services to develop a system under which individuals can apply for supplemental security income benefits (SSI) prior to their discharge or release from public institutions.

Provides that veterans' benefits may not be denied an applicant on the basis that the applicant is homeless.

Title XII: Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986 - Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986 - Limits the number of driver's licenses any person who operates a commercial vehicle can have at any time to one. Requires operators of commercial vehicles to report out-of-State traffic violations to the license-issuing State and employer.

Requires an employee who loses the right to operate a motor vehicle to report such loss to the employer. Prohibits an employer from permitting an employee to operate a commercial vehicle during any period where the employee: (1) has a suspended license; or (2) has more than one driver's license.

Directs the Secretary of Transportation to establish minimum Federal standards for operators of commercial vehicles.

Requires the Secretary to establish a clearinghouse and depository of information pertaining to the licensing and identification of operators of commercial motor vehicles.

Lists offenses which result in disqualifying a person from operating a commercial motor vehicle.

Establishes a grant program for States for issuing classified driver's licenses. Sets forth grant requirements. Provides for the withholding of State highway funds for not complying with such regulations.

Establishes civil and criminal penalties for certain violations of the Commercial Vehicle Safety Act.

Directs the Secretary to conduct a review of regulations pertaining to the use of alcohol by operators of commercial motor vehicles.

Requires the Secretary to revise certain regulations to require trucks and truck tractors manufactured after July 24, 1980, to have brakes operating on all wheels.

Directs the Secretary to conduct a demonstration project to assess the benefits of continuous use of unarmed radar equipment on highway safety.

Title XIII: Cyanide Wrongful Use - Requires the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to conduct a study of the manufacturing and distribution process of cyanide.

Title XIV: Senate Policy Regarding Funding - Expresses the sense of the Senate that amounts authorized to carry out the provisions of this Act should be provided as new budget authority for FY 1987.

Title XV: National Forest System Drug Control - National Forest System Drug Control Act of 1986 - Grants certain specially trained officers and employees of the Forest System special law enforcement powers.

Amends the Controlled Substances Act to provide criminal penalties for any person who assembles, maintains, or places a boobytrap on Federal property where a controlled substance is being manufactured, distributed, or dispensed.