Congressional Record
Formatting necessary for an accurate reading of this text may be shown by tags (e.g., <DELETED> or <BOLD>) or may be missing from this TXT display. For complete and accurate display of this text, see the PDF.

[Pages S1923-S2012] From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov] HEALTH CARE AND EDUCATION RECONCILIATION ACT OF 2010 The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Under the previous order, the Senate will resume consideration of H.R. 4872, which the clerk will report. The assistant legislative clerk read as follows: A bill (H.R. 4872) to provide for reconciliation pursuant to Title II of the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2010, S. Con. Res. 13. Pending: Gregg-Coburn modified amendment No. 3567, to prevent Medicare from being used for new entitlements and to use Medicare savings to save Medicare. McCain amendment No. 3570, to eliminate the sweetheart deals for Tennessee, Hawaii, Louisiana, Montana, Connecticut, and frontier States. Crapo motion to commit the bill to the Committee on Finance, with instructions. Enzi motion to commit the bill to the Committee on Finance, with instructions. Barrasso amendment No. 3582, to ensure that Americans can keep the coverage they have by keeping premiums affordable. Grassley-Roberts amendment No. 3564, to make sure the President, Cabinet members, all White House senior staff and congressional committee and leadership staff are purchasing health insurance through the health insurance exchanges established by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Mr. REID. Mr. President, would the Chair report how much time is left on general debate on the bill. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The majority has 7 hours 32 minutes and the minority has 8 hours 30 minutes. Mr. REID. Mr. President, I yield back all time remaining on the bill on the majority's side. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The leader has that right. The time is yielded back. The Senator from Tennessee is recognized. Motion to Commit Mr. ALEXANDER. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to temporarily [[Page S1924]] set aside the pending motion so that I may offer a motion to commit, which is at the desk. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, it is so ordered. The clerk will report the motion. The assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Tennessee [Mr. Alexander] moves to commit the bill H.R. 4872 to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate with instructions to report the same back to the Senate within 1 day with changes to reduce the interest paid by student borrowers by 1.5 percentage points and to add an offset. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator from Montana. Mr. BAUCUS. Mr. President, I wonder if the Senator from Tennessee would agree to modify his request so that the earlier amendments be set aside until a time designated by the leaders and this motion then be taken up at a time to be decided by the leaders, which is the customary practice we have been utilizing with previous amendments. Mr. ALEXANDER. Mr. President, I wonder if the Senator from Montana would permit me to consider that request and then respond to him within a few minutes. Mr. BAUCUS. The Senator would withdraw the request and make the request later? Mr. ALEXANDER. If I may consult with Senator Gregg, then respond. If you will make the request later, I would be grateful. Mr. BAUCUS. OK. Mr. ALEXANDER. Thank you very much. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator from Tennessee is recognized. Mr. ALEXANDER. Mr. President, 19 million American families will be interested in this motion because it will reduce the cost of student loans which 19 million Americans have. This is the season of the year when a great many students have been admitted to a college or a community college and are making plans and looking for where they are going to get their money. This motion is aimed at reducing the interest rate on 19 million student loans from 6.8 percent to 5.3 percent. For the average student loan debt of about $25,000, it would save that student $1,700 or $1,800 over their ten-year loan. More specifically, it would not only help the student, but it would prevent the Federal Government from overcharging 19 million American college students on their student loans to help pay for the health care bill and other government programs. One may say: Wait a minute, I thought we were debating the health care bill. How did we get to student loans? That is a very good question because it just came up over the weekend. Of course, we have talked about student loans. There have been proposals, but there have been no hearings in the Senate, no consideration in the Senate committee of which I am a member. Yet over the weekend, the Democratic majority said: Well, look, while we are at it, let's have another Washington takeover. Let's take over the Federal student loan program. Let's take a program which is working very well, in which 15 million American students have voted with their feet to say they would prefer to get a regular student loan backed by the government, which they get at their college campuses, through their community bank, through a nonprofit institution. Even though they do have an option for a government loan, three out of four students have said they prefer the student loan through the private lender. Yet over the weekend, the Democratic majority has said: While we are at it, let's take over the Federal student loan program. That means that starting July 1, students have no choice. They go to the Federal Government to get their student loan, all 19 million of them, which is a new experience for 15 of the 19 million. The way they are going to do it--and this is all going to be set up in a very short period of time--is they are now going to have to go to four Federal call centers. So instead of going to their local lender or to their nonprofit institution, that can help them with their application form and see what their options are and encourage them as they make their plans for college, welcome to the new government loan program. They have no choice. That is what they are going to do. What are the other aspects of this? Well, other than denying choice to 19 million students on more than 2,000 campuses who prefer the Federal loan program, the Federal Government is going to have to borrow another $\1/2\ trillion in order to make these loans. Let's think about this for a moment. What is the No. 1 issue that most Americans worry about today? It is that we have too much debt. So what did this weekend takeover do? It adds about $\1/2\ trillion to the Federal debt in order to make student loans, at the rate of about $90 billion or $100 billion a year for 4 or 5 years. So we take away choice, we add to the debt, and we also put 31,000 people out of their jobs. These are a lot of loans, and so we have a lot of people in these organizations, such as Edsouth in my State, a nonprofit organization that helps students get their loans. So all these lenders are out of business and we have one big bank--the Federal Government. The Education Secretary is the new banker of the year. He is a very good Education Secretary, but I don't know how good a banker he is going to be. But here is the rub, and this is what my motion is about. The Federal Government is going to be borrowing money at 2.8 percent and loaning it to students at 6.8 percent and taking the difference and spending it on new government programs, including the health care bill. So we are going to be overcharging 19 million students to help pay for the health care bill. And, according to the most recent Congressional Budget Office estimates, about $8.7 billion of the overcharged money is going to go to pay for the health care bill. My friends on the other side have already spent the money, of course. They have announced to everybody that we are going to spend it on this and on that and on this, but what they do not tell you is, where they get the money. Where they get the money is overcharging students-- overcharging students. These aren't Wall Street financiers we are overcharging. This might be a single mom going to a community college in Tennessee who has a job but who wants a better job and so she borrows some money to go to the community college and the Federal Government is going to overcharge her to pay for some government program. She might not like that. In fact, I think there will be about 19 million student loan holders across the country who will go to school next year and say: Wait a minute here. You mean you are overcharging me on my student loan to pay for this health care bill and to pay for other government programs? The answer will be: Yes, that is what we are doing, unless my colleagues support this motion. The estimate by our friends on the other side is that their Federal takeover of the Federal student loan enterprise will save $61 billion. If they are correct, let's give it to the students. Let's reduce their interest rate. I mean, $1,700 or $1,800 per student in interest over 10 years is the average amount of savings, and that is a lot of money. It may not seem like a lot of money to Congressmen and Senators in Washington, but to the single mom going to the community college who is borrowing the money to go to school in order to get a better job, $1,700 or $1,800 is a lot of money. So in addition to the higher premium numbers, the higher taxes, the Medicare cuts, and the new cost to States, we are going to be overcharging on student loans. Let me use a specific example from Tennessee, if I may. I was at the University of Tennessee earlier this week. This is the University of which I used to be president. The University of Tennessee has 30,000 students, and 37 percent of them--or 11,251--have Federal private loans today. The average student debt is about $20,000. After July 1, all 11,000 students at the University of Tennessee, with these Federal loans from private lenders, are going to have to switch to the government loans, and the government is going to overcharge 11,000 students who go to the University of Tennessee at Knoxville and use that overcharged money to pay for new government programs, including the health care bill. [[Page S1925]] They are going to do the same thing to the University of Tennessee at Martin. There they choose to use the private loan program. They like it better than the government loan program. They think it is more convenient for the students. They have chosen--3,600 students at UT Martin--have chosen Federal private loans. They are going to be out of those loans by July 1. They are going to have government loans, and the government is going to overcharge them to help pay for the health care program. Maryville College--I will be there Saturday night to help dedicate their arts center. There, 824 students have Federal loans today. They are going to have government loans. They are going to switch from private to government loans. They will have no choice after July 1. I know a lot of these students. They come from modest families, in most cases. They are not going to be very happy to learn that when they switch to a government loan after July 1, and if they have an average- size loan, which is about $25,000, that over 10 years they are going to pay $1,700 or $1,800 to help pay for the health care program or other new government programs. In Carson-Newman College, it is 1,259 students. In East Tennessee State University, it is 8,187 students. In all of Tennessee, it is 200,000 students who have student loans who are going to be overcharged an average of $1,700 or $1,800 a year to help pay for the health care program or some other government program, and this amendment would say: No, we are not. If we are going to take over the student loan program, at least we are not going to overcharge the students and use it for the health care program. We are going to give the money back to the students. The point of my amendment is very simple. We are going to reduce the interest rate we charge on 19 million student loans from 6.8 percent to 5.3 percent and let the students have the savings instead of letting the government have the savings. That is what the other side has not told people about the student loans. If we had an ample opportunity to debate this in the Senate, if we had a committee hearing on it, if we had taken it through the regular process, maybe we could have pointed this out, but no, we do it over the weekend, put it in the House bill, send it over here, jam it through with great breast beating and protestations: Look what we have done for the country. I am accustomed to that. I used to be a Governor. I remember lots of Members of Congress who would say I did a great thing in Washington and then send the bill to me to pay. And then, as Governor--in this case the health care bill will do the same thing. It will send to the Governors and to the States new costs. Our Governor estimates it is $1.1 billion over 5 years, to $1.5 billion. That is about $300 million a year new costs that State taxpayers will have to pay. As the Medicaid cost goes up, we will get the second blow to the students of Tennessee because either the State is going to have to reduce funding for public higher education--which I believe this health care bill will help permanently damage--or they are going to have to raise taxes, or they are going to have to raise tuition, or they are going to have to do all three. If I am a student at Maryville College, Carson-Newman, or the University of Tennessee, first this health care bill is going to overcharge me on my student loan to help pay for it; second, it is going to send such big new costs to the government that the Governor is going to have to reduce funding to my college or university and my tuition is going to go up. All those students in California who are protesting a 34-percent increase in tuition probably do not realize the reason for that happening. The main reason is that over the years the Federal Government has so regulated the Medicaid program that the States pay about a third of, that the State budgets have grown and grown and the Governors, such as Governor Schwarzenegger in California, have had no choice except to cut, knowing that when you get down through the budget process you have had no choice except to cut other programs. Governors know when you get down through the budget process in the State, it usually comes down to Medicaid or higher education. So a great university such as the University of California is on its knees, and if it even hoped to keep its quality, it raises tuition 34 percent. My amendment will not help that problem. The law the President signed yesterday already will transfer to States these huge new costs that are going to permanently damage higher education and raise tuition. But what my amendment will do is say we are not going to overcharge 200,000 students in Tennessee for their student loans and use $8.7 billion to help pay for health care. Sometimes I think the motto of the Obama administration is: If you can find it in the Yellow Pages, the government ought to be doing it. This is breathtaking. While we are taking over cars, banks, insurance companies, while we are taking over more of health care, we will also take over the student loan program, add $\1/2\ trillion to the Federal debt, overcharge 19 million students, cause 31,000 people to lose their jobs and say ``all in a day's work.'' That is what happened last weekend. Over the weekend that is the decision they made. Then over here bragging about how much we are going to do for everybody. We are going to do a little more for everybody if we have a chance to vote on this amendment because when we go home we will have a chance to say either I cut the interest rate on your student loan from 6.8 to 5.3 percent and give you the savings, or I voted to overcharge you $1,700 or $1,800 a year and give the money to the government to help pay for the health care bill. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to have printed in the Record following my remarks a few communications I received from Tennessee. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, it is ordered. (See exhibit 1.) Mr. ALEXANDER. Here is a letter from Vanderbilt University to Congressman Cooper from the Chancellor which says: Our overarching concern with [this proposal] is that the legislation forces institutions, including Vanderbilt, to switch to direct lending. Here is a distinguished university, one of the top research universities in the world. They have chosen--they believe it is best for their students and for their campus to use the private banks and non-profits. We know better, of course, than Vanderbilt University, what is best for the campus and best for the students. We say no, July 1, only the government. In their letter they continue: Vanderbilt opposes the elimination of the FFEL program. We encourage Congress to carefully study the many alternate proposals. . . . In addition to our concerns about the elimination of choice, competition, and the high level of services, products and debt management we believe would come with this switch, we are very concerned that the proposed timeframe for this mandated conversion is unreasonable. So Vanderbilt opposes that. So does the Baptist College of Health Sciences, so does Maryville College, so does the Middle Tennessee School of Anesthesia, so does Dyersburg State Community College. I ask to have these remarks printed in the Record and an article I wrote in the Washington Post that was published on Sunday, March 7, about the student loan takeover. Exhibit 1 Vanderbilt University, September 10, 2009. Hon. Jim Cooper, Longworth House Office Building, Washington, DC. Dear Congressman Cooper: The House of Representatives will soon consider H.R. 3221, the Student Aid and Fiscal Responsibility Act which would fundamentally restructure the federal student aid system and funnel the projected savings into a variety of higher education and K-12 programs as well as deficit reduction. While Vanderbilt supports efforts to restructure and expand federal student aid programs, we have serious reservations about this legislation. As you know, one proposed change has to do with the Direct Loan (DL) program, in which the government acts as the lender, and the Federal Family Education Loan (FFEL) program, in which lending institutions provide loans to students. Vanderbilt has a long and successful history of participation in the FFEL program which has provided our students with superior loan products, service, and choice in their federal loans for many years. Earlier this year, the administration proposed eliminating the FFEL program, requiring all institutions to participate in DL and using the projected $87 billion in savings over 10 years from this switch to fund a mandatory Pell Grant and expand the Perkins [[Page S1926]] Loan program. [Other estimates have put the ten-year savings figure at closer to $47 billion.] H.R. 3221 seeks to implement those proposals. Unfortunately, the legislation has attracted a host of other education-related provisions which, while perhaps meritorious in their own right, we believe should not be attached to federal student aid legislation. We applaud and strongly support a number of provisions of H.R. 3221: Modest increases to Pell Grants. Any increase in Pell Grants is deeply appreciated and will benefit undergraduate students. Although the bill does not create the mandatory Pell Grant proposed by the administration, it calls for $40 billion of the projected savings to be invested in the Pell Grant program, moving it toward a $6,900 maximum grant by 2019. Converts Stafford Loan interest rates from fixed to variable. The bill provides $3.25 billion to change the fixed interest rates on subsidized loans to a variable rate capped at 6.8 percent. Simplifies the FAFSA. We support reasonable efforts included in the bill to simplify the FAFSA for federal student aid programs. Eliminating the FFEL Program Our overarching concern with H.R. 3221 is that the legislation forces institutions, including Vanderbilt, to switch to Direct Lending. Of additional concern is the fact that the proposed legislation does not then direct all of the savings from this federal mandate back into federal aid programs. Vanderbilt opposes the elimination of the FFEL program. We encourage Congress to carefully study the many alternate proposals to a mandatory conversion to DL. In addition to our concerns about the elimination of choice, competition, and the high level of services, products and debt management that we believe would come with this switch, we are very concerned that the proposed timeframe for this mandated conversion is unreasonable. Institutions will need sufficient time to make changes to their IT systems and update their printed and on-line recruitment materials. Completing this by the proposed July 1, 2010 deadline is simply not feasible. In fact, Vanderbilt has already printed many of its recruitment materials and launched its 2010-2011 admissions and financial aid efforts. We would advise that, if a mandated conversion to DL is implemented, the earliest effective date be July 1, 2011. A New Perkins Loan Program The bill restructures the Perkins Loan program into essentially a second DL program that is campus-based, with an additional $5 billion. The legislation proposes a complex institutional allocation formula based on holding past participants, such as Vanderbilt, harmless, while significantly expanding participation based on low tuition and improved Pell recipient graduation rates. We believe that a Perkins program allocation formula should be based on the aggregate need of an institution's students relative to the aggregate need of all students at institutions participating in the program nationally, subject to and including the hold harmless provisions. While Vanderbilt supports expanding participation in the Perkins Loan program as well as the provisions that would hold harmless existing participants, we are troubled by proposals to eliminate the in-school interest subsidy and loan forgiveness programs. These features have made Perkins Loans uniquely attractive for many of our students. Vanderbilt also opposes proposals to require institutions to pay the accrued interest while students are still enrolled in school. This would impose significant costs on our financial aid budget and could jeopardize our participation in the program. H.R. 3221 is also not clear as to whether institutional matching funds will be required or how that determination would be made. Creates Access, Completion, and Persistence Grant Programs Included in the bill is $3 billion for the College Access Challenge Grant program. These funds would be allocated primarily to states and guaranty agencies with a small portion retained for a national competition. While Vanderbilt supports the goals of this program, and is proud of our 95 percent freshman retention and 92 percent six-year graduation rates, we are concerned that diverting up to 75 percent of the funding to the states could severely restrict the ability of private institutions to compete for the funding and could inappropriately increase state oversight of private institutions. We also believe that any savings generated from the switch to DL should remain in the existing federal student aid programs. In addition to these, there are several other provisions of the legislation that are troubling to us: Family Asset Cap. Students with family assets of more than $150,000 would be ineligible for any need-based federal aid. While the value of a family's house, farm, business, or employee pension benefit plan would be excluded, we believe this cap should be increased to at least $250,000, geographic factors should be applied, and an option established for financial aid administrators to be able to use their professional judgment such that students and parents in unique circumstances can be held harmless by this provision. Beyond Student Aid. H.R. 3221 goes far beyond federal student aid to include funding for other higher education programs as well as K-12 school construction and early childhood education. We believe that all savings generated from the student aid programs should remain in these programs. These initiatives, while potentially meritorious, should be funded through avenues other than student aid programs' savings. H.R. 3221 truly is a mixed hag. While Vanderbilt supports the significant new investment in the Pell Grant program, we are concerned that allocations to other initiatives have significantly reduced the possible level of support for the Pell Grant program. We remain strongly opposed to the elimination of the FFEL program. And, although it could bring low-cost Perkins Loans to millions of new students, we are troubled by proposals to eliminate the in-school interest subsidy and other changes to that program. Vanderbilt remains committed to the federal student aid programs, which provide a foundation to our aid packages for both undergraduate and graduate students. We look forward to continuing to work with you to ensure that all capable and eligible students, regardless of financial circumstances, are able to access and complete post-secondary education. If you have any questions or if I can provide any additional information, please let me know. Sincerely, Christina D. West, Director of Federal Relations. ____ Tennessee Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators, November 25, 2009. Hon. Lamar Alexander, U.S. Senate, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Washington, DC. Dear Senator Alexander: On behalf of the Executive Board of the Tennessee Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators (TASFAA), I want to communicate to you our collective concerns regarding the Federal Student Loan Program (Stafford and PLUS). TASFAA represents financial aid officers from 106 postsecondary institutions in Tennessee. The Tennessee postsecondary institutions serve several thousand students, many who are student loan borrowers. While our membership and schools are located within Tennessee, we have students from every state in the Union. We seek your support of our requests, which are made on behalf of the students and parents we serve. These students and parents have been well served by not only the institutions and individual professionals, but by the Federal Direct Lending Program (FDSLP) through the Department of Education and by private sector lenders within the Federal Family Education Loan Program (FFELP) also. Importantly, our students and parents have benefitted by the opportunity to seek out lenders who offer loans with savings and service that aid the borrowers throughout repayment. TASFAA is an advocate for choice within the respective loan programs. As President Obama stated in his address to a Joint Session of Congress, ``Consumers do better when there is choice and competition.'' We also want to focus on the timing of all schools currently participating in the FFELP having to switch to the Federal Direct Student Loan Program should the Senate version of H.R. 3221 be enacted. Recent information from the Department of Education showed that 1,990 of the 5,455 schools that participate in federal student loan programs are currently participating in the Direct Loan Program. Therefore, 3,465 colleges and universities across the country, that serve millions of students, are not yet participating in the FDSLP. Many elected officials have expressed their concerns regarding the timing of such a transition. Most Tennessee institutions will begin awarding financial aid packages to traditional students in early spring. In addition to the traditional calendar, some institutions have non-traditional students in year-round programs who borrow student loans throughout the year in what is known as the Borrower-Based Academic Year (BBAY). For these students, loans will be packaged in approximately four weeks, and the precarious status of the legislation may greatly harm these student borrowers. The Secretary's assistant has noted it will take 3-4 months for schools to convert their programs. Due to the issues related to the transition to a new program (shortage of staff members, new software systems, lack of training, financial issues at small schools, etc.), we ask that you consider the dilemma that these students face by the timing of such an action and at the very least, delay the implementation of full conversion to FDSLP to July 1, 2011. If you choose to support the Senate version of H.R. 3221 and move forward with full conversion to FDSLP but allow for the delayed implementation date, we implore you to support S. 2796 to extend the Ensuring Continued Access to Student Loans Act (ECASLA). ECASLA has assured that students have been able to obtain the loan(s) necessary to ensure their educational goals and dreams. This action will ensure that every educational loan borrower will be able to continue to secure the respective loan with no interrupted service. As of the date of this letter, the Senate committee of jurisdiction has not acted on this proposed legislation, as well as the entire Senate or any conferees. This is of major concern to us as the timing of the possible conversion to, and implementation of, 100 percent FDSLP is further delayed. The Senate had noted it would vote on H.R. 3221 by [[Page S1927]] October 15, 2009, but as of the date of this letter, proposed legislation still has not reached the Senate for a vote. With all of the above taken into consideration, the Executive Board of TASFAA, on behalf of our entire membership, urges you to support ``choice and competition.'' But if not, we ask you to implement a reasonable timeframe for transition. Sincerely, Marian Malone Huffman, President, TASFAA. ____ Baptist College of Health Sciences, Memphis, TN, November 24, 2009. Members of Congress: I ask that you support H.R. 4103 and S. 2796 to ensure uninterrupted FFELP funding of Federal Student Loans for students and parents attending colleges and universities across the country. I have worked in the student financial aid profession since 1982, ALWAYS at FFELP schools. In my many years of experience, I have witnessed tens of thousands of students being well served by the FFELP system. The idea of the Federal Direct Student Loan Programs certainly contributed to needed improvements to FFELP, and the two programs have served to keep each other ``on their toes.'' To shift now to a federal monopoly in the student loan business could prove to be a monumental mistake. Schools have had plenty of time to choose between FFELP and Direct Lending. It is clear that FFELP works better for some schools and Direct Lending for other schools. And most importantly, BOTH programs do a good job of serving needy students attend college. Let's please keep it that way. Sincerely, Janet Bonney-Baker, Financial Aid Supervisor, Baptist College of Health Sciences. ____ Office of Financial Aid, Dyersburg State Community College Dyersburg, TN, November 25, 2009 As a student financial aid administrator for over thirty- five years, I have concerns regarding students receiving needed funds to attend post-secondary institutions in the 2010-2011 academic year. Regardless of our stance on direct lending, we all have one common bond, and that is helping the students we serve. All schools are planning for the 2010-2011 academic year, and we feel trapped. I implore you to consider extending the Ensuring Continued Access to Student Loans Act (ECASLA) as quickly as possible, so that the students in this country will not suffer with the uncertainties accompanying delays in implementation of new programs. Timing is critical for higher education in this country. Please consider choice as the loan option for the students of this country. Competition and choice is a foundation of our economy. As President Obama stated in his address to a Joint Session of Congress, ``consumers do better when there is choice and competition''. The Secretary's assistant has noted that it will take 3-4 months for schools to convert their programs. Due to the issues related to the transition to a new program (shortage of staff members, new software systems, lack of training, financial issues at small schools, etc.), please consider delaying the implementation of full conversion of the Federal Direct Student Loan Program to July 1, 2011, at the earliest which will provide us with a reasonable timeframe for transition, if choice is not an option for us. Sincerely, Sandra Rockett, Director of Financial Aid. ____ Middle Tennessee School of Anesthesia, November 24, 2009. Members of Congress: I ask you to support H.R. 4103 and S. 2796 to ensure uninterrupted FFELP funding of Federal Student Loans for students and parents attending colleges and universities across the country. I am the sole worker in Financial Aid at Middle Tennessee School of Anesthesia, (MTSA) and we like the FFELP program. The students here at MTSA DO NOT want to use Direct Lending. The decision to end the FFELP program takes away the right to choose. The advent of the Federal Direct Student Loan Programs certainly contributed to needed improvements to FFELP, and the two programs have served to keep each other ``on their toes.'' To shift now to a federal monopoly in the student loan business could prove to be a monumental mistake. Having the ability to use both programs gives the Financial Aid Industry a healthy competition. Schools should have the ability to talk to different lenders and choose between FFELP and Direct Lending. It is clear that FFELP works better for some schools and Direct Lending for other schools. And most importantly, BOTH programs do a good job of serving needy students attending college. Sincerely, M. Joanna Hayes Dickens, Financial Aid Coordinator. ____ Rhodes College, Financial Aid Office, Memphis, TN, December 8, 2009. Senator Lamar Alexander, Dirksen Senate Office Building, District of Columbia. Dear Senator Alexander, I write to urge you to vote in favor of extending the Ensuring Continued Access to Student Loans Act, H.R. 4103 and S. 2796. As a financial aid professional, I know firsthand the importance of these funds in meeting students' educational expenses. I believe that competition breeds excellence and I am in favor of keeping both the FFEL and Direct programs in place. To eliminate FFEL especially during this particular time in history, would be a mistake that would cost institutions and students time and money that we simply can't afford. An interruption in the delivery of these funds would create a hardship for many students and make the neediest among them unable to attend college. This bill will ensure that sufficient funds will be available for students in the 2010- 2011 academic year. Please Vote YES to H.R. 4103 and S. 2796! Thank you for your understanding and support of our students! Most Sincerely, Ashley Bianchi, Acting Director of Financial Aid. ____ And Now for Students, Big Lender (By Lamar Alexander) While health-care reform occupies the spotlight, the Obama administration is pushing for another Washington takeover-- this time of the student loan system. Last month, U.S. Education Secretary Arne Duncan made the administration's latest pitch on this page. Here is what the administration and congressional Democrats have told us about this latest attempt: Starting in July, all 19 million students who want government-backed loans will line up at offices designated by the U.S. Education Department. Gone will be the days when students and their colleges picked the lender that best fit their needs; instead, a federal bureaucrat will make that choice for every student in America based on still-unclear guidelines. They say that this will save taxpayers up to $87 billion in subsidies that now go to ``greedy'' banks. In gleeful anticipation, members of Congress have lined up to spend those billions on Pell Grants and almost a dozen other programs. Banks are punished. Students are helped. Members of Congress look good. Here is what they haven't told us: The Education Department will borrow money at 2.8 percent from the Treasury, lend it to you at 6.8 percent and spend the difference on new programs. So you'll work longer to pay off your student loan to help pay for someone else's education--and to help your U.S. representative's reelection. And there are some other things the government should tell you: The estimated $87 billion in savings isn't real. According to a July 2009 letter from the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) to Sen. Judd Gregg (R-N.H.), the savings are closer to $47 billion including administration costs, if we use the same ``scoring'' (i.e., cost analysis) method that Congress required the CBO to use when it scored the Troubled Asset Relief Program last year because the method would more accurately calculate the cost to taxpayers. Finally, the government should disclose that getting your student loan will become about as enjoyable as going to the Department of Motor Vehicles. Today, roughly 2,000 lenders offer government-backed student loans on more than 4,000 campuses. One lender, Edsouth, offers Tennessee students college and career counselors, financial-aid training, and college-admissions assistance; performs hundreds of presentations at Tennessee schools; and works with 12,000 Tennessee students to improve their understanding of the college-admissions and financial- aid process. Nonprofit lenders such as Edsouth use the revenue generated under the student-loan system to operate and provide these valuable benefits--but of course, these services cost money. If--under this latest Washington takeover--Edsouth and other nonprofit lenders are prevented from making the number of loans they make today, they will no longer be able to provide these services, depriving students of real choices in lending. The student loan ``Banker of the Year'' will be the only student loan banker left calling the shots; the education secretary in Washington. Imagine trying to get all Edsouth's services from a federal call center. I was education secretary for President George H.W. Bush when, in 1991, Congress offered students a choice for borrow from a local lender or the Education Department. In 2008, 15 million students voted with their feet and chose nongovernment lenders--and only 4 million students chose to get their loans from Washington. Congress has reduced subsidies paid to lenders twice in the past four years, investing the savings in Pell Grants and other programs. But if there really is $47 billion in savings to be found, Congress should return it to students as lower interest rates, not trick students by overcharging them so Washington can create more government programs. Seven-eighths of students who applied for federal aid using the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) had an average loan debt of $24,651. Assuming a standard 10-year repayment at 6.8 percent, those students would pay roughly $9,400 in interest. If we really want to have students money, why not just reduce the interest rate by 1.5 percentage points, to 5.3 percent, saving students $2,240 in interest? If this Washington takeover happens, I propose that all 19 million-plus student loans made by the government carry this warning label: ``Beware: Your federal government is overcharging you so your representative can [[Page S1928]] take credit for starting new government programs. Enjoy the extra hours you work to pay off your student loan.'' The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator from New Hampshire is recognized. Mr. GREGG. I am recognized, correct? The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. That is correct. Mr. GREGG. I ask unanimous consent at this time to withdraw the amendment of the Senator from--on behalf of the Senator from Tennessee, I ask to withdraw his amendment. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Is there objection? Without objection, the amendment is withdrawn. Mr. BAUCUS. Mr. President, reserving the right to object. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator from Montana. Mr. BAUCUS. Mr. President, I regret, I object. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Objection is heard. The Senator from Tennessee is recognized. Mr. ALEXANDER. Mr. President, I withdraw my motion. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The motion is withdrawn. The Senator from New Hampshire is recognized. Mr. GREGG. Mr. President, at this time I yield such time as he may take off the bill to Senator Alexander to discuss his amendment, which he is not offering at this time, while retaining the right to the floor. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator from Tennessee. Is there objection? Mr. BAUCUS. Mr. President, reserving the right to object, what is the parliamentary situation at the moment? The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. There is a Grassley amendment pending. Mr. BAUCUS. Mr. President, who has the floor? The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator from New Hampshire has yielded time off the bill. Mr. GREGG. Without losing my right to the floor. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator from Tennessee has been recognized. The Senator from New Hampshire cannot reserve his right to the floor. Mr. BAUCUS. May I ask who has the floor? The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator from Tennessee has the floor. Mr. ALEXANDER. Mr. President, would you let me know when 10 more minutes has expired, please? I have a little history with the student loan program. I see the distinguished Senator from Utah is here. When he was the ranking Republican on the Senate Health and Education Committee 20 years ago, I was the U.S. Education Secretary. He even helped me in my confirmation process, for which I have always been deeply grateful. But he and I worked together during that time when the question of having a government loan program or a direct loan program came up. It was widely discussed. We had a Republican President then and a Democratic Congress. We came to a compromise. The compromise was to say let's have both. We will give students the option and help them stay on and keep the organizations on their toes. So if you are a student at the University of Tennessee, University of Utah, you have a choice. You can either say I don't want to fool with all these private lenders or the local bank or the nonprofit organizations in my State or Edsouth or others or the State organization, I want to go straight to the government. All institutions have that choice. That is 6,000 colleges and universities and 19 million students. Only one-fourth of them choose the government direct lending program. In the United States of America where choice and competition is an important part of our culture, that usually teaches us a lesson. That would suggest to us that most campuses, most students, by overwhelming majorities prefer being in the private market to lining up to go to the government. Otherwise we would have the government grocery store, we would have the government car company. Actually we are beginning to sound like that in this country. We would have the government insurance company and all banks would be government banks. Everything would be in the government. They used to have a system like that in the Soviet Union. Ours did a little better over time. Generally, our motto has been if you can find it in the Yellow Pages the government should not be doing it. What is happening with this administration and this Congress is the reverse. If you can find it in the Yellow Pages, the government should be doing it. Here is the situation that developed over the last 20 years. There are roughly 6,000 institutions of higher education in this country. Many people say all higher education is like the University of Tennessee or Harvard or University of California, but there are many kinds of colleges and universities--for-profit, nonprofit, private, public, historically Black colleges, many different kinds of institutions. The genius of our system is that we let Federal dollars, either through Pell grants or through loans, follow the student to the institution of their choice. Choice and competition in our system of higher education has given us by far the best system of higher education in the world. Of those 6,000 institutions, last year, 2008, 4,421 schools chose to use the regular student loan program. That is three out of four. About one out of four used the government loan, the direct loan program, the one that everybody is going to be made to use now. Currently there are just under 2,000 lenders who participate in the student loan program. They are banks and they are nonprofit institutions such as Edsouth in Tennessee. Last year nearly $100 billion in student loans was made. Let's keep in mind as the government takes this over we go from a system where we have government-backed loans, which cost the taxpayers very little, to government loans at the rate of $100 billion a year which means we are going to have to run up a half trillion more in debt at a time when our debt is ridiculously out of control. That is this weekend's newest Washington takeover that just occurred. There is not definitive evidence to suggest that the Federal Government can make these loans better than lenders can make these loans. I don't think the Department of Education has the manpower to do it. I think that by July 1 there is going to be consternation all over the country from families who have applied for student loans and are applying through their Federal call center or through the Internet. Edsouth, a nonprofit provider in Tennessee, for example, has five regional outreach counselors who canvas Tennessee and provide career training. They made 443 presentations to Tennessee schools to help students understand--remember, we have 200,000 of these students in Tennessee--to help them understand their options. They worked with 12,000 students to help them understand what they could do. They worked with 1,000 school counselors. The U.S. Department of Education will soon be providing all of these services. Senator Gregg earlier had written the Congressional Budget Office asking how much money this Federal takeover would save. They came back with an explanation that it is not $67 billion or $61 billion, which is the current number being used today, but more like $47 billion. My own suspicion, and I cannot prove it, but my own suspicion, having been a university president, having been Secretary of Education and having watched this program for 20 years, is that in the real world the Federal Government is not going to make these 19 million loans more convenient for students. It is not going to be able to do it any cheaper. It is just going to deny people choice, run up the debt, throw 31,000 people out of jobs, and the icing on the cake, and it is a sour- tasting icing, is that the 19 million students who have student loans after July 1 are going to be overcharged by the Federal Government, which will be borrowing money at 2.8 percent, loaning it at 6.8 percent, and using the money to help pay for the health care bill and other programs. Our friends on the other side, they will be saying--they like to blame everything on the bankers or the lenders--well, the lenders are charging too much money. Well, if they are charging too much money, reduce what they get. [[Page S1929]] You are saying there are $61 billion in savings, much of which comes from the fact that the Federal Government can borrow money more cheaply than private lenders can. But then you are saying, we are going to take the savings and we are going to spend it. We are going to overcharge these students. I can't believe the brazenness of this, and I believe neither will 19 million students understand it. So I am glad to come to the floor today and talk about my motion, which I will be glad to introduce at the appropriate time. No Senate bill has been introduced. Our committee has held no hearings. We have not had a markup of this bill. This is a wondrous Washington takeover over the weekend. We stick into the health care bill another Washington takeover, this time of 19 million student loans. On top of it: Congratulations, Mr. and Mrs. Working Student, you are going to get to be overcharged on your loan to help pay for the health care bill and other government programs. I hope my friends in the Senate, on both sides of the aisle, will see the injustice of this and say: OK, you are right, Senator Alexander. If we are going to take it over, and if we are going to create $61 billion in savings, at least let's give the students the savings. Let's not give it to the government. Let's not overcharge the students, on an average $25,000 student debt, $1,700 or $1,800 over 10 years. I think we need to have a truth-and-lending stamp that goes on every single student loan starting July 1 that says: Warning. Your government is overcharging you in order to help pay for other government programs. We will let the single mom who has a job, who is going to school to help improve her circumstances, see what she thinks about the idea of her being overcharged to help pay for other government programs. So my motion, when it is voted on, will do a very simple thing. It will say to the 19 million students in the country: We are going to reduce your interest rate on your student loan from a typical 6.8 percent to 5.3 percent. That is going to save you $1,700 or $1,800 on an average loan over ten years. It says: We are not going to overcharge 19 million students to help pay for the health care bill. Before I yield the floor, I see my friend from New Hampshire is engaged in conversation. I wonder if I could address the Senator from New Hampshire through the Chair. Before I yield the floor, I wished to ask, through the Chair, whether that is what I should do. Mr. GREGG. Well, I would like to ask the Senator from Tennessee a question on the substance of his proposal. Mr. ALEXANDER. I will be glad to take the Senator's question. Mr. GREGG. Because I do think it is an important proposal. As I understand it, what the Senator is saying is that they put this baggage on the train, which is the nationalization of all student loans in this country, the government is going to take them all over, which will be the fourth major nationalization event this administration has undertaken. First, they nationalized the auto industry. Now, they are in the process of quasi-nationalizing the health care industry. Now they are going to nationalize the educational industry. If the House final reform bill passes, they will essentially be nationalizing the financial industry--or having the capacity to--because they can break up any company, whether they are healthy or not, under the Kanjorski amendment. So my question is: They threw this proposal on the train, nationalizing the student loan industry, in order to use student loan money to finance the health care bill because this bill would have violated the budget rules if it did not have the student loan money basically paying for it? Mr. ALEXANDER. Mr. President, I am afraid the Senator from New Hampshire is exactly right. According to the Congressional Budget Office's updated estimate, $8.7 billion of this money that is being overcharged to students will be used to help pay for the health care bill. The other money, except for a small part, will be used for other government programs. So you are right on both counts--one Washington takeover after another. That is why I am saying, I think we ought to hide the Yellow Pages from these fellows because if they find something in there that is being done in the private sector, they are going to say: Oh, we can cut out the profit, we can cut out the business; why does not the government do it? Then, second, I mean this is astonishing to me. These are not Wall Street financiers going to community colleges in New Hampshire and Tennessee, these are people with jobs who are trying to improve their lot. Their student loan levels are already too high. We are worried about that. So we are going to take another $1,700 or $1,800 on a $25,000 average loan over 10 years. We are just going to say: Well, we will overcharge you. We are going to use that in government. The answer is, yes, to your question, Senator; $8.7 billion of the money taken from students by overcharging them on their student loans will go to help pay for the health care bill. Mr. GREGG. If I can ask a further question of the Senator. If they did not have that $8.7 billion of student loan money being used to finance the health care bill, this reconciliation bill would fall; would it not? Because it would not meet the budget instructions of having $1 billion of savings. Mr. ALEXANDER. The Senator is correct. Mr. GREGG. The Senator had a further question about whether the floor could be yielded. We are in the process of seeking a unanimous consent agreement. Mr. BAUCUS. I was going to ask the Senator from Tennessee a question. Mr. ALEXANDER. I will be glad to have a question. Mr. BAUCUS. Is it not true that the Congressional Budget Office stated in a letter, dated March 20, commented on the bill in a letter to the Speaker on page 13, where it states: The title as a whole--that is referring to the education title--states that the title as a whole would reduce budget deficits in both the 10-year projection period and in subsequent years. Is it not true that the Congressional Budget Office reached that conclusion and so states in their letter of March 20? Mr. ALEXANDER. Mr. President, I do not have that letter in front of me, and I do not know what that has to do with my amendment. What I am saying is, the Democratic majority is deliberately overcharging 19 million students to help pay for the health care bill. Those are the Congressional Budget Office's figures, not mine. I would ask, through the Chair, to the Senator from New Hampshire, whether I should at this point yield the floor. Mr. GREGG. I appreciate the Senator from Tennessee's courtesy. At this time, we are ready to go forward with a unanimous consent request. Mr. ALEXANDER. I yield the floor. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator from Montana is recognized. Mr. BAUCUS. Mr. President, I will propose a unanimous consent. Following that, I will state my intention on the order of votes, which I have yet to clear with the leader's office. I ask unanimous consent that the total time on the bill be divided equally between the majority and minority leaders or their designees and that the offering of amendments not add additional claims to the time. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Is there objection? Mr. GREGG. Reserving the right to object, I would simply note that the next amendment on our side would be offered by Senator Hatch. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. GREGG. Mr. President, I would ask further unanimous consent---- Mr. BAUCUS. Mr. President, I wish to finish up that business. It is something, I think, the Senator will appreciate. It is my intention--I am not asking for a unanimous consent agreement, but it is my intention that the order of amendments would be, beginning with the Gregg amendment, Medicare; McCain, target provisions; then the Crapo amendment on taxes; then the Enzi motion to commit, regarding employer mandates; the Barrasso amendment regarding premiums; and then, [[Page S1930]] next, the Grassley amendment regarding executive personnel should be in the exchange. Mr. GREGG. As I understand what the Senator is asking, is that the voting order be in the order they were offered. Mr. BAUCUS. That is correct. I am not asking consent. That is my intention, but there is no unanimous consent request at this time. Mr. President, I yield 10 minutes to the Senator from---- Mr. GREGG. May I make a point? Mr. President, I spoke inappropriately. I believe the Senator from Tennessee will want to submit his amendment back for the Record. He had withdrawn it. Can we do that? I ask unanimous consent that the pending amendment be the Senator from Tennessee's amendment. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Is there objection? Mr. BAUCUS. Reserving the right to object, I might ask if the understanding be that the motion, as on the earlier amendments, that this motion be set aside until a time to be determined by the leaders. Mr. GREGG. Why don't we do that on every amendment we offer so we do not have to do that. Mr. BAUCUS. That would be fine. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, it is so ordered. The Alexander motion is pending. Mr. BAUCUS. Mr. President, I yield 15 minutes to the Senator from Michigan, under the motion. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator from Michigan. Mr. LEVIN. Mr. President, the debate which will come to a close this week has, in one sense, been going on for a year. But in another sense, it has been going on for a century. In 1912, Theodore Roosevelt campaigned on the promise of a national health insurance program. Workers, Roosevelt said, are entitled to a basic standard of protection from injury and illness. Wherever such standards are not met by given establishments, by given industries, are unprovided for by a Legislature, or are balked by unenlightened courts, the workers are in jeopardy, the progressive employer is penalized, and the community pays a heavy cost in lessened efficiency and in misery. Well, since Teddy Roosevelt said that, Presidents and Members of Congress from both parties, seeing the same costs Theodore Roosevelt saw in the failure to assure health care for all, have grappled with this issue. These attempts at reform have largely fallen short. They have foundered for many reasons: Health care is personal and complex. The timing was wrong or the politics were difficult. Leaders on all sides failed to find the compromises that would have enabled them to move forward. But the recurring theme is that time and again, reformers have failed to overcome the enormous obstacles that those who profit from the status quo have been able to erect. Because we have fallen short in the past, Americans today face a health care system that costs too much and too often delivers too little. In our United States today, mothers and fathers wonder what else they can cut from the family budget to afford yet another increase in their health care premiums. Parents file for bankruptcy because their insurance fell thousands of dollars short in providing for a child's lifesaving treatment. Nearly two-thirds of bankruptcies in this country involve medical costs, and more than half of those involve people who had insurance. Small business owners eliminate health coverage for employees because they cannot afford another year of massive premium increases. Thousands of Americans who woke this morning with health care insurance will go to bed tonight without it. Despite those tragic facts, entrenched interests have sought again to prevent reform to consign our Nation to an unsustainable status quo because what is good for the American people will not necessarily profit some company. The health insurance industry has dominated health care decisions in this country for too long. How often have our constituents come to us with stories of insurance companies that deny them coverage of necessary treatment? How often have our constituents told us of insurance companies that deny coverage because of preexisting conditions or canceled coverage because of minor inaccuracies the company conveniently discovered just after diagnosis of a serious and costly illness? It is time to end the unhealthy dominance of the health insurance industry. So I will cast my vote again against those entrenched interests and my vote will be for health care reform. I hope our colleagues will do the same. We have the opportunity to finish the task of overcoming the entrenched opposition to do what so many Presidents and so many Members of this body have fought for decades to accomplish. The months of debate have been difficult. They have too often been filled with too much heat and too little light, with exaggeration, with half-truth, with untruth, with innuendo designed to obscure rather than to inform. That is no different in many ways from some previous debates on major reforms. When Congress approved Social Security in 1935, one Republican Senator warned that it would ``end the progress of a great country.'' When Medicare was debated in 1965, one critic charged that cooperating with the plan would be ``complicit in evil.'' Scare tactics of the past proved absurd, but they worked. Now we get more scare tactics. A number of our Republican colleagues continue to claim this is a big government takeover of health care. The American Medical Association supports this health care plan. Surely the American Medical Association is not a supporter of a government takeover of health care. Then we are told this will hurt Medicare. Yet the association that represents more seniors than any other, AARP, endorses this health care plan. The scare tactics are coming at it again, but there is a difference. While scare tactics were able to derail health care reform in the past, scare tactics are just not working this time. The American people have expressed their disapproval of wild, inaccurate claims in many ways, including personal conversations with most of us. It is true that because health care is so complex, because changes must be phased in and transition periods are often necessary, many of the benefits of this bill will not take effect for some time. But improvements in health care for millions of Americans will take place almost immediately. After President Obama signed this bill into law, small businesses immediately got a tax cut to help defray the cost of providing insurance to their employees. Within 3 months of the signing yesterday, the bill will allow people with preexisting conditions to access a special fund to help cover the gap until insurance exchanges, where they can obtain coverage, become operational. And retiree health plans will qualify for a reinsurance program to help lower cost. In October, the Federal Government will begin helping States set up agencies to help consumers choose new health plans or to challenge unfair decisions by their current insurance plan. Eventually, those agencies will help consumers enroll in insurance exchanges that will help millions of people find dependable coverage that meets minimum quality standards at a price they are more likely to afford. Within 6 months of the President's signature yesterday, insurance reforms will begin to take hold. New health plans will be required to let women see an OB/GYN without seeking insurance company approval. They will be prohibited from denying coverage to children based on preexisting conditions and required to allow children to remain on their parents' policies until age 26. Insurance companies will have to provide preventive care without copays or deductibles, and they will be barred from setting lifetime coverage limits. Those historic improvements in our health care system will take place within the first 6 months after enactment of this legislation. More sweeping changes will come with full implementation of this bill's provisions. We will protect Americans of all ages from denial of coverage based on preexisting conditions, from annual limits on treatment, from exorbitant out-of-pocket costs, and from confusing and opaque language that disguises the cost or the scope of coverage. We will even require insurers to give customers a rebate if those insurers don't spend enough revenue on patient care. We will fill the Medicare [[Page S1931]] doughnut hole that hurts many seniors. At its heart, this bill and its improvements in this reconciliation effort aim to tackle the central problems of our health care system-- rising costs and the insecurity many Americans rightly feel about the lack of dependability of their insurance. The cost of health care already exceeds the ability of many American families to pay, will price more and more families out of the system if it continues to rise, and will present enormous problems for the Federal budget if not contained. We can and we will make the health insurance system work for those who already have coverage by holding down those unsustainable increases in premiums. In ways large and small, we attempt to tame this beast that threatens to swallow family budgets and our Federal budget. How are we going to do this? I ask the Chair how many minutes I have remaining. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator has 5\1/2\ minutes remaining. Mr. LEVIN. I thank the Chair. Mr. President, even though health care experts believe these measures are going to help lower costs for families and the government, the CBO is not even taking into account the savings which will come into existence by ending wasteful subsidies to insurance companies using Medicare Advantage, by requiring Medicare Advantage to spend at least 85 percent of revenue on benefits, and by other kinds of savings. Some of those savings cannot be figured out precisely by the Congressional Budget Office. So they are prudent. They don't even take those savings into account. But what they do, obviously, take into account and do count are savings which will lead to $140 billion for the Federal budget in the first 10 years and $1 trillion over the next decade. Those savings are real savings. Those are savings which they can figure out and cost. We are going to subject investment income of the Nation's wealthiest families with incomes over $250,000 to the Medicare tax. We are going to impose a moderate Medicare tax increase on those who have that kind of earned income, over $\1/4\ million. This bill cracks down on artificial financial structures. I commend the Finance Committee, Senator Baucus and his colleagues. They are cracking down on artificial financial structures with no economic substance whose only purpose is to allow their users to avoid taxes. The Finance Committee has struggled with that issue for years. They have been trying to do this for years. They have succeeded. We pick up an awful lot of revenue that is owed to Uncle Sam by ending this kind of loophole which has allowed wealthy individuals to avoid paying taxes through the use of artificial financial structures that have no economic substance, whose only purpose is to avoid paying income taxes. We will take an enormous step with the passage of this reconciliation bill, joined with the bill the President signed yesterday. Leaders of our country--from Franklin Roosevelt to Harry Truman, Richard Nixon to Ted Kennedy--have fought so hard for these kinds of reforms. We are finally going to provide health insurance to millions of Americans who do not now have it, and we are going to protect those workers who Teddy Roosevelt warned nearly 100 years ago were in jeopardy unless every American had health insurance. Opponents of reform are vocal. They are strident. We are going to hear amendment after amendment being offered in an attempt to derail this effort. I hope our colleagues will answer history's call and make the real and lasting changes these bills provide, which will improve the lives of our citizens in ways we have been struggling to do in this Senate for decades and long before many of us got here. To those who continue to oppose reform, let me ask some questions. Isn't it long overdue to end discrimination based on preexisting conditions? The American people believe we should. So do I. Isn't it long overdue to end the insurance industry practice of rescissions, the denial of coverage to those who paid for it? The American people believe we should, and so do I. Should we not do something about the thousands of Americans who are forced into bankruptcy because of health expenses even though they have insurance they thought would protect them? The American people believe we should, and so do I. Should we not take strong steps to rein in enormous, ever-growing health care expenses, expenses that threaten to put health care out of reach for more and more Americans and to bankrupt our Nation? The American people believe we should. So do I. And should we not clear the way for 32 million Americans who do not now have health insurance to obtain it? The American people believe we should, and so do I. I hope we will join together this week and do what so many before us have tried and been unable to do--to reform a system that leaves so many of our fellow citizens in jeopardy. I urge approval of this bill, this essential reconciliation bill, passed by the House as part of a package of historic legislation to finish the task of bringing landmark change to American health care. I yield the floor. The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Senator from Montana is recognized. Mr. BAUCUS. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that Senators Warner, Begich, Burris, Tom Udall, Mark Udall, Shaheen, and Merkley be allowed to engage in a colloquy for up to 25 minutes. The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Whitehouse). Without objection, it is so ordered. The Senator from Virginia is recognized. Mr. WARNER. Mr. President, as we approach the end of this long journey, at least the end of the first step of this long journey, I and a number of my colleagues are going to come one more time to the floor to engage in a conversation for a few moments about what this health care bill will mean to our constituents and to the people of the United States. We are going to talk about some of the causes of how we got here and some of the consequences of what would happen if we don't act. At the end, I will add some comments about how we make sure we implement this bill in the appropriate fashion. Recognizing that the hour is late and colleagues have other business, I first ask my good friend, the Senator from Illinois, Mr. Burris, if he would like to give a brief recap of why he has been such a firm supporter of this legislation and why he thinks this bill is so important, not only to the people of Illinois but to the people of the United States. Mr. BURRIS. Mr. President, I thank Senator Warner. I compliment him for his leadership in getting the freshmen engaged and involved in making sure we are getting the message out to the American people. This piece of legislation, which was signed yesterday by President Obama, is historic. I am proud and appreciative that I had the opportunity to play a part. As you know, my position was for a very strong public option. But as to the issues that are in it, we deal with cost and accountability for the insurance companies. Therefore, it is a major piece of legislation which we want the public to understand. We want the public to understand that for some people this law takes effect immediately. Small businesses benefit in that they will get a tax credit right away. These tax credits can total as much as 35 percent of total premiums. Secondly, for children there will be no elimination for preexisting conditions. Within the next 90 days, these provisions will kick in on behalf of children. So there are a lot of things in this bill that will benefit all of us. We have been trying to do this for over 97 years. I say to my colleagues on the other side, the reconciliation bill is important to make some corrections. The battle they are waging, not from the standpoint of policy but certainly from the standpoint of politics, seeking to make a failure out of this issue, is not really fair to the American people. The misinformation that has been going out about this legislation is not fair. Not only are we going to see immediate benefits, but the long-term benefits of this legislation are also helpful. Situations dealing with preexisting conditions--in 2014, that will kick in. I remember when my daughter was changing jobs, she needed to get insurance because she had a headache problem. They wouldn't insure her. I had to [[Page S1932]] battle to get insurance for my daughter. This is good legislation. It is history. I want the American people to know that it is on the books, and we are going to make necessary corrections. The people will go forward. I thank my colleague from Virginia. Mr. WARNER. I thank Senator Burris for his comments. I know how hard he fought for this legislation, since day one. This legislation is going to have wide-ranging effects for people from all across the Nation. I now know my colleague, the Senator from North Carolina, wishes to speak. North Carolina and Virginia are neighbors. We both share a number of small businesses. We have a vibrant entrepreneurial flavor in Virginia and North Carolina. I know Senator Hagan has been concerned not only on the overall aspects of health care but particularly how this health care bill is going to affect small business in her State. I wish to now ask Senator Hagan to tell us how this bill will affect people in North Carolina. Mrs. HAGAN. I thank Senator Warner. I too appreciate the time for us to come down here and talk about the need for health care reform. The bill that was signed into law yesterday is getting us on that track. The new and historic law, combined with the bill we are now considering in the Senate, is going to reform our health care system to reduce costs and improve patient care for those families in North Carolina and in Virginia and families across America. In 1996, the average premium in North Carolina for a family of four was $6,000. Today it is $12,000. It is projected, in 2016, to be 24,000. People cannot afford that. That is why we need to have change. After decades of working to fix a broken health care system, this law controls exploding costs, increases access to health care, and reduces our long-term deficit, which I know we are very concerned about, by as much as $1.2 trillion over the next 20 years. But in addition to containing costs, health care reform will improve access and quality of health care for millions of Americans. Right now, in North Carolina, we have 1.7 million people without insurance. They will now have access to a family doctor. This bill provides immediate benefits to small businesses, middle- class families, and seniors in North Carolina. The small business owners whom I talk to want to provide coverage for their employees, but the costs are prohibitive. This month, I received an e-mail from a small chiropractic practice in eastern North Carolina that had to drop its health plan for its employees because the rates doubled over the last 2 years. But starting today, 112,000 North Carolinian small businesses will be eligible for tax credits to provide health care to their employees. Within the next 6 months, hard-working, middle-class families will be able to add their children up to the age of 26 on their health care plans. This will benefit about 870,000 young adults in my State. This year, insurance companies will no longer be able to deny coverage to a child for a preexisting condition, such as asthma or diabetes. And it means insurance companies will no longer be able to drop your coverage because you get sick or because you file too many claims. In North Carolina, 1.4 million seniors will receive preventive services with no additional costs, and 250,000 seniors will have their drug costs in the doughnut hole immediately reduced and eventually eliminated. I am proud of these immediate benefits and our efforts to reform the health care system over the long term. The health care reform effort would not have been possible without the work of tenacious Capitol Hill staffers. I personally want to thank two incredible health care staffers on my team, Michelle Adams and Tracy Zvenyach, who worked countless hours for reform in our country. Mr. WARNER. I thank Senator Hagan. I appreciate her leadership on this issue. Again, I also appreciate her recognition of not only the Members who have been struggling with the bill for almost a year, but the staff members who help us put together the facts, put together the case studies, who help us crunch the numbers, as we try to make sure we get this right. I now want to call on my friend, the Senator from Alaska. One of the things the freshmen have always said, as we have come to the floor over these months--as we have pointed out--is that the price of doing nothing is extraordinarily high to our economy, to our families, to our businesses, and that the status quo is not sustainable. I know this has been a theme Senator Begich has echoed repeatedly on the floor. As we come to the closing hours of this debate, if you could share with us one more time why you think the status quo is unacceptable. What is the price of doing nothing? How would that affect the people and businesses in the great State of Alaska? Senator Begich. Mr. BEGICH. I thank the Senator. Thank you again for your leadership, and especially as the freshmen group worked on the cost containment piece of this legislation. That was an important part we will see for many years to come. Over the next few days we are focusing on making a good bill a little bit better. Yesterday, the President signed the landmark legislation moving health care reform into law. So over the next few days, again, we are going to work on making that bill a little bit better. You are going to see clearly the differences. You are going to see our side of the equation has worked hard on this legislation. Those who voted for health care reform are on the side of American families, not on the side of the insurance industry. We are on the side of seniors who will see lower prescription drug costs--because reform is going to work in that direction--not on the side of big drug companies. We are on the side of American small business--not business as usual. I was truly proud to vote for and help pass that legislation last December. But as mentioned already this morning, there are many benefits that occur right now, this year. This year, for example, there is help for small businesses. As you just heard, immediately, firms with fewer than 10 workers get a tax credit worth 35 percent of what they will spend now on health insurance. It will eventually ramp up to a 50-percent tax credit, and firms with up to 25 workers will get a partial credit. For small businesses--truly the backbone of the Alaska business community and this country's business community--that is an immediate benefit. Coverage for preexisting conditions: Within 3 months, people with preexisting conditions and no insurance will get help. A $5 billion fund is being set up to provide them with affordable coverage. Coverage for dependent children: Within 6 months, parents will be able to extend their policies to cover their dependent children up to the age of 26. Some of these points you have already heard, as I said, this morning, but it is important to repeat them because I think in the noise over the last year and a half a lot of it got lost. Another--a very important one--free preventive care: Within 6 months, all insurance plans must provide free checkups. This includes seniors on Medicare. And there is much, much more when you look at this legislation. For my own State, the bill addresses many specific concerns I have heard in Alaska. It includes several of my amendments, including a panel to improve Federal health care in Alaska, increased loan forgiveness for thousands of new primary care providers, and added funding for community hospitals. We also, as a team of freshmen, wrote a cost containment amendment that cuts prices for consumers, increases value and innovation in the health care system and, as mentioned earlier--let's not forget--it is a deficit reducer: in the first 10 years, $143 billion, and in the next 10 years, $1.3 trillion in deficit reduction. This bill is paid for--paid for. These are many of the improvements. Again, these improvements will save lives; add 32 million people, those uninsured--making sure they have coverage--save seniors on prescription drug costs by closing the doughnut hole; save families, by providing tax relief to help them afford health care; and crack down on waste and fraud. It has been an enormous time in this last year and a half working on this. But I also want to say, the next 3 days [[Page S1933]] will also be tedious and confusing to the public because what you will see on the other side is every imaginable amendment we would love to see--many of them we probably would love to vote for. I am not voting for any of them because the whole tactic is to delay the delivery, to ensure that people who want a family doctor will not get one, to protect the insurance companies instead of what we are trying to do to make sure people get a fair shake from their companies. So you are going to see that over the next 3 days. I think what is important for us is to remind Americans--Alaskans in my State--why this bill is important. It helps small business, families, seniors. It does it now. It is important. It is important for us to get it done. But do not be fooled by the next 3 days on what goes on this floor. We have passed health care reform. All we are doing now is making a good bill better. I thank the Senator from Virginia. Mr. WARNER. I thank the Senator. Thank you for your comments. Thank you for your leadership, particularly on a series of freshmen amendments that dealt with cost containment. And if time exists after my colleagues speak, I am going to go back to that issue. But I now want to ask my good friend from Oregon a question. No one has come to this body with more passion about making sure working families get a fair break, not only in health care but in the world of financial reform and issues that cut across the spectrum. I know one of the issues Senator Merkley has worked on tirelessly throughout this whole conversation is how to make sure the Oregon families get that fair break, get that fair shot, how to make sure health care is affordable. I would like you to share with our colleagues and those Americans who are at home watching what this health care bill does to help those middle-class Americans, middle-class Oregonians to make sure they get that fair shot, fair break in health care reform. Senator Merkley. Mr. MERKLEY. I thank the Senator so much. It is a pleasure to come here with my colleagues on the floor. I know when all of my colleagues go home, they hear stories from their constituents about our broken health care system. That certainly is what I hear. I hear it in my townhalls. I hear it on the street, as people stop me and share their story. And I certainly hear it in my mail. I have in my hand a few of the stories citizens in Oregon have sent to me. To give you a sense of the type of frustration we are hearing, Don writes: Last year my premium went up 65 percent even though I've made no significant claims against my policy. Or we can turn to Jane, who says: . . . we are subject to being turned down for health insurance [because] I have a chronic illness. . . . Or we can turn to Adrienne, who observes: The medical debt was crushing, and we were forced to file for bankruptcy. Or we can turn to Amanda, who says: My daughter cut her finger. I took her to emergency, the hospital is a network provider. The ER Physician said she needed surgery. Okay, what do I know, they are the experts. It turns out that the Surgeon is not a network provider. She bills [me] over $9,000.00. . . . . . . I have little hope. Do I file [for] bankruptcy? Or we can turn to Art, who says: In less than 5 years, I had to change my health insurance 5 times. It was never a matter of choice; I simply had to take whatever plan my employer decided to offer. Or Dagne, who observes: When I started to fill out my insurance form, I had ``Questions such as `Have you ever had . . . ' ''--for instance, I had asthma. And he goes on to describe his challenges. And the list goes on and on and on. That is why we are in this health care dialog. Because we need to fix our health care system that is broken for working Americans. The bill we have passed and the President has signed has three terrific provisions. It creates State-based markets for health care policies, where consumers can shop for the best policy. These markets will increase choice and competition. Second, the bill ends insurance company practices that victimize our working families--practices such as turning people down for preexisting conditions or dumping them off of their policies when they are injured or when they have a disease. And, third, it invests in our provider workforce to counter the rapid retirement of baby boomers. Out in Oregon, we are going to lose 20 percent of our primary care physicians in the next 5 years, while many of us, as baby boomers ourselves, are going to need more health care. So those things are huge challenges. This bill takes a stride that is very significant, and this week we will work to pass--with an up-or- down vote--a bill that will make further improvements to the bill the President signed yesterday. I am pleased to join my colleagues in this fight to repair a broken health care system that is not working for our working citizens. Thank you. Mr. WARNER. I thank Senator Merkley. Thank you for sharing those stories from real folks who are dealing with the current broken health care system. There are enormous stress, challenges, and burdens that our current system places on those families. I think we are taking a giant step forward. The President already has by signing into law the bill yesterday. We will continue that step with passing this reconciliation bill later this week. I now wish to call on another one of my colleagues, Senator Tom Udall of New Mexico. Senator Udall has, again, along with all the other freshmen colleagues, been a leader in this fight. He has particularly taken on the issue of prevention and the fact that we have a health care system in this country that is more a sick care system than it is a wellness and prevention system. I want to hear from Senator Udall about how the bill is going to affect the good folks of New Mexico. Senator Udall. Mr. UDALL of New Mexico. Mr. President, I thank Senator Warner for leading us and pulling us together in this freshman effort. It has been a pleasure to work with all of my fellow freshman Senators on the floor again and to join them right now. Last fall, we gathered right here in this Chamber to fight for health care reform. As a group, we helped lead the charge to make quality, affordable health care accessible to all Americans. Yesterday, the change we have been fighting for became a reality. With President Obama's signature, health care reform is now the law of the land. This moment has been a long time coming. Teddy Roosevelt first called for health care reform nearly a century ago. His banner was taken up by a long and distinguished list of men and women who advocated for change. For too many years, New Mexicans, like Americans across the country, have struggled to find or afford health insurance. They have struggled to hang on to policies that get more and more expensive and more and more restrictive every day. With this reform, all of that begins to change. No longer will insurance companies be able to discriminate based on preexisting conditions. No longer will they be able to dramatically increase rates without public scrutiny. No longer will 32 million Americans worry every day about what would happen to their families if they get sick or are in an accident. I am proud to have fought for and voted in favor of this historic legislation. This reform will benefit all Americans, including our country's First Americans, the 1.9 million American Indian and Alaska Natives who have spent too many years suffering because the federal government hasn't lived up to its promise to them. With this reform, we begin meeting our obligations to Native Americans by reforming the Indian health care system and permanently reauthorizing the Indian Health Care Improvement Act. This law, which provides a framework under which health care programs for Native Americans are delivered, hasn't been reauthorized in more than 10 years. As a result, American Indian and Alaska Natives are three times as likely as whites to be uninsured, and almost half of low-income American Indians and Alaska Natives lack health coverage. With this reform, no longer will Native Americans be forced to suffer needlessly. No longer will they have to go without treatment for chronic conditions like diabetes and heart disease. [[Page S1934]] No longer will they have to put off basic care like colonoscopies or cholesterol screenings. I say again, today is a new day for health care in America. I am proud to have fought for, and voted in favor of, this historic legislation. Yesterday, we began taking back control of our own health care. Today, the journey continues. I pledge to continue fighting every day to ensure New Mexican families and small businesses have the security and stability that comes with access to quality, affordable health care. The reason I have fought so hard for reform is simple. For my constituents, the status quo is not an option. So it is the people of New Mexico I wish to talk about today. They are the reason I stand up every day and fight for comprehensive reform. People such as Katheryn Whitesides--Katheryn lives in Clayton, NM. We met last year when she attended one of my health care townhalls. Katheryn worked hard all her life. She had affordable insurance through her employer. But since she retired, Katheryn's health insurance premiums have risen dramatically from $110 a month when she was working, to more than $800 a month today. Katheryn's insurer recently denied a claim for a treatment she received. Now, on top of skyrocketing monthly premiums, she also owes about $4,000 in medical bills. That is more money than she receives from 5 months of pension payments. As Katheryn herself said: It's unsustainable for me. And I know I'm not the only one. I'm just looking for some relief--not just for me, but for all those people coming behind me. To folks such as Katheryn, I say: Relief is coming. This reform will make health insurance more affordable by placing caps on out-of-pocket medical expenses. It will make it more affordable by providing premium assistance through tax credits for low- and moderate-income families. I am fighting for New Mexicans such as Katheryn, and I am also fighting for New Mexico's small business and for entrepreneurs such as Arvind Raichur. Arvind has owned a small business in Albuquerque for more than a decade. As the boss, he has made it a priority to provide his employees with good benefits. For years, he paid 100 percent of his employees' health care premiums, but he is not sure how much longer he will be able to do that and stay afloat. You see, for the past few years, Arvind's insurer has increased his company's health care premiums by between 30 and 40 percent every year, and there is nothing Arvind can do about it. As Arvind said: We've got no bargaining power. We've got no leverage. I'm insuring maybe a dozen people at my company here. It's very hard. The insurance companies give you a 30 or 40 percent increase and that's what you get. . . . It's too big a bite. To small business owners such as Arvind and their employees, I say: Relief is coming. This reform will help small businesses by making it more affordable for them to offer coverage for their employees. We do this by providing tax credits for up to 50 percent of premiums and by creating small business health exchanges to build a larger employee pool. In New Mexico, the vast majority of our insured are employed, but they and their employers can't afford coverage. These new tax credits will help our small businesses provide insurance for their employees at a cost they can afford. For hardworking New Mexicans like Katheryn and for small business owners like Arvind, health care reform can't come fast enough. Katheryn and Arvind can't afford the health care status quo. Katheryn and Arvind are the reason I stand here today. To my friends on both sides of the aisle I say: Let's get this done. I am proud to be part of this body as we cast our final votes in favor of this landmark reform. With this final vote, we will finish this leg of the race. I look forward to building on this solid foundation in the coming months and years. I yield the floor. Mr. WARNER. I thank Senator Udall. I know our time is running out; just a final comment I wish to make. As many of my colleagues know, I had the honor of serving as Governor of Virginia before becoming a Senator. I think one of the differences between an executive and a legislator is, as a former executive I realize that passing the bill is just the first step. What happens is going to be in the implementation afterwards. The appeal I would make, particularly to my colleagues on the other side, is, I agree with some of their points that we don't go far enough on cost containment, but there are a lot of things in this bill where we grant the Secretary the ability to start experimental programs--on cost containment, on bundling of payments. How this bill is implemented is going to be where the rubber hits the road. I, for one, believe there is more we can do around this issue of cost containment, and I hope in the coming weeks and months, rather than being for repeal, they would join with us in finding that common ground to make this legislation even better. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Montana. Mr. BAUCUS. Mr. President, I wish to let Senators know that we intend to alternate blocks of time, roughly a half hour on each side. So I ask unanimous consent that the next half hour be under the control of the Republicans and the half hour thereafter be under the control of the majority. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. The Senator from Florida. Amendment No. 3586 Mr. LeMIEUX. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to temporarily set aside the pending motions and amendments so that I may offer an amendment which is at the desk. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. The clerk will report the amendment. The legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Florida [Mr. LeMieux] proposes an amendment numbered 3586. Mr. LeMIEUX. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: (Purpose: To enroll Members of Congress in the Medicaid program) At the end of subtitle C of title I, add the following: SEC. 1207. MEMBERS OF CONGRESS REQUIRED TO HAVE COVERAGE UNDER MEDICAID INSTEAD OF THROUGH FEHBP. (a) In General.--Notwithstanding chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, title XIX of the Social Security Act, or any provision of this Act, effective on the date of enactment of this Act-- (1) each Member of Congress shall be eligible for medical assistance under the Medicaid plan of the State in which the Member resides; and (2) any employer contribution under chapter 89 of title 5 of such Code on behalf of the Member may be paid only to the State agency responsible for administering the Medicaid plan in which the Member enrolls and not to the offeror of a plan offered through the Federal employees health benefit program under such chapter. (b) Payments by Federal Government.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, shall establish procedures under which the employer contributions that would otherwise be made on behalf of a Member of Congress if the Member were enrolled in a plan offered through the Federal employees health benefit program may be made directly to the State agencies described in subsection (a). (c) Ineligible for FEHBP.--Effective on the date of enactment of this Act, no Member of Congress shall be eligible to obtain health insurance coverage under the program chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code. (d) Definition.--In this section, the term ``Member of Congress'' means any member of the House of Representatives or the Senate. Mr. LeMIEUX. Mr. President, I rise in support of the amendment I am offering today. I wish to thank my colleague from Virginia who asked us to think about the practical aspects of this health care reform. I just listened to my freshman colleagues on the Democratic side talk about all of the good things, in their opinion, this bill is going to do. There is one thing I didn't hear them speak about. I didn't hear them speak about the fact that half of the new people who are going to be covered by health care in this country--some 16 million of the 30-some million who [[Page S1935]] have the opportunity for health care under this law--are going into Medicaid. The practical impact my friend from Virginia asked us to think about is that our States right now are finding themselves in bankruptcy, realistically, because of the obligations of Medicaid. Our States, unlike the Federal Government, have to balance their budgets. Medicaid is a program that the States pay some 50 percent of, and they can't make it work. We are finding out in Florida right now that this program--this new law--will cost Florida $1 billion in the next 10 years. Because they balance their budget and because they can't print money, that means the dollars will go away from teachers, away from students, and away from police. The point I wish to make today and the amendment I am offering is this: Several times, as I have been on the floor and heard from my Democratic colleagues, they have made this point: Why shouldn't the American people have the same health care that we in the Congress enjoy? Why shouldn't they, as do all Federal employees, be able to pick from a comprehensive and rich plan of benefits in order to take care of their health and the health of their families? That is a good point, but what is going to happen to these 16 million new Americans? They are going to go on Medicaid. That is not the plan we have. That is not the rich benefits the Members of Congress enjoy. Medicaid--health care for the poor, which will now have some 50 million Americans in it after these 16 million join it--is a program in crisis. It is a program that is failing. Let me give my colleagues some real examples. Right now we know patients on Medicaid can't find doctors who will treat them. We know in California, for example, 49 percent of family physicians do not participate in Medicaid. I entered this document into the Record last week. On March 17 the Seattle Times reported that Walgreens will no longer take new Medicaid patients in the city of Seattle. On March 15, the New York Times reported about Mrs. Vliet. She is in Flint, MI. She has cancer. For 2 years she has been receiving treatment, but now her doctor is dropping her from Medicaid. He says: But after a while you realize that we're really losing money on seeing those patients, not even breaking even. We are starting to lose more and more money, month after month. All across America, health care providers are dumping Medicaid, and we are about to add 16 million new people. So I wish to take a page from my friends on the other side because they say the American people should have the same rich benefits we have. What I am proposing today with this amendment is that 535 Members of Congress should have the same benefits as these 16 million new people and these 50 million Americans. Under this amendment, the Members of Congress will go into Medicaid. If it is good enough for 50 million Americans, it should be good enough for us. So I have offered amendment No. 3586. It will