Congressional Record
Formatting necessary for an accurate reading of this text may be shown by tags (e.g., <DELETED> or <BOLD>) or may be missing from this TXT display. For complete and accurate display of this text, see the PDF.

[Pages H5514-H5555] From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov] DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2015 General Leave Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days in which to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material on the further consideration of H.R. 4870, and that I may include tabular material on the same. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from New Jersey? There was no objection. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to House Resolution 628 and rule XVIII, the Chair declares the House in the Committee of the Whole House on the state of the Union for the further consideration of the bill, H.R. 4870. Will the gentleman from Georgia (Mr. Collins) kindly resume the chair. {time} 1708 In the Committee of the Whole Accordingly, the House resolved itself into the Committee of the Whole House on the state of the Union for the further consideration of the bill (H.R. 4870) making appropriations for the Department of Defense for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2015, and for other purposes, with Mr. Collins of Georgia (Acting Chair) in the chair. The Clerk read the title of the bill. The Acting CHAIR. When the Committee of the Whole rose on Wednesday, June 18, 2014, a request for a recorded vote on an amendment offered by the gentlewoman from Michigan (Mrs. Miller) had been postponed, and the bill had been read through page 141, line 4. Announcement by the Acting Chair The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to clause 6 of rule XVIII, proceedings will now resume on those amendments on which further proceedings were postponed, in the following order: An amendment by Mr. Gohmert of Texas. Amendment No. 4 by Mr. Blumenauer of Oregon. An amendment by Mr. Nadler of New York. An amendment by Mrs. Walorski of Indiana. The Chair will reduce to 2 minutes the time for any electronic vote in this series. Amendment Offered by Mr. Gohmert The Acting CHAIR. The unfinished business is the demand for a recorded vote on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Texas (Mr. Gohmert) on which further proceedings were postponed and on which the noes prevailed by voice vote. The Clerk will redesignate the amendment. The Clerk redesignated the amendment. Recorded Vote The Acting CHAIR. A recorded vote has been demanded. A recorded vote was ordered. The Acting CHAIR. This is a 2-minute vote. The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were--ayes 130, noes 292, not voting 9, as follows: [Roll No. 318] AYES--130 Amodei Bachmann Barber Barletta Barr Barrow (GA) Barton Benishek Bentivolio Bilirakis Blackburn Brady (TX) Braley (IA) Bridenstine Broun (GA) Brownley (CA) Buchanan Burgess Campbell Carter Chabot Coble Conaway Costa Crenshaw Daines Denham Dent DeSantis DesJarlais Duffy Duncan (SC) Duncan (TN) Enyart Farenthold Fincher Fleischmann Garrett Gibson Gingrey (GA) Gohmert Goodlatte Gosar Gowdy Green, Gene Griffith (VA) Hall Hanna Harper Hensarling Herrera Beutler Holding Hudson Huelskamp Huizenga (MI) Hurt Jenkins Johnson, Sam Jolly Jones Jordan King (IA) Kingston Kinzinger (IL) Kline Labrador LaMalfa Lamborn Lance Latta Loebsack Lummis Maffei Marchant Massie Matheson McCarthy (CA) McCarthy (NY) McCaul McClintock McHenry McIntyre McKinley McMorris Rodgers McNerney Meadows Messer Miller (FL) Miller (MI) Neugebauer Olson Palazzo Paulsen Perry Peters (MI) Petri Pitts Poe (TX) Pompeo Price (GA) Rahall Rogers (KY) Rooney Roskam Rothfus Royce Rush Ryan (WI) Salmon Scalise Schweikert Sensenbrenner Sessions Sinema Smith (NE) Smith (TX) Southerland Stockman Takano Terry Tiberi Tipton Walberg Weber (TX) Webster (FL) Welch Westmoreland Wolf Yoder Yoho NOES--292 Aderholt Amash Bachus Bass Beatty Becerra Bera (CA) Bishop (GA) Bishop (NY) Bishop (UT) Black Blumenauer Bonamici Boustany Brady (PA) Brooks (AL) Brooks (IN) Brown (FL) Bucshon Bustos Butterfield Byrne Calvert Camp Cantor Capito Capps Caardenas Carney Carson (IN) Cartwright Cassidy Castor (FL) Castro (TX) Chaffetz Chu Cicilline Clark (MA) Clarke (NY) Clay Cleaver Clyburn Coffman Cohen Cole Collins (GA) Collins (NY) Connolly Conyers Cook Cooper Cotton Courtney Cramer Crawford Crowley Cuellar Culberson Cummings Davis (CA) Davis, Danny Davis, Rodney DeFazio DeGette Delaney DeLauro DelBene Deutch Diaz-Balart Dingell Doggett Doyle Duckworth Edwards Ellison Ellmers Engel Eshoo [[Page H5515]] Esty Farr Fattah Fitzpatrick Fleming Flores Forbes Fortenberry Foster Foxx Frankel (FL) Franks (AZ) Frelinghuysen Fudge Gabbard Gallego Garamendi Garcia Gardner Gerlach Gibbs Granger Graves (GA) Graves (MO) Grayson Green, Al Griffin (AR) Grijalva Grimm Guthrie Gutieerrez Hahn Hanabusa Harris Hartzler Hastings (FL) Hastings (WA) Heck (NV) Heck (WA) Higgins Himes Hinojosa Holt Honda Horsford Hoyer Huffman Hultgren Hunter Israel Issa Jackson Lee Jeffries Johnson (GA) Johnson (OH) Johnson, E. B. Joyce Kaptur Keating Kelly (IL) Kelly (PA) Kennedy Kildee Kilmer Kind King (NY) Kuster Langevin Larsen (WA) Larson (CT) Latham Lee (CA) Levin Lewis Lipinski LoBiondo Lofgren Long Lowenthal Lowey Lucas Luetkemeyer Lujan Grisham (NM) Lujaan, Ben Ray (NM) Lynch Maloney, Carolyn Maloney, Sean Marino Matsui McAllister McCollum McDermott McGovern McKeon Meehan Meeks Meng Mica Michaud Miller, Gary Miller, George Moore Moran Mullin Murphy (FL) Murphy (PA) Nadler Napolitano Neal Negrete McLeod Noem Nolan Nugent Nunes O'Rourke Owens Pallone Pascrell Pastor (AZ) Payne Pearce Pelosi Perlmutter Peters (CA) Peterson Pingree (ME) Pittenger Pocan Posey Price (NC) Quigley Reed Reichert Renacci Ribble Rice (SC) Rigell Roby Roe (TN) Rogers (AL) Rogers (MI) Rohrabacher Rokita Ros-Lehtinen Ross Roybal-Allard Ruiz Runyan Ruppersberger Saanchez, Linda T. Sanchez, Loretta Sanford Sarbanes Schakowsky Schiff Schneider Schock Schrader Schwartz Scott (VA) Scott, Austin Scott, David Serrano Sewell (AL) Shea-Porter Sherman Shimkus Shuster Simpson Sires Slaughter Smith (MO) Smith (NJ) Smith (WA) Speier Stewart Stivers Stutzman Swalwell (CA) Thompson (CA) Thompson (MS) Thompson (PA) Thornberry Tierney Titus Tonko Tsongas Turner Upton Valadao Van Hollen Vargas Veasey Vela Velaazquez Visclosky Wagner Walden Walorski Walz Wasserman Schultz Waters Waxman Wenstrup Whitfield Williams Wilson (FL) Wilson (SC) Wittman Womack Woodall Yarmuth Young (AK) Young (IN) NOT VOTING--9 Capuano Kirkpatrick Lankford Mulvaney Nunnelee Polis Rangel Richmond Ryan (OH) {time} 1713 Mr. ELLISON changed his vote from ``aye'' to ``no.'' So the amendment was rejected. The result of the vote was announced as above recorded. Amendment No. 4 Offered by Mr. Blumenauer The Acting CHAIR (Mr. Marchant). The unfinished business is the demand for a recorded vote on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Oregon (Mr. Blumenauer) on which further proceedings were postponed and on which the noes prevailed by voice vote. The Clerk will redesignate the amendment. The Clerk redesignated the amendment. Recorded Vote The Acting CHAIR. A recorded vote has been demanded. A recorded vote was ordered. The Acting CHAIR. This will be a 2-minute vote. The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were--ayes 179, noes 242, not voting 10, as follows: [Roll No. 319] AYES--179 Bass Beatty Becerra Bera (CA) Bishop (NY) Blumenauer Bonamici Brady (PA) Braley (IA) Brown (FL) Brownley (CA) Butterfield Capps Caardenas Carney Carson (IN) Cartwright Castor (FL) Castro (TX) Chu Cicilline Clark (MA) Clarke (NY) Clay Cleaver Clyburn Cohen Connolly Conyers Costa Courtney Crowley Cuellar Cummings Davis (CA) Davis, Danny DeFazio DeGette Delaney DeLauro DelBene Deutch Dingell Doggett Doyle Duncan (TN) Edwards Ellison Enyart Eshoo Esty Farr Fattah Foster Frankel (FL) Fudge Gabbard Garamendi Garcia Gibson Grayson Green, Al Green, Gene Grijalva Gutieerrez Hahn Hanabusa Hastings (FL) Heck (WA) Higgins Himes Hinojosa Holt Honda Horsford Hoyer Huffman Israel Jackson Lee Jeffries Johnson (GA) Johnson, E. B. Jones Kaptur Keating Kelly (IL) Kennedy Kildee Kilmer Kind Kuster Langevin Larsen (WA) Larson (CT) Lee (CA) Levin Lewis Loebsack Lofgren Lowenthal Lowey Lujaan, Ben Ray (NM) Lynch Maffei Maloney, Carolyn Matheson Matsui McCarthy (NY) McCollum McDermott McGovern McNerney Meeks Meng Michaud Miller, George Moore Moran Murphy (FL) Nadler Napolitano Neal Negrete McLeod Nolan O'Rourke Owens Pallone Pascrell Pastor (AZ) Payne Pelosi Perlmutter Peters (MI) Petri Pingree (ME) Pocan Price (NC) Quigley Rahall Roybal-Allard Ruiz Ruppersberger Rush Saanchez, Linda T. Sanchez, Loretta Sarbanes Schakowsky Schiff Schneider Schrader Schwartz Scott (VA) Serrano Sewell (AL) Shea-Porter Sherman Sires Slaughter Smith (WA) Speier Takano Thompson (CA) Thompson (MS) Tierney Titus Tonko Tsongas Van Hollen Vargas Vela Velaazquez Visclosky Walz Wasserman Schultz Waters Waxman Welch Wilson (FL) Yarmuth NOES--242 Aderholt Amash Amodei Bachmann Bachus Barber Barletta Barr Barrow (GA) Barton Benishek Bentivolio Bilirakis Bishop (GA) Bishop (UT) Black Blackburn Boustany Brady (TX) Bridenstine Brooks (AL) Brooks (IN) Broun (GA) Buchanan Bucshon Burgess Bustos Byrne Calvert Camp Campbell Cantor Capito Carter Cassidy Chabot Chaffetz Coble Coffman Cole Collins (GA) Collins (NY) Conaway Cook Cooper Cotton Cramer Crawford Crenshaw Culberson Daines Davis, Rodney Denham Dent DeSantis DesJarlais Diaz-Balart Duckworth Duffy Duncan (SC) Ellmers Engel Farenthold Fincher Fitzpatrick Fleischmann Fleming Flores Forbes Fortenberry Foxx Franks (AZ) Frelinghuysen Gallego Gardner Garrett Gerlach Gibbs Gingrey (GA) Gohmert Goodlatte Gosar Gowdy Granger Graves (GA) Graves (MO) Griffin (AR) Griffith (VA) Grimm Guthrie Hall Hanna Harper Harris Hartzler Hastings (WA) Heck (NV) Hensarling Herrera Beutler Holding Hudson Huelskamp Huizenga (MI) Hultgren Hunter Hurt Issa Jenkins Johnson (OH) Johnson, Sam Jolly Jordan Joyce Kelly (PA) King (IA) King (NY) Kingston Kinzinger (IL) Kline Labrador LaMalfa Lamborn Lance Latham Latta Lipinski LoBiondo Long Lucas Luetkemeyer Lujan Grisham (NM) Lummis Maloney, Sean Marchant Marino Massie McAllister McCarthy (CA) McCaul McClintock McHenry McIntyre McKeon McKinley McMorris Rodgers Meadows Meehan Messer Mica Miller (FL) Miller (MI) Miller, Gary Mullin Murphy (PA) Neugebauer Noem Nugent Nunes Olson Palazzo Paulsen Pearce Perry Peters (CA) Peterson Pittenger Pitts Poe (TX) Pompeo Posey Price (GA) Reed Reichert Renacci Ribble Rice (SC) Rigell Roby Roe (TN) Rogers (AL) Rogers (KY) Rogers (MI) Rohrabacher Rokita Rooney Ros-Lehtinen Roskam Ross Rothfus Royce Runyan Ryan (WI) Salmon Sanford Scalise Schock Schweikert Scott, Austin Scott, David Sensenbrenner Sessions Shimkus Shuster Simpson Sinema Smith (MO) Smith (NE) Smith (NJ) Smith (TX) Southerland Stewart Stivers Stockman Stutzman Swalwell (CA) Terry Thompson (PA) Thornberry Tiberi Tipton Turner Upton Valadao Veasey Wagner Walberg Walden Walorski Weber (TX) Wenstrup Westmoreland Whitfield Williams Wilson (SC) Wittman Wolf Womack Woodall Yoder Yoho Young (AK) Young (IN) NOT VOTING--10 Capuano Kirkpatrick Lankford Mulvaney Nunnelee Polis Rangel Richmond Ryan (OH) Webster (FL) Announcement by the Acting Chair The Acting CHAIR (during the vote). There is 1 minute remaining. {time} 1718 So the amendment was rejected. The result of the vote was announced as above recorded. Amendment Offered by Mr. Nadler The Acting CHAIR. The unfinished business is the demand for a recorded vote on the amendment offered by the gentleman from New York (Mr. Nadler) on which further proceedings were postponed and on which the noes prevailed by voice vote. The Clerk will redesignate the amendment. The Clerk redesignated the amendment. [[Page H5516]] Recorded Vote The Acting CHAIR. A recorded vote has been demanded. A recorded vote was ordered. The Acting CHAIR. This is a 2-minute vote. The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were--ayes 187, noes 233, not voting 11, as follows: [Roll No. 320] AYES--187 Amash Barber Bass Beatty Becerra Bera (CA) Bishop (NY) Blumenauer Bonamici Brady (PA) Braley (IA) Brown (FL) Brownley (CA) Bustos Butterfield Capps Caardenas Carney Carson (IN) Cartwright Castor (FL) Castro (TX) Chu Cicilline Clark (MA) Clarke (NY) Clay Cleaver Clyburn Cohen Connolly Conyers Costa Courtney Crowley Cummings Davis (CA) Davis, Danny DeFazio DeGette DeLauro DelBene Deutch Dingell Doggett Doyle Duckworth Edwards Ellison Engel Enyart Eshoo Esty Farr Fattah Foster Frankel (FL) Fudge Gabbard Gallego Garamendi Garcia Gibson Grayson Green, Al Grijalva Gutieerrez Hahn Hanabusa Hastings (FL) Heck (WA) Higgins Himes Hinojosa Holt Honda Horsford Hoyer Huffman Israel Jackson Lee Jeffries Johnson (GA) Johnson, E. B. Jones Kaptur Keating Kelly (IL) Kennedy Kildee Kilmer Kind Kuster Langevin Larsen (WA) Larson (CT) Lee (CA) Levin Lewis Lipinski Loebsack Lofgren Lowenthal Lowey Lynch Maffei Maloney, Carolyn Maloney, Sean Massie Matheson Matsui McCarthy (NY) McCollum McDermott McGovern McNerney Meeks Meng Michaud Miller, George Moore Murphy (FL) Nadler Napolitano Neal Negrete McLeod Nolan O'Rourke Owens Pallone Pascrell Pastor (AZ) Payne Pelosi Perlmutter Peters (CA) Peters (MI) Petri Pingree (ME) Pocan Price (NC) Quigley Rahall Rohrabacher Roybal-Allard Ruppersberger Rush Saanchez, Linda T. Sanchez, Loretta Sanford Sarbanes Schakowsky Schiff Schneider Schrader Schwartz Scott (VA) Serrano Sewell (AL) Shea-Porter Sherman Sinema Sires Slaughter Smith (WA) Speier Swalwell (CA) Takano Thompson (CA) Thompson (MS) Tierney Titus Tonko Tsongas Van Hollen Vargas Veasey Vela Velaazquez Visclosky Walz Wasserman Schultz Waters Waxman Welch Wilson (FL) Yarmuth NOES--233 Aderholt Amodei Bachmann Bachus Barletta Barr Barrow (GA) Barton Benishek Bentivolio Bilirakis Bishop (GA) Bishop (UT) Black Blackburn Boustany Brady (TX) Bridenstine Brooks (AL) Brooks (IN) Broun (GA) Buchanan Bucshon Burgess Byrne Calvert Camp Campbell Cantor Capito Carter Cassidy Chabot Chaffetz Coble Coffman Cole Collins (GA) Collins (NY) Conaway Cook Cooper Cotton Cramer Crawford Crenshaw Cuellar Culberson Daines Davis, Rodney Delaney Denham Dent DeSantis DesJarlais Diaz-Balart Duffy Duncan (SC) Duncan (TN) Ellmers Farenthold Fincher Fitzpatrick Fleischmann Fleming Flores Forbes Fortenberry Foxx Franks (AZ) Frelinghuysen Gardner Garrett Gerlach Gibbs Gingrey (GA) Gohmert Goodlatte Gosar Gowdy Granger Graves (GA) Graves (MO) Green, Gene Griffin (AR) Griffith (VA) Grimm Guthrie Hall Hanna Harper Harris Hartzler Hastings (WA) Heck (NV) Hensarling Herrera Beutler Holding Hudson Huelskamp Huizenga (MI) Hultgren Hunter Hurt Issa Jenkins Johnson (OH) Johnson, Sam Jolly Jordan Joyce Kelly (PA) King (NY) Kingston Kinzinger (IL) Kline Labrador LaMalfa Lamborn Lance Latham Latta LoBiondo Long Lucas Luetkemeyer Lujan Grisham (NM) Lujaan, Ben Ray (NM) Lummis Marchant Marino McAllister McCarthy (CA) McCaul McClintock McHenry McIntyre McKeon McKinley McMorris Rodgers Meadows Meehan Messer Mica Miller (FL) Miller (MI) Miller, Gary Mullin Murphy (PA) Neugebauer Noem Nugent Nunes Olson Palazzo Paulsen Pearce Perry Peterson Pittenger Pitts Poe (TX) Pompeo Posey Price (GA) Reed Reichert Renacci Ribble Rice (SC) Rigell Roby Roe (TN) Rogers (AL) Rogers (KY) Rogers (MI) Rokita Rooney Ros-Lehtinen Roskam Ross Rothfus Royce Ruiz Runyan Ryan (WI) Salmon Scalise Schock Schweikert Scott, Austin Scott, David Sensenbrenner Sessions Shimkus Shuster Simpson Smith (MO) Smith (NE) Smith (NJ) Smith (TX) Southerland Stewart Stivers Stockman Stutzman Terry Thompson (PA) Thornberry Tiberi Tipton Turner Upton Valadao Wagner Walberg Walden Walorski Weber (TX) Webster (FL) Wenstrup Westmoreland Whitfield Williams Wilson (SC) Wittman Wolf Womack Woodall Yoder Yoho Young (AK) Young (IN) NOT VOTING--11 Capuano King (IA) Kirkpatrick Lankford Moran Mulvaney Nunnelee Polis Rangel Richmond Ryan (OH) Announcement by the Acting Chair The Acting CHAIR (during the vote). There is 1 minute remaining. {time} 1722 So the amendment was rejected. The result of the vote was announced as above recorded. Amendment Offered by Mrs. Walorski The Acting CHAIR. The unfinished business is the demand for a recorded vote on the amendment offered by the gentlewoman from Indiana (Mrs. Walorski) on which further proceedings were postponed and on which the ayes prevailed by voice vote. The Clerk will redesignate the amendment. The Clerk redesignated the amendment. Recorded Vote The Acting CHAIR. A recorded vote has been demanded. A recorded vote was ordered. The Acting CHAIR. This will be a 2-minute vote. The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were--ayes 238, noes 179, not voting 14, as follows: [Roll No. 321] AYES--238 Aderholt Amodei Bachmann Bachus Barber Barletta Barr Barrow (GA) Barton Benishek Bentivolio Bilirakis Bishop (UT) Black Blackburn Boustany Brady (TX) Bridenstine Brooks (AL) Brooks (IN) Broun (GA) Brown (FL) Buchanan Bucshon Burgess Byrne Calvert Camp Campbell Cantor Capito Carter Cassidy Chabot Chaffetz Coble Coffman Cole Collins (GA) Collins (NY) Conaway Cook Cotton Cramer Crawford Crenshaw Cuellar Culberson Daines Davis, Rodney Denham Dent DeSantis DesJarlais Diaz-Balart Duffy Duncan (SC) Duncan (TN) Ellmers Farenthold Fincher Fitzpatrick Fleischmann Fleming Flores Forbes Fortenberry Foxx Franks (AZ) Frelinghuysen Garcia Gardner Garrett Gerlach Gibbs Gibson Gingrey (GA) Gohmert Goodlatte Gosar Gowdy Granger Graves (GA) Graves (MO) Green, Gene Griffin (AR) Griffith (VA) Grimm Guthrie Hall Hanna Harper Harris Hartzler Hastings (WA) Heck (NV) Hensarling Herrera Beutler Holding Hudson Huelskamp Huizenga (MI) Hultgren Hunter Hurt Issa Jenkins Johnson (OH) Johnson, Sam Jolly Jones Jordan Joyce Kelly (PA) King (NY) Kingston Kinzinger (IL) Kline LaMalfa Lamborn Lance Latham Latta Lipinski LoBiondo Long Lucas Luetkemeyer Lummis Maloney, Sean Marchant Marino Matheson McAllister McCarthy (CA) McCaul McClintock McHenry McIntyre McKeon McKinley McMorris Rodgers McNerney Meadows Meehan Messer Mica Miller (FL) Miller (MI) Miller, Gary Mullin Murphy (FL) Murphy (PA) Neugebauer Noem Nugent Nunes Olson Palazzo Paulsen Pearce Perry Peters (MI) Peterson Petri Pittenger Pitts Poe (TX) Pompeo Posey Price (GA) Reed Reichert Renacci Ribble Rice (SC) Rigell Roby Roe (TN) Rogers (AL) Rogers (KY) Rogers (MI) Rohrabacher Rokita Rooney Ros-Lehtinen Roskam Ross Rothfus Royce Ruiz Runyan Ryan (WI) Salmon Scalise Schock Scott, Austin Scott, David Sensenbrenner Sessions Shimkus Shuster Simpson Sinema Smith (MO) Smith (NE) Smith (NJ) Smith (TX) Southerland Stewart Stivers Stockman Stutzman Terry Thornberry Tiberi Tipton Turner Upton Valadao Wagner Walberg Walden Walorski Weber (TX) Webster (FL) Wenstrup Westmoreland Whitfield Williams Wilson (SC) Wolf Womack Woodall Yoder Yoho Young (AK) Young (IN) NOES--179 Amash Bass Beatty Becerra Bera (CA) Bishop (GA) Bishop (NY) Blumenauer Bonamici Brady (PA) Braley (IA) Brownley (CA) Bustos Butterfield Capps Caardenas Carney Carson (IN) Cartwright Castor (FL) Castro (TX) Chu Cicilline Clark (MA) Clarke (NY) Clay Cleaver Clyburn Cohen Connolly [[Page H5517]] Conyers Cooper Costa Courtney Crowley Cummings Davis (CA) Davis, Danny DeFazio DeGette Delaney DeLauro DelBene Deutch Dingell Doggett Doyle Duckworth Edwards Engel Enyart Eshoo Esty Farr Fattah Foster Frankel (FL) Fudge Gabbard Gallego Garamendi Grayson Green, Al Grijalva Gutieerrez Hahn Hanabusa Hastings (FL) Heck (WA) Higgins Himes Hinojosa Holt Honda Horsford Hoyer Huffman Israel Jackson Lee Jeffries Johnson (GA) Johnson, E. B. Kaptur Keating Kelly (IL) Kennedy Kildee Kilmer Kind Kuster Langevin Larsen (WA) Larson (CT) Lee (CA) Levin Lewis Loebsack Lofgren Lowenthal Lowey Lujan Grisham (NM) Lujaan, Ben Ray (NM) Lynch Maffei Maloney, Carolyn Massie Matsui McCarthy (NY) McCollum McDermott McGovern Meeks Meng Michaud Miller, George Moore Moran Nadler Napolitano Neal Negrete McLeod Nolan O'Rourke Owens Pallone Pascrell Pastor (AZ) Payne Pelosi Perlmutter Peters (CA) Pingree (ME) Pocan Price (NC) Quigley Rahall Roybal-Allard Ruppersberger Rush Saanchez, Linda T. Sanchez, Loretta Sanford Sarbanes Schakowsky Schiff Schneider Schrader Schwartz Scott (VA) Serrano Sewell (AL) Shea-Porter Sherman Sires Slaughter Smith (WA) Speier Swalwell (CA) Takano Thompson (CA) Thompson (MS) Thompson (PA) Tierney Titus Tonko Tsongas Van Hollen Vargas Veasey Vela Velaazquez Visclosky Walz Wasserman Schultz Waters Waxman Welch Wilson (FL) Yarmuth NOT VOTING--14 Capuano Ellison King (IA) Kirkpatrick Labrador Lankford Mulvaney Nunnelee Polis Rangel Richmond Ryan (OH) Schweikert Wittman Announcement by the Acting Chair The Acting CHAIR (during the vote). There is 1 minute remaining. {time} 1726 So the amendment was agreed to. The result of the vote was announced as above recorded. {time} 1730 Amendment No. 2 Offered by Mr. Cotton Mr. COTTON. I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will designate the amendment. The text of the amendment is as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title) insert the following: Sec. __. None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act may be used to transfer or release any individual detained at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba to the individual's country of origin or to any other foreign country. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 628, the gentleman from Arkansas and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Arkansas. Mr. COTTON. I yield myself such time as I may consume. Mr. Chairman, my amendment would very simply prohibit the use of funds in this legislation from being used to transfer detainees at Guantanamo Bay to their country of origin or any foreign country. There are two main reasons why this amendment is necessary, both related to the President's action in trading five senior Taliban commanders for Private Bowe Bergdahl. First, he has proven that section 1035 of the National Defense Authorization Act is inadequate; and, second, we need to review conditions of the release of the Taliban Five. On the first point, this Congress granted the President, last year, expanded authority to release detainees from Guantanamo Bay, conditioned on 30 days' notice to the Congress, as well as certain conditions. The President abused that authority by releasing the Taliban Five without notification, even to the so-called Gang of Eight, the senior leaders of both parties in both Chambers, the senior leaders of both Intelligence Committees in both Chambers. The President, having duly signed the National Defense Authorization Act into law with those restrictions, but then did not obey those restrictions, did not claim his core article II constitutional powers to override them. Therefore, it is imperative on our institution to reclaim, on principle, our constitutional authority. Second, the Taliban Five have been released into the country of Qatar. We need to take a year to review the conditions of those released. As many of you have seen, they appear to be moving about freely in the country of Qatar without any restrictions on their movement, absent the requirement that they remain in Qatar. This would allow them--senior commanders, mind you--to communicate freely with Taliban on the battlefield against our troops in Afghanistan. We should be able to take at least 1 year to see if such conditions are adequate to support the release of such hardened terrorist commanders. What does this amendment not do? This is not a permanent ban on transfers of detainees from Guantanamo Bay, nor does it authorize indefinite detention. It simply says we will take a 1-year pause to evaluate the conditions under which five senior Taliban commanders were released and to reassert our constitutional prerogatives. Who are these detainees? They are not goat herders who were innocently swept up by the American military, nor are they foot soldiers or couriers. These are the worst of the worst, 149 hardened terrorists, which Joint Task Force Guantanamo Bay says 120 of are high risk to return to the battle. In fact, just this week, a former Guantanamo Bay detainee was arrested in Spain, recruiting for the Islamic States of Iraq and Syria, the terrorist group that is currently rampaging through both Syria and Iraq. I urge my colleagues to support this amendment, stand up for your honor as a coequal branch, stand up for our national security, and stand up for the safety of your constituents. I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Mr. Chairman, I rise in opposition to the gentleman's amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from Indiana is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Mr. Chairman, the gentleman would have a restriction, and I would point out, after today's vote, this would now be the fifth restriction relative to the detainees at Guantanamo Bay. While the gentleman suggests that it is not a permanent ban, it is a mantra of let's do nothing. These are human beings, whether we want to admit that or not, and to simply continue, after 13 years, to do nothing is wrong. We are a Nation of laws. I believe the continued operation of Guantanamo Bay reduces our Nation's credibility and weakens our national security by providing terrorist organizations with recruitment material. Also, we are debating an appropriation bill, and people ought to understand that we are spending $2.7 million annually per inmate at Guantanamo Bay, which is about 35 times more than the cost of an inmate at a supermaximum Federal prison in the United States. I would also point out that the United States has transferred 620 detainees from Guantanamo since May of 2002, with 532 transfers occurring during the Bush administration and 88 transfers occurring during the Obama administration. At this point, Mr. Chairman, I would reserve the balance of my time. Mr. COTTON. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Florida (Mr. Yoho). Mr. YOHO. Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank my colleague for yielding. I rise today in support of the gentleman from Arkansas, Tom Cotton's amendment, which would prohibit any funds from being used to transfer or release any of the prisoners held at Guantanamo Bay. We are a Nation of laws, and we need to make sure we follow those laws. I support this amendment for a litany of reasons, chief among them is that it sends a clear message to the President that he cannot circumvent Congress and that he, the President, cannot override the law of the land. He should have notified Congress 30 days prior to releasing the five prisoners in exchange for Sergeant Bergdahl. The implications of this release will have a far-reaching impact on the national security of the United States. Just recently, as the gentleman from Arkansas (Mr. Cotton) pointed out, Spanish authorities arrested a former [[Page H5518]] Guantanamo Bay detainee on suspicions of running a terrorist recruitment network. The Director of National Intelligence has said that, by January of 2014, about 29 percent of the 614 detainees released from the prison at Guantanamo Bay had returned to violence. Our brave men and women in uniform have fought too hard and have sacrificed too much to have the President release these detainees who will likely return straight to the battlefield. We understand this, and our constituents understand this. I support this amendment, and I urge my colleagues to support this strongly, too. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Mr. Chairman, I would point out, relative to the gentleman's suggestion that we need to make sure the laws of the land are followed, that that is exactly what we do in this bill. Chairman Frelinghuysen had an amendment in the full committee, which I supported and spoke on behalf of, given the recent transfer of Taliban prisoners by the administration, and the fact is, in section 9015 of the bill, as printed and pending, it says: No more than 15 percent of the funds made available may be obligated until the Secretary of Defense provides the congressional Defense and Intelligence Committees with a detailed spend plan for the funds provided. Essentially, the chairman's initiative that I supported--and the committee voted for--fences that money off to make sure the law is followed. This amendment is unnecessary. I will continue to reserve the balance of my time. Mr. COTTON. Mr. Chairman, with due respect to the gentleman from Indiana on numerous points, this is the fifth restriction that this Congress has undertaken. If it were to pass, it simply shows the judgment of this Congress, the people's representatives, that these remaining 149 detainees are too dangerous to be cavalierly released into a country without adequate constraints or without notification to Congress, as the law that the President signed demanded. I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. Moran). Mr. MORAN. Mr. Chairman, I rise in opposition to this bill. There are some facts that need to be put on the table that are inconsistent with what has been suggested by the gentleman from Arkansas. 18.6 percent of the people that were released by the Bush administration were ``confirmed'' recidivism cases, but it needs to be made clear that the Obama administration has released 95 people, and five of them have gone back to the battlefield. Now, we don't want anyone to go back to the battlefield. There are 149 detainees still at Guantanamo. Fifteen are clearly the worst of the worst. Nobody is talking about transferring them, ever; but among them are a number of Muslim men who are innocent of any act against this country or our allies who were in the wrong place at the wrong time and were kidnapped by bounty hunters. Only 5 percent of the prisoners held at Guantanamo were actually apprehended by U.S. forces, and as many as 86 percent were delivered to coalition forces in exchange for a bounty of millions of dollars per head. There are 78 people who have been cleared for release by the Department of Defense, and they are still under detention. That is a travesty. That is not right. That is inconsistent with everything we believe and stand for in terms of American jurisprudence. I think the gentleman has made it sufficiently clear by now that many of us know that the political and legal expediency of this detention center at Guantanamo has not been worth the cost to America's reputation around the world, nor to the erosion of our legal and ethical standards here at home. For far too long, over the course of this war, we have let our fear and anger triumph over our commitment to the rule of law, and every day that we continue to hold these men without charge, we diminish ourselves and cede our moral authority in the world. So, Mr. Chairman, this amendment is wrong. We need to exercise our judgment. Not all are the same. Not all should be there. Some should be tried in our courts, and this country has the ability to try and prosecute them. {time} 1745 Mr. COTTON. I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. VISCLOSKY. I yield my remaining time to the gentleman from New York (Mr. Nadler). Mr. NADLER. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Cotton says that by this amendment, Congress recognizes the danger presented by these detainees. But legislative bodies have no right to make such judgments about individuals. Ever since Magna Carta, we have denied the government the power to imprison or punish people on mere accusations. Just because the government or Congress labels someone a terrorist doesn't make him one. The government must be required to prove the accusation in court. That has always been a bedrock American principle until we opened Guantanamo. Now we imprison people indefinitely without trial. By what claim of right do we do this? How can we be sure we are punishing actual terrorists and not innocent people when we hold no trials? Guantanamo should be closed and its inmates either tried or released. It is beyond time to close Guantanamo to end this shame on American justice. The Acting CHAIR. The time of the gentleman has expired. Mr. COTTON. Mr. Chairman, in conclusion, I would simply say that the 149 terrorists left at Guantanamo Bay are not goat herders, they are not couriers, and they are not even foot soldiers. They are bomb- makers, they are commanders, and they are intelligence experts who have killed American soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines around the world. Yes, there have been releases in the past, but many of those release were of less dangerous terrorists. The Joint Task Force Guantanamo Bay says 120 out of 149 of the remaining detainees are at high risk to return to the battlefield. That is over 80 percent. Mr. Chairman, I urge a ``yes'' vote to put a pause on the President's lawless release of the Taliban Five from Guantanamo Bay. I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Arkansas (Mr. Cotton). The question was taken; and the Acting Chair announced that the ayes appeared to have it. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Mr. Chairman, I demand a recorded vote. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to clause 6 of rule XVIII, further proceedings on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Arkansas will be postponed. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Mr. Chairman, I move to strike the last word. The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from Indiana is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Mr. Chairman, I would like to yield to the gentlewoman from Ohio (Ms. Kaptur). Ms. KAPTUR. I thank the gentleman for yielding. Mr. Chairman, I rise today to support this bill and provisions therein which underscore that a free, independent, and democratic Ukraine is in the interests of liberty everywhere, most especially the European continent, which largely shares America's constitutional values and respect for the rule of law. The road ahead will not be easy. Ukraine faces enormous challenges in transitioning to a democratic society as Russia eats away at her eastern provinces and now begins to sabotage her internal assets. The incomes of ordinary people in Ukraine have dropped significantly. Consumer inflation for the year is up 16 percent at the same time the Hryvnia has depreciated sharply, forcing private consumption to drop precipitously and further pushing GDP to decline. Life for ordinary citizens has become increasingly unsympathetic. Liberty hangs in the balance. With winter's approach, economic pressures will further mount as Russia restricts gas supplies to Ukraine. This is a time for attention to Ukraine, which holds enormous potential to be the world's breadbasket in this 21st century, if only political conditions are stabilized to allow a better future to be built for all. One powerful dimension of Ukrainian society most often ignored by Ukraine's former leaders and by the world community is Ukraine's village women. Despite all obstacles, they continue to produce nearly half the food [[Page H5519]] that that nation's citizens eat. In village after village, on plots that are small and open pastures, these stalwart women--many of them grandmothers--toil, using simple hand tools, worn out handcarts, wearing old boots, and planting seed and plants whose germ-plasma is nearly worn out. Their timeworn, horse-drawn wagons need tires to navigate the rough back roads. Their dwellings often lack water and indoor plumbing. Life is survival, and it is hard. Empowering Ukraine's women to lighten their load and make their task a bit easier would be one important step our country and world leaders could take to allow Ukraine to transition through these delicate years to a better future. For these reasons, the Appropriations Committee included language in the Defense bill directing the Secretary of Defense to submit a report to the congressional defense committees not later than 60 days after the enactment of this act describing additional assistance that the Department may provide to Ukraine, including out of its surplus warehouses. The goal of our humanitarian efforts is to empower the women of Ukraine, who, despite enormous obstacles, literally hold their families and that nation together. It is to use humanitarian shipments from our country, from government surplus--anywhere in the world we can acquire it--to simply provide items to help them with their food production and preservation. Give to these village women: good seed, buckets, wheelbarrows, gloves, boots, shovels, scythes, hoes, rakes, plastic on rolls, fencing, carts, used tires that will fit their horse-drawn wagons, simple canning equipment for putting up fruits and vegetables, drying equipment, scissors, hand shovels, grass clippers, pruners, loppers, saws, hammers, small hoop houses, hose, rope, and string. And while we are at it, how about some shortwave radios so they can connect to the world beyond their meager circumstances? We anticipate with other provisions in this legislation States with lift capacity, such as Ohio, can arrange Department of Defense humanitarian shipments through their National Guard Partnership for Peace programs to transport the above-mentioned agricultural tools and supplies to the Ukrainian women in their villages through charitable networks in that country. Mr. Chairman, I rise today to recognize this important inclusion in this bill. I thank the chairman of our committee, Mr. Frelinghuysen, the ranking member, Mr. Visclosky, and all freedom-loving people everywhere for understanding the vital consequence of these provisions at this moment of history. I would like to include for the Record an article entitled ``Ukraine Faces Hurdles in Restoring Its Farming Legacy.'' [From the New York Times, May 27, 2014] Ukraine Faces Hurdles in Restoring Its Farming Legacy (By Danny Hakim) Zibolky, Ukraine.--Like many of her neighbors in this old Soviet collective farm, Maria Onysko prefers to be paid in grain instead of cash for the modest plot of land she rents out. ``I have two cows and four pigs, many chickens,'' said Ms. Onysko, 62. ``So we use it for them.'' After the breakup of the Soviet Union, farmland in newly independent Ukraine was divided among villagers, acre by acre, creating a patchwork of agricultural endeavors that are often inefficient or unprofitable. Some land is rented to fruit growers, grain operators or large-scale farming businesses. Some locals work small plots on their own. Some acreage sits fallow, stuck in legal limbo after the owner has died. Ukraine was once the breadbasket of the Soviet Union, known for its rich soil where grain, sunflowers and livestock flourished. But farming production dropped sharply in the chaotic decade after the collapse of communism, and recovery has come in fits and starts. Production is only now returning to peak levels of the 1990s, stymied by the corruption, red tape and inefficiencies that have plagued the broader Ukrainian economy for years and left the villagers living humble existences. Restoring Ukraine's farming legacy will be crucial to the success of the country's newly elected president, the billionaire businessman Petro O. Poroshenko. Such efforts would go a long way toward fixing Ukraine's economy and reducing its dependence on Russia. Agriculture once accounted for nearly 20 percent of the gross domestic product; it is now roughly 10 percent. The potential became clear last year when a strong harvest helped Ukraine avoid a drop in output. ``It was just because of agriculture,'' said Pavlo Sheremeta, Ukraine's minister of economic development. ``Otherwise, it would have been a decline.'' Against the backdrop of the crisis with Russia, Western interests are pressing for change. The European Union is moving forward with a plan to bolster trade by lifting custom duties on Ukrainian agriculture. As part of a deal with the International Monetary Fund for up to $18 billion in loans, the country's government must push through business reforms that would help alleviate the problems with farming and other businesses. The hope is that such initiatives will also bolster the confidence of foreign investors as the crisis abates. Big multinationals have expressed tentative interest in Ukrainian agriculture, but they have largely remained on the sidelines, unwilling to invest in an industry hampered by structural deficiencies and, more recently, the uncertainty with its eastern neighbor. ``If cheap capital comes in along with foreign investment, and you have a good government without roadblocks, Ukraine can close to double its production in the future,'' said Roman Fedorowycz, a Ukrainian-American who returned here years ago and now runs a farming company that grows mainly corn, sunflowers and soybeans. Even small improvements would make a big difference in a highly inefficient industry starved for money. While roughly 70 percent of Ukraine's land is considered suitable for agriculture, it has not been fully cultivated. The country's yield per hectare of grain is about half that of the United States, according to the World Bank. Change won't come easy, given the challenges. Previous governments have tried to restrict what crops farmers grow and when they rotate crops, as well as limiting exports. Some state inspectors lack cars to conduct on-site inspections, so farmers must bring grain to them before shipping. Selling farmland is also forbidden in Ukraine, a legacy of its communist past. So fields remain cut up ``like chessboards,'' said Georgiy Vaydanych, land manager for Agrokultura, a Stockholm-based agricultural company that rents 173,000 acres in many such villages. ``For the moment we have 40,000 active landlords,'' Mr. Vaydanych said. ``Forty thousand!'' Making matters worse, paperwork is costly and many villagers never officially inherit the farmland after their parents die. ``There is uncertainty on how to farm this land, because we have the dead souls in the middle of our fields,'' Mr. Vaydanych said, in a reference to Nikolai Gogol, whose 19th-century classic, ``Dead Souls,'' is required school reading here. Even as the crisis in the east intensifies, life in the agricultural west remains much the same. A dirt road straddling tilled fields leads into this village, with potholes so deep that drivers zigzag past each other. There are horse-drawn carts, roosters crowing, elderly women in kerchiefs and a church painted pale green topped by bulbous spires. Few in this pro-European area of Ukraine are nostalgic for Moscow. Still, Oleg Gusak, head of the village council, said life had not improved. ``When it was a collective, the level of life was better,'' he said, explaining that it was once a larger operation that harvested crops, had livestock and made clothing, furniture and jams. ``People even came from other regions, because we had so much work,'' he said, adding, ``Now, it's not the same.'' Trouble raising capital at reasonable prices makes it difficult to start or expand farms. ``I have to pay up to 12 percent if I borrow in euros,'' said Taras Barshchovsky, an entrepreneur who founded T.B. Fruit, which makes fruit juices and whose rented orchards cover thousands of acres. He has expanded into Poland, where he said he could borrow for less than 3 percent. ``Those who work with Ukrainian banks in hryvnias,'' the national currency, ``they pay up to 20 percent or more. I don't believe you can profit and return money on that percentage,'' he added. And while other former Soviet bloc neighbors like Hungary, Romania and Poland began easing their land sale restrictions after joining the European Union, Ukraine has repeatedly delayed lifting its moratorium, considering the move politically risky in its agrarian society. In 2013, the government of Viktor Yanukovych, the deposed Ukrainian leader, extended the moratorium until 2016, after he expected to stand for re-election. ``I'm afraid if I sell my land in the future my children will say their old grandfather drank away all their money,'' Hrynchyshyn Myroslaw, 62, said as he cleared a willow field near another village. With a laugh, he added: ``It depends how much you will pay me. If there are enough zeros, you can pay me.'' Volodymyr Baran, 43, a tractor mechanic, said he would never sell his six acres: ``The land is our bread.'' Such dynamics deter foreign investment, which has been tepid for years. Despite some interest from China and multinationals, large agricultural enterprises tend to be Ukrainian owned, and recent prominent deals have been less than they seemed. For example, Cargill paid a reported $200 million [[Page H5520]] for a stake in UkrLandFarming, an agricultural holding company. But a Cargill spokeswoman emphasized that the shares were collateral for a loan rather than a long-term investment. The rules make ``it so much more difficult to understand, and to bring in investment,'' said David Sedik, a senior official at the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ``It's not that a foreigner or a company has to buy the land, but it breeds opaqueness in the sector. You need transparent land laws.'' At his office, Mr. Vaydanych pulled out a village map and showed how its 2,500 acres were divvied up among 507 villagers. ``Every field is split, by little, little plots,'' he explained. Being a land manager requires a political touch. Mr. Vaydanych goes from village to village handing out favors, fending off competitors trying to outbid his rental contracts. A village chief, he said, ``may call us and tell us, it's the wintertime, we have a lot of snowfall, so give us a forklift to clean the road. O.K., well, we do that.'' ``He may say this electricity substation is broken so we need urgently to repair it, or he's calling because the water pump at school broke, so we replace it,'' he said. ``That's the commitment that comes with the land.'' ``I wouldn't be surprised by any request,'' Mr. Vaydanych said. ``It is about keeping everyone happy. That's my work.'' Mr. VISCLOSKY. Mr. Chairman, I yield to the gentleman from New Jersey (Mr. Frelinghuysen), the chairman. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. I would like to join with the ranking member in commending you for this colloquy and for the purpose of the colloquy. Mr. Chairman, as you know, we share, love, and represent a number of Ukrainian Americans, and we know their plight, and we salute your efforts. This is an important focus that you have brought to our attention. Ms. KAPTUR. Thank you so very much for your openness to this, Mr. Chairman. And Mr. Ranking Member, thank you for allotting me the time. Mr. VISCLOSKY. I want to thank the gentlewoman for her service and for her commitment to her constituents, to her country, and to the Ukrainian people. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time. Amendment Offered by Mr. Runyan Mr. RUNYAN. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title) insert the following: Sec. __. None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this Act may be used to retire, divest, or transfer, or to prepare or plan for the retirement, divestment, or transfer of, the entire KC-10 fleet during fiscal year 2015. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 628, the gentleman from New Jersey and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey. Mr. RUNYAN. Mr. Chairman, my amendment simply states that none of the funds made available by this act may be used to retire, divest, or transfer--or to prepare to retire, divest or transfer--the KC-10. During my time in Congress, I have been a strong supporter of the Air Force's new tanker, the KC-46A. We must bring a new tanker online, but during the transition, it is critical that we are able to meet all mission requirements. This is why I am strongly concerned by the Air Force's proposal to do a possible vertical cut of the KC-10 tanker and retire it. Having a mission capability shortfall by eliminating the newest tanker currently in our inventory while the KC-46A comes online is simply unacceptable. As many of you are aware, I am proud to have Joint Base McGuire-Dix- Lakehurst in my district, and my colleague Mr. Garamendi has Travis Air Force Base in California, which are both home to the KC-10. This is not parochial. It is an air refueling and air mobility mission readiness issue. The KC-10 platform has more than proved itself as a workhorse in support of air refueling and air mobility in Iraq, Afghanistan, our homeland defense, and other missions as called upon. Unlike other tankers in our inventory, it can refuel Air Force, Navy, and international military aircraft with its dual boom and hose-and- drogue systems. The KC-10 itself can also be refueled while in flight, helping extend our global reach. Most importantly, this aircraft is critical to providing an air bridge across the Arctic, Atlantic, and Pacific routes to support our combatant commanders. This amendment sends a message to the Air Force and the DOD that Congress remains committed to active oversight of our air refueling mission platforms and sufficient capacity to support our warfighters. I want to thank the chairman, the members of the subcommittee, and the staff for working with me on this important amendment. I would particularly highlight our appreciation for the strong support Chairman Frelinghuysen has shown for the KC-10 platform, and his concern for ensuring there is no mission gap for our military's air refueling needs. Mr. Chairman, I urge my colleagues to support this amendment. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Will the gentleman yield? Mr. RUNYAN. I yield to the gentleman from New Jersey. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Let me thank my colleague from New Jersey for raising this important issue. We believe this proposal to be an extremely risky proposition because the KC-10 provides a particularly vital link in the air bridge that enables global operations of our Armed Forces. We could not have done what we did in Afghanistan and Iraq without this vital link, and to retire the entire fleet would be a huge mistake. This is the only tanker that currently uses the boom to fuel Air Force aircraft and the basket to refuel the Navy and Marine Corps fleet. So it is darn important. I appreciate the work the gentleman has done to bring this to our attention. We have included, of course, language in our bill which reemphasizes the importance of the KC-10 to national security. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding. Mr. RUNYAN. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for those kind words, and I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Mr. Chairman, I rise in opposition to the amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from Indiana is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the recognition and would certainly at the outset compliment the gentleman for his concern about the KC-10 and also for his remarks about the performance of the aircraft as well as the value to our country. That is not in dispute, and that certainly is not the reason I am on my feet now. But the amendment, I believe, would reserve a specific element in the Department of Defense force structure. The practice of the committee and in our bill has been to avoid protection of specific weapons systems or bases and to leave the Department flexibility as far as a path going forward, particularly as far as restructuring units, as well as retirement of programs. This language does not comport with the general concepts of this bill. I would also point out an issue similar to this relative to a transfer of an airlift wing that was in one State of this great country, and the Department proposal that it be transferred to a different State in this country was debated in committee relative to the reporting of this bill, and we had a vote on that issue, and the committee voted against interfering with the decision that the Department had made relative to their military judgment. Therefore, I would urge the rejection of the gentleman's amendment with all due respect to the capabilities of the KC-10. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. RUNYAN. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for his comments on that. And I will just tell the committee that I have had many conversations with the Air Force about this exact issue, and to be able to take a capability away from what we can do in our global reach and not have a legitimate answer in the near future I think would be devastating to what we can do and how we can project power globally. So the readiness issue has not been answered, and I think this is a step in the right direction to make sure that our national security is at the forefront. So, with that, I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from New Jersey (Mr. Runyan). [[Page H5521]] The amendment was agreed to. Amendment Offered by Mr. Moran Mr. MORAN. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to carry out sections 8107 and 8108. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 628, the gentleman from Virginia and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Virginia. {time} 1800 Mr. MORAN. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself 3 minutes to explain that my amendment would allow the U.S. military to transfer to their home countries the 77 detainees who have been cleared for release by the intelligence community and the Joint Chiefs of Staff and to bring those not cleared for release to the United States to be charged, tried, and sentenced. The Sergeant Bergdahl exchange has brought this issue again to center stage, but the fact is that, if we had dealt with these individuals in a responsible and legal way, we would not be in this situation discussing the merits of the decision to release five of them. For 12 years now, Guantanamo has operated outside of a legal checks of the American judicial system, serving a physical reminder of the gap between the principles that define us as Americans and our willingness to abandon those principles in the name of national security. With the final withdrawal of American troops from Afghanistan this year, the continued indefinite detention at Guantanamo enters a new stage. We will no longer be at war, and the current Authorization for the Use of Military Force will expire. So we have to ask ourselves: Do we have the legal authority to hold these enemy combatants indefinitely? Now is the time to either transfer or bring these men to trial--now--while we can still do so on our own terms, while we can give the Defense Department the legal authority it needs to make the right decisions about these prisoners. It is costing us $2.7 million per detainee, per year, versus $34,000 at a maximum security prison in the United States. More than 300 individuals convicted of crimes related to international terrorism are currently incarcerated in 98 Federal prisons in the United States, with no escapes or attacks in attempts to free them. The indictment and capture of Ahmed Abu Khattala for his role in the Benghazi attack is a great example of our ability to deal with high- profile terrorists swiftly and safely. Mr. Khattala will not be brought to Guantanamo to become yet another symbol of U.S. hypocrisy. He will be brought to the United States to answer for his crimes in a Federal court and punished in accordance with the laws of this Nation. I have every confidence in our legal institutions to bring Mr. Khattala to justice. General Michael Lehnert, who oversaw the opening of Gitmo has said that its continued operation ``has helped our enemies'' and makes ``a mockery of our values.'' It is time to put an end to this by supporting this amendment, and let me just use one more quote. In the words of the family members of the 9/11 victims, the current system is ``immoral, unlawful, expensive, counterproductive, unnecessary, and has failed to deliver justice for the 9/11 attacks.'' I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, I seek time in opposition. The Acting CHAIR (Mrs. Black). The gentleman from New Jersey is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, I would first like to recognize Mr. Moran's service on our committee. As just exhibited, in the full committee, he is truly a passionate man, and I must say he has been consistently passionate on this issue, but despite his passion and his reasoning, I stand in opposition to his amendment. The provisions contained in our bill are the same as current law, and they have been carried in some form since fiscal year 2010, in both the appropriations bill and in the Defense authorization bill. Quite honestly, they need to remain there. The provisions we carry ensure that the remaining Gitmo detainees who are judged to be the most dangerous will never be brought into our homeland, where U.S. citizens could be threatened. There is a pretty strong and enduring consensus--bipartisan consensus--in Congress that Guantanamo Bay should remain open, that the detainees should not be transferred to the United States for any reason, and that no facility should be built in the United States to house them. As everyone here is aware and as it has been mentioned in earlier debate, a number of detainees who have been released from Guantanamo have gone back to the fight and killed and wounded Americans. The threat is real. We haven't quite left Afghanistan. The threats there are real. I strongly oppose the gentleman's amendment, and I ask the House to give it a strong negative vote. I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. MORAN. Madam Chair, how much time do I have remaining? The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from Virginia has 2\1/2\ minutes remaining. Mr. MORAN. Madam Chair, I yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from New York (Mr. Nadler), a distinguished member of the Judiciary Committee. Mr. NADLER. Madam Chair, we are holding 154 people at Guantanamo, 77 of whom have been cleared for release. That is to say they have been found guilty of nothing, are thought to be guilty of nothing, and have been judged not to pose any danger, but nonetheless, they are not released. There is no reason and no right for us to hold them further. The others should be brought to the United States and tried in a secure facility, tried for their offenses. Madam Chair, I wonder which of our colleagues doesn't believe in the American system of justice. I wonder which of us does not trust our own American courts. I wonder who among us does not believe in the Bill of Rights, who does not believe in the right to counsel or that people should have an opportunity to have their guilt or innocence established in court. What we have at Guantanamo is a system that is an affront to those beliefs and to the United States. In the last decade, we have begun to let go of our freedoms bit by bit, with each new executive order, each new court decision, and each new act of Congress. We have begun giving away our right to privacy, our right to our day in court when the government harms us, and with this legislation, we are continuing down the path of destroying the right to be free from imprisonment without due process of law. The language in this bill, without this amendment, prohibits moving any detainees into the United States or releasing any at all and guarantees that we will continue holding people indefinitely, people who may not be terrorists, who may not be enemy combatants, some of whom we may suspect to be terrorists, none of whom have been proven to be terrorists, none of whom have had a day in court. We will continue to hold them indefinitely without charge, contrary to every tradition this country stands for, contrary to any notion of due process. Mr. Cotton says that this Congress has judged that these people are dangerous people. This Congress has no right, under the Constitution, to make such a judgment. That is called the bill of attainder and is specifically prohibited. People to be found guilty must be found guilty in a court, not by a legislative body. Because of this momentous challenge to the founding principles of the United States that no person may be deprived of liberty without due process of law and certainly may not be deprived of liberty indefinitely without due process of law, we must close the detention facility at Guantanamo now, in order to restore our national honor. This will afford the detainees no additional constitutional rights. The Supreme Court has already ruled that detainees at Guantanamo have the same constitutional rights at Guantanamo as they would if they were brought here. They should be brought here. They should be tried in a Federal court, [[Page H5522]] where they can be convicted if guilty and acquitted if innocent and not wait for years for military tribunals which have succeeded in convicting nobody at trial at all. We must restore the honor of the United States and eliminate this exception to our traditions and to our rule of law and to our rule of justice. Just because we think or somebody in the government thinks that somebody is terrorist does not mean that that person is a terrorist--he may or may not be--and it does not mean that he does not have the right to his day in court. Mr. MORAN. Madam Chair, I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, what about justice for the victims of those who died on September 11, 2001? What about justice for those five detainees that were released the other day in the prisoner exchange, how is there justice there? They were among the worst of the worst. We need to keep the provisions in this bill. I urge a strong ``no'' vote on this amendment. I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. Moran). The question was taken; and the Acting Chair announced that the noes appeared to have it. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Madam Chair, I demand a recorded vote. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to clause 6 of rule XVIII, further proceedings on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Virginia will be postponed. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, I move to strike the last word. The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from New Jersey is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, I yield to the gentleman from Alabama (Mr. Byrne) for the purpose of a colloquy. Mr. BYRNE. Madam Chair, I rise to engage in a colloquy regarding the Navy's littoral combat ship. The Navy's littoral combat ship represents the future small surface combatant for the United States Navy. This program is in its infancy, but has, so far, cleared many hurdles and is well on its way to becoming an integral part of the fleet. The Navy reduced the budget request from four ships in fiscal year 2015, as they projected last year, to three ships. Mr. Chairman, your bill has further reduced the program to a recommended level of two ships. Mr. Chairman, wouldn't you agree that the LCS is an important part of the Navy's future fleet? Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Let me first salute the gentleman from Alabama for his strong advocacy on behalf of the littoral combat ship, and let me say that the littoral combat ship plays an extremely important role in the future of the Navy's fleet. In fact, the ship represents nearly one-sixth of the 306-ship fleet the Navy has expressed as its stated fleet requirement. During markup of the bill, the committee spent as much time, if not more, on this issue than any other. In the end, we were extremely concerned with the strong words expressed by the Secretary of Defense with respect to the small surface combat requirements that these ships must have. Since the littoral combat ship does play a vital role, we want to make sure we are buying the correct version. That is why we slowed the production. However, we recognize the importance of the industrial base--very much so--and we certainly don't want to let that in any way stagnate, so we have provided funding for two ships to bridge the gap until the Navy can verify the requirements and incorporate them into the production line. I do recognize that this is an important program for your community, and you have been a remarkable advocate. You have been on my case for quite a long time, and I am hugely admiring of your passion and determination. I want to assure you that we will continue to work with you to address your concerns. We will continue to monitor, as we proceed to conference with the Senate, and we will work with the gentleman to ensure we adopt the right policy for our national security and the industrial base, including a very important shipyard in the gentleman's district in Mobile, Alabama. Mr. BYRNE. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your attention to this matter. I look forward to working with you and Ranking Member Visclosky, as well as Chairman Rogers, as we move toward conference. The Navy has been unequivocal in its support for the LCS, and as you say, the LCS plays an extremely important role in the future of the Navy's fleet. It is vitally important the Congress not lose sight of that and that I not lose sight of the importance of this shipyard to my district. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, I yield back the balance of my time. Amendment No. 31 Offered by Ms. Lee of California Ms. LEE of California. Madam Chair, I have amendment No. 31 at the desk, preprinted in the Congressional Record. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will designate the amendment. The text of the amendment is as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: Sec. _. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used for the purposes of conducting combat operations in Iraq. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, I reserve a point of order on the gentlewoman's amendment. The Acting CHAIR. A point of order is reserved. Pursuant to House Resolution 628, the gentlewoman from California and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from California. Ms. LEE of California. Madam Chair, I rise today, remembering 12 years ago when I stood on this floor and offered an amendment with the same purpose as the amendments I offer this evening: to prevent a war with Iraq; to keep our young men and women--our troops--out of harm's way; and to be prudent with taxpayers' hard-earned dollars, as well as ensuring our national security. We are all familiar with the reports coming out of Iraq about the horrific sectarian violence taking place. We must not let history repeat itself. Calls to be dragged back into a war in Iraq must be rejected because the reality is there is no military solution in Iraq. I want to applaud the President for reiterating that again today and for making it clear that he does not want combat troops on the ground in Iraq. This amendment would not allow funding for combat operations. This is a sectarian war with longstanding roots that were inflamed, unfortunately, when we invaded Iraq in 2003. Any lasting solution must be political and take into account respect for the entire Iraqi population. {time} 1815 The change Iraq needs must come from Iraqis, rejecting violence in favor of a peaceful democracy that represents all and respects the rights of all. Our job is to continue to promote and support regional and international engagement, recognition of human rights and political reforms, support for women and children, and religious freedom. Madam Chair, after more than a decade of war, thousands of American lives, and hundreds of billions of dollars, the American people are rightfully war weary. The American people are not interested in repeating the mistakes of the past. A recent poll found that 74 percent of the public is opposed to sending combat troops into Iraq. This amendment would not impact the President's ability to protect U.S. personnel or our Embassy. We must do that. It does not impact the President's ability to act if there is a direct or imminent threat to our national security. As the President cited in his recent notification to Congress, doing so would be consistent with his responsibilities to protect U.S. citizens both at home and abroad. Finally, it does not impact the President's ability to send assistance to gather intelligence or advisers and trainers. Madam Chair, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, I withdraw my reservation, and I seek the time in opposition. The Acting CHAIR. The reservation is withdrawn. The gentleman from New Jersey is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, what is occurring in Iraq is complicated and dangerous and violent. [[Page H5523]] This is a complicated issue that the gentlewoman seeks to address with multifaceted policy ramifications that really cannot be fully debated in an amendment in this short period of time. The situation in Iraq remains highly complicated, very dangerous, and does, I believe, and many believe, pose an imminent threat to U.S. and allied interests, particularly regional security; witness the fact that the President has sent over a number of advisers to either protect the Embassy or work with the Iraqi military. This amendment, in my judgment, goes too far as it attempts to tie the U.S. Government's hands, i.e., the Commander in Chief's hands, in navigating the complicated situation we face related to threats emanating from Iraq, recognizing that half of the country is now in the hands of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria. We have to be realistic. What this amendment would do is to remove any possibility of the U.S. engaging under any circumstance, even if such engagement would be in the best interest of our own country or allies. For example, this would preclude the U.S. from providing any assistance to the Iraqi Government to defeat a terrorist group inside Iraq, and it appears we may be on the verge of doing exactly that. Given the ever-changing dynamics in Iraq and the rising terrorist threats coming from within Iraq--and again, almost half the country is in the hands of terrorists--this is a very ill-advised amendment, and I strongly oppose it. I reserve the balance of my time. Ms. LEE of California. Madam Chair, just to clarify, all this amendment does is it would not fund the combat operations in Iraq. I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Minnesota (Mr. Nolan). Mr. NOLAN. Madam Chair, I rise in support of the Lee amendment. The American people have invested 10 years of precious blood and treasure into this conflict. The simple truth is that the Iraqi Government and the Iraqi Army have failed to win the confidence of their own people. The fact is, the army has cut and run, leaving behind valuable equipment, and the fact is we have no friends in this conflict. It is time to get out and to stay out. Thank you, Representative Lee, for your amendment. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, this amendment sends, I think, the wrong message to the Iraqi people, who have suffered a great deal, and of course I recognize the loss of our soldiers and the sacrifice of our soldiers and their families. I think this is a very ill-advised amendment and I strongly oppose it. I yield back the balance of my time. Ms. LEE of California. Madam Chair, how much time do I have remaining? The Acting CHAIR. The gentlewoman from California (Ms. Lee) has 2\1/ 2\ minutes remaining. Ms. LEE of California. I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Arizona (Mr. Grijalva). Mr. GRIJALVA. Madam Chair, I am here to support the amendment to prohibit the use of ground troops in Iraq. What the American people are seeking is an end to 10, 12, 11 years of a war without end. What the American people are seeking is attention to the needs in this country. What the veterans that have fought in that war are seeking are jobs and the proper care for the visible and invisible wounds of that war. The only thing we need to protect--and it is not about us going into a conflict and picking sides in what is fundamentally a religious war where there will be no end for us. We must avoid and prevent combat troops being in Iraq. We do that because the American people are against it; we do that because it is the moral imperative; and we do that because we have learned a lesson from history. And history has taught us that this is a war that will not end. We have an opportunity to end it. We have an opportunity to demand of the international community that they use diplomacy to solve the problem in the region. Ms. LEE of California. Madam Chair, I yield 1 minute now to the gentleman from Minnesota (Mr. Ellison). Mr. ELLISON. Madam Chair, it is as simple as this: the al-Maliki government has abused and excluded huge portions of his population. Because of that, there is a conflict in that country of al-Maliki's own making. Now, what we are going to do if we send combat troops there is literally be his air force, be his ground troops. We shouldn't do that. That is not the right thing for the United States to do. If we want to help, what we should do is engage the regional community, the countries around Iraq and Iraqi leaders, in a diplomatic solution that hopefully includes them having a more inclusive, less abusive government. That is the proper role of the United States. Trying to stop us from being combat troops is the right thing to do. I urge everybody to support this. I think the gentleman is incorrect; we are right to stay out of this thing. What, after all, have we learned if 11 years has not taught us? Training? We have given plenty of training. We have trained these people up the wazoo. They abandoned their post. It is not a training problem. Ms. LEE of California. Madam Chair, in closing, let me just underscore the fact that combat operations will not solve the problems in Iraq. This amendment would not fund combat operations. We should not repeat these terrible mistakes of the past. Let me once again clarify. This amendment would not impact the ability of the United States personnel and our Embassy. We want to protect the United States personnel and Embassy. Secondly, it would not impact the President's ability to provide unmanned intelligence gathering and assistance. It would not impact the President's constitutional authority to protect U.S. citizens both at home and abroad. I urge for a ``yes'' vote, and I yield back the balance of her time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentlewoman from California (Ms. Lee). The question was taken; and the Acting Chair announced that the noes appeared to have it. Ms. LEE of California. Madam Chair, I demand a recorded vote. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to clause 6 of rule XVIII, further proceedings on the amendment offered by the gentlewoman from California will be postponed. Amendment Offered by Mr. Walberg Mr. WALBERG. Madam Chair, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: Sec. 10002. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to promulgate Directive 293, issued December 16, 2010, by the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 628, the gentleman from Michigan and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Michigan. Mr. WALBERG. Madam Chair, I rise in support of my amendment that would reiterate Congress' objection to a proposed policy change by the Department of Labor Office of Federal Contract Compliance Program. That would treat health care providers as Federal contractors. In December 2010, OFCCP quietly issued directive 293 asserting that contractual arrangements under Medicare, TRICARE, and the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program will trigger OFCCP jurisdiction. This directive would reclassify a majority of hospitals in the United States as Federal contractors, subjecting hospitals in your district and mine to OFCCP's often crushing regulatory burden. With respect to TRICARE, the agency aggressively asserted in its jurisdiction in the 2009 administrative case OFCCP v. Florida Hospital of Orlando, OFCCP argued the hospital was a Federal subcontractor by virtue of its participation as a provider in a TRICARE network of providers. The agency took this troubling position despite the fact that the Department of Defense, which regulates TRICARE, previously included: ``It would be impossible to achieve the TRICARE mission of providing affordable health care for our Nation's Active Duty and retired military members and their families if onerous Federal contracting rules were applied to the more than 500,000 TRICARE providers in the United States.'' Unfortunately, Madam Chair, the administrative law judge in the case did not heed DOD's warning and failed to [[Page H5524]] see this policy change for what it is: an expansion of government power over the health care sector. As such, Congress acted to oppose this overreach, and the 2012 National Defense Authorization Act clarified that a TRICARE network health care provider is not a Federal contractor or subcontractor. As chairman of the Subcommittee on Workforce Protections, I am deeply concerned by this attempt by OFCCP to expand its jurisdiction through executive fiat. In response, I introduced the Protecting Health Care Providers from Increased Administrative Burdens Act, which would clarify that health care providers are not Federal contractors subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of Labor's OFCCP. Our actions on the committee in bringing attention to this issue have been successful in prompting OFCCP to place a moratorium on the policy. However, as OFCCP has previously defied Congress and the Department of Defense, I believe this amendment is necessary. Therefore, Madam Chair, I ask the House to support my amendment that would prohibit funds to be used under this act for implementing this overreach and affirmatively show the House will not support such actions by the Department of Labor and OFCCP. I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Madam Chair, I claim the time in opposition to the gentleman's amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from Indiana is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Madam Chair, I appreciate the recognition. I appreciate the thrust of the gentleman's amendment. I rise in opposition to it, however, because I think it is overly broad. One of the concerns I have is, if it is adopted, I am concerned about whether or not technical assistance could continue to be given to contractors and subcontractors; and, obviously, given the complexity of the law, it would be helpful for them to have it, and I would not want it to be prohibited. Additionally, the amendment would appear to interfere with the OFCCP's ability to connect outreach and, again, technical assistance under the current moratorium to help contractors and subcontractors understand their obligations under the law. So again, I appreciate where the gentleman is coming from. I am concerned that, given the broadness of the amendment, it may inhibit the type of information and assistance that these contractors and subcontractors really do need. So, for that reason, I am opposed to the gentleman's amendment. I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. WALBERG. Madam Chair, I appreciate the gentleman's concern; however, as DOD has recommended in the past and stood on the fact that, for purposes of TRICARE and the like, hospitals are not contractors, they do not contract with the Federal Government, with the Department of Defense. {time} 1830 So I don't see the reason for continuing to address this issue any further for these contractors, at least as defined by OFCCP. In closing, again, this is an issue that DOD has spoken on strongly, this is an issue that Congress has spoken on, this is an issue that OFCCP continues to push. I believe we would be remiss if we allowed this to happen and allowed the concept that hospitals would be considered government contractors simply for providing health care under TRICARE and the like to our veterans, to our military, and certainly to any of our Federal employees. I would appreciate support for this amendment, and I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Michigan (Mr. Walberg). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment Offered by Ms. DeLauro Ms. DeLAURO. Madam Chair, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to enter into any contract with an incorporated entity if such entity's sealed bid or competitive proposal shows that such entity is incorporated or chartered in Bermuda or the Cayman Islands, and such entity's sealed bid or competitive proposal shows that such entity was previously incorporated in the United States. Ms. DeLAURO (during the reading). Madam Chair, I ask unanimous consent to dispense with the reading of the amendment. The Acting CHAIR. Is there objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Connecticut? Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, I object. The Acting CHAIR. Objection is heard. The Clerk will read. The Clerk continued to read. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 628, the gentlewoman from Connecticut and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from Connecticut. Ms. DeLAURO. Madam Chair, I yield myself 2 minutes. My amendment would prohibit Federal contracts issued by the Department of Defense from going to entities incorporated in Bermuda and the Cayman Islands, two nations most often abused as tax havens. This body accepted a similar provision for the Departments of Transportation and Housing and Urban Development earlier this month. According to a joint study by the U.S. Public Interest Research Group and Citizens for Tax Justice, 70 percent of the companies in the Fortune 500 used tax havens last year. These companies stashed nearly $2 trillion offshore for tax purposes, with almost two-thirds of that total, 62 percent, being hidden away by just 30 companies. We just saw the medical device manufacturer Medtronic, a company founded in a Minnesota garage with deep roots throughout the State, announce it was effectively moving operations to Ireland to escape its tax obligations. This is a persistent and a growing problem, and we need to start taking action to rein it in. We can start with this amendment. Of the companies who have established subsidies in tax havens, nearly two-thirds have registered at least one in Bermuda or in the Cayman Islands. The profits these companies claim were earned in these two island nations in 2010 totaled over 1,600 percent of these countries' entire yearly economic output. These companies take advantage of our education system, our research and development incentives, our skilled workforce, and our infrastructure, all supported by U.S. taxpayers. They should not be allowed to pretend that they are an American company when it is time to get a defense contract, then claim to be an offshore company when the tax bill comes. We should not spend taxpayer money on Federal contracts to companies that have renounced their American citizenship in favor of an island tax haven. As I said, a similar amendment became part of the Transportation and Infrastructure bill. I urge my colleagues to pass this amendment, and I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, we do not oppose the amendment. Ms. DeLAURO. Madam Chair, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Texas (Mr. Doggett). Mr. DOGGETT. Madam Chair, that is very good to hear. I join in supporting this amendment as a coauthor of it. Multinational corporations that do business around the globe have an even greater interest in world order and in national security. They should not be paying a lesser rate of taxes than corporations that focus their business right here in America. Unfortunately, some of them scheme to avoid their fair share and to shift the burden to smaller businesses and to individuals. Some of these same companies have on more than one occasion paid more to their lobbyists to lobby this Congress and the Treasury to avoid paying taxes than they actually pay to the Treasury. It has been a pretty wise investment for them because our Tax Code is a mess. It is riddled with preferences and loopholes and one exception after another. This amendment addresses one of the most egregious tax gimmicks. That is where a corporation actually renounces its American citizenship, declares itself a citizen of some other country, and then continues operations in [[Page H5525]] America, demanding the full protection of the laws and the military and the educational system that it refuses to contribute a fair share to pay for. Tax lawyers call it an ``inversion''; I call it a perversion of our tax laws. To add insult to injury, some of these same corporations, which have abandoned their citizenship, then ask for American government contracts paid for with the very tax dollars from the small businesses and individuals to whom they have shifted the tax burden. American companies that stay and contribute to building our country and keeping her strong at home and abroad deserve a level playing field, and that is what this amendment does. The action that we take in approving this amendment today sends a message to executives that they can pretend that their company is located on some Caribbean beach to avoid paying taxes, but Congress is not going to put its head in the sand about this kind of tax dodging. Ms. DeLAURO. Madam Chair, may I inquire as to how much time is remaining. The Acting CHAIR. The gentlewoman from Connecticut has 1 minute remaining. Ms. DeLAURO. I thank the Chair. Madam Chair, I and others have long fought for--and we have succeeded in passing through the appropriations process--a ban on Federal contracts for U.S. companies that acquire a business in a lower tax jurisdiction and claim their headquarters there, despite still being a U.S. company. According to a 2009 GAO report, 63 of the 100 largest publicly traded U.S. Federal contractors reported having subsidies and tax havens in 2007. These companies are currently paying a tax rate of zero percent-- zero percent. So unless you believe tax reform should eliminate taxes for U.S. companies, this avoidance is not about corporate tax reform. We need to send that clear message. If a company is going to abuse the tax loopholes at the expense of businesses that are paying their fair share, they will not be rewarded with defense contracts. I am happy to hear and I urge my colleagues to make this stand with me again and to pass this amendment. I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentlewoman from Connecticut (Ms. DeLauro). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment No. 14 Offered by Mr. Fleming Mr. FLEMING. Madam Chair, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will designate the amendment. The text of the amendment is as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: Sec. ___. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to appoint chaplains for the military departments in contravention of Department of Defense Instruction 1304.28, dated June 11, 2004, incorporating change 3, dated March 20, 2014, regarding the appointment of chaplains for the military departments. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 628, the gentleman from Louisiana and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana. Mr. FLEMING. Madam Chairman, the amendment before you today holds the Department of Defense to current accepted DOD policy and standards when appointing military chaplains. It maintains the status quo, which has been well accepted for decades, if not centuries. My amendment affirms the spiritual role of chaplains in the U.S. armed services, preserving the integrity of the U.S. Chaplain Corps. I want to thank Representatives Jim Bridenstine and James Lankford for their cosponsorship of this amendment. This amendment was adopted last year during the House's consideration of DOD appropriations on a bipartisan basis, although it was ultimately dropped from the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2014. I would urge my colleagues to support its passage again today. Chaplains by definition are ministers for spiritual needs to people of secular institutions. They are equipped to do so because, like many other professionals requiring a certain skill set, chaplains possess a belief in God or a spiritual world view. Chaplains are experienced in their field, educationally qualified, and are willing to serve and attend to the spiritual needs of all members of the armed services, regardless of whether or not that soldier, sailor, airman, or marine shares the same faith as that of the chaplain. Current DOD guidelines requires that the candidates be endorsed by a ``qualified religious organization'' whose primary function is to perform religious ministries to a nonmilitary lay constituency and which holds tax-exempt status as a church. Faith and spiritual leadership are integral and inseparable from the institution of the Chaplain Corps. It would be difficult for an individual lacking in any faith to be appointed as a military chaplain without first dismantling the purpose of the chaplaincy and making significant changes to the DOD policy. Madam Chairman, it is an oxymoron to have a secular person attached to a secular institution as a chaplain. How can that person minister to the spiritual needs of others? Even so, there continues to be a movement to appoint atheist chaplains in the military. Such individuals reject the very existence of God, a deity, or even a spiritual world view, and thus an atheist chaplain would not serve any identifiable need for servicemembers that is not already currently being met with the Armed Forces. There are a host of other nonspiritual services available to support people in a nonfaith context, including social workers, psychologists, and counselors. Through Military OneSource and the Military and Family Life Counselor Programs, servicemembers can receive temporary and confidential counseling services from a licensed professional without any attachment to their records. In addition to these services, military chaplains can stand ready to faithfully and respectfully serve all servicemembers with any resources they might need, regardless of whether the individual shares the chaplain's faith. My amendment would prevent DOD from making changes to its longstanding appointment process that could undermine the integrity of the chaplaincy and interfere with the chaplain's responsibility to meet the religious needs of our brave men and women in uniform. I would like to thank the Family Research Council and the Chaplain Alliance for their support of this amendment, and urge all of my colleagues to join me in supporting this amendment. Madam Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Madam Chair, I rise in opposition to the gentleman's amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from Indiana is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Madam Chair, the gentleman has spoken much about the spiritual role of chaplains in the military. I am very concerned that the impulse here is related to sexual orientation and the limitation in serving as a chaplain in the United States military. I would tell the gentleman at one time in my life--and I obviously took a bad turn in the road because I got involved in politics--I was in a Roman Catholic seminary. My God is a loving God. My God is a tolerant God. My God passes judgment on the goodness of a person's soul. In this day and in this world, where there is so much hate and violence and anger, I think it is very disappointing that we in public life would try to accentuate that there are differences between us that may cause us not to like each other. Each of us seeks our God differently. We have different religions, we have different customs, we have different preferences. But it is important to find that chaplain and spiritual guide who meets those needs to help us to find that just and forgiving and kind God. I think it is wrong to foreclose any avenue for any American, and particularly those who put the uniform of this country on and risk their lives for us and are under incredible stress. To foreclose any avenue of spiritual guidance and relief for them is wrong. I would simply close by noting that there is a monument--Thomas Jefferson--in Washington D.C. {time} 1845 One of the writings of Jefferson is on the southeast portico. It says: [[Page H5526]] Laws and constitutions must go hand in hand with the progress of the human mind. As that becomes more developed, more enlightened, institutions must advance to keep pace with those times. We might as well require a man to wear still the coat which fitted him when a boy as a civilized society to remain ever under the regimen of their barbarous ancestors. My vote would be a vote to have a tolerant policy in a tolerant country. I oppose the gentleman's amendment, and I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. FLEMING. Madam Chair, may I ask how much time I have remaining? The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from Louisiana has 1 minute remaining. Mr. FLEMING. It is interesting. The gentleman argues that-- amazingly--somehow a chaplain is not going to be open to serving the spiritual needs of all, whether they be gay or otherwise. There is nothing in this amendment that says anything about the choice of one's sexual partner whatsoever. In fact, remember that we already have in our chaplaincy Wiccans, Buddhists, Muslims, Christians, and Jews. Many of those accept same-sex marriages. This argument that the gentleman makes is for another debate, not for this one. This deals purely with atheism. It is very interesting because the scene is that, on the battlefield, you have a chaplain who is serving the spiritual needs of a dying soldier and the soldier asks the chaplain: What happens now? What happens after my death? The answer from the atheist chaplain is: There is nothing for you after death. That is really a very disturbing thought, and I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. VISCLOSKY. Madam Chair, I stand for a tolerant Nation, and I stand in opposition to the gentleman's amendment, and I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Louisiana (Mr. Fleming). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment No. 33 Offered by Ms. Lee of California Ms. LEE of California. Madam Chair, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will designate the amendment. The text of the amendment is as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: Sec. _. None of the funds made available by this Act may be obligated or expended pursuant to the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002 (Public Law 107-243; 50 U.S.C. 1541 note). The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 628, the gentlewoman from California and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from California. Ms. LEE of California. Madam Chair, this amendment would simply prohibit funding for any operations or activities pursuant to the 2002 Authorization for Use of Military Force in Iraq. Why is this amendment necessary? Well, more than 2 years since the United States troops withdrew from Iraq, the 2002 Authorization for Use of Military Force remains on the books. Two years ago, President Obama declared the war in Iraq as over. Just yesterday, according to press reports, White House Press Secretary Jay Carney stated that the 2002 AUMF is ``no longer used for any United States Government activities.'' Further, in our Appropriations Committee, our chairman confirmed that this bill does not contain any funding to implement the 2002 authorization. That is good news, and it should make supporting this amendment an easy thing to do for Members on both sides of the aisle. The American people need an affirmative vote that the war in Iraq that began over 11 years ago through the military operation--shock and awe, which took over 2,000 lives--has come to an end and none of their hard-earned tax dollars are being spent. Some of us agree that it is well past time that we remove this authorization totally from the books, but on this appropriations bill, we only state very clearly that no funds may be obligated or expended for the authorization. Congress should never allow war-funding authorizations to remain on the books in perpetuity. We don't do this for the farm bill. We don't do this for the transportation bill. Madam Chair, we are all familiar with reports coming out of Iraq about the horrific sectarian violence taking place there. Once again, I want to applaud President Obama for reiterating again today that there is no military solution to the sectarian war there and also for his clear position that the United States is not going to be returning to combat in Iraq. This amendment does not limit the President's authority under the Constitution or War Powers Act to act if there is a direct or imminent threat to our national security. As the President cited in his recent letter to Congress, doing so would be consistent with his responsibilities to protect United States citizens both home and abroad. This amendment does not take away that authority. Further, this amendment fully allows for the protection of the United States Embassy and its personnel and would not impede any of those efforts by the United States military. Given that there is no funding in this bill for the 2002 AUMF, supporting this amendment is just plain common sense. The American people deserve this vote. It is long overdue. We should vote primarily also to ensure that our constitutional role is reasserted in war- making. I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, I claim the time in opposition. The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from New Jersey is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. FRELINGHUYSEN. Madam Chair, I rise in opposition to the gentlewoman's amendment. As the gentlelady knows, U.S. military action in Iraq came to an end in December of 2011. I want to make sure that she also knows that there are no funds in this act for military action in Iraq, pursuant to the Iraq AUMF resolution. Its grant of authority has both practically and legally ended. This amendment is an amendment in search of a problem, a problem that doesn't exist. This amendment is not about substance. To a great extent, it is about symbolism. It is intended to send a message that the United States has washed its hands of Iraq, which we haven't. At a time when sectarian tensions are at the highest level since we left and terrorists have, once again, succeeded in capturing large swaths of territory in Iraq and brutalizing the Iraqi people after our troops essentially fought to protect them, what kind of message are we sending with this amendment to both the Iraqi people and to the men and women of our Armed Forces and our international armed forces who so valiantly served? Let me repeat that there are no funds in this