Congressional Record
Formatting necessary for an accurate reading of this text may be shown by tags (e.g., <DELETED> or <BOLD>) or may be missing from this TXT display. For complete and accurate display of this text, see the PDF.

[Congressional Record Volume 163, Number 77 (Thursday, May 4, 2017)] [Pages H4114-H4138] From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov] PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION OF H.R. 2192, PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT AMENDMENT, AND PROVIDING FOR FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF H.R. 1628, AMERICAN HEALTH CARE ACT OF 2017 Mr. COLLINS of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, by direction of the Committee on Rules, I call up House Resolution 308 and ask for its immediate consideration. The Clerk read the resolution, as follows: H. Res. 308 Resolved, That upon adoption of this resolution it shall be in order to consider in the House the bill (H.R. 2192) to amend the Public Health Service Act to eliminate the non- application of certain State waiver provisions to Members of Congress and congressional staff. All points of order against consideration of the bill are waived. The bill [[Page H4115]] shall be considered as read. All points of order against provisions in the bill are waived. The previous question shall be considered as ordered on the bill and on any amendment thereto to final passage without intervening motion except: (1) one hour of debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Energy and Commerce; and (2) one motion to recommit. Sec. 2. During further consideration of the bill (H.R. 1628) to provide for reconciliation pursuant to title II of the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2017, as amended, pursuant to House Resolution 228, the further amendments printed in the report of the Committee on Rules accompanying this resolution shall be considered as adopted. The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr. Poe of Texas). The gentleman from Georgia is recognized for 1 hour. Mr. COLLINS of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, for the purpose of debate only, I yield the customary 30 minutes to the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. McGovern), pending which I yield myself such time as I may consume. During consideration of this resolution, all time yielded is for the purpose of debate only. General Leave Mr. COLLINS of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous materials on House Resolution 308, currently under consideration. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from Georgia? There was no objection. Mr. COLLINS of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to bring forward this rule on behalf of the Rules Committee. Over the past few weeks, the Rules Committee has had the opportunity to hear from numerous stakeholders, from the chairs and ranking members of committees of jurisdiction to the Members who have offered amendments. Most recently, last night we heard testimony from Mr. MacArthur and Mr. Upton to explain their amendments and address any questions from the committee members, and from Ms. McSally to explain her legislation. {time} 0915 This rule provides for further consideration of H.R. 1628, the American Health Care Act, and incorporates three amendments--the Palmer-Schweikert amendment, the MacArthur amendment, and the Upton amendment--that strengthen the underlying bill. It also provides for consideration of H.R. 2192, legislation authored by Representative McSally, with 1 hour of debate equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking member of the Committee on Energy and Commerce. Mr. Speaker, all across our country, the Affordable Care Act continues to strip hardworking Americans and families of access to affordable, quality medical care and offer them skyrocketing premiums and anemic provider networks in return. Democrats smuggled ObamaCare through with little regard for the procedure, left lofty and empty promises that benefit simply a bureaucratic machine. Seven years later, we have seen these promises evaporate as ObamaCare patients lose access to their doctors and lose the very insurance plans they were promised would remain intact. Our friends across the aisle claim that coverage has been expanded and individuals who never had quality health care before now have access. Mr. Speaker, I wish that were true, but it is not. I wish my colleagues and I didn't hear from neighbor after neighbor who can't find a doctor to accept ACA insurance or who avoids medical care altogether because their deductibles reach higher than the clouds. But we do hear from them because Americans are suffering as insurance providers flee from the not-so-free market. You see, coverage doesn't mean access to care. Unfortunately, we have heard all too often that individuals may have health coverage, but they can't use it because their premiums and deductibles are too high for them to actually afford the care. What good does the coverage do a woman who earns $22,000 a year and has a $5,000 deductible? What good does it do a young family to have insurance that no provider in their community accepts? What good does it do to say we want to grow the economy and create jobs when American businesses are struggling to keep their doors open due to the ObamaCare mandate? We have witnessed insurers dropping out of the exchanges and seen premiums climbing while consumers are left with less and less choice. Five States have one option and no choice for health insurance, and nothing guarantees that their residents will keep that much. ObamaCare has hijacked the free market, and it has taken some Americans' liberties with it. We must remember that exchanging freedom, choice, self-determination for securities at the hands of Big Brother too often leaves us with neither liberty nor security. We know that ObamaCare was designed to make a single-payer system inevitable. And to the extent that a single-payer system means a zero- choice system, the prophecy has already come true. Families can no longer choose to save for retirement or pay their mortgages because premiums suck up all the oxygen in their budget. Individuals who want to purchase a PPO cannot because their county only offers HMO plans. Disabled Americans who depend on Medicare find that ObamaCare has given more Federal funding to able-bodied Americans than our more vulnerable neighbors. In my district, a young mother who wants to take her young son to the family doctor post-ObamaCare can't because she can't find a physician who accepts her new insurance. Brittany Ivey and her husband have struggled under the consequences of the Affordable Care Act. Mrs. Ivey was working part-time at a small business that provided her family with health insurance until the effects of ObamaCare on the insurance market raised her premiums sharply. This drove the Ivey family into the individual market, where a midlevel plan took 65 percent of her monthly gross income, even after a small Federal subsidy. Unable to afford insurance through her employer, Mrs. Ivey turned to the Federal exchange, where she obtained a plan that neither she nor her children's doctor would accept. The Affordable Care Act robbed Americans of the ability to choose health care that worked for them, and the Affordable Care Act destroyed the insurance market along with the benefits that competition and innovation offer all of us. The American people deserve better. ObamaCare replaced our doctors with bureaucrats because that is what socialized medicine does. The American Health Care Act is our last chance to get off the Federal ferris wheel before we are locked into a healthcare system that takes us nowhere and offers neighbors nothing but heartburn. The American Health Care Act guts the most egregious provisions of ObamaCare, rolls back the law's taxes, restores flexibility to the States, and helps to make quality care more accessible and affordable. Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons I came to Congress is to repeal and replace ObamaCare and rein in our Nation's bloated, ballooning entitlement system. The American Health Care Act does that by, for the first time, making major reforms to an entitlement program--Medicaid. It rolls back the Medicaid expansion under ObamaCare, one of the fundamental pillars, and it makes structural changes to the program to ensure it only goes to the individuals it was intended to help. The American Health Care Act allows States to establish work requirements for able-bodied adult Medicaid enrollees. It lets States choose between the per capita cap and a flexible Medicare block grant, and it increases the growth rate to cover disabled and elderly Medicaid populations. The bill enacts patient-centered reforms, increases access to healthcare savings accounts, and creates a Patient and State Stability Fund to help stabilize insurance markets that have contracted during ObamaCare. Over the course of the last several weeks, we have worked in this House to strengthen the bill. We have listened to feedback from constituents, neighbors, stakeholders, and each other. Importantly, coverage for individuals with preexisting conditions is maintained as a baseline within the bill. An [[Page H4116]] amendment from Mr. MacArthur further protects individuals' preexisting conditions from being denied coverage. While the amendment provides States with additional flexibility by allowing them to seek a waiver, individuals with preexisting conditions will not be left out to dry. In fact, there are conditions attached to the waiver that ensure States use funds provided by the bill, should they receive a waiver, to set up high-risk pools for those very individuals. With the addition of the Upton amendment, the bill provides $108 billion to help States fund programs such as high-risk pools. Mr. Speaker, my home State of Georgia has very different needs than California. That is why I think it makes sense to give States more say in what works for their populations. Our plan does this, but it does so in a way that ensures protections exist for vulnerable populations like the elderly, disabled, and children. The rule also provides for Representative McSally's legislation to ensure that Members of Congress are treated the same as all Americans. I fully support this bill and firmly believe elected officials should be required to live under the same laws as those they were elected to represent. President Trump has made his support of the American Health Care Act and its strengthening amendments clear, and I stand with him in supporting this legislation to gut ObamaCare and rescue the American people. Mr. Speaker, average premiums rose by 40 percent or more in 11 States just this year. The statistics and the stories speak for themselves. We must act to dismantle ObamaCare, and the Affordable Care Act does that. I support the rule before us today to provide for further improvements to the bill and look forward to supporting both the rule and the underlying bill. I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume. (Mr. McGOVERN asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. McGOVERN. I thank the gentleman from Georgia (Mr. Collins) for the customary 30 minutes. Mr. Speaker, pathetic, that is the word to describe this process and this bill. If the American people could sue Congress for malpractice, my Republican friends would be in deep trouble. How could you do this? How could you do this to the American people? How can you do this to the people you represent? You are taking away essential healthcare protections. You are allowing insurance companies to discriminate against people with preexisting conditions. You are supporting a bill that will throw 24 million people off of their health care and cut Medicaid by $880 billion to give a $1 trillion tax break to the wealthiest people in this country. What is wrong with you guys? Today's rule self-executes three of the newest Republican amendments to the Republican health plan. This means, without any sort of debate or discussion whatsoever, the Palmer, MacArthur, and Upton amendments will magically pass the House. What I find so hard to believe about this latest backroom deal is that they actually make this bill worse. I didn't think that was possible, Mr. Speaker. To shore up support amongst this Chamber's most conservative faction, Representative MacArthur and others made a deal with President Trump to gut protections for individuals with preexisting conditions and to eliminate essential health benefits like maternity care, mental health treatment, and prescription drug coverage, just to name a few. These are among the most popular provisions of the Affordable Care Act. The American people were justifiably outraged, and they showed up by the thousands to townhalls to express their anger. And there were some on the Republican side who actually got it. They listened to their constituents and they had the courage to stand up and say no. But when Republican leaders came up short in their whip count, Representative Upton ran to the White House and concocted a deal with President Trump to try to win back votes. His amendment adds a measly $8 billion spread out over 5 years in a futile attempt to soften the devastating effect that this bill will have on millions and millions of Americans with preexisting conditions. Now, $8 billion over 5 years sounds like a lot, but when we are talking about an entire country, it really isn't. Don't take it from me. Robert Graboyes from the conservative Mercatus Center said: ``The $8 billion amount is a pittance. Spread over 5 years, it's a fifth of a pittance.'' This is not a leftwing organization. This is an organization funded by Koch Industries, the Koch brothers. My friends love the Koch brothers. What's more, some analysts have already estimated that an additional $200 billion will be needed over a decade to adequately fund high-risk pools. So this amendment is billions upon billions upon billions of dollars short. And as the Center for American Progress points out, the Upton amendment ``will have almost no effect.'' Now, my colleagues who have been won over by this should be ashamed of themselves. We are supposed to fix problems and help people, not merely settle for political cover that can be used in a press release. $8 billion to cover a $200 billion shortfall? Back where I come from, we call that being a cheap date. I guarantee you, your constituents are going to figure this out, and they will not be happy. So to so-called moderate Republicans who have contorted themselves this week to try to find a fix to the damage being done to the people with preexisting conditions, I have breaking news: I have a magic bullet fix if Republicans really want to protect people with preexisting conditions. Are you ready? Brace yourselves. Don't change the law. Everyone is already protected by the Affordable Care Act, including people with preexisting conditions and those who struggle to find affordable care. Let me say to my colleagues that to claim or imply that this Republican plan covers preexisting conditions is a lie, plain and simple. Now, let me say a few words about the process that has been used to bring this bill to the floor. It has been a disaster from start to finish, with secret negotiations, backroom deals, and bribes to buy off factions within the Republican Conference. There have been no hearings on this bill whatsoever. And the Republican leadership couldn't even slow down long enough to receive a score from the CBO. I have one simple question: What is the rush? Wait a week and get a CBO score. Why is that such a radical idea? Mr. Speaker, are Republican leaders jamming this bill through to appease Donald Trump? Are they concerned that a new CBO score will confirm what we already know is true, that this bill will be devastating to the people of this country, force even more people to lose their health care, especially to older, sick, and low-income Americans. Or maybe, Mr. Speaker, Republican leaders are worried that their colleagues will go home over this weeklong break and actually hear from their constituents who overwhelmingly oppose this effort to repeal the Affordable Care Act. Honestly, I don't know how my Republicans friends can defend this terrible, closed, authoritarian process. It is an absolute disgrace. I urge my colleagues to vote ``no'' on this bill, or, better yet, I urge my Republicans colleagues to do what they did a couple of weeks ago and pull this disastrous bill. I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. COLLINS of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Kentucky (Mr. Yarmuth), the distinguished ranking member of the Committee on the Budget. Mr. YARMUTH. Mr. Speaker, the question every Member of Congress should be asking themselves today is: Who in the world is better off because of today's bill? It is not the 24 million people the CBO says will lose their health coverage if this bill becomes law. It is not the seniors who will be priced out of the market by an age tax or the millions of families who will see their health care gutted by the more than $800 billion in cuts to Medicaid. It is not the 881,000 non-elderly adults in Kentucky with preexisting conditions who would, once again, face [[Page H4117]] staggering health costs with reduced care. So who is better off? Well, certainly corporations and millionaires who will see nearly $1 trillion in tax cuts from this bill. And at least, in their minds, a few Republican Members are so desperate for some type of political victory they are willing to risk the health and well-being of their constituents to ram through a bill without hearings, analysis, or, most alarmingly, any sense of morality. That is the cruel tradeoff my Republican colleagues have decided to make. Our families deserve far better. I urge my colleagues to exercise better judgment and vote ``no'' on this bill. Mr. COLLINS of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time. {time} 0930 Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I am not sure if my colleagues are aware of this since we are moving so quickly here, but I want to flag for everyone an important op-ed in The Hill by the executive director of the Boston Area Rape Crisis Center. She points out that in the latest version of this legislation, rape can once again be categorized as a preexisting condition as it often was before the Affordable Care Act. I include her column, entitled ``Health `reform' will make sexual assault survivors sick,'' in the Record. Health `Reform' Will Make Sexual Assault Survivors Sick (By Gina Scaramella) So far, we know that about 24 million Americans stand to lose their health insurance coverage if the Affordable Care Act (ACA) is replaced with the American Health Care Act (AHCA). We know that most of those 24 million people will be low-income. We also know that groups of people who experience significant health care disparities, such as lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) people, and Black and Latino people, will be among those who risk losing the most if the ACA is repealed. To that list, we must add survivors of sexual violence. Before passage of the ACA in 2010, sexual assault survivors who had sought medical care for their injuries could be denied health insurance coverage at a later date. The reason? Health insurers often categorized rape as a pre-existing health condition. In one widely reported case, a 45-year-old woman met two men at a bar in Florida who bought her a drink. Hours later, she found herself lying by the side of the road with injuries indicating that she had been raped and that the men had spiked her drink. Her doctor prescribed a treatment of anti- viral, post-HIV exposure drugs to protect against HIV transmission. When the woman lost her health insurance several months after the attack, she was unable to obtain new insurance due to the health care treatment she had received for the assault. She went without health insurance for three years. Stories like these prompted the National Women's Law Center to launch a campaign called ``Being a Woman Is Not a Pre- Existing Condition.'' It was so popular that then-House Speaker Nancy Pelosi adopted the phrase in her pro-health reform talking points with media, and the New York Times ran an explainer on the ways in which health insurers treated women as if they were just one giant pre-existing condition. The AHCA initially retained the ACA's ban on discrimination against people with pre-existing conditions. But an amendment to the AHCA bill offered last week by New Jersey Congressman Tom MacArthur and North Carolina Congressman Mark Meadows would make it easier for health insurers to deny coverage to people with pre-existing conditions. By letting states waive the ACA prohibition on charging people with pre-existing health conditions higher premiums, protections for those who've previously been medically treated for sexual assault would be gutted. Perhaps more alarming, though, is the MacArthur-Meadows amendment's provision allowing states to also seek waivers from the ACA's requirement that essential health benefits be covered by health insurance plans. Essential health benefits include preventive health care services that most of us take for granted. These include tests for blood pressure and cholesterol, mammograms, and vaccinations. Essential health benefits also include coverage for mental health care and substance abuse treatment. Sexual violence survivors face acute treatment needs in the aftermath of an assault such as care for gynecological injuries, other physical trauma, sexually-transmitted diseases, and pregnancy. But sexual violence takes many forms: incest: ongoing sexual abuse outside of the family, sexual assault, sexual harassment or exploitation, and rape. Each of these types of assault puts the survivor at risk for various potential negative physical health and mental health outcomes. For example, an adult survivor of childhood sexual abuse is at a higher risk for psychiatric disorders. Women and men who have survived rape as adults are at higher risk of post- traumatic stress disorder, depression, anxiety, and substance abuse--any of which can significantly interfere with daily living. No one can deny that there is a direct line between having survived sexual violence, and an increased risk of physical and mental health problems. The mental health impacts of sexual violence are deep and often longstanding. Survivors need long-term access to nonjudgmental health and mental health services to reduce their suffering and mitigate as much as possible the stress that recovery from sexual violence puts on intimate family relationships, and obligations related to school and work. It is hard to see any good coming from this latest attempt to repeal the ACA and all of the care it has brought to survivors of sexual violence. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the gentlewoman from Washington (Ms. DelBene). Ms. DelBENE. Mr. Speaker, this destructive legislation hurts middle class families and threatens massive disruption to our healthcare system. And it has only gone from bad to worse. Stripping protections from 133 million Americans with preexisting conditions isn't just wrong, it is inhumane. Nobody in this country should go bankrupt trying to afford the medical care they need to stay alive. This isn't about politics; it is about human decency and who we are as Americans. It is about people like Jackie, a cancer survivor from Snohomish who says the Affordable Care Act saved her life. She wrote to me saying: ``My cancer recurred, but I was covered. I was able to complete my treatments without having to worry about how to put food on the table. Or being left to die. Because of the ACA, I survived.'' We all have stories like this in our districts, but some of my colleagues aren't listening. I hope they find the courage and the wisdom to vote ``no'' on this dangerous legislation. Mr. COLLINS of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Texas (Mr. Castro). Mr. CASTRO of Texas. Mr. Speaker, Republicans, over the last few months, have said that they would fundamentally change health care in the United States, and it is clear today that they have. They have made it much worse. I want to highlight one provision that allows for States to permit insurers to get rid of essential healthcare benefits and charge people more who have preexisting conditions. Think about that for a second. In my home State of Texas, the Governor and other State leaders have already turned their back on so many people, allowing foster care children to sleep in State offices, allowing sex trafficking and human trafficking victims to go to jail because there is nowhere else to put them. You should ask yourselves: What will your leaders do? Will they allow insurers to charge you more for preexisting conditions like diabetes and hypertension and cancer and asthma? Do you think, and do you trust, that they are going to do the right thing by you? Because today, this plan allows them to abandon you. Mr. COLLINS of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume. At this time, I think one of the interesting things is, as discussed, the criticism of this. I think it was just a reminder, Mr. Speaker, of what happened 7 years ago when our healthcare market, which could have been helped by many good ideas, was decided to be taken on a very unhealthy bent. We are now paying the price for that. We are going to continue to see that unless we change it. We are changing that for the better. One of the strongest voices that we have had in this body is someone who has actually taken it as his living to take care of people. Dr. Burgess not only came to this Congress with a strong voice of not only what doctors and the medical profession have, but I think it gives us an insight into what patients need as well. He has been a clarion voice through this whole process, before ObamaCare, during the disaster of ObamaCare, and now as we look to fix the problems that have existed. I yield as much time as he may consume to the gentleman from Texas (Mr. Burgess). Mr. BURGESS. Mr. Speaker, how did we get to this point? [[Page H4118]] The Affordable Care Act is simply not working for the American people. It is limiting choices. It is raising costs. It is leaving millions without access to care. And unfortunately, these are not just talking points but very real issues affecting very real Americans. The Affordable Care Act has left the individual market in shambles and has driven insurers away from offering coverage. Now, we are seeing one-third of all counties in the United States of America with only a single insurer. And among the plans that have chosen to remain in these markets, there have been widespread, double-digit premium increases. In Texas, premiums have jumped 29 percent a year, on average, from 2014 to 2017. The markets are in difficulty. They are failing to live up to the promise made 7 years ago, that Americans would be able to receive ``affordable care.'' As we knew then, and we still know now, this was an empty promise and has priced over 19 million Americans out of the market. What is worse, these individuals are forced to pay the individual mandate penalty or seek a hardship exemption because of the cost to purchase and use their health insurance. Mr. Speaker, 11 months ago, Speaker Ryan released the Better Way plan to save the Nation's healthcare system and to bring relief to the American people. This plan, which served as the blueprint for the American Health Care Act, laid out policies to stabilize the markets damaged by the Affordable Care Act, repeal the burdensome Affordable Care Act taxes and mandates that have hindered innovation and limited access to care. So let's take a look at what the American Health Care Act does. First and foremost, the American Health Care Act provides immediate relief to the State insurance markets. As Republicans, we know that one-size-fits-all works for no one, and certainly did not work for the individual markets. The States should have the flexibility to support their insurance markets and ensure that plans can continue to provide options for coverage. To do this, we relax two of the more egregious market regulations that were imposed under the Affordable Care Act: the mandate that premiums cannot vary for younger and older Americans by more than a 3- to-1 ratio and the mandate creating fixed actuarial values for plans. The mandate limiting a plan's ability to set premiums by age has driven up the cost of coverage for younger and healthier Americans and, subsequently, pushed them away from seeking coverage by the millions. Of the over 19 million Americans who have sidestepped the individual market, it is estimated that as many as 45 percent of these individuals are under the age of 35. Without these younger Americans seeking coverage, the markets have plunged, as insurers have hiked up premiums year after year to compensate for unhealthy risk pools. To change this, there is relaxation of the 5-to-1 ratio. It will lower premium costs and provide necessary opportunities to stabilize markets. We also give States the option, the choice to go higher or go lower, which honors the spirit of federalism. Additionally, we are repealing the actuarial values mandate to provide insurers with additional flexibility to offer more coverage options. The requirement for insurers to offer specified Bronze, Silver, and Gold level tiers has limited consumer choice, driving even more individuals away from seeking coverage and further contributing to the collapse of the healthcare markets. To further supplement these efforts, we are establishing the Patient and State Stability Fund. This fund provides States access to a total of over $140 billion over 10 years to promote innovative solutions to lower costs and increase access to health care for their unique patient populations. Mr. Speaker, the goal is simple, to provide States with maximum flexibility in how they address the cost of care for their citizens. The American Health Care Act provides States with options for how to use funds, including providing financial assistance for high-cost individuals, incentivizing insurer participation in those markets, reducing the cost of insurance, promoting access to preventive services, and reducing out-of-pocket costs for patients. The Congressional Budget Office estimated that a combination of the Stability Fund and other proconsumer changes would reduce premiums by 10 percent below current projections of 2026. We want patients to have access to high-quality, affordably priced health coverage. The Patient and State Stability Fund can help States lower costs and can increase access to high quality health care for their citizens. In addition to supporting the insurance markets, the American Health Care Act creates needed reforms to the Medicaid program itself. Without any changes, the current Medicaid expansion is expected to cost $1 trillion in 10 years' time--$1 trillion a year in 10 years' time. Medicaid needs reform so that States can continue to provide coverage to children, people with disabilities, and other vulnerable groups, the very populations that this safety net program was created to serve. To address these concerns, the American Health Care Act first phases out the Medicaid expansion, not traditional Medicaid but Medicaid expansion. The expansion has hurt State budgets and limited States' abilities to ensure that resources will continue to be available for the vulnerable populations for which Medicaid was designed. By phasing out expansion, we are providing States with greater budget autonomy. Additionally, our bill helps further bend the Medicaid cost curve by shifting the program toward a per beneficiary allotment. Per beneficiary allotments set limits on the annual growth for per capita expenditures for which the States will receive matching funds from the Federal Government. Per beneficiary allotments create greater fiscal accountability and ensure that the program can continue to exist for years to come. This is not a new idea. This was an idea put forward by President Bill Clinton and, at one time, supported by every Democratic Member of the Senate in 1995. Second, the American Health Care Act increases the amount of flexibility that States have in managing their Medicaid program. The bill scales back the Affordable Care Act mandates that have limited a State's ability to tailor plans toward the needs of beneficiaries. States can and States should be trusted to effectively manage the needs of their Medicaid beneficiaries. The American Health Care Act will allow them to do so. Additionally, the American Health Care Act furthers the goal of providing the States with greater flexibility in managing their Medicaid programs by providing States with the option to implement two additional opportunities: work requirements and block grants for Medicaid. When the Affordable Care Act was being debated, some of the most consistent complaints that we heard throughout the discussion came from Governors and State representatives expressing concerns about the negative consequences that they saw on the horizon. This time around, we chose to engage our State counterparts in the discussion and listen to their input as we designed the bill; and at the top of their list was a desire to see the work requirements built into the Medicaid and the expansion populations, and the opportunity to work with Medicaid as a block grant. Republicans trust that States know what works for their respective populations, and we are not going to stand in the way of States seeking to design Medicaid programs that work for them. Finally, the American Health Care Act provides additional resources to bolster State safety net providers. The bill provides increases to the Community Health Center Fund, offers enhanced funding to support the safety net providers in States that did not expand Medicaid, and ends the cuts to Disproportionate Share Hospital payments, cuts that are going to occur under current law on October 1 of this year. We are committed to ensuring that our local providers can continue to deliver lifesaving care and that the American Health Care Act turns this commitment into action. For the millions of Americans in rural and medically underserved areas, these actions [[Page H4119]] will provide needed relief that was undercut by the Affordable Care Act and will allow these Americans to continue to have access to care. Moving forward, together, these efforts will provide meaningful reform and relief for the States and for the individuals seeking health care. We are stabilizing the markets, reforming Medicaid in the most substantive and consequential way in its 52-year history, and ensuring that all Americans can maintain access to care through local safety net providers. We do recognize there is still more work to be done in health care, and that is why we only consider the American Health Care Act to be the beginning. It is the key that gets us through the door into additional health reform. From here, we will work with Secretary Price at the Department of Health and Human Services to further deregulate the marketplace and increase consumer choice in the healthcare markets, and we will enhance the American Health Care Act with additional legislative efforts to further the goal of lowering healthcare costs. Mr. Speaker, this should be a very exciting time in health care. With all of the knowledge that has been gained over the years in the practice of medicine, I am humbled to be here today speaking in support of this legislation. It will begin the much-awaited process of unwinding the Affordable Care Act and will finally return patients to the center of health care. {time} 0945 Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, wow. I yield myself such time as I may consume, and to rebut the gentleman from Texas, let me include in the Record a letter from the American Cancer Society, the American Diabetes Association, the American Heart Association, the American Lung Association, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation, the March of Dimes, the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, the National Organization for Rare Disorders, and the National Coalition for Women with Heart Disease. Leading Patient Advocacy Groups Remain Opposed to the American Health Care Act Eight Organizations Issue Statement Criticizing Upton Agreement Washington, May 3, 2017.--Earlier today, House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Greg Walden (R-OR) issued a press release stating that an amendment proposed by Representative Fred Upton (R-MI) to the American Health Care Act (AHCA) provides ``protection and certainty for patients with pre- existing conditions.'' Eight leading patient groups, listed below, issued the following statement in response: Despite the Upton amendment, we remain strongly opposed to the American Health Care Act and urge Congress to consider the people at the heart of this decision. The various patchwork solutions offered by lawmakers would still leave the millions of patients we represent, who have serious and chronic health conditions, at risk of not being able to access life-saving treatments and care. There is no substitute for fundamental, unequivocal protections for people with pre-existing conditions. The AHCA, including the potential amendment, would undermine vital safeguards against being charged more for insurance based on health status. Increasing funding for risk sharing programs and consumer financial assistance does not address the legitimate challenges built into these proposals. The other equally important problems with the AHCA remain, including: Allowing states to waive the guarantee of essential health benefits, which would: Segment the market into plans for sick people and plans for healthy people, driving up the cost of plans for people with serious health care needs Undermine the protection against annual and lifetime coverage caps, a critical safeguard for patients Eliminating Medicaid expansion coverage for millions of Americans and altering the program's financing structure in a way that jeopardizes coverage of new and innovative treatments Increasing out-of-pocket costs for many Americans, including some of the sickest and elderly among us Given the numerous shortcomings of the American Health Care Act in serving the patients we represent, our organizations have no choice but to oppose this legislation and urge all Representatives to vote against it, with or without the Upton and MacArthur amendments. Patient Advocacy Groups American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network American Heart Association American Lung Association Cystic Fibrosis Foundation March of Dimes National Organization for Rare Disorders National MS Society WomenHeart: The National Coalition for Women with Heart Disease Media Contacts American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Alissa Crispino. American Heart Association, Abbey Dively. American Lung Association, Allison MacMunn. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Jessica Rowlands. March of Dimes, Cindy Pellegrini. National Organization for Rare Disorders, Jennifer Huron. National MS Society, Eileen Curran. WomenHeart: The National Coalition for Women with Heart Disease, Tom Murphy. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I also include in the Record a statement from the American Medical Association in opposition to this bill. [From the American Medical Association, May 3, 2017] AMA Warns that Proposed Changes to the American Health Care Act Do Not Remedy Bill's Shortcomings Despite amendments to bill, millions of Americans would still lose health insurance coverage Chicago.--American Medical Association (AMA) President Andrew W. Gurman, M.D., issued the following statement today about proposed changes to the American Health Care Act (AHCA): ``None of the legislative tweaks under consideration changes the serious harm to patients and the health care delivery system if AHCA passes. Proposed changes to the bill tinker at the edges without remedying the fundamental failing of the bill--that millions of Americans will lose their health insurance as a direct result of this proposal. ``High-risk pools are not a new idea. Prior to the enactment of the Affordable Care Act, 35 states operated high-risk pools, and they were not a panacea for Americans with pre-existing medical conditions. The history of high- risk pools demonstrates that Americans with pre-existing conditions will be stuck in second-class health care coverage--if they are able to obtain coverage at all. ``Not only would the AHCA eliminate health insurance coverage for millions of Americans, the legislation would, in many cases, eliminate the ban against charging those with underlying medical conditions vastly more for their coverage.'' ``America should not go backward to the time when our fellow citizens with pre-existing health conditions faced high costs for limited coverage, if they were able to obtain coverage at all. The AMA urges congressional leaders and the Administration to pursue a bipartisan dialogue on alternative policies that provide patients with access and coverage to high quality care and preserve the safety net for vulnerable populations.'' Background on high-risk pools A January report from the American Academy of Actuaries notes that ``enrollment has generally been low, coverage has been limited and expensive, they require external funding, and they have typically operated at a loss . . . Removing high-risk individuals from the insured risk pools reduces costs in the private market only temporarily. Over time, even lower-cost individuals in the individual market can incur high health care costs, which would put upward pressure on premiums.'' According to the Kaiser Family Foundation: State high-risk pools featured premiums above standard non- group market rates--with most states capping them at 150%- 200% of standard rates. Many also featured high deductibles, some $5,000 or more. Despite the fact that many individuals were forced into high-risk pools because of a pre-existing condition, nearly all states excluded coverage for these conditions for 6-12 months. Almost all high-risk pools imposed lifetime limits on covered services, and some imposed annual limits. Some states capped or closed enrollment. Combined net losses for the state high-risk pools totaled more than $1.2 billion for 2011, or $5,510 per enrollee, on average. Furthermore, a 2010 paper by James Capretta and Tom Miller that appeared in National Affairs estimated that the cost of adequately funded high risk pools would be $15 billion to $20 billion per year. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I also include in the Record a letter from the American Academy of Family Physicians in opposition to this bill. American Academy of Family Physicians, May 3, 2017. Jim McGovern, Representative, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Dear Rep. Jim McGovern: Despite recent activities and amendments, the American Health Care Act (H.R. 1628) remains a highly flawed proposal that will destabilize our health care system, cause significant loss of coverage, and allow for the discrimination against patients based on their gender, age, and health status. For these reasons, the American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) continues to oppose the AHCA and [[Page H4120]] encourages the House of Representatives to reject this failed policy. The fact remains that the AHCA will: Cause more than 24 million people to lose their health care coverage, including more than 7 million with employer- sponsored coverage. Destabilize the individual health insurance market. Create a race to the bottom by eliminating any standards with respect to minimum insurance benefits. Enact draconian cuts in the Medicaid program that will have an immediate negative impact on low-income individuals, children, and millions of senior citizens who rely on the program. Eliminate community rating and return to medical underwriting, thus allowing insurers to discriminate against individuals based on their gender, age, and health status. Deny individuals protection against annual and lifetime spending caps, thus threatening the financial stability of millions of individuals and families in the future. Over the past few days there has been an effort to advance policies that seek to protect individuals with pre-existing conditions from facing discrimination in insurance underwriting as a result of their health status. Despite a willingness to spend more money on these proposals, the current efforts on pre-existing conditions fail to accomplish their goal. High-risk pools are inherently flawed and expensive. The proposals under consideration provide inadequate funding for an inadequate period of time, thus creating an under-funded and temporary solution for the millions of Americans with pre-existing conditions. We find it regrettable that Congress would seek to relegate individuals with high health care needs to a program that has a questionable history and would face uncertain financial stability in the future. By removing critical consumer protections that collectively ensure that the millions of individuals with pre-existing conditions can continue to purchase affordable health care coverage, the AHCA would result in higher premiums and higher deductibles for millions. Additionally, the negative impact of the AHCA is not limited to the individual insurance market. These policies also may impact the more than 130 million people with employer-sponsored insurance. Thank you. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I also include in the Record a statement from the AARP in strong opposition to this bill. AARP, May 3, 2017. Dear Representative: Older Americans care deeply about access to and affordability of health care. With the addition of the Upton Amendment, as reported, we once again write to share our opposition to the American Health Care Act (AHCA) and urge you to vote NO. Changes under consideration that would allow states to waive important consumer protections-- allowing insurance companies to once again charge Americans with pre-existing conditions more because they've had cancer, diabetes or heart disease--would make a bad bill even worse. This would be devastating for the 25 million Americans 50-64 who have a deniable pre-existing condition. The Upton amendment would do little to reduce the massive premium increases for those with pre-existing conditions. Throughout consideration of the AHCA, we have been expressing serious concerns about the impact that this legislation will have on older Americans. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO)'s last estimate further demonstrates the harmful impact of this bill on older Americans and some of our most vulnerable. Specifically, the American Health Care Act will weaken the fiscal sustainability of Medicare; dramatically increase premium and out-of-pocket costs for 50- 64 year olds purchasing coverage on the individual insurance market; allow insurance companies to once again discriminate against those with pre-existing conditions; substantially increase the number of Americans without insurance; and put at risk millions of children and adults with disabilities and poor seniors who depend on the Medicaid program to access long-term services and supports and other benefits. Our members and others 50 years of age and older care deeply about health care and want to know where their elected leaders stand. Recognizing the importance of the upcoming vote on the American Health Care Act, AARP intends to inform our members, and others over age 50, how their elected officials voted. We'll communicate the results of the vote in our widely-circulated publications, in e-mail alerts, in our online channels, and through the media. Again, we urge all Representatives to vote NO on the American Health Care Act in its current form. Medicare The American Health Care Act repeals provisions in current law that have strengthened Medicare's fiscal outlook, specifically, the repeal of the additional 0.9 percent payroll tax on higher-income workers. Repealing this provision would remove billions from the Hospital Insurance trust fund, hasten the insolvency of Medicare, and diminish Medicare's ability to pay for services in the future. Individual Private Insurance Market Currently, about 25 million Americans age 50-64 have a pre- existing condition, about 6.1 million purchase insurance in the non-group market, and nearly 3.2 million are currently eligible to receive subsidies for health insurance coverage through either the federal health benefits exchange or a state-based exchange (exchange). Since passage of the ACA, the number of 50-64 year old Americans who are uninsured has dropped by half. We are deeply concerned that the AHCA would be a significant step backwards and result in millions of older Americans who cannot afford their health care, including many simply losing their health care. Based on CBO estimates, approximately 14 million Americans will lose coverage next year, while a total of 24 million Americans would lose coverage over the next 10 years. Affordability of both premiums and cost-sharing is critical to older Americans and their ability to obtain and access health care. A typical 50-64 year old seeking coverage through an exchange has a median annual income of under $25,000 and already pays significant out-of-pocket costs for health care. We have serious concerns--reinforced by the CBO estimate--that the bill under consideration will dramatically increase health care costs for 50-64 year olds who purchase health care through an exchange due both to the changes in age rating from 3:1 (already a compromise that requires uninsured older Americans to pay three times more than younger individuals) to 5:1 (or more) and reductions in current tax credits for older Americans. CBO concluded that the bill will substantially raise premiums for older people and force many into lower quality plans. Age rating plus reduced tax credits equal an unaffordable age tax. Our previous estimates on the age-rating change showed that premiums for current coverage could increase by up to $3,200 for a 64 year old. In addition, the bill reduced the tax credits available for older Americans to help purchase insurance. We estimate that the bill's changes to current law's tax credits alone could increase premium costs by more than $5,800 for a 64-year old earning $15,000. Overall, both the bill's tax credit changes and 5:1 age rating would result in skyrocketing cost increases for older Americans. In their analysis, CBO found that a 64 year old earning $26,500 a year would see their premiums increase by $12,900--758 percent--from $1,700 to $14,600 a year. Current law prohibits insurance companies from discriminating against individuals due to a pre-existing condition. The bill would repeal pre-existing condition protections and would once again allow insurance companies to charge Americans more--we estimate up to $25,000 more--due to a pre-existing condition. As a result, the 40 percent of 50- to 64-year-olds (about 25 million people) who have a deniable pre-existing condition risk losing access to affordable coverage. The Upton Amendment, which would add funds to address the impact of premium increases for those with pre-existing conditions, would do little to mitigate the massive premium increase for some of the most vulnerable Americans. AARP strongly opposes any weakening of the law's pre-existing condition protections which benefit millions of Americans. Medicaid and Long-Term Services and Supports AARP opposes the provisions of the American Health Care Act that create a per capita cap financing structure in the Medicaid program. We are concerned that these provisions could endanger the health, safety, and care of millions of individuals who depend on the essential services provided through Medicaid. CBO found that the bill would cut Medicaid funding by $880 billion over 2017-2026, about 25 percent less than what it projects under current law. Medicaid is a vital safety net and intergenerational lifeline for millions of individuals, including over 17.4 million low-income seniors and children and adults with disabilities who rely on the program for critical health care and long-term services and supports (LTSS, i.e., assistance with daily activities such as eating, bathing, dressing, managing medications, and transportation). Older adults and people with disabilities now account for over sixty percent of Medicaid spending, and cuts of this magnitude will result in loss of benefits and services for this vulnerable population. Of these 17.4 million individuals: 6.9 million are ages 65 and older (which equals more than 1 in every 7 elderly Medicare beneficiaries); 10.5 million are children and adults living with disabilities; and about 10.8 million are so poor or have a disability that they qualify for both Medicare and Medicaid (dual eligibles). Dual eligibles account for almost 33 percent of Medicaid spending. While they comprise a relatively small percentage of enrollees, they account for a disproportionate share of total Medicare and Medicaid spending. Individuals with disabilities of all ages and older adults rely on critical Medicaid services, including home and community-based services (HCBS) for assistance with daily activities such as eating, bathing, dressing, and home modifications; nursing home care; and other benefits such as hearing aids and eyeglasses. In providing a fixed amount of federal funding per person, this approach to financing would likely result in overwhelming cost shifts to states, state taxpayers, and families unable to shoulder the costs of care without sufficient federal support. This would result in cuts to program eligibility, services, or both--ultimately harming some of our nation's most vulnerable citizens. [[Page H4121]] The bill also repeals the six percent enhanced federal Medicaid match for states that take up the Community First Choice (CFC) Option. CFC provides states with a financial incentive to offer HCBS to help older adults and people with disabilities live in their homes and communities where they want to be. About 90 percent of older adults want to remain in their own homes and communities for as long as possible. HCBS are also cost effective. On average, in Medicaid, the cost of HCBS per person is one-third the cost of institutional care. Taking away the enhanced match could disrupt services for older adults and people with disabilities in the states that are already providing services under CFC and would result in a loss of about $12 billion for HCBS over ten years. Prescription Drugs The AHCA would repeal the fee on manufacturers and importers of branded prescription drugs, which currently is projected to add $24.8 billion to the Medicare Part B trust fund between 2017 and 2026. Rather than repeal this fee for Medicare, AARP believes Congress must do more to reduce the burden of high prescription drug costs on consumers and taxpayers, and we urge action on bipartisan solutions. AARP remains willing to work with you to ensure that we maintain a strong health care system that ensures robust insurance market protections, controls costs, improves quality, and provides affordable coverage to all Americans. However, the AHCA does not accomplish these goals, and we continue to urge you to vote NO. Sincerely, Nancy A. LeaMond, Executive Vice President and Chief Advocacy and Engagement Officer. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, if this bill were so great, these organizations would be supporting the Republican bill, not opposing it; and they are strongly opposing it. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Texas (Mr. Doggett). Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Speaker, the harsh indifference of these Republicans to the well-being of so many Americans is startling. Trump may temporarily bury the lies central to this plan with a tweet storm--with fake news. But these Republicans who follow him will not be able to find an excuse as one family after another suffers. Today's surprise attack on American health care has been widely condemned by healthcare professionals across the country and those who represent the disabled and sick, like the American Cancer Society and the March of Dimes. Jimmy Kimmel, know that your baby was fortunate, but others born with a disability will face the barrier of preexisting conditions. They didn't listen to the AARP, which knows that those Americans too young for Medicare by a few years will get socked with unaffordable premiums. They don't know what this monstrosity of a bill costs to the taxpayer. They don't know how many families will lose coverage or how many jobs will be lost. They don't really know what is in this bill. They know only that the Pied Piper of Trump Tower is playing a tune today and they must dance. There is much talk about high-risk pools. The real high-risk pool is the one that everyone who votes for this outrageous proposal is about to plunge into. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the distinguished gentlewoman from New York (Ms. Slaughter), the ranking member of the Rules Committee. Ms. SLAUGHTER. Mr. Speaker, I certainly thank my colleague for yielding to me. Mr. Speaker, I was fortunate enough to bring the ACA to the floor after years of working on it and experts writing it. It had such incredible things in it. I think it would behoove us this morning to talk about what every one of us who has health insurance is going to lose because the benefits of the ACA accrued to all of us. Now, you need to know first that we are going to lose the fact that 85 cents of every premium dollar will go for health care. It will go back to insurance profits. We are also going to lose the fact that families could no longer go bankrupt because of health care. The largest cause of bankruptcy are families with medical bills, and the ACA took care of that. Nobody ever talks about that much, but if a single person spent $4,500 a year on health care, a family $12,500, the insurance companies picked up the rest of it. How about that? That is a pretty good loss that we are going to face. So why in the world are we rushing into this thing? Well, the President of the United States, Donald Trump, verified as recently as last Saturday evening in Pennsylvania that we have to do this first because $800 billion has to come out of health care so that they could do the tax bill with great corporate tax relief for the 1 percent. So as you lose your health care, your ability to go to the doctor, and your preexisting conditions because risk pools don't work, be comforted by the fact that we are in the hands of people who put the needs of corporations and wealthy people ahead of the citizens of the United States. Just in case you think people aren't paying any attention, for the first time in my life, my office has 185 applications for six seats as interns in the summertime. It is unheard of. Calls in my office have gone from about 10 a day to 80, all of them talking about this. I have never seen political suicide in my life like I am seeing today. I think our leader put it so succinctly: you are tattooing that on your foreheads. Now, those people out there who have really gotten sort of used to this, all we have heard all the way through is that this is going to fall apart. The problems going on with the ACA right now are that the insurance companies have uncertainty because of what has been going on here. I need to bring up one of the greatest hoaxes in America in any institution that passes laws. For over 60 times, you brought to the floor of this House and we debated bills to do away with the health care. ``Repeal and replace,'' you shouted. Millions and millions of dollars' worth of time on this floor were spent on what was absolutely a hoax because you had no repeal-and-replace plan. It was simply all talk, and now you have got to rush through this so you can do your big tax bill. I am sorry to see this happen. It is a sad day for the United States. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I feel bad for the gentleman because it appears as if he only has one speaker supporting this rule and the bill, and nearly our entire caucus wants to speak on this against the Republican healthcare repeal bill. So I was wondering whether the gentleman might consider sharing some time with us? Mr. COLLINS of Georgia. Will the gentleman yield? Mr. McGOVERN. I yield to the gentleman from Georgia. Mr. COLLINS of Georgia. I thank the gentleman for yielding. As a wonderful manager of time, he will be able to parse the time as best he may see fit. I have other speakers who probably will be coming by, so I will just encourage the manager to manage his time well. Mr. McGOVERN. It looks kind of lonely over there. It speaks volumes about how much support there is for this bill. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from New Jersey (Mr. Pascrell). Mr. PASCRELL. Mr. Speaker, now I have to say to my friends on the other side: You sold out cheap--as we say in New Jersey--all to give a tax cut to insurance companies and the most well off. The Upton amendment is, of course, an admission. After 7 years, you came up with this? You have got to be kidding me. This is worse than a Fellini movie. At least he didn't take 7 years to distinguish between fantasy and reality. For a New Jerseyan with asthma, this will mean a $4,340 premium surcharge; for autism, $5,510. The list goes on and on--60, $70,000 if you have cancer. But less discussed is their attempt to rid the essential health benefits which removes yet another ACA protection for everyone. So now the Republicans have hit for the cycle. You hit for the cycle. You jeopardized the health care of nearly every single American--those on Medicare, those on Medicaid, those in the ACA exchanges, and now 150 million people with employer coverage. You sold out. It is a shame. I like most of you, but you are on the wrong path. It took you 7 years for this? I will never yield. I will never yield. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to direct their remarks to the Chair, not to each other. Mr. COLLINS of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I include in the Record a letter from the [[Page H4122]] American College of Physicians in opposition to the bill. American College of Physicians, April 24, 2017. Hon. Paul Ryan, Speaker, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Hon. Nancy Pelosi, Minority Leader, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Hon. Mitch McConnell, Majority Leader, Washington, DC. Hon. Charles Schumer, Minority Leader, U.S. Senate, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker Ryan, Minority Leader Pelosi, Majority Leader McConnell, and Minority Leader Schumer: On behalf of the American College of Physicians (ACP), I am writing to urge Congress to move away from the harmful changes to patient care that would occur if the American Health Care Act (AHCA) were to become law, and to instead work for bipartisan solutions to improve the Affordable Care Act (ACA) rather than repealing and replacing it. We believe that the AHCA, which would repeal and replace the most important coverage and consumer protections created by the ACA, is so fundamentally flawed that it cannot be made acceptable. We understand that the leadership in the House of Representatives continues to explore ways to bring a modified version of the AHCA to a vote, based on a draft amendment reportedly being developed by Representatives MacArthur and Meadows, a summary of which was made available to the public through news organizations. This amendment would make the harmful AHCA even worse by creating new coverage barriers for patients with pre-existing conditions and weakening requirements that insurers cover essential benefits. The American College of Physicians is the largest medical specialty organization and the second-largest physician group in the United States. ACP members include 148,000 internal medicine physicians (internists), related subspecialists, and medical students. Internal medicine physicians are specialists who apply scientific knowledge and clinical expertise to the diagnosis, treatment, and compassionate care of adults across the spectrum from health to complex illness. The draft MacArthur-Meadows amendment would create what is known as the ``Limited Waiver Option'' that would allow states to eliminate or severely weaken vital ACA Title I consumer protections--specifically, community rating and essential health benefits (EHBs)--returning the country to the pre-ACA days when persons with pre-existing ``declinable'' medical conditions in most states were priced out of the market and the insurance products available in the individual market did not cover medically necessary services. Specifically: The MacArthur-Meadows amendment would create an option for states to obtain Limited Waivers from certain federal standards that would gut existing law consumer protections. Based on a summary of the draft amendment, states could seek Limited Waivers for: Essential Health Benefits (EHBs) Community-rating rules, except for the following categories, which are not waivable: Gender or Age (except for reductions of the 5:1 age ratio previously established) or Health Status (unless the state has established a high-risk pool or is participating in a federal high-risk pool) To obtain the waiver, states would only need to ``attest that the purpose of their requested waiver is to reduce premium costs, increase the number of persons with healthcare coverage, or advance another benefit to the public interest in the state, including the guarantee of coverage for persons with preexisting medical conditions. The Secretary shall approve applications within 90 days of determining that an application is complete.'' [Emphasis added in italics]. In other words, as long as a state attested that there was a ``benefit to the public,'' insurers would be once again allowed to charge more to people with pre-existing conditions, or decline to cover needed benefits like physician and hospital visits, maternity care and contraception, mental health and substance use disorder treatments, preventive services, and prescription drugs. This would take us back to the days when people had to fill out intrusive insurance company applications to document their previous health history, even before being advised what the premium would be based on their individual health risk. Unlike community rating, which bases premiums based on the expected costs associated with all persons in the insurance pool (adjusted only by age, tobacco use, and family size), the Limited Waiver would again allow insurers in states that obtain a waiver to again charge people exorbitant and unaffordable premiums for their pre-existing conditions. Before the ACA, insurance plans sold in the individual insurance market in all but five states typically maintained lists of so-called ``declinable'' medical conditions including asthma, diabetes, arthritis, obesity, stroke, or pregnancy, or having been diagnosed with cancer in the past 10 years. Even if a revised bill would not explicitly repeal the current law's guaranteed-issue requirement which requires insurers to offer coverage to persons with pre-existing conditions like these guaranteed issue without community rating allows insurers to charge as much as they believe a patient's treatment will cost. The result would be that many patients with pre-existing conditions would be offered coverage that costs them thousands of dollars more for the care that they need, and in the case of patients with expensive conditions like cancer, even hundreds of thousands more. An amendment to the AHCA reported out of the Rules Committee on April 6th to establish a ``Federal Invisible Risk Sharing Program,'' which would create a fund that states could use to reimburse insurers for some of the costs associated with insuring sicker patients, would not offset the harm done to patients with pre-existing conditions by allowing the Limited Waiver of community rating and essential benefit protections. The pre-ACA experience with high-risk pools was that many had long waiting lists, and offered inadequate coverage with high deductibles and insufficient benefits. Unless a national high-risk pool is supported with a massive infusion of funding it will not be sufficient to cover the millions of people with pre-existing conditions that would be denied or charged more for coverage under the AHCA. One paper estimates that a national high-risk pool would cost $178.1 billion a year, roughly $176.4 billion more than the annual funding provided to the Invisible Risk Sharing Program. Also, shifting people out of the existing health insurance marketplace to a high- risk pool would undermine the assurance that enrollees could keep their existing coverage. The Limited Waiver Option will also allow states to seek waivers from the essential health benefits required of all plans sold in the individual insurance market, with the result that millions of patients will be at risk of losing coverage for essential services like maternity care, cancer screening tests and treatments, prescription drugs, preventive services, mental health and substance use disorder treatments, and even physician visits, prescription drugs and hospitalizations. Prior to passage of the ACA, 62% of individual market enrollees did not have coverage of maternity services, 34 did not have substance-use disorder-services, 18% did not have mental-health services and 9% did not have coverage for prescription drugs. A recent independent analysis found that the AHCA's repeal of current law required benefits would result in patients on average paying $1,952 more for cancer drugs; $1,807 for drugs for heart disease; $1,127 for drugs to treat lung diseases; $1,607 for drugs to treat mental illnesses; $4,940 for inpatient admission for mental health; $4,555 for inpatient admission for substance use treatment; and $8,501 for maternity care. Such increased costs would make it practically impossible for many patients to avail themselves of the care they need. The result will be delays in getting treatment until their illnesses present at a more advanced, less treatable, and more expensive stage, or not keeping up with life-saving medications prescribed by their physicians. Allowing states to eliminate the EHB will threaten our nation's fight against the opioid epidemic. A study concluded that with repeal of the ACA, ``approximately 1,253,000 people with serious mental disorders and about 2.8 million Americans with a substance use disorder, of whom about 222,000 have an opioid disorder, would lose some or all of their insurance coverage.'' Finally, allowing states to drop important benefits like maternity, substance use disorder treatment, and preventive services will do little to reduce premiums. A report by Milliman found that the main drivers of premium costs were ambulatory patient services, hospitalization, and prescription drugs. These are crucial services that form the core of any health insurance plan. To be clear: while some younger and healthier persons might be offered lower premiums in states that obtained a ``Limited Waiver'' of community-rating and essential health benefits, it would be at the expense of making coverage unaffordable for those who need it most, older and sicker persons, and result in skimpy ``bare-bones'' insurance for many others that does not cover the medical care they would need if and when they get sick. Finally, even without the Limited Waiver Amendment, ACP continues to believe that the AHCA has numerous other provisions and policies that that will do great harm to patients including: The phase-out of the higher federal match in states that have opted to expand Medicaid and the ban on non-expansion states being able to access the higher federal contribution if they choose to expand Medicaid; Converting the shared federal-state financing structure for Medicaid to one that would cap the federal contribution per enrollee; Providing states with a Medicaid block grant financing option; Eliminating EHBs for Medicaid expansion enrollees; Imposing work or job search requirements on certain Medicaid enrollees; Regressive age-based tax credits, combined with changes that will allow insurers to charge older people much higher premiums than allowed under current law; Continuous coverage requirements for patients with pre- existing conditions; Legislative or regulatory restrictions that would deny or result in discrimination in the awarding of federal grant funds and/or Medicaid and Children's Health Insurance Program funding to women's health clinics that are qualified under existing federal law for [[Page H4123]] the provision of evidence-based services including, but not limited to, provision of contraception, preventive health screenings, sexually transmitted infection testing and treatment, vaccines, counseling, rehabilitation, and referrals, and; Elimination of the Prevention and Public Health Fund, which provides billions in dollars to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to prevent and control the spread of infectious diseases. The College strongly believes in the first, do no harm principle. Therefore, we continue to urge that Congress move away from the fundamentally flawed and harmful policies that would result from the American Health Care Act and from the changes under consideration--including the proposed ``Limited Waiver'' amendment--that would make the bill even worse for patients. We urge Congress to instead start over and seek agreement on bipartisan ways to improve and build on the ACA. The College welcomes the opportunity to share our ideas for bipartisan solutions that would help make health care better, more accessible, and more affordable for patients rather than imposing great harm on them as the AHCA would do. Sincerely, Jack Ende, MD, MACP, President. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I include in the Record a letter from the Cancer Action Network against this bill. Cancer Action Network, American Cancer Society, May 3, 2017. Hon. Paul Ryan, Speaker, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Hon. Nancy Pelosi, Minority Leader, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker Ryan and Minority Leader Pelosi: The American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS CAN) is deeply concerned about the reports of additional amendments to the American Health Care Act (AHCA), including one that would allegedly add $8 billion in new spending for state high-risk pools. This amendment is particularly egregious because it would further incent states to apply for waivers from current-law market rules that protect patients with pre- existing conditions. Historically, state high-risk pools have fallen short of providing coverage of prevention, treatment and follow-up care for cancer patients and survivors. Segmenting people with cancer and other serious illnesses away from the private marketplace and into high-risk pools absent an adequate and permanent source of public funding has never been an adequate solution. Between 1976 and 2010, 35 states created high-risk pools to cover individuals who could not otherwise purchase insurance in the private market, usually because of a pre-existing condition. Every one of those risk pools experienced net operating losses year after year. Furthermore, high-risk pools did not result in lower premiums. All of them set premiums above the non-group market average or standard rate in the state, usually by 150-200 percent. Only a few states provided additional premium assistance for low-income individuals, leaving many who could not afford premiums priced out of the program. Most states also imposed waiting periods before covering preexisting conditions. An individual with a prior cancer diagnosis often had to wait 6-12 months before the high-risk pool would cover the costs associated with cancer treatment or follow-up survivorship care. Most states imposed limitations on coverage with either lifetime or annual limits. And most plans offered deductibles of $1,000 or higher. Neither AHCA, nor the new amendment would fully protect patients from any of those conditions. Cancer patients and survivors need insurance coverage that is affordable, readily accessible, and protects them from pre-existing condition exclusions, annual and lifetime caps on coverage and extraordinary out-of-pocket costs. Past experience has shown that high-risk pools failed to meet these basic needs, yet still were a drain on state budgets. As we have indicated in our earlier letters, there are reasonable fixes that could be made to the current law. We stand ready to work with you to develop policies that improve the law and encourage a robust health insurance market that provides affordable and comprehensive coverage options. Sincerely, Christopher W. Hansen, President. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I include in the Record a letter from the American Society of Clinical Oncology against this bill. American Society of Clinical Oncology, April 27, 2017. Hon. Paul Ryan, Speaker, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker Ryan, On behalf of the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), I write to express our strong opposition to the American Health Care Act (AHCA), as currently amended. As the leading professional society representing more than 42,000 physicians worldwide who care for people with cancer, ASCO has a unique perspective on the law's potential impact on cancer patients. Our core mission is to ensure every patient with cancer has meaningful access to high quality care. We believe Congress shares this goal and our comments today are in the spirit of advancing that common purpose. In January 2017, as Congress embarked upon the repeal and replacement of the Affordable Care Act, ASCO shared a set of guiding principles that support improvements to the current health care system. We also put forth specific areas where people with cancer need protections. Our principles rest on the belief that any health system reform must ensure all people affected by cancer receive high-quality care. ASCO's first principle states, ``all Americans should have access to affordable and sufficient healthcare coverage regardless of their income or health status. To ensure protected access, the current ban on preexisting condition limitations, elimination of annual and lifetime coverage caps, and maintenance of guaranteed renewability should be preserved.'' We take the position that ``any efforts to reform the healthcare system at the national, state, or local levels should ensure that individuals with healthcare insurance can continue to access affordable insurance without interruption.'' The amended AHCA violates these principles. Studies show that when cancer patients do not have adequate insurance they receive less care, receive it later, and have worse outcomes than those with better insurance coverage. Uninsured and under-insured families facing a cancer diagnosis experience significant stress. They often are unable to meet out-of-pocket expenses and even forgo cancer care in order to pay for necessities of daily living. The AHCA as currently constructed will create or worsen these barriers to care. It will add costs to the system, decrease access to appropriate treatment and increase existing disparities in care. We are especially concerned with provisions allowing state waivers that could erode important protections for patients with cancer, including pre-existing condition safeguards, coverage of essential services, and access to affordable health insurance. Removing these protections from current federal law allows for a weakening of these critical provisions in some states and establishes a system of inequitable protections across state lines for cancer patients. We urge policymakers to ensure that robust requirements are in place to ensure that all insurance products cover the full scope of services and therapies that cancer patients require. ASCO strongly opposes passage of the AHCA in its current form. We welcome the opportunity to address these issues--and to work toward a better proposal--with you and your staff. Sincerely, Daniel F. Hayes, MD, FASCO, FACP, President, American Society of Clinical Oncology. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I include in the Record a letter from the American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine against this bill. American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine, May 2, 2017. Re Deep Concerns with the American Health Care Act and Related Amendments. Hon. Paul Ryan, Speaker, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Hon. Nancy Pelosi, Democratic Leader, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker Ryan and Leader Pelosi: The American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine (ACRM) writes in reference to the American Health Care Act (AHCA), H.R. 1628, and the MacArthur Amendment to the bill. ACRM is an organization of rehabilitation professionals dedicated to serving people with disabling conditions by supporting research and services that promote health, independence, productivity, and quality of life; and meet the needs of rehabilitation clinicians and individuals with disabilities. ACRM is seriously concerned that current House proposals will undercut the federal coverage standard for rehabilitation and habilitation services and devices established under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Access to rehabilitation enables individuals experiencing injuries, illnesses, and disabilities to maximize their quality of life by enhancing their health, function, and independence. We believe that any ACA repeal and replace bill that advances in the House and Senate must maintain access to rehabilitation and habilitation services and devices. In particular, the AHCA (H.R. 1628, as amended) includes a provision that would allow states to apply for waivers exempting them from compliance with important patient protections that are required by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), including premium rating ratios based on age, protections for consumers disallowing medical status underwriting (i.e., community rating), and requirements for insurers to cover a defined package of essential health benefits (EHBs), which include rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices. We are deeply concerned these EHB changes will curtail access for both children and adults in Medicaid expansion states, as well as private ACA health plans. ACRM believes that these provisions will significantly undermine the health insurance coverage that patients need. ACRM urges Congress to work in a bipartisan manner to improve access to affordable, comprehensive care for all Americans, [[Page H4124]] including those with disabilities and chronic conditions needing rehabilitation and habilitation services and devices. Douglas Katz, MD, FACRM, FAAN, ACRM President. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I include in the Record a letter from the Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities in strong opposition to this bill. Consortium for Citizens With Disabilities, April 28, 2017. Dear Member of Congress: The Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities (CCD) is strongly opposed to the amended American Health Care Act. The amended American Health Care Act retains the original bill's proposals to dramatically cut Medicaid services that are vital to people with disabilities and seniors through per capita caps, which CCD has opposed. The new amendments--including permitting states to seek waivers from the protections for people with pre-existing conditions and from the requirement to provide essential health benefits--makes the amended AHCA even more harmful to people with disabilities. We urge you to oppose this legislation. Medicaid provides services and supports that maintain the health, function, independence, and well-being of 10 million enrollees living with disabilities. For many people with disabilities, being able to access timely needed care is a life or death matter. The American Health Care Act changes the way that the Federal Government funds Medicaid--rather than paying states based on the actual costs of healthcare for people in Medicaid, it sets a cap on the amount of federal support, a cap that is totally unrelated to the actual costs of needed care for enrollees. This cap is designed to cut Medicaid, and the bill uses those cuts to pay for unrelated tax cuts. Slashing federal support for Medicaid, which is already a lean program, will force states to cut services and eligibility that put the health and wellbeing of people with disabilities at significant risk. The newest amendments to the American Health Care Act make the bill even more harmful to people with disabilities. The new amendments would allow states to easily obtain waivers that would allow them to charge higher premiums to people with pre-existing conditions, including people with disabilities. They also would allow states to seek waivers from the Affordable Care Act's requirement to provide essential health benefits, including crucial services for people with disabilities such as mental health and substance use disorder services, prescription drugs, rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices, preventative and wellness services and chronic disease management, and pediatric services. These waivers jeopardize the Affordable Care Act's protections for people with pre-existing conditions, including people with disabilities, and CCD opposes any roll- back of those protections. The ACA helped millions of people with disabilities and others to gain access to affordable and comprehensive health insurance. The amended American Health Care Act is insufficient to help people with disabilities meet their healthcare needs, and we urge you to oppose the bill should it come to a vote. Sincerely, Health Task Force Co-chairs: Bethany Lilly, Bazelon Center for Mental Health Law; Dave Machledt, National Health Law Program; Peter Thomas, Brain Injury Association of America; and Julie Ward, The Arc of the United States. Long Term Services and Supports Co-chairs: Alison Barkoff, Center for Public Representation; Nicole Jorwic, The Arc of the United States; Sarah Meek, Lutheran Services in America Disability Network; and Laura Weidner, National Multiple Sclerosis Society. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. Moulton.) Mr. MOULTON. Mr. Speaker, there is only one reason this bill is on the floor today: the President cares more about cutting a deal than keeping his promises. He promised we would lower costs. That turned out to be a lie. He promised we would expand coverage. That turned out to be a lie. He promised we would protect millions of Americans with preexisting conditions. That, too, was a lie. Back in Massachusetts at the Agawam Diner, I met a veteran named Clif, who told me when I was on my way to Washington for the first time to go to Washington as an American--not as a Democrat or a Republican, but as an American. To my Republican colleagues, heed Clif's advice today. Don't vote as a Republican. Vote as an American. Don't throw away your credibility to give a legislative victory to a President who will never stick his neck out for anyone other than himself. For what? To betray the people who trusted them? I urge my Republican colleagues to put country before party. Vote ``no'' on this ridiculous bill. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the President. Mr. COLLINS of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I think it is interesting today since we would not be here today if there was not the problems that you, Mr. Speaker, and I have seen. One-third of this country has one insurer, premiums with double-digit increases, people who can afford--maybe even with subsidies the amount of their plan can't afford the deductibles and co-pays. They go to doctors who won't take their insurance. We are not here by mistake, Mr. Speaker. We are here because ObamaCare is an abject failure. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I include in the Record a letter from Children's Leadership Council opposed to this bill. Children's Leadership Council, May 1, 2017. Dear Representative: The Children's Leadership Council opposes the American Health Care Act (AHCA) because it would jeopardize health care for millions of babies, children, youth and families. We urge you to vote NO on this legislation. The Children's Leadership Council (CLC) is a coalition of organizations dedicated to improving the lives and opportunities of America's children. Nationwide, CLC members work to advance the health, education and well-being of babies, children and youth in order to prepare them for school, work, and life. The CLC is the only national children's coalition solely dedicated to supporting investments in our nation's children and youth; and collectively, CLC's members have affiliates, partners, and members in every state in the nation. The Affordable Care Act and Medicaid play a crucial role in the lives of children, including those facing the greatest challenges such as children in poverty; children suffering abuse and neglect; children in foster care, and children with disabilities. Medicaid, for example, provides coverage for approximately 37 million children, including children with disabilities, children in foster care and children from low- income families. Children are the largest group of Medicaid recipients, and nearly 40 percent of all the nation's children rely on Medicaid and CHIP for their healthcare. Medicaid provides health care treatment and preventive services, mental health care, case management and transportation services to and from medical appointments for children who are low-income or disabled. The AHCA's changes to Medicaid would radically restructure a program that has worked for more than 50 years to support children's health. The Medicaid cap would shift $839 billion to stages, forcing them to cut eligibility, benefits, or provider rates that could have disastrous health consequences. There is no question that the massive cuts to Medicaid, increased premiums likely for millions of families, and eliminating the Essential Health Benefits requirements under current law will seriously harm children and families. Maternity benefits would be among the many medical services no longer guaranteed if this bill were to become law. The massive Medicaid reductions in substance abuse treatment will add to the increases nationwide in the need for child welfare services because of the surge in opioid addiction. Families caring for children with disabilities will find supports for care at home jeopardized. With a record 95% of children with health coverage in our country, the AHCA would turn back the clock on progress for children. And recent proposed changes to the bill would further undermine consumer protections that make health care out of reach for low-income children and their families--thus making the already harmful bill worse for children. Polling conducted by the Children's Leadership Council found 71 percent of parents, including 67 percent of Independent parents (of children under the age of 18), want increased investments in programs that help children in the areas of education, health and nutrition, not less as proposed by the AHCA. Congress has a strong history of working on a bipartisan, bicameral basis on issues, policies and programs important to children. It is our hope and expectation that members of Congress continue this history, as Congress works on improving our nation's healthcare system. This legislation would be a dangerous step backward. We strongly urge you to vote NO. Sincerely, Randi Schmidt, Executive Director, Children's Leadership Council. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I include in the Record a letter from the Paralyzed Veterans of America against this bill. Paralyzed Veterans of America, Washington, DC, May 3, 2017. Hon. Paul Ryan, Speaker, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Hon. Nancy Pelosi, Minority Leader, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker Ryan and Leader Pelosi: Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA) urges [[Page H4125]] rejection of the latest version of the American Health Care Act (AHCA). PVA is the nation's only Congressionally- chartered veterans' service organization solely dedicated to representing veterans with spinal cord injury and/or disease. Consequently, we are very concerned about the conflicting information circulating about this legislation and the adverse impact it could have on our members and millions of other people with disabilities. As we understand it, the AHCA cuts $880 billion out of the Medicaid program in order to finance tax cuts that will explode the deficit and largely assist upper income individuals, corporations, and providers. The Medicaid changes are particularly devastating to people with disabilities. Under the cap and cut proposal, the federal government would no longer share in the costs of providing health care services and community services beyond the capped amount. This would eliminate the enhanced federal match for the Community First Choice Option under Medicaid that provides attendant care services in the community. Thanks to this program, many poor veterans with serious non-service- connected disabilities have been able to move from nursing homes into their communities. The AHCA also weakens Medicaid by ending the Medicaid expansion earlier and offering Medicaid block grants to states. Data from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation shows expansion has helped thousands of veterans and their caregivers. For veterans and PVA members in particular, the AHCA continues several problematic policies of the ACA as well as troubling new provisions that could affect the ability of many veterans and their family members to afford health insurance in the private market. The underlying AHCA bill: Continues to exclude CHAMPVA beneficiaries--dependents of the most catastrophically disabled veterans--from the dependents' coverage policy up to age 26. Fails to remove the prohibition on enrollment into the VA health care system for Priority Group 8 veterans, thus denying these veterans access to the principal health care system for veterans. Denies access to tax credits making health insurance affordable to anyone eligible for a host of other federal health programs, including those ``eligible'' for coverage under Title 38 health care programs. This would prevent many veterans who may be ``eligible for'' but not enrolled in the VA health care system from accessing these tax credits intended to help people buy insurance. Not only do the changes made to the original version of the AHCA continue its failure to protect veterans and people with disabilities, they make these circumstances worse. The latest changes would allow states to seek waivers that would allow insurers to charge higher premiums to people with pre- existing conditions, including people with disabilities. The new amendments also would allow states to seek waivers from the ACA's requirement that certain essential health benefits must be provided, including crucial services for people with disabilities such as prescription drugs, rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices, preventative and wellness services and chronic disease management. The combination of these changes would make it nearly impossible for people with pre-existing conditions to find affordable plans that cover basic health care services. Throughout these past few months, the American people have been calling for a bipartisan effort to improve the nation's health care system. Congress should heed these voices, stop its pursuit of the flawed American Health Care Act and work together through regular order to strengthen all Americans' access to affordable, high quality health care. Sincerely, Carl Blake, Associate Executive Director. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I include in the Record a letter from the March of Dimes opposed to this bill. [From the march of dimes] Under AHCA, Over 6 Million Women of Childbearing Age Will Lose Health Coverage Dear Representative: Prior to 2010, low-income adult women could generally only obtain Medicaid coverage after they were pregnant. By the time they enrolled in this coverage, many of the best opportunities for guaranteeing a healthy pregnancy and healthy baby had already been missed. Today, states that have expanded Medicaid can extend Medicaid coverage to low-income women of childbearing age, giving them the chance to get healthy before they get pregnant. The March of Dimes estimates that approximately 6.5 million low income women of childbearing age are currently covered under Medicaid expansion, giving them access to treatment for tobacco use, obesity, substance abuse, and other conditions that can have a major impact on future pregnancies. Between 2012 and 2015, the rate of uninsurance among women of childbearing age dropped by 40%, with much of that decline attributable to Medicaid expansion. The American Health Care Act (AHCA) would do away with these advances by rolling back Medicaid expansion. Its fundamental restructuring of the traditional Medicaid program would also likely lead to significant coverage losses or restriction of services to beneficiaries, including pregnant women. These changes do a serious disservice to low-income women and families by denying them access to the care they need to lead healthy lives and, ultimately, have healthy pregnancies and give birth to healthy infants. The MacArthur amendment and other proposed changes to the AHCA do not address these issues. Women, infants, families, and communities will bear the longterm cost if health care for women of childbearing age and pregnant women is shortchanged and more babies are born sick as a result. The March of Dimes urges all Representatives to oppose the American Health Care Act. Sincerely, Stacey D. Stewart, President. Mr. McGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, I include in the Record a letter from AFSCME in strong opposition to this bill. AFSCME, May 3, 2017. U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Dear Representative: On behalf of the 1.6 million working and retiree members of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME), I am writing to express our continuing opposition to the American Health Care Act (AHCA), notwithstanding the addition of the Upton amendment. The harm that AHCA will impose on ordinary Americans is breathtaking in scope. As the Congressional Budget Office has detailed, 24 million will lose their health care coverage. The Medicaid program will be cut by $839 billion and restructured, ending the guarantee that the federal government will fund a specified share of state Medicaid costs. The bill makes coverage more expensive, especially for lower-income families and older workers and it undermines the financial strength of Medicare. And the MacArthur amendment makes a very bad bill worse by allowing states to opt out of Affordable Care Act protections that ensure that people with pre-existing conditions will be able to obtain comprehensive, affordable health care. Moreover, the MacArthur amendment would allow insurance companies to re-impose caps on annual and lifetime limits, even in employer-sponsored coverage, putting the health care of those with catastrophic illnesses or injuries at risk. Under the Upton amendment, grants to states that could be used