Congressional Record
Formatting necessary for an accurate reading of this text may be shown by tags (e.g., <DELETED> or <BOLD>) or may be missing from this TXT display. For complete and accurate display of this text, see the PDF.

[Pages H4816-H4856] From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov] DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2016 The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr. Rouzer). Pursuant to House Resolution 333 and rule XVIII, the Chair declares the House in the Committee of the Whole House on the state of the Union for the further consideration of the bill, H.R. 2822. Will the gentleman from Minnesota (Mr. Emmer) kindly take the chair. {time} 1910 In the Committee of the Whole Accordingly, the House resolved itself into the Committee of the Whole House on the state of the Union for the further consideration of the bill (H.R. 2822) making appropriations for the Department of the Interior, environment, and related agencies for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2016, and for other purposes, with Mr. Emmer of Minnesota (Acting Chair) in the chair. The Clerk read the title of the bill. The Acting CHAIR. When the Committee of the Whole rose earlier today, a request for a recorded vote on amendment No. 6, printed in the Congressional Record, offered by the gentlewoman from Tennessee (Mrs. Blackburn), had been postponed, and the bill had been read through page 132, line 24. Amendment Offered by Mr. Gallego Mr. GALLEGO. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill, before the short title, insert the following: Sec. 441. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to issue a grazing permit or lease in contravention of section 4110.1 or 4130.1-1(b) of title 43, Code of Federal Regulations. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from Arizona and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Arizona. Mr. GALLEGO. Mr. Chairman, I rise to offer an amendment that will reaffirm Congress' support for the enforcement of grazing fees on public lands. Grazing on public lands is a privilege, not a right, and it is critical that individual ranchers who use these lands abide by the law and pay their fair share. My commonsense amendment simply confirms that grazing permits or leases should not be issued to anyone who does not comply with BLM regulations. My amendment does not penalize people for forgetting to repair a fence or for forgetting to make a payment once or twice. Rather, this amendment ensures that egregious violations of grazing regulations are not going to be allowed to happen under the taxpayers' watch, as there are American taxpayers who work every day to ensure that all of their regulations are met. Mr. Chairman, revenues from grazing fees go toward the management, maintenance, and improvement of public rangeland. The vast majority of ranchers understands how important these efforts are and pay their fees on time, but some ranchers are outright refusing to pay their grazing fees. One particular rancher, who is well known to the media, has been more than $1 million in arrears since 1993. He has ignored the executive and judicial branches of our government, expanding his herds further onto our lands without permission. Unauthorized grazing, such as in this case, has the potential to destroy habitat for protected species and to damage public property. In addition, he has instigated volatile situations that has put the lives of local and Federal Government officials at risk. Unbelievably, some in this body have actually applauded these dangerous actions. That is simply irresponsible. Mr. Chairman, I strongly suspect that, if anyone in my congressional district in Phoenix forcibly resisted paying the Federal Government more than $1 million, he or she would be in handcuffs instead of on television or meeting with potential Presidential candidates. {time} 1915 Ultimately, however, this amendment is about more than one man. It is about upholding the basic principles that our laws should be applied fairly to everyone who lives in this country and uses its public lands. Mr. Chairman, we must ensure that egregious violations of grazing regulations are not financed by the American taxpayer. To that end, I hope all Members will support this critical amendment. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Arizona (Mr. Gallego). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment Offered by Mr. Pearce Mr. PEARCE. Mr. Chair, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to increase the rate of any royalty required to be paid to the United States for oil and gas produced on Federal land, or to prepare or publish a proposed rule relating to such an increase. [[Page H4817]] The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from New Mexico and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Mexico. Mr. PEARCE. Mr. Chair, Washington recently issued the advanced notice of rulemaking in which they declared they were going to consider raising the royalty rates on oil and gas production on Federal land. Now, there is several reasons that we would want to consider that before we implemented it, and so our amendment simply says let's stop the process. First of all, what it does is it is going to drive the royalty rates up on Federal lands. It will be one more impediment to producing the oil and gas that fuels this Nation's economy. Secondly, small businesses, small independent producers are already under pressure to try to just stay in business, and it would increase their operating costs. For a small State like ours, rural States, the small businesses, these local producers are sources of prosperity that are desperately missing from the rural parts of the country. If we are going to have an economy that is healthy, if we are going to have an economy that provides jobs for the future, then we need energy that is both affordable and a predictable supply. Nothing is better than producing our own. When we have to import oil from other nations, some of those nations are unstable politically. Some just don't like us as a country; and so why not produce our own energy, providing our own jobs and providing revenues to the Federal Government? Anytime you increase taxes on a given item, then you are going to see less of that item, and oil and gas is no exception. Let's let the department think about this just a bit more before we rush into a royalty rate which will decrease America's energy supply and make us more dependent on foreign oil. I reserve the balance of my time. Ms. PINGREE. Mr. Chair, I claim the time in opposition to this amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The gentlewoman from Maine is recognized for 5 minutes. Ms. PINGREE. Mr. Chair, the amendment would prohibit the Bureau of Land Management from using its legal authorities to modernize its royalty rate structure, which would result in less revenue to the Treasury. The Department of the Interior's oil and gas royalties have been the subject of repeated study by the Government Accountability Office and other entities for many years. In 2008, the GAO said the United States could be forgoing billions of dollars in revenue from the production of Federal oil and gas resources due to the lack of price flexibility in royalty rates and the inability to change the fiscal terms on existing leases. In 2013, the GAO issued another report that noted concern that the Department of the Interior had not taken the steps to change the onshore royalty rate regulations. Modernizing the Bureau of Land Management's rate structures can provide critical flexibility, especially given the dramatic growth of oil development on public and tribal lands, where production has increased in each of the past 6 years and combined production was up 81 percent in 2004 versus 2008. It seems to me that it is critical that the Department of the Interior is ensuring that the public is receiving a fair return from the production of oil and gas from Federal leases. This amendment would guarantee a sweetheart deal for Big Oil companies at the expense of the American taxpayer. I urge my colleagues to oppose this amendment. I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. PEARCE. Mr. Chair, I would like to thank my cosponsors on this amendment: Mr. Tipton, Mr. Cramer, Mr. Lamborn, and Mr. Zinke. I appreciate their presence here. The gentlewoman raises a significant question whether or not revenues would increase or decrease. We have got a couple of charts here showing exactly what is happening. First of all, the average number of leases that the BLM issued during each administration, we can see back in the Reagan administration the highest level. It decreases down to--you can see the relative position of the Obama administration. If the administration were really interested in revenues, it seems like they would be producing the permits at a little faster rate. Then this chart shows the oil production; the increase in oil production in blue is shown here on private lands while the decrease in oil production on the public lands is being shown in the red. Again, if the administration were very interested, it seems like they would modernize not the royalty rate, but the way in which they approve these wells. Sometimes, wells go for 6 months or a year without being permitted, where States can offer 30-day processing of the permits. The same is happening with natural gas. Again, we just see the blue on private lands where natural gas production is increasing, dramatic decreases in production of natural gas on Federal lands. Again, it looks like, if the agency were worried about the revenues, they would seek to modernize and update their procedures first. I yield to the chairman of the committee. Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chair, I thank the gentleman for yielding. Mr. Chair, I thank the gentleman for this amendment. I think it is a good amendment. I certainly understand his concern. I would urge my colleagues to support the gentleman's amendment. Mr. PEARCE. I reserve the balance of my time. Ms. PINGREE. Mr. Chair, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from California (Mr. Lowenthal). Mr. LOWENTHAL. Mr. Chair, I rise in opposition to the amendment. The Bureau of Land Management has only just begun the process of examining whether royalty rates and rentals for oil and gas leases on public lands should be increased. That process should be allowed to continue. GAO recently found that, based upon the results of a number of studies, the U.S. Government receives one of the lowest government takes, commonly understood to be the total revenue, as a percentage of the value of oil and natural gas produced in the entire world. For example, royalty rates on public land are at 12.5 percent, considerably less than the royalty rates even on State lands, which range from a low of 16.67 percent to 25 percent-plus. These low royalty rates cheat the American taxpayers and keep them from receiving a fair return for the extraction of their oil and gas resources. However, rental rates are even worse. To secure very valuable mineral rights, sometimes worth hundreds of millions of dollars, companies only have to bid a minimum, and I repeat, a minimum of $2 an acre upfront to win the lease and then $1.50 per acre each year to keep the lease. That is right, a rental of $1.50 per acre per year. This low price was last set by Congress in the 1980s and has not been adjusted since. This can and should change. Oil companies, some of which generate billions of dollars per quarter in profits, should pay their fair share to the American people for the development of the Nation's public resources. Imagine if your rent had not increased since Ronald Reagan was President or if the local grocery store had not raised their prices since 1987. The Acting CHAIR. The time of the gentleman has expired. Ms. PINGREE. I yield the gentleman an additional 30 seconds. Mr. LOWENTHAL. This scenario may sound too good to be true, but in fact, that is exactly the sweetheart deal that we are currently giving oil and gas industries, a sweetheart deal that should end. All Americans must deal with the unavoidable reality of inflation; so why shouldn't oil and gas companies? It is long past time for the BLM to assess better ways for the public to receive their fair share. Blocking the BLM from doing that is fiscally irresponsible, a giveaway to the oil and gas companies. Ms. PINGREE. I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. PEARCE. Mr. Chair, may I inquire how much time I have remaining? The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from New Mexico has 1 minute remaining, and the gentlewoman from Maine has 1 minute remaining. Mr. PEARCE. Mr. Chair, the assumption that the royalty rates are abnormally low in the United States simply ignores the fact that we have lease [[Page H4818]] sales on top of the royalties. Many countries fail to have those. The United States has the most extreme environmental regulations, so the regulatory burden gladly borne by the oil companies is an additional cost that many nations do not have. In addition, we have got income taxes paid by the companies, and many countries don't charge that on top of the royalty. What we are hearing from our friends on the other side of the aisle about the sweetheart deals, I think, take a look and see actually how much the oil and gas companies are paying. In our State, they have contributed to two of the largest permanent funds in the world held by our State. I think oil and gas companies are paying their fair share by a lot. What other industry is paying truck drivers $100,000 a year to drive a truck for a contractor? I think that those sorts of computations are simply ignored by the GAO. Again, I would urge Members to support this amendment. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time. Ms. PINGREE. Mr. Chair, in spite of the arguments that my colleague from New Mexico has made, I still say this amendment, in my opinion, doesn't pass the straight face test. I can't imagine my constituents thinking that we should make things any easier for the oil and gas companies or that we should be giving away the opportunity to earn taxpayer revenue on our Federal lands. The Federal onshore royalty rate has not been increased since 1920. That is 95 years. The offshore royalty rate is 18.75 percent; yet the onshore rates have been stuck at 12.5 percent for 95 years. Where is the equity in that? As far as I am concerned, I think it is time for the American taxpayers to get a fair return on the use of public resources, especially from some of the most profitable companies in the world. I urge my colleagues to oppose this amendment. Mr. Chair, I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from New Mexico (Mr. Pearce). The question was taken; and the Acting Chair announced that the ayes appeared to have it. Ms. PINGREE. Mr. Chair, I demand a recorded vote. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to clause 6 of rule XVIII, further proceedings on the amendment offered by the gentleman from New Mexico will be postponed. Amendment Offered by Mr. Huffman Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Chair, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill, before the short title, insert the following: Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to implement National Park Service Director's Order 61 as it pertains to allowing a grave in any Federal cemetery to be decorated with a Confederate flag. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from California and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California. {time} 1930 Mr. HUFFMAN. Mr. Chair, I yield myself such time as I may consume. I appreciate very much the bipartisan support and passage of my earlier amendment, which would end the practice of concessionaires in our national parks selling Confederate flags and memorabilia of the Confederacy. We now, with this Interior Appropriations bill, have a second opportunity to speak on this very important national debate that we are having regarding symbols of the Confederacy. This additional amendment will end the practice of allowing groups to display Confederate flags on federally managed cemeteries. The American Civil War was fought, in Abraham Lincoln's words, to ``save the last best hope of Earth.'' We can honor that history without celebrating the Confederate flag and all of the dreadful things that it symbolizes. I request an ``aye'' of my colleagues, and I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from California (Mr. Huffman). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment No. 9 Offered by Mr. Walberg Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will designate the amendment. The text of the amendment is as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: limitation on funds Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used by the Environmental Protection Agency to lobby in contravention of section 1913 of title 18, United States Code, on behalf of the proposed rule entitled ``Definition of `Waters of the United States' Under the Clean Water Act'' (79 Fed. Reg. 22188; April 21, 2014). The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from Michigan and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Michigan. Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Chairman, my amendment tells the Environmental Protection Agency to follow the law and clearly establishes the view of Congress that the EPA cannot lobby on behalf of the waters of the U.S. rule, in violation of the Anti-Lobbying Act. Over the past few years, the EPA has been pushing the limits of its statutory authority to the issue of the waters of the U.S. rule. Now, we have learned that, as part of their efforts to regulate every pond, stream, and ditch in America, the EPA may have violated the Anti- Lobbying Act to garner public comments in support of the proposed rule, even though the Department of Justice has consistently stated that the act prohibits Federal agencies from engaging in substantial grassroots lobbying. In fact, The New York Times recently reported: In a campaign that tests the limits of Federal lobbying law, the Agency orchestrated a drive to counter political opposition from Republicans and enlist public support in concert with liberal environmental groups and a grassroots organization aligned with President Obama. The New York Times went on to say as well: The most contentious part of the EPA's campaign was deploying Thunderclap, a social media tool that spread the Agency's message to hundreds of thousands of people, a ``virtual flash mob,'' in the words of Travis Loop, the head of communications for EPA's water division. Mr. Chairman, this is unseemly. The EPA Administrator later used the skewed results as evidence of public support before Congress. For this reason, my amendment is needed to make clear that the EPA shall not violate the Anti-Lobbying Act while pursuing the completion of the waters of the U.S. I respectfully urge all my colleagues to support my amendment. Mr. CALVERT. Will the gentleman yield? Mr. WALBERG. I yield to the gentleman from California. Mr. CALVERT. I thank the gentleman for yielding. I agree with the gentleman and with The New York Times that this is why the underlying bill reduces funding for certain offices within EPA that were responsible for these questionable actions. Therefore, this language is complementary to the approach the committee has already taken in the bill, and I urge an ``aye'' vote on the amendment. Mr. WALBERG. I reserve the balance of my time. Ms. PINGREE. Mr. Chairman, I claim time in opposition to the amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The gentlewoman from Maine is recognized for 5 minutes. Ms. PINGREE. The gentleman's amendment would prohibit funds in the act from being used to lobby on the waters of the U.S. There is an existing prohibition on lobbying that applies to all Federal employees that has been in place since 1919, so this is an unnecessary and redundant amendment. I would remind my colleagues that Federal employees are not prohibited from providing information to Congress on legislation, policies, or programs. There must be an open dialogue between the legislative and executive branches to ensure that laws are being implemented appropriately and programs achieve their intended goals. We should not and cannot operate in an information vacuum. We don't need [[Page H4819]] to add extraneous, redundant provisions to a bill that is already overburdened with harmful legislative riders. I urge my colleagues to oppose the amendment, and I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentlewoman for her comments. It is the law, and that is all I am trying to substantiate, but I have read to you not from an organ of the conservative Republican Party side, but from The New York Times. They also went on to say: The architect of the EPA's new public outreach strategy is Thomas Reynolds, a former Obama campaign aid who was appointed in 2013 as an associate administrator. He said this in relationship to flash mob tactics and the lobbying efforts: We are just borrowing new methods that have proven themselves as being effective. Mr. Chairman, it may be effective, but it is unseemly that EPA, an agency of the Federal Government, would violate the law in lobbying and trying then to show Congress through trumped up evidence that they have produced through lobbying the private sector that they have support for the waters of the U.S. rule. Mr. Chairman, that is why I think we need to establish it here very clearly in this appropriations bill. I reserve the balance of my time. Ms. PINGREE. Mr. Chairman, I oppose this amendment, and I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. WALBERG. Mr. Chairman, I urge support, and I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Michigan (Mr. Walberg). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment Offered by Mr. Peters Mr. PETERS. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: limitation on use of funds Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to enforce section 435 of this Act. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from California and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California. Mr. PETERS. Mr. Chairman, my amendment would not allow any funds to enforce section 435 of this bill, which is another harmful policy rider that limits the ability of our environmental agencies to take action to improve public health and fight the root causes of climate change. This section blocks the EPA's ongoing efforts to regulate hydrofluorocarbons, or HFCs, which is the wrong approach. HFCs are factory-made gases used in air conditioning and refrigeration and are up to 10,000 times more potent than carbon dioxide. This potency has led to HFCs being referred to as a superpollutant. Unless we act now, United States emissions are expected to double by 2020 and triple by 2030. While not as abundant as carbon dioxide, superpollutants, also known as short-lived climate pollutants--including HFCs, methane, and black carbon--have contributed up to 40 percent of observed global warming. By limiting the EPA's authority under the Clean Water Act to propose, finalize, or enforce any regulation or guidance regarding HFCs, we undercut their ability to protect public health and demonstrate American leadership in emission reductions. The EPA's Significant New Alternatives Policy Program, or SNAP, requires us to evaluate substitutes for superpollutants like HFCs that are harming public health and our environment. Through SNAP, we can ensure a more smooth transition to safer alternatives for our country's industrial sector. Within the last week, EPA finalized a new rule on HFCs that the Environmental Investigation Agency estimates will avoid superpollutant emissions equal to the annual greenhouse gas emissions of more than 21 million cars by 2030. It will allow heavy users of HFCs, including supermarkets, which are the largest source of HFC emissions, to continue developing cleaner alternatives. As we continue international negotiations to phase down HFCs, the United States should be a leader in reducing the use of HFCs and other superpollutants. The standard set by EPA will drive U.S. and international innovation and market development of low-emission and energy-efficient refrigeration, air conditioning, foam-blowing agents, and aerosol technologies. These innovations will actually get at one of the root causes of climate change before we are forced to react to increasingly extreme weather and sea level rise. American industry has already begun creating alternatives that both have a lower emissions profile and are more energy efficient than current HFCs, and last September, we saw major companies--including Coca-Cola, Carrier, DuPont, Honeywell, PepsiCo, and other industry leaders--commit to voluntarily reducing harmful HFC emissions. My amendment simply bars funding to enforce section 435 of this bill so we can instead continue with existing rules and move our country's global leadership in finding innovative solutions to reducing emissions forward. We should not be handcuffing the important work being done at EPA to reduce superpollutants. I ask my colleagues to support the amendment, and I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, I rise in opposition to the gentleman's amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from California is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. CALVERT. The committee still has concerns about the costs, technology requirements, and compliance periods in the final rule. It is not clear why EPA divided some categories into subcategories and provided different deadlines for similar products. The EPA clearly chose winners and losers. For the losers, the timetables remain unworkable. Manufacturers need time to implement engineering and technology changes and address new risk and safety challenges. Historic experience with the Montreal Protocol indicates that manufacturers need approximately 6-plus years to successfully transition between new materials. This new rule will particularly be hard on small businesses. The large businesses that the gentleman mentioned have the resources and the technologies available to them to comply quicker. These smaller businesses will find it very difficult to comply with DOE's energy conservation standards. EPA's proposal is not being driven by a statutory mandate, so the committee believes additional time is warranted. The EPA left critical decisions regarding energy, efficiency, and system performance up to the manufacturers; and they need time to get this right. I urge my colleagues to vote ``no'' on this amendment, and I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. PETERS. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate very much the constructive comments by my colleague, the gentleman from California. I would just suggest this is not the way to deal with these issues, but rather to address them via policy approach. Section 435 of this bill will just take out the legs from all work we would do on HFCs and superpollutants, and it is just too broad a brush to paint with. I urge a ``yes'' vote on this amendment, and I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. CALVERT. I urge opposition to this amendment, and I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from California (Mr. Peters). The amendment was rejected. {time} 1945 Amendment No. 30 Offered by Mr. Walden Mr. WALDEN. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will designate the amendment. The text of the amendment is as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following new section: resource management plans Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to complete or implement the revision of the resource management plans for the Coos Bay, Eugene, Medford, Roseburg, or Salem Districts of the Bureau of Land Management or the Klamath [[Page H4820]] Falls Field Office of the Lakeview District of the Bureau of Land Management proposed in the Bureau of Land Management Notice of Availability of the Draft Resource Management Plan Revisions and Draft Environmental Impact Statement for Western Oregon published in the Federal Register on April 24, 2015 (80 Fed. Reg. 23046). The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from Oregon and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Oregon. Mr. WALDEN. Mr. Chairman, the past several decades have been really hard on Oregon's forested communities as timber harvest from Federal lands dropped more than 90 percent because of, in part, litigation, lack of management, government regulation. Across the State, we have lost more than 300 forest product mills. They have closed. We have lost more than 30,000 forest-related jobs. This has left our communities in really bad shape, nearing bankruptcy in some cases in our counties, high poverty rates in our communities. Unemployment rates are high in these forested areas and, of course, we face, without active management, these enormous forest fires that contribute massively to the carbon buildup. Recently, the BLM released a proposed update to their two-decade, 20- year-old management plan in western Oregon. The vast majority of the forests covered by these plans are what are called O&C; lands, which are managed by a very unique Federal statute called the O&C; Act. That law calls for sustainable timber production and revenue to local counties. It is different than the other forest laws. Now, despite that clear mandate in Federal law, the BLM's proposal would allow for harvesting on about 22 percent is all, 22 percent of the land base. It would lock up the remainder in various reserves. Oregon's forested counties, some of which have more than 70 percent of their land controlled by the Federal Government, rely on receipts from Federal timber projects to fund basic needs like law enforcement, schools, and other essential services. Unfortunately, under BLM's proposal, these counties would receive an estimated 27 percent is all of their historical average receipt--27 percent. Now, while the BLM's proposed plans fall far short of meeting these communities' needs, it seems the agency is determined to push forward anyway with these plans. In a bipartisan effort, the entire Oregon Congressional Delegation requested a 120-day extension of the comment period so that the counties and other interested parties have time to thoroughly review the more than 1,500 pages of analysis and provide some useful input and comment. Apparently, the BLM isn't interested in that input, since I understand they will be rejecting our request and moving forward with their plan under their current timeline. That is really disappointing. You see, these local communities are most affected by the management changes on the Federal land that surrounds them, and the BLM, I wish, would care more about their input than a self-imposed deadline likely out of some office back here. This amendment would simply delay the BLM's implementation of these proposed plans. That would give more time for our counties and interested parties to thoroughly review the more than 1,500 pages of analysis. It would also give the agency time to consider additional alternatives that better incorporate the clear mandates of the O&C; Act. I want to quote, Mr. Chairman, from the Portland Oregonian. This is the statewide newspaper that probably leans a little more to the left. They said: ``Minimally, BLM needs to extend its comment period and develop more alternatives to be considered. But it is unlikely to develop any alternative that would be acceptable to the industry, counties and environmental advocates. Congress, not a government agency, needs to step up and help solve this long-festering problem.'' Mr. Chairman, with Oregon's wildfire season well off to a terrible start, we need time to review these plans, get active management on these forestlands, and by passing this amendment, we will give the taxpayers, the people who live there, a better opportunity to weigh in. So I urge support. I yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from California (Mr. Calvert), the chairman of the committee. Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for offering the amendment and yielding me time. I appreciate the concerns that he brings to us today. It is troubling that the Bureau of Land Management has proposed land use plans that appear to contradict its multiple-use mandate. So with that, I would happily accept his amendment. Mr. WALDEN. Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time. Ms. PINGREE. Mr. Chair, I claim the time in opposition to the amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from Maine for 5 minutes. Ms. PINGREE. Mr. Chair, I appreciate the concerns raised by the gentleman from Oregon, but this amendment would prohibit the Bureau of Land Management from completing or implementing updates to certain resource management plans in western Oregon. These updated plans cover 2.5 million acres of land that play an important role in the social, economic, and ecological well-being of western Oregon, as well as to the American public generally. The plans determine how BLM-administered lands will be managed to further the recovery of threatened and endangered species, provide for clean water, restore fire-adapted ecosystems, produce a sustained yield of timber products, and coordinate land management of surrounding tribal land. The amendment would suspend the BLM's authority to implement a new resource management plan in western Oregon. As a result, the BLM would be forced to rely on a 20-year-old outdated plan that doesn't incorporate significant new information. For example, the old plan does not include important conservation activities, such as the northern spotted owl recovery plan. The amendment would block one of the most comprehensive and detailed landscape plans that the BLM has ever developed and would ignore significant public input. The public has a right to engage in the management decisions of their Federal lands. Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. WALDEN. Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that the spotted owl is covered by their planning process today in some measure because it certainly contributed to the downfall of our communities, absent this plan. Look, all we are asking for is time for people to have a better chance to review what this Federal agency, after 20 years, has finally come up with--1,500 pages. I think they should have a chance, as do my colleagues, including Mr. Schrader, a member of your party, supporting this amendment. So it is a bipartisan Oregon approach that I would hope my colleague from Maine would share that we need to do better managing America's Federal forests. Turn on the TV. They are going up in flames right now. I don't like that for the habitat. I don't like that for the communities. I don't like that for what the firefighters have to face. I think we can do better. Most observers in the State think we can do better, and I would encourage my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to support this amendment. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time. Ms. PINGREE. Mr. Chairman, again, I just want to say I appreciate the concerns that the gentleman from Oregon has raised, and other Members from Oregon who share those concerns. I thought it was important to address some of the considerations and concerns that we have with this amendment. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Oregon (Mr. Walden). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment Offered by Mr. Lowenthal Mr. LOWENTHAL. Mr. Chairman, I rise to offer an amendment to require companies to follow the law if they want to export crude oil from the United States. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: [[Page H4821]] limitation on use of funds to issue any new federal oil and gas leases and drilling permits Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to issue any new Federal oil and gas lease or drilling permit to any person that does not commit to following Department of Commerce regulations regarding the requirement of obtaining a license for exporting crude oil. Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, I reserve a point of order. The Acting CHAIR. A point of order is reserved. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from California and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California. Mr. LOWENTHAL. Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned, I offer this amendment to require companies to follow the law if they want to export crude oil from the United States. I want to make it clear. This amendment is not about whether we should lift the crude oil export ban altogether. That is a debate for a different time and a different bill. This is about those narrow cases where companies are currently able to export crude oil in limited quantities but are also choosing not to follow the rules. Last summer, the Commerce Department ruled that two companies could export very light crude oil, called condensate, after it had been lightly processed. That decision meant that those companies would not need to obtain a license to export crude oil even though licenses are required for all other crude oil exports. Because of that ruling, which I believe was inappropriate, another company decided that they, too, would begin exporting their own light crude oil without even asking the Commerce Department for a decision first, let alone try to get a license. Since then, exports have skyrocketed. From January 2010 until June 2014, when the Commerce Department made that ruling, we exported about 97,000 barrels of crude oil a day, mostly to Canada. Since that day in June of 2014, our oil exports have quadrupled to an average of over 400,000 barrels a day, hitting all-time record levels, with more and more of that crude oil going to Europe and to Asia. I don't think we should be exporting so much of our domestic oil when we are still importing roughly 7 million barrels every day. We may be the world's number one oil producer, but we are still the world's number one oil importer. If we want to change that, we shouldn't be letting oil companies simply ship American crude oil anywhere in the world that they want to. We should certainly also not let them ignore existing laws and regulations in order to do so. First and foremost, oil produced in America, particularly oil from America's public lands that belong to the American people, should remain in this country for the benefit of the American people. If we are going to allow these companies to export oil, they must follow the law. They simply can't take matters into their own hands and decide whether they need or do not need a license before shipping this oil all over the world. My amendment is a simple, commonsense solution to this problem. It simply states, if you are going to drill on public land, you must follow the legal process for getting an export license if you want to ship that oil elsewhere. This is not an onerous restriction. It only applies to public land, only requires companies to commit to following the existing process for getting a license with the Department of Commerce. That way, the Commerce Department can evaluate these options on a case-by-case basis to determine if they are in the national interest. The concept of exporting American crude oil is too important to let the companies make that call on their own. Mr. Chair, I ask unanimous consent to withdraw this amendment. The Acting CHAIR. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from California? There was no objection. {time} 2000 Vacating Demand for Recorded Vote on Amendment Offered by Mr. Yoho Mr. YOHO. Mr. Chair, I ask unanimous consent that the request for a recorded vote on my amendment be withdrawn to the end that the amendment stand disposed of by the voice vote thereon. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will redesignate the amendment. The Clerk redesignated the amendment. The Acting CHAIR. Without objection, the request for a recorded vote is withdrawn. Accordingly, the noes have it, and the amendment is not adopted. There was no objection. Amendment Offered by Mr. Hardy Mr. HARDY. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill, before the short title, insert the following: Sec. 441. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to make a Presidential declaration by public proclamation of a national monument under chapter 3203 of title 54, United States Code in the counties of Mohave and Coconino in the State of Arizona, in the counties of Modoc and Siskiyou in the State of California, in the counties of Chaffee, Moffat, and Park in the State of Colorado, in the counties of Lincoln, Clark, and Nye in the State of Nevada, in the county of Otero in the State of New Mexico, in the counties of Jackson, Josephine and, Malheur in the State of Oregon, or in the counties of Wayne, Garfield, and Kane in the State of Utah. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from Nevada and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Nevada. Mr. HARDY. Mr. Chairman, I rise today to offer an amendment with my good friends from Arizona, California, Colorado, New Mexico, Oregon, and Utah to prohibit public land management agencies in this bill from making declarations under the Antiquities Act in counties where there is significant local opposition. Mr. Chairman, I would like to begin by stating my strong support for our Nation's public lands. As an active hunter and an outdoorsman, I marvel at the beauty of our landscapes, our unique flora, and the abundant animal species that roam our terrain. With that being said, I also come from Nevada, a State where roughly 85 percent of the land is controlled by the Federal Government. Addressing this concentration of land use decisionmaking power in the hands of Washington bureaucrats has been one of the strong motivating factors during my time in this body, as I am sure that it has been for many of my colleagues in the Western States. While this concentration is certainly a topic that should be addressed by the authorizing committees, I believe that we can and should take an important step here today. A recent prominent example demonstrating the need for this amendment is the administration's draft proclamation to establish the Basin and Range National Monument on more than 700,000 acres of land in Lincoln and Nye Counties in my district. Not only is the sheer size of the proposed monument staggering, being nearly as large as many of the Eastern States, it also poses some significant risks, both local and national in scope. Nevada's economy was one of the hardest hit by the Great Recession, and far too many in our State are still struggling to get by. Nevada's rural county economies are particularly sensitive, and any decision that restricts ranching, recreation, and types of land use activities should have much of the local input as possible. Earlier this year I spoke on the floor of the House about the national security implications of designating the Basin and Range, given that most of the acreage in the proposed monument falls directly under the airspace of the Nevada Test and Training Range, one of the most heavily used military operating areas, or MOAs, in the United States. Establishing this monument could drastically impair vital ground-based training activities tied to the NTTR. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to my colleague from Arizona (Mr. Gosar). Mr. GOSAR. Mr. Chairman, in my home State of Arizona, a few special interest groups have been pushing the President to unilaterally designate a massive new 1.7-million-acre national monument in the Grand Canyon watershed. Twenty-six Members of Congress have joined me in opposing this misguided effort, and there is significant local opposition. [[Page H4822]] Here is a sample of those resolutions, and I would like to share a few of their comments here: ``The creation of a national monument by Presidential declaration does not allow for input from local communities . . . and could result in negative impacts for . . . grazing, hunting, water development and forest restoration . . . which would result in negative economic and public health impacts to the City of Williams. ``The Arizona Game and Fish Commission is concerned that the potential monument . . . 'will impede proactive and effective management of wildlife populations and habitats . . . and may result in reduced hunter opportunities and loss of revenues that directly support conservation and local communities.' '' I could provide several more examples but will stop there. I urge the adoption of the amendment. Mr. HARDY. Mr. Chairman, I now ask how much time I have remaining. The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from Nevada has 1\1/2\ minutes remaining. Mr. HARDY. I yield 1 minute to my distinguished colleague from Utah (Mr. Bishop). Mr. BISHOP of Utah. Mr. Chairman, this Antiquities Act was passed over a century ago in 1906, when four States weren't even in the Union at that time. They were still territories. There are absolutely no environmental laws that we had at that particular time protecting anything. Yet, this act was not used by every President. In fact, most Presidents never used it. Ronald Reagan never used it. Most Presidents only used it one time. It was changed, starting with the Jimmy Carter administration, so that no longer is this act that was supposed to protect antiquities-- thus, the name the Antiquities Act--used to protect antiquities. It was used as a political weapon and abused as a political weapon. The saddest part is there is absolutely no input that has to be guaranteed by this act. In fact, the vast majority of monuments that were created through this Antiquities Act, there was no public input whatsoever. Any public input that took place was purely by accident, purely by coincidence. The people in the counties that are designated in this amendment need to have the right to have some input in how land decisions are used that area. That is what this amendment does. Give them the chance to be heard because, under the present Antiquities Act, they are not heard. Mr. GRIJALVA. Mr. Chair, I rise in opposition to the amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from Arizona is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. GRIJALVA. Mr. Chairman, this amendment would place uncalled-for restrictions and undercut any President from using their authority under the Antiquities Act to establish a national monument, an authority, I should add, that has been available to Presidents for 100 years. The Antiquities Act is an important tool that enables the President to protect and strengthen America's heritage. Since Theodore Roosevelt first designated the national monument Devil's Tower in Wyoming, 16 Presidents from both parties have used the Antiquities Act to protect more than 160 of America's best known and loved landscapes. Only three Presidents have not. National monuments tell the story of the American people. Out of 460 national monuments and national parks, 113 reflect the diverse community that makes up our Nation. Nineteen recognize the achievements of the Latino community, twenty-six of the African American community, and eight for women. It should be noted that an important factor in the designation process is the First Americans, the Native Americans, their legacy, their heritage, and their cultural and historic resources on the land. But with the Antiquities Act, the lack of diversity reflected in our public units, whether it is parks or national monuments, is changing. President Obama has been using the Antiquities Act to diversify the story of public lands with new designations such as the Cesar Chavez National Monument in Keene, California, which he recently designated. Since the beginning of his administration, the President used this authority to create national monuments that recognize the contributions of Africa Americans and other diverse voices in this country. The Center for American Progress published a report that found that 33 percent of presidential designations are inclusive of the American people, compared to only 20 percent of the designations done by Congress. America's public places are becoming more inclusive, more representative of all Americans because of the Antiquities Act. This amendment would jeopardize that progress. I urge its defeat. I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. HARDY. How much time remains, Mr. Chairman? The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from Nevada has 30 seconds remaining. The gentleman from Arizona has 3 minutes remaining. Mr. GRIJALVA. Mr. Chairman, let me point out some obvious points. This amendment, as I said earlier, would undermine conservation of public lands and stall efforts to ensure that our public places tell the very important diverse story of America and be representative of all Americans. Development and conservation--to say that this would deny jobs and opportunities to particular regions is not true. Over 9 million acres are available right now under energy leases from the Obama administration compared to--those were added to it--only 4.1 million acres that are now land that is protected. Since its enactment in 1906, 16 Presidents have used it. 160 of America's best known landscapes have been preserved. National monuments designated under the Antiquities Act are comprised of existing Federal lands only. No new lands are added to the Federal estate by these designations. National monument designations have better reflected the complexity-- and Presidents have used that--of our Nation, ensuring that the voices of a changing and diverse community, which is this country, is told as we change and as we go forward. I would urge a ``no'' vote. Undercutting an authority that existed for 100 years that has brought benefit to the Nation, enhanced the cultural, historic, and conservation ethics of this Nation should be preserved. With that, I urge a ``no'' vote amendment. It is unneeded, restrictive, and goes against a tradition and an authority that has existed in this country for 100 years. I hope this effort is not about who is President at this time, but it is an authority that has been with us for 100 years. I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. HARDY. Mr. Chairman, in closing, I would just like to reiterate to my colleagues that voting for this amendment is a vote for empowering the communities and the local stakeholders most affected by the monument designations. Doing so will increase transparency, allow local input, and provide improved management of our public lands. It will fulfill the responsibility to ensure these communities have a legitimate voice in the process. I strongly urge a ``yes'' vote. I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Nevada (Mr. Hardy). The question was taken; and the Acting Chair announced that the ayes appeared to have it. Ms. McCOLLUM. Mr. Chair, I demand a recorded vote. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to clause 6 of rule XVIII, further proceedings on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Nevada will be postponed. Amendment Offered by Mr. Engel Mr. ENGEL. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used by the Department of the Interior, the Environmental Protection Agency, or any other Federal agency to lease or purchase new light duty vehicles for [[Page H4823]] any executive fleet, or for an agency's fleet inventory, except in accordance with Presidential Memorandum--Federal Fleet Performance, dated May 24, 2011. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from New York and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York. Mr. ENGEL. Mr. Chairman, on May 24, 2011, President Obama issued a memorandum on Federal fleet performance that required that all new light-duty vehicles in the Federal fleet to be alternative fuel vehicles, such as hybrid, electric, natural gas, or biofuel by December 31, 2015. My amendment echoes the President's memorandum by prohibiting funds in this act from being used to lease or purchase new light-duty vehicles unless that purchase is made in accord with the President's memorandum. I have submitted identical amendments to 18 different appropriations bills over the past few years, and every time they have been accepted by both the majority and the minority. I hope my amendment will receive similar support today. Global oil prices are down. We no longer pay $147 per barrel. But despite increased production here in the United States, the global price of oil is still largely determined by OPEC. Spikes in oil prices have profound repercussions for our economy. The primary reason is that our cars and trucks run only on petroleum. {time} 2015 We can change that with alternative technologies that exist today. The Federal Government operates the largest fleet of light-duty vehicles in America, over 633,000 vehicles. Almost 35,000 of these vehicles are within the jurisdiction of this bill. Mr. Chairman, when I was in Brazil a few years ago, I saw how they diversified their fuel use. People there can drive to a gas station and choose whether to fill their vehicle with gasoline or with ethanol. They make their choice based on cost or whatever criteria they deem important. I want the same choice for American consumers. That is why I am also proposing a bill this Congress, a bipartisan bill, as I have done many times in the past, which will provide for cars built in America to be able to run on a fuel instead of or in addition to gasoline. It is virtually very inexpensive, under $100 per car; and if they do it in Brazil, we can do it here. In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, expanding the role these alternative technologies play in our transportation economy will help break the leverage that foreign government controlled oil companies hold over Americans. It will increase our Nation's domestic security and protect consumers. Mr. Chairman, I ask that my colleagues support the Engel amendment, and I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from New York (Mr. Engel). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment Offered by Mr. Byrne Mr. BYRNE. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to propose or develop legislation to redirect funds allocated under section 105(a)(2)(A) of the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act of 2006 (43 U.S.C. 1331 note). The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from Alabama and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Alabama. Mr. BYRNE. Mr. Chairman, my straightforward amendment would prohibit any effort to redirect funds allocated under the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act, also referred to as GOMESA. GOMESA was passed in 2006 and created a revenue sharing agreement for offshore oil revenue between the Federal Government and four States in the Gulf of Mexico: Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, and my home State of Alabama. Under GOMESA, 37.5 percent of the revenues generated from selected oil and gas lease sales in the Outer Continental Shelf of the Gulf of Mexico is returned to these Gulf States. There is a reason the law was structured this way. These Gulf States not only provide the lion's share of the infrastructure and workforce for the industry in the Gulf of Mexico; we also have inherent environmental and economic risks. The BP oil spill 5 years ago should tell us all what that means. Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, in his budget proposal this year, President Obama has recommended that the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, under the Department of the Interior, redirect the distribution of expanded revenue payments expected to start in 2018 for the Gulf of Mexico oil and gas leases away from the Gulf Coast and instead be spent all around the country. Not only does this proposal directly contradict the current Federal statute, it vastly undermines the purpose of the law, to keep revenues from these lease sales in the States that supply the workforce and have the inherent risk of a potential environmental and economic disaster. My amendment today is simple, to protect the clearly defined statute and prevent the President from using these revenue sharing agreements as a slush fund for politically driven environmental projects across the country. Regardless of whether you are from a Gulf Coast State or not, I would urge my colleagues to vote in favor of this important amendment to protect the rule of law to support our coastal communities. Mr. Chairman, I yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from California (Mr. Calvert), the chairman. Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding, and I would urge adoption of the gentleman's amendment. Mr. BYRNE. Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time. Ms. McCOLLUM. Mr. Chair, I claim the time in opposition to express a few concerns. The Acting CHAIR. The gentlewoman from Minnesota is recognized for 5 minutes. Ms. McCOLLUM. Mr. Chair, this amendment is an overreaction to a policy proposal in the administration's--in the administration's--2016 budget request. The President's budget requested to propose to direct funds currently allocated to payments to States and shift them more towards Federal programs that serve the Nation more broadly. Now, this is a proposal that the President suggested in his budget, and it wasn't included in this bill because the Appropriations Committee just flat out rejected it. This is an appropriations process. That is what it is. It is a process. The administration submitted a proposal. The committee evaluated it. It had the power to accept it or reject it. The proposal lay with the committee as to what to do. As I said, the committee rejected it. This amendment would unnecessarily stifle any proposals to amend current formula, which is unnecessary because Congress would need to enact legislation before any changes could be made to the formula. The Department of the Interior doesn't have the authority to change the formula through rulemaking or other administrative action. Basically, this amendment would prohibit the Department from even suggesting an idea for Congress to consider. I just wanted to claim the time in opposition, Mr. Chair, just to say I really think this amendment--although it appears that the majority is going to take it and I am not going to ask for a vote or anything on it--is just really, in my opinion, political overreach. Mr. Chair, I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. BYRNE. Mr. Chairman, I wish that these sorts of amendments were unnecessary, but the way this administration plays fast and loose with its interpretation of the law, particularly through these administrative agencies, I am afraid it is necessary to protect a law passed by this Congress in 2006 in recognition of the inherent risk that these four Gulf States have produced so much energy for this country have, and [[Page H4824]] without it, we will have an agency that will take the laws that exist-- even this appropriations bill--and interpret it the way they want to, and this amendment makes it very clear they can't do that, that these four coastal States will retain control over these moneys as it was enacted by this Congress in 2006. Mr. Chairman, I respect the gentlewoman's point of view. I wish it were unnecessary, but given the behavior of this administration through these administrative agencies, I am afraid it is necessary. Mr. Chairman, I ask for the Members to support this amendment, and I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Alabama (Mr. Byrne). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment No. 34 Offered by Mr. Grayson Mr. GRAYSON. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will designate the amendment. The text of the amendment is as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to enter into a contract with any offeror or any of its principals if the offeror certifies, pursuant to the Federal Acquisition Regulation, that the offeror or any of its principals-- (1) within a three-year period preceding this offer has been convicted of or had a civil judgment rendered against it for commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with obtaining, attempting to obtain, or performing a public (Federal, State, or local) contract or subcontract; violation of Federal or State antitrust statutes relating to the submission of offers; or commission of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, making false statements, tax evasion, violating Federal criminal tax laws, or receiving stolen property; or (2) are presently indicted for, or otherwise criminally or civilly charged by a governmental entity with, commission of any of the offenses enumerated in paragraph (1); or (3) within a three-year period preceding this offer, has been notified of any delinquent Federal taxes in an amount that exceeds $3,000 for which the liability remains unsatisfied. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from Florida and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Florida. Mr. GRAYSON. Mr. Chair, this amendment is identical to other amendments that have been inserted by voice vote into every appropriations bill considered under an open rule during the 113th and 114th Congresses. My amendment expands the list of parties with whom the Federal Government is prohibited from contracting due to serious misconduct on the part of the contractor. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Florida (Mr. Grayson). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment No. 39 Offered by Mr. Zinke Mr. ZINKE. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will designate the amendment. The text of the amendment is as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: limitation on use of funds with respect to valuation of coal Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to finalize, implement, or enforce subparts F and J of part 1206 of the proposed rule by the Department of the Interior entitled ``Consolidated Federal Oil & Gas and Federal & Indian Coal Valuation Reform'' and dated January 6, 2015 (80 Fed. Reg. 608). The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from Montana and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Montana. Mr. ZINKE. Mr. Chairman, I rise today in support of economic opportunity for local communities across the Nation. In my home State of Montana, the Crow Nation suffers from unemployment rates as high as 50 percent, despite having over $1 billion in coal reserves. Similar situations play out in communities across America. This administration has waged a war against coal. In the words of Crow Chairman Old Coyote: ``A war on coal is a war on the Crow people.'' Republicans and Democrats agree; we all want clean air and water and affordable power. Thankfully, advances in technology have made it possible to have both, making it possible to use our vast resources of clean coal to power American homes and manufacturers and put Americans back to work. We can't power the American economy on pixie dust and hope; it takes innovation and investment in areas like clean coal. Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, this administration is fighting a more aggressive war against American coal than they are against ISIS. We all know of countless attempts to kill coal with regulations, cap-and- trade, and carbon taxes. Now, the most recent attempt is by the Department of the Interior. The DOI is planning to change how coal on Federal lands and reservations is valued, creating an unpredictable and unstable market that threatens the livelihoods of our local communities and tribes. When oil, gas, and coal resources are sold, local communities receive tax revenues and royalties to help fund everything from education to infrastructure. However, this administration's one-size-fits-all plan puts funding in jeopardy; places heavier burdens on States and local governments; and also stifles innovation, investment, and job creation. The national labor participation is the lowest it has been in the past 30 years. Wages are stagnant; the cost of living is going up, and energy prices for home heating and manufacturing are skyrocketing. Our communities simply can't afford another Federal assault on our economy. These jobs are real, Mr. Chairman. I have been to the Rosebud Mine in Colstrip where union jobs earn their paychecks to provide for their families. This is not just a couple hundred jobs in Montana. There are thousands more like them in Kentucky, West Virginia, Utah, and beyond. Whether the coal is mined in Montana or turned into electricity to build cars in Michigan, coal is a critical part of our American economy. Again, I am reminded of the words of Chairman Old Coyote: ``For the Crow people, there are no jobs that compare to a coal job-- the wages and benefits exceed anything else that is available.'' Mr. Chairman, I urge my colleagues to join me in fighting for American workers and American jobs by supporting my amendment to block funding for the Obama administration to continue their war on coal. I yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from California (Mr. Calvert). Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding, and I urge the adoption of the gentleman's amendment. It is a good amendment. Mr. ZINKE. Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time. Ms. McCOLLUM. Mr. Chair, I claim the time in opposition to the amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The gentlewoman from Minnesota is recognized for 5 minutes. Ms. McCOLLUM. Mr. Chair, I rise in strong opposition to this amendment which would deny the American public, especially Native Americans, a fair return for the use of their coal resources. The current coal valuation regulations have been in effect since 1989. A lot has happened in the intervening 26 years since these regulations were last updated. It has now been nearly 3 years since it was first reported that coal companies were skirting Federal royalty payments by selling coal to sister companies in order to value exported coal at low domestic prices rather than the much higher prices these sister companies were selling the exported coal for in overseas markets. Now, while there has been a boom for Western coal companies, it has meant the Federal Government and Western States--where we share 50-50 of the royalties--have forgone hundreds of millions of dollars that are rightly due the American people. These coal royalty valuations especially hurt Native Americans who depend on these royalties for their income. The proposed regulations were a response to States such as Wyoming pleading with the Department of the Interior: Do not allow coal producers to create affiliates to reduce the royalties paid. [[Page H4825]] This amendment offers Members a stark contrast. Do they want to side with the coal industry which has been gaming the existing royalty system? Or do they stand with the American public, especially Native Americans, in seeing that coal is fairly priced and that the royalties due Western States, tribes, and the Federal Government are paid? I, for one, will stand with the American people and especially my Native American brothers and sisters to make sure that they are treated fairly. Mr. Chair, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. ZINKE. Mr. Chairman, how much time is remaining? The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from Montana has 2 minutes remaining. Mr. ZINKE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\3/4\ minutes to the gentleman from Colorado (Mr. Lamborn). {time} 2030 Mr. LAMBORN. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman from Montana for yielding. Mr. Chairman, current Federal coal valuation rules have provided stable and significant royalty revenue to State, tribal, and Federal governments. Despite this tract record, the Department of the Interior has carelessly proposed to modify the valuation of Federal and Indian coal by granting the Office of Natural Resources Revenue new authority to deem sales, potentially disallow costs, and use the default rule to assert arbitrary values for royalty purposes. These broad new authorities come without clear or transparent guidelines for regulators and regulated parties alike, setting the stage for inconsistent valuation and protracted litigation. Furthermore, the arbitrary regulatory environment created by this rule could jeopardize affordable and reliable energy production, American jobs, and crucial revenue for State, Federal, and tribal governments. For these reasons, I encourage my colleagues to support this amendment and to stop funding for this new rule until the Department of the Interior can demonstrate the need, if there is any--and I am skeptical--to radically alter the way royalties are accessed on Federal coal. Mr. ZINKE. Mr. Chairman, as the sole Representative of the great State of Montana, I do represent, and am proud to represent, the Crows, the Northern Cheyenne, the Assiniboine Sioux, and our American Indian tribes and great nations and understand the value of having a prosperous economy. With that, Mr. Chairman, I would like the support of all Members. The Acting CHAIR. The time of the gentleman has expired. Ms. McCOLLUM. Mr. Chairman, I want to repeat, it has now been nearly 3 years since it was first reported. Coal companies were skirting Federal royalty payments by selling coal to sister companies in order to value exported coal at low domestic prices rather than the much higher prices these sister companies were selling the exported coal for in overseas markets. It is our job--it is our job--to see that coal is fairly priced and that the royalties due to Western States, tribes, and the Federal Government are paid. I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Montana (Mr. Zinke). The question was taken; and the Acting Chair announced that the ayes appeared to have it. Ms. McCOLLUM. Mr. Chairman, I demand a recorded vote. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to clause 6 of rule XVIII, further proceedings on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Montana will be postponed. Amendment Offered by Mr. Norcross Mr. NORCROSS. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: revision of dollar amounts Sec. __. The amounts otherwise provided by this Act are revised by reducing the amount made available for ``Department of the Interior--Office of the Secretary-- Departmental Operations'' for payments in lieu of taxes under chapter 69 of title 31, United States Code, and increasing the aggregate amount made available for ``Environmental Protection Agency--Hazardous Substance Superfund'', by $22,884,840. Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, I reserve a point of order on the gentleman's amendment. The Acting CHAIR. A point of order is reserved. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from New Jersey and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey. Mr. NORCROSS. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume. This is a very simple amendment that would increase funding for the Superfund with the intention the money go specifically to the cleanup program account. Superfund cleanup is right for the environment and certainly right for the U.S. economy, which is right for the U.S. I come from New Jersey, the Garden State. We have great tomatoes, corn, and it is blueberry season. But what we also have, particularly in the southern half of the State, is a history of heavy industry. New Jersey found out the hard way that you just can't take those resources after they are finished and dump them into the backyard. We have more than 200 sites in New Jersey listed as being in serious violation of at least one of four Federal environmental laws. The company offenders, they are gone, and left the constituents, my constituents, holding the bags. My predecessor, Representative Jim Florio, back in the early eighties, was the author of the Superfund bill. He had the vision of what we have to do to protect our citizens. I just want to tell a quick story, two of them. The first one is one site, $1 billion, and it is about a quarter of a mile from where I live. It is the Welsbach & General Gas Mantle in Gloucester City, New Jersey. As part of that process of making gas mantles almost a half century ago, radium, the substance that was used to make it glow brighter, was dumped throughout the city. This material is now sitting there. Radium has a half-life of 1,600 years--1,600 years. The process started in 1996, and it is about two-thirds finished. There is no company to go back to. The second story is Sherwin Williams in Gibbsboro, which was a gorgeous spot. But as we all know, years ago, that lead paint is now in the water system and impacting that area horribly. The site includes Kirkwood Lake. The soil under the lake is contaminated. They can't use the lake. These are two very simple stories. I have 15 Superfund sites in my district--15. It is our responsibility to protect our citizens. There are no companies to go back to. That is why I offer this simple amendment. The damage is already done, and we must continue to protect our citizens by funding this amendment correctly. I want to thank the chairman, with the understanding that this amendment will be ruled out of order. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to withdraw my amendment with the hope that we continue to work on this important issue in a very bipartisan way to protect our citizens. The Acting CHAIR. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from New Jersey? There was no objection. Amendment Offered by Mr. Jolly Mr. JOLLY. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used to research, investigate, or study offshore drilling in the Eastern Gulf of Mexico Planning Area. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from Florida and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Florida. Mr. JOLLY. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume. As a nation, we continually strive to achieve both energy independence, as well as protect the environment, our critical habitats, and the quality of life [[Page H4826]] in communities like Pinellas County, Florida, that I have the opportunity to represent. One way we strike that balance is represented in how we currently manage the Gulf of Mexico when it comes to oil drilling. Under a 2006 act, we allow for drilling exploration in the central and western Gulf off the coast of Texas and Louisiana and other States, but we have a ban that protects the State of Florida. That ban currently protects the State of Florida with a drilling ban of about 125 miles or, in some cases, 235 miles. This ban has been in place for 32 years through the operations of the Appropriations Committee. And while the current statute allows for the ban through 2022, year after year, those on the other side of this debate, very respectfully, attempt to erode that ban. The truth is we don't need any additional drilling in the eastern Gulf of Florida to achieve energy independence. There are nearly 1,000 active leaseholds in the central and western Gulf. There are probably nearly 3,000 more available. And to change the ban is just something that we don't need. This amendment is very simple. It says none of the funds may be used to study, prepare for, research, investigate any increased offshore oil drilling in the eastern Gulf contemplating the expiration of a ban in 2022. I am pleased to be joined in offering this amendment by my colleague from Bonita Springs, Mr. Clawson; my colleague from Tallahassee, Ms. Graham; and my colleague from Jupiter, Mr. Murphy. With that, Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, I rise in reluctant opposition to the amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from California is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, as in the case of a number of offshore- related amendments that we will deal with today, the Interior Appropriations bill is not the appropriate venue, though I do understand it has been used in the past. I understand this amendment dovetails with the current congressional moratorium, and the Department of the Interior has no intention of acting in a manner that is contrary to congressional intent. The Department is focused on the next 5-year oil and gas leasing plan, which is limited to 2017-2022, so many departmental activities in fiscal year 2016 are already limited in scope through 2022. If my colleagues wish to see the moratorium extended beyond 2022, then they should work with the appropriate authorizing committees. With that, I would oppose the amendment, and urge a ``no'' vote. I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. JOLLY. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the chairman's understanding of the interest of those in the State of Florida and the current debate currently from those on the other side that wish to actually lift the ban. It is important that, as a delegation, we have the opportunity to have this debate. I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Florida (Mr. Clawson), my colleague from Bonita Springs. Mr. CLAWSON of Florida. Mr. Chairman, I start by thanking Representative Jolly for his leadership and persistence on this issue-- it is so important to my district--and to the chairman for allowing disagreement. Disagreement allows learning, and we appreciate your leadership in this regard. I speak in full support of Representative Jolly's amendment. I base my support on the enormous all-time high, proven reserves elsewhere in our country and a conviction that we can focus in areas other than the Gulf. The private sector definitely needs cheap oil, and our businesses, our manufacturing companies, cannot be successful without low energy prices. I know it, because I lived it. But let's drill where drilling makes sense. And to us, it doesn't make sense to drill in the eastern Gulf of Mexico. The recent BP settlement, the highest such settlement ever, is evidence that the economic and environmental risk of drilling in the Gulf greatly offset any potential returns. For those of us who live, work, or have business in the Gulf, we were told that an oil disaster could never happen, and then it happened. Fool me once, shame on you; fool me twice, shame on me. I say it is not worth the risk. I say let's do everything we can to never have more drilling in the eastern Gulf. Mr. JOLLY. Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, I would just say that, again, I am in reluctant opposition to this amendment. This should be dealt with in the authorizing committees. I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. JOLLY. Mr. Chairman, I would close by offering my colleagues there is authorizing legislation that would extend the ban past the year 2022. This language simply says a ban is a ban is a ban. And while there is a ban on activities on drilling and the like, this simply says that no planning may occur for post-2022 drilling. With that, I would urge a ``yea'' vote, and I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Florida (Mr. Jolly). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment Offered by Mr. Garamendi Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: None of the funds made available by this Act may be used in contravention of Executive Order 13693. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from California and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California. {time} 2045 Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Chairman, I think I will start this discussion with the words of a rather influential individual: Pope Francis. In his recent encyclical, he wrote: ``If present trends continue, this century may well witness extraordinary climate change and an unprecedented destruction of ecosystems, with serious consequences for all of us.'' That is Pope Francis. In this legislation, the appropriation bill, there are numerous efforts to deny the reality of climate change. And, specifically, what I want to deal with on this amendment is Executive Order No. 13693: Planning for Federal Sustainability in the Next Decade. The intention of this amendment is to support the Federal Government's efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 40 percent over the next decade relative to 2008. This bill will save taxpayers money--about $18 billion--in avoided energy costs, and it will increase the share of electricity the Federal Government consumes from renewable resources by up to 30 percent. Twenty-six million metric tons of greenhouse gases would be eliminated. So why in the face of all of the scientific evidence and why in the face of the reality that the climate is, indeed, changing, when we have throughout the State of California and around the Nation local governments planning for the eventually, not the reality, of higher sea levels, would we put forth a bill that would prohibit the Federal Government from planning for climate change? Let me just cite some of the ways in which the current legislation, this proposal, deals with it: It prohibits Federal funds for any rulemaking or guidance with regard to the social cost of climate change. It prohibits the EPA from limiting carbon pollution from new and renovated power plants, and there has been much discussion about that on the floor today. It prohibits the funding to update and revise the EPA's ozone standards. It prohibits the funding for any change to the status of HFCs. These are fluorocarbons. It also prohibits the reporting detailing the Federal funding for domestic and international climate change programs. This is denial, denial, denial about what is really happening. My amendment would simply say that there is no money to carry out these provisions in the current bill. It is really time for all of us here to recognize that there is a serious challenge, and it is one that Pope Francis points out so clearly. I reserve the balance of my time. [[Page H4827]] Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, I rise in opposition to the amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The gentleman from California is recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, climate change is winning the amendment contest tonight. We have had a number of amendments on that subject. Earlier we debated whether or not to continue a bipartisan reporting requirement in the bill on climate change expenditures. My colleagues on the other side of the aisle wanted to remove that requirement, which would have reduced transparency. Now my friend wants to ensure that funds are being expended on climate and efficiency executive orders issued by the President. So I am left to wonder whether my colleagues would prefer to know if the funds are spent on these programs or not. Regardless, this amendment is certainly unnecessary. The President did not consult Congress on these executive orders. If anything, we should defund these programs until Congress can have an appropriate policy debate. I see no reason to include this language, and I urge my colleagues to vote ``no.'' I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Chairman, the executive order by the President is very straightforward. It basically says that the Federal Government shall reduce greenhouse gases, and he is using his appropriate authority as the administrative agent of our government to find ways to do that. Certain goals are set in the executive order, for example, reducing greenhouse gases by 40 percent over the next decade. What could be wrong with that when you save $18 billion in the process and create more opportunities for renewable energy by up to 30 percent? Why would we pass a bill in this appropriation bill that would go in exactly the opposite direction, one that would actually create greater greenhouse gases and lead more directly and more imminently to the climate crisis? I fail to understand why we would want to take up a piece of legislation that has so many provisions in it that deny the reality of climate change, that puts this government on the course to spend more money on programs that actually create a crisis that will be extraordinarily expensive. I ask for an ``aye'' vote on this amendment, which would maintain the President's executive order and keep America on a path that all the world should carry out. Pay attention to what Pope Francis said: ``If present trends continue, this century may well witness extraordinary climate change and an unprecedented destruction of ecosystems, with serious consequences for all of us.'' This is not something we should deny. This is something we should, in fact, pay attention to, and we ought to be able to maintain the President's executive order. I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, the President did make his unilateral determination in an executive order. We have an opportunity to vote ``no'' on this amendment, and I urge a ``no'' vote. I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from California (Mr. Garamendi). The question was taken; and the Acting Chair announced that the noes appeared to have it. Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Chairman, I demand a recorded vote. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to clause 6 of rule XVIII, further proceedings on the amendment offered by the gentleman from California will be postponed. Amendment Offered by Mr. Crawford Mr. CRAWFORD. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: Sec. ___. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to enforce the requirements of part 112 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, with respect to any farm (as that term is defined in section 112.2 of such title). The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from Arkansas and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Arkansas. Mr. CRAWFORD. Mr. Chairman, I offer this amendment in defense of agricultural producers across our Nation who are facing the heavy hand of EPA regulations. The EPA's Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure rule for on- farm fuel storage requires farmers and ranchers to make costly infrastructure improvements to their oil storage facilities to reduce the possibility of an oil spill. These regulations fail to take into account the relative risk of oil spills on farms, and they do not factor in the simple fact that family farmers are already careful stewards of our land and water. No one has more at stake in the health of their land than those who work on the ground from which they derive their livelihoods. The USDA itself discovered little evidence of oil spills on farms and determined in a recent study that more than 99 percent of farmers have never experienced a spill. To require that all of our producers make a significant investment to prevent such an unlikely event seems out of touch with reality and disregards the already overwhelming number of safeguards our farmers already employ. My amendment would restrict the EPA's ability to enforce SPCC regulations on farms so that farmers and ranchers can go about their business of producing food and fiber without having to worry about unnecessary compliance costs and red tape. On three separate occasions, the House unanimously passed my bipartisan legislation, the FUELS Act, which rolled back these same SPCC regulations on farms. I urge my colleagues to again support our farmers and ranchers by supporting this amendment. Mr. CALVERT. Will the gentleman yield? Mr. CRAWFORD. I yield to the gentleman from California. Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Chairman, I would urge the adoption of the gentleman's amendment. Mr. CRAWFORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time. Ms. McCOLLUM. Mr. Chairman, I rise in opposition to the amendment. The Acting CHAIR. The gentlewoman from Minnesota is recognized for 5 minutes. Ms. McCOLLUM. Mr. Chairman, this amendment would stop the EPA from requiring farms to submit a plan on how they will prevent oil from entering navigable waters. I come from Minnesota; so, this seems like a pretty commonsense requirement to me. If a facility has large amounts of oil, it should tell the agency responsible for an inland oil spill cleanup how it will prevent an environmental disaster. Why shouldn't the holder of gallons of oil have a plan even if it is an agriculture business? It should have a plan. And there are criteria to make sure that a facility truly should be subject to the Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure rule. It has to meet three criteria. It must be nontransported. It must have an aggregate aboveground storage capacity greater than 1,320 gallons or a completely buried storage capacity greater than 42,000 gallons. We are talking about a lot of oil. The third point is that there must be a reasonable expectation that, if something were to go wrong and if there were a discharge, it would go into navigable waters of the United States or of adjoining shorelines. In other words, if there is an accident and if there is water nearby, you would need to have a plan in place so that not only would oil not seep in and ruin your land, but that it would not flow into waters past the boundaries of your water and just keep polluting. The preparation of the SPCC plan is the responsibility of a facility owner or operator or it can be prepared by an engineer or a consultant, but it must be certified by a registered professional engineer. Let's just think about it. You have 42,000 gallons of oil stored underground, and you have 1,320 gallons of oil above. All this does is say you need to have an emergency plan if, when that accident would occur--and it can [[Page H4828]] occur--there would be the possibility of having that oil go into navigable waters and spread onto other property owners' land or State land or Federal land. I think these sound like reasonable requirements. It is a small step to help work with the farmer to prevent an environmental disaster that would most likely end up being cleaned up with taxpayers' funds. I always think you should hope for the best, but you always need to have a plan just in case something goes wrong. This rule requirement makes sure that these facilities that meet these criteria have a plan in place. I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR (Mr. Rodney Davis of Illinois). The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from Arkansas (Mr. Crawford). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment Offered by Mr. Jeffries Mr. JEFFRIES. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill (before the short title), insert the following: limitation on use of funds Sec. __. None of the funds made available to the National Park Service by this Act may be used for the purchase or display of a confederate flag with the exception of specific circumstances where the flags provide historical context as described in the National Park Service memorandum entitled ``Immediate Action Required, No Reply Needed: Confederate Flags'' and dated June 24, 2015. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from New York and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York. Mr. JEFFRIES. Mr. Chairman, this amendment would prohibit the use of funds made available to the National Park Service by this Act for the purchase or display of a Confederate flag with the exception of specific circumstances when such flags provide historical context as set forth by the National Park Service in their memo to all park superintendents, dated June 24, 2015. {time} 2100 The National Park Service has jurisdiction over operation of the National Park System, associated sites such as national heritage areas, and various State grant accounts. In light of recent events, the display of the Confederate flag has been at the forefront of discussion throughout our Nation. This amendment is consistent with a bipartisan effort across the country to promote harmony and not division in this great Nation. On June 17, we were all shocked by the heinous massacre that took the lives of nine God-fearing African American churchgoers in Charleston, South Carolina. This act of domestic terror was carried out by an individual who idolized the Confederate flag and harbored racist beliefs, calling for a return to the human subjugation of others on the basis of race. Unfortunately, that same Confederate flag flew on the grounds of the State capitol amidst the funeral of a State senator and dedicated pastor who taught that we are all God's children at the historic Emanuel AME Church. We have come a long way in America, but we still have a long way to go in our march toward a more perfect Union. The cancer of racial hatred continues to adversely impact our society, and people of good will must unite to eradicate it. Limiting the use of Federal funds connected to the purchase or display of the Confederate flag is an important step in that direction. Earlier today, lawmakers in South Carolina from both sides of the aisle came together to support removing the Confederate battle flag from their State capitol grounds. This evening, the United States House of Representatives has the opportunity to further limit the public display of this divisive symbol that is so closely associated with defense of the institution of slavery. I thank the chairman and the ranking member for their consideration. For the aforementioned reasons, I urge my colleagues to support the amendment. I yield to the distinguished gentlewoman from Minnesota. Ms. McCOLLUM. Mr. Chairman, I am very happy that this opportunity has been presented for us to have a discussion on the House floor and the National Park Service doing the right thing about the removal of this symbol of what has become racist hate speech. I thank the gentleman for bringing forward the amendment, and I rise in support of it. Mr. JEFFRIES. I thank the distinguished gentlewoman for her support. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time. The Acting CHAIR. The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from New York (Mr. Jeffries). The amendment was agreed to. Amendment Offered by Mr. Smith of Texas Mr. SMITH of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk. The Acting CHAIR. The Clerk will report the amendment. The Clerk read as follows: At the end of the bill, before the short title, insert the following: Sec. __. None of the funds made available by this Act may be used by the Environmental Protection Agency to propose, finalize, implement, or revise any regulation in which the research data relied on to support such action is subject to OMB Circular A-110 and is withheld in contravention of the Freedom of Information Act as prescribed under OMB Circular A-110 or if the Science Advisory Board of the Environmental Protection Agency fails to provide scientific advice as may be requested on such regulation to the Congress in contravention of section 4365 of title 42, United States Code. The Acting CHAIR. Pursuant to House Resolution 333, the gentleman from Texas and a Member opposed each will control 5 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas. Mr. SMITH of Texas. Mr. Chairman, this amendment reflects the core principles of two bills passed by the House earlier this year with bipartisan support. They are H.R. 1029, the EPA Science Advisory Board Reform Act, and H.R. 1030, the Secret Science Reform Act. I am pleased to be joined by the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology's former Subcommittee on Environment chairman, Representative David Schweikert, who sponsored the original version of the Secret Science bill in 2014. The amendment simply requires the Environmental Protection Agency to base its regulations on publicly available data that can be verified. Why would the administration want to hide this information from the American people? We must make sure that Federal regulations are based on science that is available for independent review. Many Americans are unaware that some of the EPA's most expensive and burdensome regulations, such as its proposed climate and ozone rules, are based on underlying data that not even the EPA has seen. This amendment ensures that the decisions that affect every American are based on independently verified, unbiased, scientific research instead of on secret data that is hidden from the American people. That is called the scientific method. This amendment also ensures that the EPA Science Advisory Board is able to provide meaningful, balanced, and independent assessments of the scienc