UN Official Found Dead After He Was Set To Testify In Clinton Corruption Case !
33.2k SHARES Share Tweet

Oh the ‘coincidence!’ A former United Nations official has been found dead, assumed to have died due to a weight-lifting accident. All that sound’s perfectly fine, except with one little detail that makes the death a little suspicious: the official was linked to a corruption scandal that involved former presidential nominee Hillary Clinton.

The U.N. official, John Ashe, has allegedly died from a barbell, but the timing of the ‘accident’ couldn’t be more perfect for conspiracy theorists to allege that this was no mere accident.

Ashe’s body was discovered on Wednesday in his house in Westchester county. The police reported that his suffered heavy injury on his throat, presumably by the barbell while he was working out.

Ashe was scheduled to appear in court on Monday with Chinese billionaire and Ashe’s co-defendant, David Ng Lap Seng, who is suspected of smiling $4.5 million in the United States as of 2013 and lied that the money would be used to buy art pieces and casino chips.

Reports say that the Chinese businessman was channeling money using a restaurant owner of Arkansas named Charlie Trie, to the Democratic National Committee during the Clinton administration, but he has never been prosecuted, till now.

One source said, “During the trial, the prosecutors would have linked Ashe to the Clinton bagman David Ng Lap Seng. It would have been very embarrassing. His death was conveniently timed.”

Spot on comment. The timing of this influential official’s death couldn’t be more convenient for the Democrats. I guess we can say that we’ve found the secret the Clinton family has had for being able to escape prison for a long time: getting rid of all the suspects before any of them could reveal incriminating information about the god-knows-how-many criminal activities they’ve been involved in.

What do you think about this? Share this on Facebook and Twitter along with your comments!