Trump rallies Kentucky supporters, warns of losing Republican majority
CLOSE Donald Trump stumped for Andy Barr and did not hold back on his challenger Amy McGrath Louisville Courier Journal

Buy Photo A large video screen flashed the image of President Donald Trump to the delight of supporters as they waited in a parking lot outside the Alumni Coliseum Saturday afternoon. (Photo: Matt Stone/Louisville Courier Journal)Buy Photo

Touting his immigration crackdown, effort to end a “war on coal” and conservative Supreme Court appointments, President Donald Trump urged a roaring crowd of 6,100 supporters at Eastern Kentucky University Saturday to protect Republicans’ congressional majority.

Trump, who is holding campaign rallies to block Democrats’ hopes of taking control of the U.S. House or Senate in the Nov. 6 midterm elections, issued fiery warnings that Democratic control would mean job losses, higher taxes and open borders.

"Democrats want to open America’s borders and turn our country into a friendly sanctuary for murderous thugs from other countries who will kill us all," Trump said.

While he celebrated last week’s confirmation of Justice Brett Kavanaugh after a bitter fight, Trump was in Richmond to target Democratic challenger Amy McGrath, a retired Marine fighter pilot who is in a tight and potentially pivotal race with 6th Congressional District incumbent Republican Congressman Andy Barr.

From the rally: Donald Trump blasts Amy McGrath as an 'extreme liberal' in Kentucky

“Amy supports a socialist takeover of your health care” Trump said, claiming she wanted to “decimate your now thriving coal industry” at a time when miners were being “put back to work.” A state report in August showed a recent decline in coal jobs.

McGrath disputed his statements saying after the speech,“Mr. President, you clearly don’t know me. Yet.”

Trump was joined by Kentucky Republican leaders including Gov. Matt Bevin, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and Sen. Rand Paul. Paul also warned that Democratic control over Congress would lead to an agenda of “investigate the President, impeach the President.”

Barr told Kentuckians they had been forgotten, but “under President Donald J. Trump, you were remembered.” Trump won his district in 2016 by 16 percentage points.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-866-2211. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The overflow crowd who wore “Make America Great Again” hats and T-shirts reading “Kentucky Deplorable” and “Trump 2020” poured in from nearby counties, including those in Appalachian coal country that also voted heavily for Trump. Some arrived the night before, and overflow crowds watched the address from a screen in the parking lot.

Sherry Perdue, a retired teacher from Breeding, Kentucky, stood in a line of thousands before the rally that snaked around a parking lot and produced chants of “USA!” and “Trump!” She said she saw the battle over Kavanaugh, who denied accusations that he assaulted a woman in the 1980s, as mostly political. It angered her and galvanized her desire to vote in November, she said.

“A lot of Republicans had slacked off — that brought them back. It certainly energized me,” said Perdue, who believes Kavanaugh was falsely accused.

During his speech, Trump praised Paul and McConnell, who he said had “stared down the angry left-wing mob” during the confirmation process and decried the “Democratic politics of hatred, anger and division.”

“Never has a man been treated so badly,” Trump said of the allegations. “We stuck with him all the way, because we knew the facts. And Rand Paul and Mitch McConnell stuck with him too.”

Across the street from Alumni Coliseum, protesters, including some students who objected to the university hosting the rally, lined the street and held signs including one that read, “It is no longer about whether Trump has any decency, but if we do.”

Earlier this week, more than 100 EKU faculty and staff members wrote a letter to EKU President Michael Benson objecting to the visit. “It’s appalling what he is doing to our country,” said Janice George, 54, a Maysville psychologist who stood outside the rally.

Also: Democrats want sanctuary for thugs, and other things Trump said in Kentucky

During more than an hour of speaking, Trump drew cheers with familiar Republican foils such as Nancy Pelosi and NFL players who have kneeled in protest during the national anthem. He elicited loud boos criticizing the “fake news” reporters covering the event.

Trump also celebrated the release of American pastor Andrew Brunson, who was freed from Turkey after being detained for two years: “We don’t pay ransom,” he said.

Trump, who touted low unemployment rates in Kentucky and across the nation, currently has a 43 percent approval rating, according to RealClearPolitics. Rally attendees said they see the election as a referendum on Trump almost halfway through his term.

“I’m going to be hauling people to the polls for free,” said Sharon Anderson, 62, of Chattanooga, Tennessee, who supports Trump for clamping down on immigration and boosting the economy.

Courtland Wilder, 27, a construction worker and father of two from Irvine, Kentucky, who attended the rally, said his support for Trump has not waned despite a string of controversies, including the investigation into connections between his campaign and Russian election meddling. More important, he said, is that jobs are plentiful where he lives.

“Every one of my friends and family wants to vote for him more than they did the first time,” Wilder said.

Reporter Chris Kenning can be reached at 502-396-3361 or ckenning@courierjournal.com.

CLOSE President Trump's message to Kentucky, elect more republicans. Louisville Courier Journal

Support our journalism Become a Courier Journal subscriber today to support stories like this one. Get unlimited digital access here!

Read or Share this story: https://www.courier-journal.com/story/news/politics/2018/10/13/president-donald-trump-speaks-richmond-kentucky/1577851002/