McConnell wants to see how Green New Deal will play out in Senate vote
CLOSE Democrats, including Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, are calling for a Green New Deal intended to transform the U.S. economy to combat climate change and create thousands of jobs in renewable energy. (Feb. 7) AP

Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell wants to know where Democrats stand on an ambitious anti-pollution proposal ahead of the 2020 presidential contest.

Kentucky’s senior senator announced this week that his GOP-controlled chamber would vote on the Green New Deal, which was introduced last week by Democratic Sen. Edward Markey, of Massachusetts, and U.S. Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, of New York, to address climate change.

"I've noted with great interest the Green New Deal, and we're going to be voting on that in the Senate to give everybody an opportunity to go on record to see how they feel," a grinning McConnell told reporters in Washington.

The senator’s office was mum when asked by the Courier Journal why McConnell, a vocal supporter of Kentucky’s coal industry, wants such a vote. He had initially said there was no likelihood of the proposal passing his chamber, but the senator's aides told the Washington Post it is an effort to "rattle" Senate Democrats, many of whom are running for president in 2020.

More news: Mitch McConnell supports tentative deal to avoid government shutdown

Many liberal activists favor the 14-page resolution, which calls for getting 100 percent of the country’s power from renewable resources by 2030. It also looks to make major investments in climate-friendly jobs and infrastructure, and seeks to get carbon out of all major segments of the U.S. economy.

McConnell's campaign had a different take on the resolution, which may reveal the GOP leader's motivations behind holding a vote.

“We're going to vote in the Senate and see how many Democrats want to end air travel and cow farts,” the McConnell campaign said via Twitter on Tuesday afternoon.

We're going to vote in the Senate and see how many Democrats want to end air travel and cow farts. pic.twitter.com/1vl4sSTq9A — Team Mitch (@Team_Mitch) February 12, 2019

That is referring to a FAQ page on Ocasio-Cortez's website, which initially had the phrase about addressing “farting cows.” It was later changed to “emissions from cows” before it was deleted altogether.

Methane produced by cattle has long been noted as a factor in overall greenhouse gas emissions.

Republican critics have used that and other parts of the plan to mock Ocasio-Cortez, who is a democratic socialist, and her lofty goals as too costly.

Green New Deal: What is it and what does it mean for climate change?

President Donald Trump targeted the proposal during his first major campaign rally ahead of the 2020 election. He told a crowd of supporters in El Paso, Texas, that, "I really don’t like their policy of taking away your car, of taking away your airplane rights, of ‘let’s hop a plane to California,’ of 'you’re not allowed to own cows anymore.'"

CLOSE President Donald Trump is ripping a proposal that some Democrats have embraced to curb global warming. Trump, at a rally in El Paso, Texas, claimed that the "Green New Deal" would shut down American energy and air travel. (Feb. 12) AP

Ocasio-Cortez also appears eager to have this fight when she took to Twitter after McConnell announced he would have the vote.

"We are already feeling the early nightmares of climate crisis, (and) the GOP is doing nothing to stop it — as they have for years," she tweeted. "I’ve been reading docs all week about how much people knew about climate (and) when. They knew early. And their goal has been to sow doubt this entire time."

Recent polling discovered more than 80 percent of registered voters said they support the such a plan.

The December survey, which was conducted by the Yale Program on Climate Communication and the George Mason University Center for Climate Change Communication, showed 92 percent of Democrats and 64 percent of Republicans back the idea.

It surveyed 966 registered voters and had a margin of error of 3 percentage points.

Read this: Paradise lost? Trump weighs in on imperiled Kentucky coal power plant

But the survey found 82 percent had heard nothing about the actual Green New Deal. That means McConnell and Ocasio-Cortez are in a messaging war to define what the deal means for average Americans.

Ocasio-Cortez took to social media to mock the GOP for suggesting she wants to ban air travel and even ice cream. "Trust me, I like ice cream way too much to do that," she tweeted.

She and other environmental advocates are also betting the green deal and its dramatic moves will be popular among younger voters.

"Don’t mess with our future," she said in another tweet. "When it comes to climate, it’s all our lives at stake. The younger you are, the more consequences you’ll see. It’s life and death for us. And we will fight like it."

Don’t mess with our future.



When it comes to climate, it’s all our lives at stake. The younger you are, the more consequences you’ll see.



It’s life and death for us.

And we will fight like it. https://t.co/jlyFGkzCUW — Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (@AOC) February 13, 2019

Reporter Phillip M. Bailey can be reached at 502-582-4475 or pbailey@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/philb.

Read or Share this story: https://www.courier-journal.com/story/news/politics/2019/02/13/mcconnell-allow-vote-democrats-green-new-deal/2851792002/