Protesters sound off on President Trump in streets of Downtown Evansville
CLOSE

Protestors gather at Memorial Baptist Church before they march to the Ford Center for President Donald Trump's Make America Great Again rally in Evansville Aug. 30, 2018. (Photo: Macabe Brown)

EVANSVILLE, Ind. — A noisy protest that at peak times hovered around 1,000 people met President Donald Trump and his supporters in downtown Evansville Thursday.

Chanting "Lock him up," "Dump Trump" and many other things for several hours, protesters took aim at the president's stances on the environment, gay rights, women's rights, immigration and more.

Two protests, one that started at Memorial Baptist Church and the other near Old National Events Plaza, merged as one and marched toward the Ford Center, where Trump spoke Thursday evening. By the time Trump's rally started at 7 p.m., protesters were clustered along Martin Luther King Boulevard, facing the arena.

The sign-carrying throng stood face-to-face across the street from a small group of Trump supporters who did not attend the president's rally inside the Ford Center. Dozens of officers with the Evansville Police Department, Vanderbugh County Sheriff's Office and Indiana State Police stood on the street, physically separating the groups.

Evansville Police Sgt. Jason Cullum said there were two arrests. The two men were involved in a fistfight. Both were taken away in handcuffs.

Other than that, the two groups remained separate and nonviolent. As people left the rally in the Ford Center, they were steered by police south on Main Street, away from protesters.

Cullum said there were instances throughout the day and night when individuals were warned about behavior, but there were no other arrests.

Some of the protesting groups were the Vanderburgh County Democratic Party, Indivisible Evansville, Tri-State Alliance, the Sierra Club and Midwest Activism and Advocacy.

A common thread for many of the protesters and protest groups was what they see as a disregard for minority communities.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7104. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"My personal belief is that Trump's America is not lost," Leah Whitaker, volunteer communications director for Indivisible Evansville, said. "There are people who live in the middle of America who believe in progressive values and who want to hold our politicians to a higher moral standard. We are not satisfied with this administration's constant tearing down of minority groups and the LGBTQ communities."

Marcia "Skitz" Evrad, of Terre Haute, came specifically to stand up for the rights of LGBTQ people as she believes Trump has belittled that group in particular.

"I also feel like we need to stand up against this particular administration because it does not reflect what American people believe or what our makeup is," she said. "The more that he expresses this, the more that we need to show we support people in all of the different ways that he is prejudiced."

Della Sandage, 22, of Evansville, was with Midwest Activism and Advocacy. The group's goal, Sandage said, is to stand up for disenfranchised citizens, women and minorities.

Other foes of the president seized on investigations and controversies surrounding him.

Patty McDaniel of St. Wendel was one such protester.

"This is one of those things I just felt compelled to do," she said. "I feel like his policies are detrimental to the country and only benefit the wealthy. And I think he's corrupt."

Vicki White, 62, of Evansville, said she finds Trump's weakening of Environmental Protection Agency standards objectionable. White said she was surprised by Trump's level of support.

"I am really stunned that so many people have sold out the rest of the country based on one or two things they think Trump will do for them," she said.

Jacob Leaman of Evansville came to protest both Trump and Republican Senate candidate Mike Braun.

“I believe (Braun is) completely bad for this state," Leaman said. "I believe he’s bad for farmers. I believe that he is bad for trade in general in this state, that he supports Trump’s tariffs.”

Trump protesters Lydia Johnson, Kathy Schapker and Patty O'Neill walked through downtown with their own signs, with messages such as "Love thy neighbor" and "What happened to honesty?"

Theresa Davies, 39, of Evansville and Joe Vance, 46, of Lamar, preferred to be called "dignity advocates" rather than protesters.

"I believe that every human person should be treated with dignity regardless of politics," Davies said.

One woman dressed in a costume apparently inspired by the dystopian television series "The Handmaid's Tale" was led away from the VIP entrance at the Ford Center. She left calmly, with a slight smile. The reason for her expulsion was unclear.

Read or Share this story: https://www.courierpress.com/story/news/local/2018/08/30/protesters-sound-off-trump-evansville/1113024002/