Frank A. Verrastro
You are here Home

Frank A. Verrastro

Senior Vice President and Trustee Fellow, Energy and National Security Program

Frank Verrastro is senior vice president and trustee fellow with the Energy and National Security Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). From 2012 to 2017, he held the James R. Schlesinger Chair for Energy and Geopolitics. Prior to that (2003 to 2012), he served as director of the CSIS Energy and National Security Program. His extensive energy and management experience spans over four decades in energy policy, operations, and project management positions in both the U.S. government and the private sector. His government service has included staff positions in the White House and the Departments of Interior and Energy, including serving as deputy assistant secretary for international energy resources. In the private sector, he has served as director of refinery policy and crude oil planning for the nation’s largest independent refiner, TOSCO Corporation, and more recently as senior vice president for Pennzoil. Responsibilities at Pennzoil included government affairs activity, both domestic and international, corporate planning, risk assessment, and international negotiations. In addition, he served on the company’s Executive Management and Operating Committees, as well as the Environmental, Health and Safety Leadership Council.

Mr. Verrastro holds a B.S. in biology/chemistry from Fairfield University, a master’s degree from Harvard University, and he completed the executive management program at the Yale Graduate School of Business and Management. He has been an adjunct professor at the Elliott School of International Affairs at George Washington University and has lectured at Harvard’s Kennedy School. He has served as an expert witness before both houses of Congress and serves as an adviser to the National Intelligence Council. He has written extensively on energy policy, oil and gas markets, and security topics, served on the Advisory Board for the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), and is a member of both the National Petroleum Council and the Council on Foreign Relations.