Donald Trump's American real estate, mapped
Donald Trump has built his reputation—both in business and now as the President-elect of the United States—on real estate. Listen to any stump speech or interview and you'll hear about Trump's developments, from his newly opened hotel in Washington, D.C., to a suburb for wealthy Venezuelans outside of Miami.

But thanks to Trump's love of exaggeration, it can be hard to know exactly what he or the Trump Organization own. In his 1987 book The Art of the Deal, Trump admits, "a little hyperbole never hurts. People want to believe that something is the biggest and the greatest and the most spectacular. I call it truthful hyperbole. It's an innocent form of exaggeration—and a very effective form of promotion."

In an effort to determine exactly what Trump owns across the United States, we sorted through the "truthful hyperbole" to map 21 of Trump's current real estate holdings, ones the President-elect either owns in full or in part. A slew of projects—like Trump Place in New York City—use Trump's name (but not for long) even if he had to sell his development rights before the project was finished. Other buildings use the Trump name even if he never owned or developed the project. Trump Soho Manhattan, Trump Hollywood in Florida, and the Trump International Hotel Waikiki Beach in Hawaii are all examples of Trump's extensive hotel management and licensing business wherein companies merely pay to use his name.

Some of these properties are listed on the Trump.com website as part of his "Real Estate Portfolio." But if you click on the disclaimer for properties like Trump Hollywood, it reads: "Trump Hollywood® is not owned, developed or sold by Donald J. Trump, The Trump Organization or any of their affiliates. TRG Holiday, Ltd., the owner and developer of the property, uses the 'Trump' name and mark under license from Trump Marks Hollywood LLC, which license may be terminated or revoked according to its terms."

Tapping into public records and drawing from a recent Forbes article that estimates the current value of Donald Trump's assets, here is a factual look at what our future president owns in America.