Halloween comes early to police stations with these costumed idiots' mugshots
Trick or treat! The bizarre police mugshots that gave cops a Halloween fright (and a few laughs too)

With Halloween falling on a Wednesday this year the celebrations have started early.

That means America's police stations are being haunted with a unique brand of criminal from dusk till dawn.

As these mugshots at the Smoking Gun reveal, a bad costume isn't the most embarrassing thing that can happen to you on Halloween night.

This Georgia man was arrested for drunk and disorderly conduct This man and woman were two of several arrested in 2011. This year has already seen similar arrests of people dressed up in Halloween costumes

This Idaho man probably had just as much trouble explaining to police what his costume was as he did explaining why he was drinking and driving

Most costumed revelers are picked up for alcohol related violations like Driving Under the Influence, while the other most common charges are disorderly conduct or fighting.

While some of the partiers try and look frightening in zombie and and monster make-up, one hopes the police provided those in feather boas and glitter a little time to clean themselves up before they're thrown in a holding cell.



Parolee from hell: Bad timing this Michigan man was busted for being a parole absconder while in costume

Glam Ghoul: If you're going to get busted on a DUI, be like this Arkansas man and look good doing it

As there's still a few days to Halloween, last minute celebrants should take heed not to drive drunk and keep their calm.

Otherwise they might end up going as a convict.



Spooky: This woman was arrested last year. Most costumed revellers are picked up for alcohol related violations

Worse for wear: This pair's make-up seems to have most worn off leaving behind smudges of red and black That time of year again: Police must find it hard to keep a straight face when arresting people dressed like this

Ghoulish: This man partied a little too hard last year and ended up in a police cell

Haunting: This Arizona man for criminal damage and disorderly conduct but not impersonating a racoon

Man of steel: This Arizona man learned that Superman wouldn't get arrested for disorderly conduct/fighting

With his feather boa this North Dakota man should be popular with the rest of the lockup as he waits to be released on his DUI charge