Saipov was radicalized in the US, say Uzbek sources
Suspected New York terrorist Sayfullo Saipov was radicalized in the United States, according to sources in his native Uzbekistan

Suspected New York terrorist Sayfullo Saipov was radicalized in the United States, according to sources in his native Uzbekistan who were 'interrogating' his parents and sister overnight.

They have established that the 29-year-old was from a relatively prosperous family in capital Tashkent and his mother and father - market traders - are 'shocked and shamed' by their son's alleged killing of eight people.

'They cannot understand how he came to do this terrible deed and they had no warning that this was coming,' said a source.

'They feel disgrace on their family,' said a neighbor, who described them as 'good people, Muslims yes of course, but not fanatics'.

It was 'a deep shock and shaming'.

Saipov's 52-year-old father, Habibullo Saipov, and 50-year-old mother, Muqaddas Saipova, sell clothes at the Bektopi bazaar in Tashkent.

Uzbek security service SNB were working with the parents and Saipov's 17-year-old sister, and relaying their accounts to the FBI.

The Muslim immigrant from Uzbekistan (above in court sketches) accused of carrying on Tuesday's terror attack in Manhattan entered court Wednesday evening in a wheelchair, handcuffed and with his feet shackled, to face terrorism charges filed against him by the US Attorney for the Southern District of New York

Saipov (seen being taken into custody on Tuesday) immigrated to the US from his native Uzbekistan in March 2010

They were focusing on the mother's trip to the US between December 2016 and February 2017 to see her newborn grandchild.

But it also seemed clear that the suspected terrorist had not returned to his home Uzbekistan since leaving for the US in 2010.

Nor did he have a criminal record before leaving his country after securing Green Card entry to America, according to the Uzbek government.

'His radicalization cannot have been here, but in the United States,' said a security source.

The above image shows the house in Tashkent, Uzbekistan where Saipov's parents and his younger sister live now

Sources say the Uzbek security services 'interrogated' Saipov's parents and sister. The above image shows the street where they live now

Sources say the mother and father are 'shocked and shamed' by their son's alleged actions in New York. The above image shows a block of flats where Saipov lived in Tashkent until 2006

Saipov's 52-year-old father, Habibullo Saipov, and 50-year-old mother, Muqaddas Saipova, sell clothes at the Bektopi bazaar in Tashkent. The above image shows residents of the block of flats in Tashkent where Saipov once lived

He is remembered as being 'friendly', and a man who wanted to 'better himself'.

Another neighbor described them as 'an ordinary family. They are not very religious.

'They do not pray five times a day. But they are economically well-off.

'They have a Gentra [model] car. They get on with everyone in the neighbourhood.

'Their elder daughter got married and moved to the Huvaydo neighbourhood.

'Their younger daughter is a college student and lives with them.'

Registration documents came to light showing that Saipov had an address in a Soviet-era block in the Shaykhantahur district, north-west Tashkent, said Ferghana.

His parents later moved to a new address in the dusty central Asian city.

Before leaving Tashkent, Saipov had worked as a bookkeeper at drab Sayohat Hotel in the city.

Between 2005 to 2009, he studied at the Tashkent Financial Institute, a large university in the capital.

Before leaving Tashkent, Saipov had worked as a bookkeeper at drab Sayohat Hotel in the city. The above document confirms Saipov's previous address in the Uzbek capital

Between 2005 to 2009, he studied at the Tashkent Financial Institute, a large university in the capital

Saipov's social media accounts suggest he had a network of friends in 2011-13 in Osh, in Kyrgyzstan, another ex-Soviet republic, and there were suggestions he had lived here at some point.

The city has a large population of ethnic Uzbeks, and clashes between Uzbeks and Kyrgyz led to hundreds of deaths in the area in 2010.

Ethnic Uzbek terrorist Akbarzhon Dzhalilov, from Osh, last year blew up a Metro train in Vladimir Putin's home city St Petersburg, Russia, killing 15 people.

There are also unconfirmed reports that Saipov had spent time in Vologda in the north of Russia, but Muslim sources said there was no evidence for this claim.

President Shavkat Mirziyoyev of Uzbekistan sent condolences to President Donald Trump and vowed to do all he could to aid the investigation.

He condemned the 'ruthless and extremely cruel crime' in New York.

His country would 'use all the forces and means available to assist in the investigation of this terrorist act'.