Muslims gather in Birmingham for Eid to mark the end of Ramadan
Day-long celebration is marked by exchanging gifts, wearing new clothes and throwing parties for friends and family

The 'Feast of Sacrifice' is the biggest day in Islam calender and marks the end of Ramadan - holy month of fasting

Up to 70,000 Muslims attended morning prayers at Small Heath Park in Birmingham this morning to celebrate Eid

Advertisement

Muslims around the world have gathered to celebrate Islam’s biggest holiday today which marks the end of Ramadan, the holy month of fasting.

Eid al-Adha, or Feast of Sacrifice, is one of the most significant dates on the calendar for Muslims and is marked by exchanging gifts, wearing new clothes and by throwing parties for friends and family.

As per tradition, up to 70,000 Muslims attended morning prayers at Small Heath Park in Birmingham today to celebrate Eid, before descending on food stalls and a funfair.

Green Lane Masjid and Community Centre first hosted the Celebrate Eid event in 2012 where more 12,000 people turned up, and it has grown ever since.

Amer Ijaz, manager of Green Lane Masjid, said preparations for the massive event had been in the planning for the last six months.

He added: ‘Through this we have brought the community together. It’s important we keep it a family event.'

Eid, a day-long celebration, signals the end of Ramadan, the Islamic holy month of fasting that commemorates the first revelation of the Quran to the Prophet Muhammed.

It is the holiest month in the Muslim calendar where believers focus on personal reflection and prayer through three types of worship: charity, prayer and fasting.

Much like Easter Sunday in the Christian calendar, Eid does not fall on the same day every year and is dictated by a new moon.

The annual festivity comes after Muslims spent the last four weeks eating only before dawn and after sunset for Ramadan.

Scroll down for video

Up to 70,000 Muslims attended morning prayers at Small Heath Park in Birmingham today to celebrate Eid, which marks the end of Ramadan

Eid al-Adha, or Feast of Sacrifice, is one of the most significant dates on the calendar for Muslims and is marked by exchanging gifts, wearing new clothes and by throwing parties for friends and family. Pictured: Thousands of muslims attend morning prayers in Birmingham

Green Lane Masjid and Community Centre first hosted the Eid event in 2012 where over 12,000 people turned up and it has since grown

Eid signals the end of Ramadan, the holy month of fasting that commemorates the first revelation of the Quran to the Prophet Muhammed

It is the holiest month in the Muslim calendar where believers focus on personal reflection and prayer through three types of worship

Amer Ijaz, manager of Green Lane Masjid, said preparations for the massive event in Birmingham had been in the planning for six months

Eid is followed by two days of festivity for the global Muslim community. Pictured: Muslims attend morning prayers in Birmingham today

A man tosses his son up in the air as people celebrate Eid al-Fitr feast, marking the end of the Muslim fasting month of Ramadan in Egypt

Muslims offer Eid al-Fitr prayers outside Al Noor Mosque in Sharjah, United Arab Emirates, to mark the end of the 30 day Ramadan period

Prayers at the Grand Mosque, also known as Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Masjid, in the Philippines at the end of the month-long Ramadan

Muslims follow morning prayers on the first day of the Eid al-Fitr celebrations in Thailand's southern province of Narathiwat earlier today

Palestinians attend morning prayers for the Eid al-Fitr holiday, marking the end of the holy month of Ramadan, in the east of Gaza City

Palestinians attend morning prayers for the Eid al-Fitr holiday in the east of Gaza City, with feasts expected across the country afterwards

Albanian Muslims take part in Eid al-Fitr prayer at the main boulevard in Tiranas as celebrations for the holy day continue around the world