That's high enough, Joe! Hilariously awkward picture of White House reporter fending off Biden's too-close Christmas embrace
Down Joe! Hilariously awkward moment Biden gets a bit too friendly with White House reporter at Christmas party

Vice President Joe Biden's folksy-yet-awkward-uncle persona came out to play during a recent Christmas party, judging from a photo that Amie Parnes, White House Correspondent at The Hill, posted on her Facebook page.

The Daily Caller found the priceless image, showing Joe and Jill Biden greeting Parnes and an unnamed companion – and the vice president's right paw is not where the journalist expected it to be.

While Parnes is shown laughing uproariously, her own right hand appears to be blocking Biden's from roaming northward into 'War On Women' territory.

Parnes' right hand kept Biden's vice presidential exploratory committee (of one) from ranging into sexual-harassment territory during a recent Christmas party Uh oh: Another female falls under the spell of 'Joe being Joe' at the vice president's annual holiday party There's no truth to the rumor that Biden's left hand was up to no good in this party photo -- probably

The picture isn't the first sign the public has seen of Biden's randy public moments. During a September 2012 campaign stop in Seaman, Ohio, Biden famously embraced an aging biker babe for what her male companions seemed to think was a few moments too long.



'I told him he was so handsome, so good-looking, that I was not going to let go of him,' Jan Queen told reporters afterward.

'Will you write a note to my wife and tell her that?' a grinning Biden asked.

Parnes, who covered the Obama administration for Politico before her current stint at The Hill, didn't respond to emailed questions.

'Is there a back-story behind the Biden photo?' MailOnline asked. 'Was he telling a joke at that moment? Did he slip on a banana peel and land in that position?'

The Ohio biker chick in the bandana and leather vest didn't sit in Biden's lap, but it certainly looked like it How it's done: President Obama's hands are nowhere to be seen as he poses with first lady Michelle in a holiday photo with Amie Parnes and her sister Sherry Parnes The vice president seems to be carefully cultivating an image as a dirty old man, just in time for the 2016 elections Well done, Joe: Both hands are clearly visible and platonic in this party pic

Grope and change! Hands-on Joe Biden is at it again ==> http://t.co/G0SvxTQ40A — Michelle Malkin (@michellemalkin) December 16, 2013

There's a fine line between Quirky Uncle Joe Biden and Creepy Uncle Joe Biden. #protip — Milkshakes Anytime (@MomMilkshake) December 16, 2013

If Joe Biden were 6 years old and in school, he'd get suspended for sexual harassment. http://t.co/fCXrjbPiEQ — RB (@RBPundit) December 16, 2013

But Biden, who may be on the cusp of an improbable White House run of his own, appears to be in good company in the unfortunate-photo-grope department.

Last month New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie's re-election campaign took him to Hot Dog Johnny's, a popular Belvidere, New Jersey eatery.

One photo that appeared on Christie's official Facebook page showed him posing with the restaurant's staff: As he reached around one young female, his hand came to rest in a most unfortunate place north of the navel and south of the collarbone.

Christie's social media staff zapped the pic from Facebook, but not before it got a life of its own on Twitter.

Just like Biden's latest visual gaffe.

'This is just Joe being Joe, as usual,' a Republican campaign strategist told MailOnline.

'Can you imagine this guy running for president? Seriously? The next time we hear about "binders full of women," it'll be the cases linking Biden with "filthy" Bob Filner.'



Biden and his wife Jill hosted their annual shindig at the vice-presidential mansion -- complete, it seems, with lots of eggnog

The Bidens' annual party normally includes a cameo from the Obamas, but the president was otherwise occupied -- taking selfies at the Nelson Mandela memorial service

Always good for a laugh: Biden delivered remarks on Saturday after receiving the Pennsylvania Society's Gold Medal award at the Waldorf-Astoria hotel in New York