Mueller DENIES he quit Trump's golf course in fee dispute
Special Counsel Robert Mueller relinquished his membership at a golf course owned by President Donald Trump 'without dispute' six years ago, his office said amid a new effort to muddy the investigator.

Mueller's office is contesting an account floated by the White House that there was some sort of an issue with Mueller, a former member of Trump's club that hugs the Potomac River near Washington, that could potentially interfere with his inquiry.

President Trump himself is said to be nursing a grudge about the issue, which his legal team is grasping as it compiles a list of potential conflicts of interest that might help it deflect a sprawling Russia probe that has come to encompass Trump's past business dealings.

'Mr. Mueller left the club in October 2011 without dispute,' special counsel spokesman Joshua Stueve told DailyMail.com.

Special counsel Robert Mueller's office says he left Trump's Virginia golf course 'without dispute. Here, he is pictured when he was Federal Bureau of Investigation Director visiting the American military compound at Kandahar Airport January 23, 2002 in Afghanistan

His statement came hours after the Washington Post reported on an 'allegation' that Mueller and the club, located 25 miles outside of Washington, 'had a dispute over membership fees when Mueller resigned as a member in 2011.'

The report was sourced to two White House advisers – putting the golf club pushback operation within the confines of the seat of executive power.

Post reporter Carol Leonnig amplified the story Friday morning in an appearance on CNN – adding the detail that the President himself was 'ticked' about the alleged incident.

'The president himself is interested in and slightly ticked a bit ... about what he considers to be an important conflict which is that Mueller resigned from a Trump golf course in 2011 and that as described or as alleged, Mueller had some sort of dispute over back fees that he was owed,' she said.

'The president thinks this is something that conflicts Mueller,' she added.

YOU TEE OFF ANY TIME YOU WANT: Robert Thompson hits to the first green during Round 1 of the Senior PGA Championship at Trump National Golf Club on May 25, 2017 in Sterling, Virgina.

Former Atlanta Braves pitcher Tom Glavine talks with Donald J. Trump during a taping of "Trump's Fabulous World of Golf" at the Trump National Golf Club on April 23, 2010 in Bedminster, New Jersey

President Trump himself is said to be slightly ticked about a dispute with Mueller, which Mueller denies

The pushback came after a report that Mueller plans to examine Trump business transactions, such as the one where Trump doubled his money on the sale of this Palm Beach mansion to a Russian oligarch for $95 million in 2008

Although it could not be immediately verified which side was correct on the subject of an alleged fee dispute, membership fees at Trump golf properties have caused controversy and even drawn lawsuits in the past.

Membership fees at Trump golf courses around the country vary. They are $14,000 and $25,000 at another, according to a McClatchy report, and far higher at Mar-a-lago, where Trump jets frequently during the winter and keeps a residence.

Those who choose to walk away do not get their money back. 'No portion of an Initiation Fee will be refundable in connection with a member’s resignation,” said a membership plan at a Trump National Course in Colts Neck, New Jersey obtained by the paper.

A prior practice was to fund initiation fees only when a member had belonged for 30 years. Trump had access to $100 million worth of initiation fees in 2004, according to the report.

A Florida judge ruled in February that Trump National in Jupiter must refund $6 million in fees. Members wanted their annual deposits back. Trump had changed the rules after his 2012 purchase, telling those who wanted to leave they would have to pay annual dues but couldn't use the club and would only get their money after new members were found.