EXCLUSIVE: Barack Obama invited to Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's wedding
PRINCE Harry and Meghan Markle have snubbed advice and invited Barack Obama to their Royal wedding, Daily Star Online can reveal.

The smitten couple have asked the former US President and his wife Michelle to attend their big day at Windsor Castle on Saturday, May 19. A Royal source told us Harry and Meghan “want to do things their own way”, despite aides advising them to hold back on the invite. It was feared such a move would outrage US President Donald Trump – who has reportedly not been invited – and rock diplomatic ties with his country.

DS/GETTY DEAR BARRACK... Meghan and Harry are said to have sent an invite to the Obamas

Prince Harry and Meghan Markle wedding: The A-list guest list Some of the world's biggest stars have bagged an invite to the royal wedding 1 / 15 Richard Wadey-James/Sentebale vi Joss Stone is one of Prince Harry's close friends

But Harry and Meghan have turned their noses up at the risk by sending out the RSVP, leaving the final decision to Obama himself. The source told Daily Star Online: “The invitations are going out now, but Mr and Mrs Obama still have to respond. “I am very, very sure they will attend though.

GETTY LOVE IS IN THE AIR: The loved-up Obamas are set to see their smitten friends marry

Prince IN Wales: Meghan Markle and Prince Harry visit Cardiff Bride-to-be Meghan Markle wows crowds in Wales 1 / 30 Getty Images Prince Harry and Meghan Markle watch a performance by a Welsh choir

“Harry and Meghan want to do things their own way. “They are inviting their own friends, and not on the advice of aides.” Harry and Obama have a genuine friendship that goes beyond work, with the former US president interviewed by the prince recently on BBC Radio 4's Today programme.

GETTY BLOSSOMING BROMANCE: Harry and Barack are good friends outside of work

Royals arrive for Xmas service Meghan Markle and pregnant Kate dazzle at Christmas Day service 1 / 37 PA Prince Harry and Meghan Markle look loved-up at the Xmas service