House overwhelmingly rejects immigration bill despite Trump's call to pass it
Updated at 2:25 p.m. Wednesday with Texas reaction to the vote.

WASHINGTON — The Republican-led House rejected a far-ranging immigration bill Wednesday despite its eleventh-hour endorsement by President Donald Trump. The gulf between the GOP's moderate and conservative wings proved too deep for leaders to avert an election-year display of division on the issue.

The vote was 301-121, with nearly half of Republicans opposing the measure. The depth of GOP opposition was an embarrassing showing for Trump and a rebuff of House GOP leaders, who'd postponed the vote twice and proposed changes in hopes of driving up the vote for a measure that seemed doomed from the start.

The tally also seemed to empower GOP conservatives on the fraught issue. Last week, a more conservative package was defeated but 193 Republicans voted for it.

Even if it passed, it would have been dead on arrival in the closely divided Senate, where Democrats would have had enough votes to kill it.

Seventeen of Texas' 24 House Republicans joined every Texas Democrat in voting against the immigration measure.

It wasn't just hardliners like Tyler Rep. Louie Gohmert, either. Also in the group were those with close ties to House GOP leadership: Dallas Rep. Pete Sessions, House Rules Committee chairman; Fort Worth Rep. Kay Granger, a top appropriator; and Houston Rep. John Culberson, another top appropriator.

"It did not go far enough to close the biggest loopholes that are driving our immigration crisis: eliminating chain migration and cutting off the employment magnet for illegal immigrants by mandating use of E-Verify," said Rep. Jodey Arrington, R-Lubbock.



Even San Antonio Rep. Will Hurd voted no, despite having helped force the vote by threatening a discharge petition that would've put more bipartisan legislation up for consideration.



"I have long advocated for securing our nation's borders and providing a permanent legal fix for DACA recipients, but this proposal does not accomplish either goal," he said last week.

At least one Texas Republican who voted for the measure pointed blame across the aisle.

"Democrats showed their true colors and abandoned the Dreamers they claim to support, proving their rhetoric is nothing but a political ploy," said Rep. Kevin Brady, R-The Woodlands, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee.

Rep. Bill Flores, R-Bryan, was one of the seven Texans voting yes.

"In my view, a 'NO' vote was a vote to maintain the status quo for these important issues — like most Texans, I strongly believe that the status quo is unacceptable," he said in a written statement. "Despite this setback, Congress must continue working to reform our immigration system, to develop an effective solution for our Dreamer population, to stop illegal immigration, to secure our border and to keep hardworking American families safe."

Democratic Rep. Marc Veasey called on Republicans to work with Democrats.