Dallas man who served 31 years in prison for a rape he didn't commit finally declared innocent
Wyatt's attorney, Houston-based John Raley, calls the DA's filing "happy holiday news" and says Wyatt is "ecstatic, euphoric and very grateful to everyone involved," including attorneys with The Innocence Project who pushed for his release."Like most good things in life, this has been a team effort," Raley says. "We appreciate the DA's office looking at the evidence and reaching this conclusion."Raley -- who filed a federal lawsuit against the city, the Dallas Police Department and the Southwestern Institute of Forensic Sciences earlier this year -- is now hoping the state will expedite paying Wyatt the money he's owed for being wrongfully imprisoned for more than three decades. He's entitled to $80,000 a year for each year he was behind bars.In Wyatt's case, that number adds up to $2.5 million.Raley will move to dismiss his suit against the city and the other defendants only when his client is paid the money coming to him."The timing of this compensation involves factors beyond Mr. Wyatt's control," says Raley's Christmas Eve filing containing Collins' order. "When the process is complete, and funding is approved and allocated, Mr. Wyatt intends to accept the funding and nonsuit the case. Until then, Mr. Wyatt wishes this case to remain on file to assure that all his rights are protected."Wyatt was actually arrested for three rapes, but tried for just one. And attorneys with the Innocence Project discovered that the victim in that case did not identify Wyatt as her attacker during a live police line-up. Prosecutors and police also withheld evidence showing Wyatt didn't fit the victim's description of her attacker. Innocence Project attorneys alleged prosecutorial misconduct. In 2012, the judge and district attorney agreed. Now, it's official.When Wyatt was sent to prison, his daughter was 3. He would go on to become the longest-serving exonerated man behind bars in the state's history.