Beto O'Rourke heads to Iowa on Saturday, still undeclared for 2020 but anticipation building
Vikki Brown, chair of the Black Hawk County Democrats in Waterloo, said she expects hundreds of local activists to turn out for O'Rourke, even though few had heard about it by Monday night.

"We haven't really publicized it yet," she said, but "Beto seems to have a large following. He's very popular at this time."

He has been weighing a run for president since losing the Senate race in Texas four months ago, and has yet to set foot in Iowa or New Hampshire or any other state that gets an early crack at winnowing the field of presidential contenders. This will be his first such appearance. He recently ruled out another run for the U.S. Senate, saying that he has decided what he'll do next -- presumably a run for the White House -- and will announce that decision "soon."

Drumming up support for a local candidate is a time honored way for would-be presidential contenders to meet voters, generate good will and command media attention.

"If he decides to throw his hat in the ring, he will be a very formidable candidate," Brown said.

Sen. Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota is expected to canvass for Giddens on Saturday, too, and Sen. Cory Booker of New Jersey will be there on Sunday, party officials said.

Earlier Monday, the anti-tax Club for Growth confirmed that it will unleash an ad blitz in Des Moines aimed at planting doubts among Democrats about O'Rourke's liberal bona fides — not to weed out faux liberals from the 2020 pack, but because polls show that he would be a huge threat in Texas if he wins the nomination.

And if Democrats win Texas, there's virtually no way Republicans can keep the White House.



"We have internal polling that shows that Trump and Beto are statistically tied in Texas in a presidential head-to-head, and that's hugely significant," Club president David McIntosh said in an interview. "You'll notice we didn't do ads on the 16 other candidates that have talked about running."

The group spent millions in Texas last year to shore up Sen. Ted Cruz, who eked out a second term against O'Rourke with less than 51 percent of the vote.



The group's two-minute attack ad will air in Des Moines and run on digital platforms in Iowa. The Club says it will spend five figures — that is, less than $100,000 — getting out the message that the former three-term El Paso congressman isn't as liberal as voters might think.