Texas’ retired teachers face ‘death spiral’ in health insurance unless lawmakers help, add money
“If we don’t do something, TRS is genuinely concerned that they could go into a death spiral,” Houston GOP Sen. Joan Huffman, author of a stalled Senate overhaul bill, said of the health plans.

In that scenario, skyrocketing premiums in several current policies would stampede beneficiaries into a legally required “no cost” plan. Reeling from loss of income, the TRS “board would likely be obligated to close the TRS-Care plan and begin to phase out current participants,” according to a November report by a special House-Senate panel that studied the problem.

An alternate rescue bill by Rep. Trent Ashby, which is favored by many retirees, is scheduled for debate on the House floor Wednesday.

Inaction is not an option, said Ashby, a Lufkin Republican. He referred to a projected shortfall in TRS-Care of about $3 billion in 2020-2021. That’s down from an even higher deficit forecast just a few months ago — between $4 billion and $6 billion.

“You look at those out-year costs and we have to do something different,” he said.

At risk is health insurance for about 207,000 retired educators and 54,000 of their dependents. In Texas, 95 percent of school district employees haven’t paid into Social Security. For many, TRS’ annuity checks are their only source of retirement income.

Since 2001, lawmakers have let the retirement fund grant only one cost-of-living increase in those checks. Many live on $24,000 a year or less.

To offset some of the pain, as inflation ravaged retired teachers’ monthly checks, the Legislature’s budget writers often have included “intent” provisions that basically told the system not to increase premiums.

A 12-year freeze on premiums, relentless medical-care inflation and a surge in early retirees — who are more costly because they don’t qualify for the federal Medicare program — have capsized the retiree health plan’s finances. Last September, the pension system’s board imposed $40 million a year of increases in copays and other out-of-pocket costs for beneficiaries.

One early retiree, Helen Strohschein of Frisco, is very worried.

At 63, unable to qualify for Medicare for another couple of years, Strohschein said she’s grateful for coverage. She said she’s willing to pay even more — in the form of higher premiums and deductibles — if that’s what it takes to save the program.

“It would be devastating if they did nothing and I had absolutely no access to health insurance,” she said of lawmakers.

During her 36 years as a teacher, principal and director of instruction, Strohschein said she felt the state implicitly promised her adequate health coverage in retirement.

“I would just hope the state would step up and be willing to contribute more rather than passing all of the cost onto retirees,” she said.