Death of a Nation: Can We Save America a Second Time?
Lincoln united his party and saved America from the Democrats for the first time. Can Trump—and we—come together and save America for the second time?

Moreover, which is the party of racism today? Is fascism now institutionally embodied on the right or on the left?

But which is the party of the slave plantation? Which is the party that invented white supremacy? Which is the party that praised fascist dictators and shaped their genocidal policies and was in turn praised by them?

Now the target of the Democrats is President Trump and his supporters. The Left calls them racists, white supremacists and fascists. These charges are used to justify driving Trump from office and discrediting the right "by any means necessary."

Not since 1860 have the Democrats so fanatically refused to accept the result of a free election. That year, their target was Lincoln. They smeared him. They went to war to defeat him. In the end, they assassinated him.

These links will allow you to download and share images that you can use to spread the word about Death of a Nation. Click the cards to find links to share each image on Facebook and Twitter or download the image to email, print, and upload to other social media platforms.

Inspired by the turbulent events of post-2016 presidential election America, Dinesh D'Souza's Death of a Nation reveals an eerie similarity between the situations faced by President Trump now and the situations faced by President Lincoln in 1860. The film demonstrates how Trump can use the example of Lincoln to shut down the Democratic plantation once and for all.

D'Souza has served as a John M. Olin Fellow at the American Enterprise Institute and Robert and Karen Rishwain Fellow at Stanford University. D'Souza has won numerous awards including "Best Documentary" for America: Imagine The World Without Her (The Dove Foundation), and he has been called one of the "top young public-policy makers in the country" by Investor's Business Daily.

Born in Mumbai, India, Dinesh has truly lived the American Dream. He moved to the United States to attend school on a Rotary Scholarship, and, following graduation from Dartmouth College, he went on to work in the Reagan White House as a policy analyst.

Dinesh D'Souza is a best-selling author and filmmaker. His films 2016: Obama's America and America: Imagine The World Without Her are the #2 and #6 highest-grossing political documentaries of all time, respectively. D'Souza's latest feature-length film, Hillary's America , is widely credited with contributing to Hillary Clinton's defeat in 2016, and quickly joined his first two films in the top 10 political documentaries of all time.

Simply click on the button below to download the entire Death of a Nation press kit. In addition to the the full press kit, you can download the following specific files:

You can access media resources and other press information for Death of Nation, now playing in theaters nationwide, using the links in this section.

8. Your use of this Site and any dispute arising out of such use of the Site is subject to the laws of the United States.

7. From time to time this Site may also include links to other websites. These links are provided for your convenience to provide further information. They do not signify that The Big Lie, LLC endorses the website(s). The Big Lie, LLC has no responsibility for the content of the linked website(s).

5. All trademarks reproduced in this Site, which are not the property of, or licensed to the operator, are acknowledged on the Site.

4. This Site contains material which is owned by or licensed to The Big Lie, LLC. This material includes, but is not limited to, the design, layout, look, appearance, and graphics. Reproduction is prohibited other than in accordance with special permission granted by The Big Lie, LLC.

3. Your use of any information or materials on the Site is entirely at your own risk, for which The Big Lie, LLC shall not be liable. It shall be your own responsibility to ensure that any products, services, or information available through this Site meet your specific requirements.

2. Neither The Big Lie, LLC nor any third parties provide any warranty or guarantee as to the accuracy, timeliness, performance, completeness, or suitability of the information and materials found or offered on the Site for any particular purpose. You acknowledge that such information and materials may contain inaccuracies or errors and The Big Lie, LLC expressly excludes liability for any such inaccuracies or errors to the fullest extent permitted by law.

1. The content of the pages of the Site is for your general information and use only. It is subject to change without notice.

The Big Lie, LLC provides access to and use of the website at deathofanationmovie.com ("Site") subject to your agreement to the following Terms of Use ("Terms"). Please read these Terms carefully before accessing or using the Site. By accessing or using the Site, you agree to be bound by these Terms, which are as follows:

Privacy Policy

This privacy policy lets you know how your personal information is processed and used. We promise that we will take steps to use your personal information only in ways that are compatible with this privacy policy. The following policies are only in effect for the web pages, newsletters, and opt-in announcement lists owned and operated by The Big Lie, LLC. The following discloses our privacy policy.

What information are you collecting and how are you collecting it?

Every computer connected to the Internet is given a domain name and a set of numbers, that serve as that computer's "Internet Protocol" or IP address. When a visitor requests a page from any website within the Death of a Nation website, our web servers automatically recognize that visitor's domain name and IP address. The domain name and IP address reveal nothing personal about you other than the IP address from which you have accessed our site.

Our web servers also collect information about the type of internet browser you are using, your operating system, as well as which of the Death of a Nation web pages you have accessed. This information is used to help our team develop websites to display properly for the majority of our visitors. Our servers also use enhanced analytics to better reach potential visitors and entice return visitors using cookies (see below).

Our web servers do not automatically record email addresses of the visitors.

Does your website use cookies?

Yes, our website uses cookies. A cookie is a small piece of data that is sent to your internet browser from a web server and stored on your computer's hard drive. Cookies are often used to provide you with a customized experience. At no time is any personal information stored within one of our cookies.

Accepting cookies through your browser is a personal choice. You can sill enjoy the Death of a Nation website if you choose not to accept cookies.

What information do you collect when I complete forms?

Any information supplied through our contact forms is used to aid our business to respond to your request and provide you with the necessary information.

Your email address may be entered to receive the Death of a Nation electronic newsletter. You can unsubscribe to this newsletter at any time.

Will you disclose the information you collect to outside third parties?

The Big Lie, LLC will not sell or otherwise provide the information we collect to outside parties for the purpose of direct or indirect mass email marketing. Your personal submitted data and data collected with cookies will not be sold, but may be shared with third parties for tracking and marketing purposes related to The Big Lie, LLC.

We will disclose personal information and/or an IP address, when required by law or in the good-faith belief that such action is necessary to:

1. Cooperate with the investigations of purported unlawful activities and conform to the edicts of the law or comply with legal process served on the Death of a Nation website.

2. Protect and defend the rights or property of The Big Lie, LLC sites and related properties, or visitors to The Big Lie, LLC sites and related properties.

3. Identify persons who may be violating the law, the rights of third parties, or otherwise misusing the Death of a Nation website or its related properties.

What safeguards are in place?

The Big Lie, LLC is obligated to protect your personal information by making reasonable security arrangements against such risks as unauthorized access, use, collection, disclosure, or disposal. Security measures have been integrated into the design, implementation, and day-to-day operating practices as part of the commitment to protect the personal information it holds.

What else should I know about my privacy when online?

This website contains many hyperlinks to third party websites. The Big Lie, LLC is not responsible for the privacy practices or the content of such third party websites or advertisers. We do not share any of the individual personal information you provide The Big Lie, LLC with the third parties to which we link. Please check with those websites to determine their privacy policy.Please keep in mind that whenever you voluntarily disclose personal information online – for example, through email, discussion lists, or elsewhere – that information can be collected and used by others. In short, if you post personal information online that is accessible to the public, you may receive unsolicited messages from other parties in return.Ultimately, you are solely responsible for maintaining the secrecy of your personal information. Please be careful and responsible whenever you're online.

Consent To This Agreement

By using the Death of a Nation website, you consent to the collection and use of information by The Big Lie, LLC as specified above. If we decide to change our privacy policy, we will post those changes on this page so that you are always aware of what information we collect, how we use it, and under what circumstances we disclose it.