Dean Heller for US Senate
Las Vegas, NV – As Nevadans file theirs taxes under the unfair and outdated code for the last time today, the Heller for Senate campaign released its latest digital ad to remind voters what is at stake in this year’s election. Harry Reid’s handpicked candidate, Jacky Rosen, has promised to join Nancy Pelosi and repeal the middle class tax cut that is already leading to higher wages, bonuses, bigger paychecks, and more job opportunities.

Watch the ad here.

Since President Trump signed the historic bill into law, over 500 companies have announced their plans expand employee benefits because of tax reform. The new Heller ad highlights a few of the Nevada employers – Apple, AT&T, Waste Management, and Tesla.

Just yesterday, the Kroger Company, which owns grocery stores across Nevada, announced they would invest their tax savings in their employees with higher wages, expanding their education-assistance program, and increasing their 401K match.

The ad also showcases locally owned companies that are using their tax cut to create jobs and award employees.

The developers of the stalled-Fontainebleau resort—recently renamed the Drew— on the Las Vegas Strip announced they will complete the project, which will create more than 10,000 jobs in Southern Nevada. And South Point Hotel, Casino, and Spa doubled their bonuses for workers.

These benefits are just the beginning for Nevada families. With new lower rates taking effect, as well as a doubling of the child tax credit thanks to Sen. Dean Heller’s leadership, Nevadans will be keeping more of their hard-earned money unless Pelosi and Rosen get their way.

Rosen has repeatedly shown she is out-of-touch with Nevada’s middle class. She has stuck to Pelosi’s talking points by calling bigger paychecks “crumbs,” and has recklessly promised to repeal these middle class tax cuts.

“Our latest ad highlights the biggest difference between Dean Heller and Jacky Rosen,” Heller campaign spokesman Keith Schipper said. “While Sen. Heller fights for Nevada families, Jacky Rosen will always sell out Nevadans if it pleases her party bosses.”