Deborah Ross for Senate
Keeping Americans Safe

When I was a child, my father served his country as a doctor in the United States Air Force during the Vietnam era and cared for his fellow service member and their families. When I think of the men and women in uniform around the world right now that are risking their lives to keep Americans safe, I think of service members like my father. Their service and sacrifice knows no political party and neither should the elected officials whose duty it is to keep our country safe. Unrest in the Middle East, terrorists fixated on attacking the west,[1] and challenges around the globe call for serious leadership, not partisanship, empty rhetoric, and hollow bluster. As your United States Senator, I will protect the safety and security of you and your family, and I will work across party lines on tough and smart policies to defeat terrorists and maintain our position as the world’s leader.

Defeat ISIS. These brutal extremists have killed Americans, orchestrated and inspired brutal attacks in the United States and against our allies, and present the most serious threat to the American people. The United States must use all of the tools at its disposal—the strongest military and intelligence community the world has ever known, the extraordinary capabilities of our Special Forces, and the power of diplomatic and economic pressure—to defeat these terrorists. Eliminating ISIS isn’t as simple as ‘carpet-bombing’ the Middle East and instead requires a tough, smart, and comprehensive approach

Increase airstrikes: Since the United States began its air campaign in August 2014, the coalition against ISIS has conducted thousands of airstrikes in the region. These operations strike at the heart of ISIS territory, and we should increase our intelligence on the ground to collect more information on high-value targets.

Since the United States began its air campaign in August 2014, the coalition against ISIS has conducted thousands of airstrikes in the region. These operations strike at the heart of ISIS territory, and we should increase our intelligence on the ground to collect more information on high-value targets. Strengthen our allies on the ground: Iraqis and Syrian moderates must be on the front lines to fight for their countries and retake territory from ISIS. To ensure that these allies have the resources they need to succeed, we must provide arms and equipment to vetted forces on the ground, including the Iraqi military, the Iraqi Kurds, and Southern Front in Syria. To grow their ranks, we must prevent Iraq from devolving into sectarian conflict and pursue a political transition in Syria so that they can unite behind defeating ISIS. The Syrian civil war creates chaos and conditions on the ground that allow ISIS to thrive, and the extreme violence of the Assad regime continues to fuel terrorist recruitment. Political stability in these countries will create additional military success in the region.

Iraqis and Syrian moderates must be on the front lines to fight for their countries and retake territory from ISIS. To ensure that these allies have the resources they need to succeed, we must provide arms and equipment to vetted forces on the ground, including the Iraqi military, the Iraqi Kurds, and Southern Front in Syria. To grow their ranks, we must prevent Iraq from devolving into sectarian conflict and pursue a political transition in Syria so that they can unite behind defeating ISIS. The Syrian civil war creates chaos and conditions on the ground that allow ISIS to thrive, and the extreme violence of the Assad regime continues to fuel terrorist recruitment. Political stability in these countries will create additional military success in the region. Cut off their finances: ISIS can generate millions in revenues a day through oil sales, looting banks, extortion, and human trafficking. The coalition against ISIS must continue to target and destroy the oil infrastructure and tankers, eliminate their access to the financial system, and break their hold over territory where they extort and tax civilians.

ISIS can generate millions in revenues a day through oil sales, looting banks, extortion, and human trafficking. The coalition against ISIS must continue to target and destroy the oil infrastructure and tankers, eliminate their access to the financial system, and break their hold over territory where they extort and tax civilians. Declare war on ISIS: Our commander-in-chief asked Congress to pass an updated Authorization for the Use of Military Force (AUMF) more than a year and a half ago, and the Republican Congress has refused to take any action this request. There are thousands of American service members deployed in the Middle East, Northern Africa, and around the globe confronting ISIS. They deserve to have their government unified behind their mission, rather than playing political games with the conflict. Declaring war against ISIS will send a clear message to our military, allies, and enemies that the United States is wholly committed to and will win the war against ISIS.

Our commander-in-chief asked Congress to pass an updated Authorization for the Use of Military Force (AUMF) more than a year and a half ago, and the Republican Congress has refused to take any action this request. There are thousands of American service members deployed in the Middle East, Northern Africa, and around the globe confronting ISIS. They deserve to have their government unified behind their mission, rather than playing political games with the conflict. Declaring war against ISIS will send a clear message to our military, allies, and enemies that the United States is wholly committed to and will win the war against ISIS. Strengthen our intelligence capabilities: When Republicans shutdown the federal government for 16 days in 2013, roughly 70% of our nation’s intelligence personnel were off the job. These analysts are on the front lines of identifying and disrupting terrorist plots, and helping us learn about the inner workings of ISIS. They should have the resources they need and certainty that outside parties won’t politicize or sabotage their operations.[2]

When Republicans shutdown the federal government for 16 days in 2013, roughly 70% of our nation’s intelligence personnel were off the job. These analysts are on the front lines of identifying and disrupting terrorist plots, and helping us learn about the inner workings of ISIS. They should have the resources they need and certainty that outside parties won’t politicize or sabotage their operations.[2] Confronting the threat online: 21st century warfare requires a hi-tech approach, and US CYBERCOM is ‘dropping cyber bombs’ on ISIS. We must increase the scope and scale of these cyber-attacks against terrorists, increase the resources available to these offenses, and completely debilitate their ability to use technology to conduct any operations, organize, or communicate.

Secure the homeland. It isn’t enough to defeat terrorists and deny them safe haven abroad. We must also redouble our efforts to prevent jihadists from coming to the United States, stop extremists from causing harm, and preventing radicalization from spreading.

Prohibit suspected terrorists from buying deadly weapons: Common sense gun safety laws in our country already prohibit violent criminals from purchasing a firearm; however, a loophole in existing law does not stop a suspected terrorist or an individual on the no-fly list from buying a gun. Unfortunately, thousands of these purchases have gone through, and al Qaeda leaders have actively encouraged extremists to exploit this weakness to buy a firearm. If someone is too dangerous to get on a plane, they’re too dangerous to buy a deadly firearm. Period.

Common sense gun safety laws in our country already prohibit violent criminals from purchasing a firearm; however, a loophole in existing law does not stop a suspected terrorist or an individual on the no-fly list from buying a gun. Unfortunately, thousands of these purchases have gone through, and al Qaeda leaders have actively encouraged extremists to exploit this weakness to buy a firearm. If someone is too dangerous to get on a plane, they’re too dangerous to buy a deadly firearm. Period. Double our border agents: Thousands of individuals cross our nation’s southern border every year at great risk to their own personal safety. As we reform our nation’s immigration system, we must address visa overstays with an electronic entry-exit system. In addition, we should commit to doubling the number of border agents at the southern border. This should be accompanied with advanced technology including mobile surveillance, ground sensors, and drones to fully control and monitor the border.[3]

Thousands of individuals cross our nation’s southern border every year at great risk to their own personal safety. As we reform our nation’s immigration system, we must address visa overstays with an electronic entry-exit system. In addition, we should commit to doubling the number of border agents at the southern border. This should be accompanied with advanced technology including mobile surveillance, ground sensors, and drones to fully control and monitor the border.[3] Take down extremist propaganda: In a 21 st century globalized world, a single terrorist can spread his message around the globe with just a few clicks at a computer. Terrorists have raised their recruitment strategies to new heights, and we must work with the brightest minds in technology companies around the globe to stop the propaganda from spreading. Twitter has deleted hundreds of thousands of ISIS accounts,[4] and the federal government should throw the full weight of its resources behind helping other companies build on these efforts.

In a 21 century globalized world, a single terrorist can spread his message around the globe with just a few clicks at a computer. Terrorists have raised their recruitment strategies to new heights, and we must work with the brightest minds in technology companies around the globe to stop the propaganda from spreading. Twitter has deleted hundreds of thousands of ISIS accounts,[4] and the federal government should throw the full weight of its resources behind helping other companies build on these efforts. Secure terrorists and prevent recidivism: Hundreds of prisoners that were being held at the military prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba were transferred to other countries and have since rejoined the battlefield. This is completely unacceptable, which is why I oppose the President’s plan to close Guantanamo and transfer the remaining detainees overseas or to the United States.

Hundreds of prisoners that were being held at the military prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba were transferred to other countries and have since rejoined the battlefield. This is completely unacceptable, which is why I oppose the President’s plan to close Guantanamo and transfer the remaining detainees overseas or to the United States. Tighten travel and admittance security: International travel has always been critically important to American businesses and helping our economy grow. Further, the United States must continue to honor its founding traditions as a nation of immigrants and a place of new beginnings for those fleeing the violence and war in their home countries. Staying true to these traditions and values cannot come at the price of Americans’ safety. We live in a world where a lone wolf with a suicide vest can cause mass devastation, and we know ISIS has developed a sophisticated industry of fake passports and forged documents. That is why every single individual coming into this country—either as a refugee or a businessman traveling via the visa waiver program—must be thoroughly vetted. That is why I support increasing the amount of resources dedicated to these screening procedures and demanding better intelligence sharing from our allies in exchange for special traveling privileges into the US.[5]

International travel has always been critically important to American businesses and helping our economy grow. Further, the United States must continue to honor its founding traditions as a nation of immigrants and a place of new beginnings for those fleeing the violence and war in their home countries. Staying true to these traditions and values cannot come at the price of Americans’ safety. We live in a world where a lone wolf with a suicide vest can cause mass devastation, and we know ISIS has developed a sophisticated industry of fake passports and forged documents. That is why every single individual coming into this country—either as a refugee or a businessman traveling via the visa waiver program—must be thoroughly vetted. That is why I support increasing the amount of resources dedicated to these screening procedures and demanding better intelligence sharing from our allies in exchange for special traveling privileges into the US.[5] Confronting lone wolf terrorism: In addition to limiting the ability of ISIS to spread its propaganda online, we must have a more comprehensive approach to self-radicalization. The FBI has nearly 1,000 active ISIS-related investigations open in all 50 states,[6] and we need to ensure that these officials have the resources they need to comprehensively conduct these investigations and make arrests when the need arises. Further, cities across the country are experimenting with important community partnerships to reach young people who may be targeted by extremists. The federal government must do all it can to support innovative approaches that prevent ISIS from gaining sympathizers in the United States.[7]

Make Iran play by the rules. Iran must not be allowed to acquire a nuclear weapon. This would present an existential threat to our closest ally in the region, Israel, and escalate a deadly arms race in a region already overrun by turmoil and defined by bitter rivalries. I support the Iran nuclear deal because it was the only viable option on the table to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. However, nothing in this arrangement prevents the United States from taking military action against Iran in the future. If Iran cheats on the deal and attempts to acquire nuclear weapons, absolutely all options—including the use of military force—remain on the table.

Strict enforcement: Over the coming years, we must strictly enforce the rules of the nuclear deal, and the United States must be prepared to act decisively and enact severe consequences anytime Tehran bends or breaks the rules.

Over the coming years, we must strictly enforce the rules of the nuclear deal, and the United States must be prepared to act decisively and enact severe consequences anytime Tehran bends or breaks the rules. Crackdown on Iranian aggression: Addressing their nuclear program is only one piece of our relationship with Iran. The United States government should not pay Tehran for the return of American prisoners or allow Iran to use the US dollar or American finance system. Their state support for terrorist networks has cost American lives and must stop. In the future, the US should extend Iranian sanctions and consider increasing them to stop Iran from financing terrorism around the globe.

Addressing their nuclear program is only one piece of our relationship with Iran. The United States government should not pay Tehran for the return of American prisoners or allow Iran to use the US dollar or American finance system. Their state support for terrorist networks has cost American lives and must stop. In the future, the US should extend Iranian sanctions and consider increasing them to stop Iran from financing terrorism around the globe. Deepening our ties with allies in the region: The relationship between the US and Israel is based on common democratic values and critical security interests for both countries. A strong relationship with Israel is more important now than it has ever been, and the United States must be wholly committed to providing resources to the Israelis for them to maintain their military edge and utmost technology to defend themselves.

[1] Politico, “Clinton breaks from Obama, calls Orlando attack ‘radical Islamism.’” June 13, 2016. http://www.politico.com/story/2016/06/hillary-clinton-radical-islam-224255

[2] Politico, “Clinton urges ‘intelligence surge’ to counter terrorist threat.” June 13, 2016. http://www.politico.com/story/2016/06/hillary-clinton-national-security-224267

[3] These provisions were in the Senate-passed bipartisan immigration reform bill. Third Way, “How Tough is the Senate’s Immigration Bill?” http://s3.amazonaws.com/content.thirdway.org/publishing/attachments/files/000/000/057/How_Tough_is_the_Senates_Immigration_Bill_.pdf?1412360146

[4] The Guardian, “Twitter deletes 125,000 ISIS accounts and expands anti-terror teams.” February 5, 2016. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/05/twitter-deletes-isis-accounts-terrorism-online

[5] ABC News, “ISIS has whole fake passport ‘industry’,’ official says.” January 25, 2016. http://abcnews.go.com/International/isis-fake-passport-industry-official/story?id=36505984

[6] GWU, “ISIS in America.” December 2015. https://cchs.gwu.edu/sites/cchs.gwu.edu/files/downloads/ISIS%20in%20America%20-%20Full%20Report_0.pdf