About Us: Democracy Fund
Kierna Mayo

Kierna Mayo is the Senior Vice President of Lifestyle Content + Brands at iOne Digital, Inc. A veteran culture writer/editor and brand architect, Mayo has been recognized by Folio, The Root, and the NAACP among others as a modern media trailblazer.

Mayo’s editorial career began in the early 1990s as an editor at The Source magazine. With cultural criticism as her foundation, she went on to become an urban affairs reporter at the NYC award-winning publication, City Limits. Soon after, Mayo and a creative partner pitched the concept for Honey magazine to publishers—and in 1998, the brand launched to critical acclaim at Harris Publications. New York Magazine opined, “Honey feels right on time.”

As Honey founding Editor-in-Chief, Mayo fostered an uncharted visibility for millions of young, multicultural women of the hip-hop generation—and a name for herself as a journalistic maverick and formidable media brand creator.

In 2000, Mayo joined the digital “1.0” content wave and developed LikePepper.com, with early digital player Urban Box Office. In the years following, she stacked deeper publishing experience: Mayo was tapped to reimagine Essence Girl, a special interest publication for teens. A four-year foray at Hearst Magazines followed: named Cosmogirl, Senior Editor, Mayo also served as a founding member of the Hearst Magazines Diversity Council.

Post-Hearst, Mayo consulted on multimedia projects for BET Networks and became a popular staff writer for CafeMom.com, a general-market parenting site. By 2009, Mayo was chosen by model and mogul Tyra Banks to be Editorial Director of her daily platform, TYRA.com.

As a veteran culture writer, Mayo has penned provocative commentary, articles, and cover stories for several national publications including Essence, Marie Claire, Glamour, Seventeen, Vibe, Uptown, and many digital outlets. Her early writings are oft-referenced and excerpted in academic and commercial text including the seminal “And It Don’t Stop: The Best American Hip Hop Journalism of the Last 25 Years.”

In 2011, Mayo became Editorial Director of EBONY.com, soon after garnering a Min/Folio “Best of the Web” honorable mention. The impressive reintroduction of the venerable brand to a millennial audience led to her quick ascension to EBONY Editor in Chief. During Mayo’s reign, she was heralded for noteworthy covers that created a swell of new interest in the 70-year-old title. Chicago Magazine called her EBONY creations “bold and confrontational.”

Throughout Mayo’s two-decade career, she has most notably helped to launch numerous media careers of other people of color. She is the recipient of the “Veteran Award for Extraordinary Leadership and Lasting Contribution in Media” from Women in Media Meet Up, and of distinguished honors from the ROOT 100, NAACP, GLAAD and others.

Mayo currently serves on the American Heart Association, Diversity Leadership Committee, and she is a founding member of the Kennedy Center Hip Hop Culture Council.

Mayo can be frequently seen on CNN Tonight with Don Lemon and has appeared on numerous radio, podcasts and cable TV shows. She has been an invited guest speaker at colleges and universities including NYU, Harvard, Howard, Wellesley and Syracuse. A graduate of Hampton University with a B.A. in Mass Media Arts, Mayo is a recent recipient of the school’s Esteemed Alumna Trailblazer Award for Digital and Print Media. A Brooklyn native, Mayo now resides in Long Island, NY with her husband and two sons.