President Trump knocks New York, Cuomo and Attorney General James over NRA fight
CLOSE Assemblyman David Buchwald, D-White Plains, and Sen. Brad Hoylman, D-Manhattan, have legislation in New York that would make the state tax department release President Donald Trump's taxes. They spoke during a news conference on Monday, April 8, 2019, at the state Capitol. Joseph Spector, Albany Bureau Chief

ALBANY – President Donald Trump on Monday criticized New York's leaders for targeting the National Rifle Association, but also warned the group to "get its act together quickly."

On Twitter, Trump also continued to knock his home state, saying "People are fleeing New York State because of high taxes and yes, even oppression of sorts. They didn’t even put up a fight against SALT - could have won."

Trump was referring to Gov. Andrew Cuomo's ongoing criticism of the federal tax reform approved in 2017 that limits state and local tax deductions, known as SALT, to $10,000 a year — a move that mainly hurts wealthy New York homeowners.

"So much litigation," Trump continued. "The NRA should leave and fight from the outside of this very difficult to deal with (unfair) State!"

Lawsuit against NRA in New York

President Donald Trump at the National Rifle Association convention Friday in Indianapolis. (Photo: Jenna Watson/IndyStar, IndyStar-USA TODAY NETWORK)

On Friday, Attorney General Letitia James's office confirmed it opened an investigation into the NRA's tax-exempt status.

On Saturday, the NRA's president Oliver North announced he would not serve a second term amid turmoil in the organization.

"The NRA is under siege by Cuomo and the New York State A.G., who are illegally using the State’s legal apparatus to take down and destroy this very important organization, & others," Trump said in the first of two tweets on the issue Monday morning.

"It must get its act together quickly, stop the internal fighting, & get back to GREATNESS - FAST!"

The New York Times reported that James sent letters to the NRA and its charitable foundation to preserve its financial records.

New York has jurisdiction over the NRA because it was chartered in the state in 1871.

"Attorney General Letitia James is focused on enforcing the rule of law," her office responded Monday on Twitter. "In any case we pursue, we will follow the facts wherever they may lead. We wish the President would share our respect for the law."

More: Trump tax returns: How New York Democrats think they have a new way to obtain them

NRA and New York

The NRA is under siege by Cuomo and the New York State A.G., who are illegally using the State’s legal apparatus to take down and destroy this very important organization, & others. It must get its act together quickly, stop the internal fighting, & get back to GREATNESS - FAST! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) April 29, 2019

The fight with the NRA is the latest in New York.

Cuomo's administration is looking to end an insurance policy run by the NRA, called "Carry Guard." The case is in court.

Cuomo, a Democrat, has long fought with the NRA, and New York passed a series of gun-control laws in 2013 in the wake of the Newtown, Conn., school shootings.

Earlier this year, Cuomo and the Democratic-led Legislature passed another round of gun laws, such as banning bump stocks and allow people to seek a court order to ban dangerous people from having guns.

On Monday, Cuomo responded to Trump's tweets by saying since the Newtown shootings, there have been 2,029 mass shootings in the nation.

Cuomo said that since Trump took office in 2017, there have been 74,600 gun-violence deaths, saying in a statement, "You have done nothing but tweet about it."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-790-9565. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"The only thing illegal is the gun lobby's insurance scheme," Cuomo said.

"Unlike you, President Trump, New York is not afraid to stand up to the NRA. I will continue to fight for the children of this state. As for the NRA, we'll remember them in our thoughts and prayers."

More: President Trump raises abortion, fracking issues during tax talk with Andrew Cuomo

More: What's next for the NRA? Subpoenas, investigations and leadership turmoil

Trump and Cuomo

....People are fleeing New York State because of high taxes and yes, even oppression of sorts. They didn’t even put up a fight against SALT - could have won. So much litigation. The NRA should leave and fight from the outside of this very difficult to deal with (unfair) State! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) April 29, 2019

Trump met with Cuomo at the White House in February to discuss the impact of the tax reforms on New York, but no resolution was reached.

Trump has repeatedly criticized his home state for its sagging upstate economy.

"I love those people," he said in February. "Those people are my voters. They’ve been treated very badly."

He added: "If New York isn’t gonna treat them better, I would recommend they go to another state where they can get a great job."

New York Democrats, meanwhile, are fighting Trump on several fronts, including trying to get a law passed that would require the release of his state taxes to Congress.

Cuomo has been a regular critic of the Republican president, too.

"Nobody makes the anti-Trump case better than Trump. Just let Trump talk, and let Trump act, and let Trump divide," Cuomo said March 26 on WNYC radio.

Cuomo responds to Trump’s latest tweets:



"Unlike you, President Trump, New York is not afraid to stand up to the NRA...



"As for the NRA, we'll remember them in our thoughts and prayers.” https://t.co/XZMWAYwocypic.twitter.com/13yAYqRxh9 — Joseph Spector (@GannettAlbany) April 29, 2019

More: President Trump (again) to upstate New Yorkers: Consider leaving

More: The Simpsons sang a song about upstate New York. It wasn't pretty.

Read or Share this story: https://www.democratandchronicle.com/story/news/politics/albany/2019/04/29/president-trump-knocks-new-york-cuomo-and-agl-tish-james-over-nra/3615281002/