Democrats.org
WASHINGTON – Today the Democratic National Committee announced it raised nearly $7 million, including nearly $1 million from the Democratic Grassroots Victory Fund, in January. The total represents a 40% increase over last January’s total and is the DNC’s best January since Barack Obama’s re-election campaign in 2012.

Not only is last month’s haul more than the DNC raised in the past five Januaries, it’s more than the organization raised in January 2006 and January 2008, both of which were major Democratic wave election years.

The DNC also finished the month of January with more cash on hand than it had at the same point in 2016 and 2014.

“Democrats are winning again because of the strong grassroots support of Democratic donors across the country,” said DNC Chair Tom Perez. “We’ve demonstrated that when we invest early and organize everywhere, we win elections. 2017 was just the beginning. With so many pickup opportunities in 2018, the Democratic Party is in a strong position to scale up our organizing efforts to compete and win in every ZIP Code.”

January’s total includes the best cash haul to date under Chairman Tom Perez, who recently named Clayton Cox as the DNC’s new National Finance Director. The DNC’s fundraising operation has produced an uptick in recent months as DNC investments helped usher in sweeping Democratic wins from Virginia to New Jersey to Alabama to numerous other state and local elections across the country.

Strong grassroots fundraising continues to power the DNC. January saw the biggest day of online fundraising since the days following Donald Trump’s inauguration and his administration’s attempted implementation of the Muslim ban. Nearly 6 in 10 contributions came from grassroots donors and the DNC’s average contribution was $52.06.

This continues strong grassroots trends that began in 2017, which saw the DNC’s best “off year” fundraising performance in years. Throughout 2017, nearly two-thirds of contributions to the DNC came from grassroots donors.

Consistent support from grassroots donors provided the DNC with the resources necessary to compete and win in 2017. From Resistance Summer, to unprecedented investments in state parties, to targeted investments in races up and down the ballot, the generous contributions of grassroots donors have powered Democrats to wins across the country. Their support continues to lead Democrats to victory in 2018.