Hickenlooper’s criticism of higher fees isn’t in line with his budget for Denver
Denver Mayor John Hickenlooper said Thursday that it’s “crazy” to raise fees or taxes when government revenues are down, but his 2010 budget raised fees and fines in the city by at least $5.1 million annually.

The increases, which were more modest than others had urged, addressed areas where revenues had remained static for years, Hickenlooper said at the time.

The mayor, who is seeking the Democratic nomination in this year’s governor’s race, was too busy Friday to respond to requests for interviews, his staff said.

Budget officials said previously that the fee increases covered the cost of doing businesses. The extra fines will provide an incentive to bring people into compliance, they say. Those measures, and their estimated annual revenues:

• A new fee charging businesses $50 every two years to process the city’s occupational privilege tax ($1.4 million).

• Increasing from $25 to $75 the fine for drivers who fail to register their cars ($1 million).

• A yet-to-be-determined fee from firms that do mass Web record searches of Denver’s court information ($1 million).

• A yet-to-be-determined fee charged of people visiting Denver from elsewhere for medical response should they get in an accident ($1 million).

• An increase in the registration fee for sales tax licenses from $25 to $50 every two years ($500,000).

• A processing fee for DUI arrests ($200,000).

The subject of fees came up Thursday as Hickenlooper appeared before the South Metro Chamber of Commerce.

He said that when Denver’s revenues plunged in 2008 and in 2009 at a pace only exceeded during the Depression, he rejected revenue hikes as the solution. He said he thought calls to put in place new fees for trash collection were “crazy.”

Earlier Thursday, in an appearance on the talk radio show of Mike Rosen, he said he instructed his budget writers to be prudent with increases.

“Our instructions to the budget folks last year were to only raise fees on those places where the cost, you know, hadn’t been raised in years, and they weren’t looking at it as a revenue source,” Hickenlooper said.

The $5.1 million in new fees and fines was one strategy the mayor employed to cover a $160 million budget gap. He also tapped $40 million in reserves.

His budget slashed personnel costs by $23.3 million, triggering layoffs of city workers and delaying scheduled raises for safety workers. The budget also saved another $75.7 million by streamlining city operations. His administration is covering the rest of the shortfall through new grants and by charging other jurisdictions to house prisoners at a new jail.

The mayor told a radio caller he thinks the city’s occupational privilege tax isn’t the best way to raise money.

“The occupational privilege tax, just between you and me, off the record, it’s always seemed kind of a wrongheaded tax anyway because we’re trying to encourage businesses to come here, and we want them to grow, and yet the more employees they have, we’re only penalizing them,” Hickenlooper said.

The tax, enacted in 1969 and last raised in 1988, charges $5.75 per month per employee in Denver who is paid more than $500 a month. Businesses also pay $4 a month for each taxable staffer.

The tax raises an estimated $40 million annually.

The caller said he was self-employed and objected to the new processing fee, which costs more than the $48 in tax he will have to pay.

City budget officials have said the new fees will cover processing costs and prevent cuts in service elsewhere.

“It does seem crazy that you would have to pay a fee for just turning in yourself,” the mayor told the caller. “Give me a month. Let me go look at that, and if that’s the case, let me see if I can get some sort of exemption, because that’s crazy.”

Sabrina D’Agosta, a spokeswoman for the mayor, said he told staff to look at possible adjustments to the fee.