Emotions run hot over artifact raids in Utah
BLANDING, Utah — This small Four Corners community prides itself on being a law-abiding, church and family-oriented, patriotic throwback to more innocent times. So the Fourth of July is a gala of parades, prayers and pyrotechnics where sparkling apple cider is the strongest celebratory beverage.

But this year, the festivities had an angry edge.

Mayor Toni Turk opened with a prayer that included beseeching God to keep Blanding citizens free from unreasonable searches and seizures. The annual melodrama incorporated lyrics about recent raids and seizures of ancient artifacts from Blanding homes. “Legalize Pot” T-shirts, emblazoned with images of ancient ceramic pots, sold out quickly.

Blanding is in an uncharacteristic uproar because the Ancestral Puebloan artifacts that abundantly litter this area — and which have been collected by generations of residents — have become the stuff of nightmares.

In a federal raid last month, more than 150 armed agents pounded on doors around town at dawn and rousted 16 residents. They had allegedly looted artifacts such as pipes, jewelry, stone knives and woven sandals and sold them to an undercover informant.

Those snared in the sting ranged from convicted drug users to some of the town’s most upstanding citizens. They were taken to Moab and charged, some with as many as four or five felonies, and all of them with at least one felony — violation of the antiquities act.

One of those charged was Harold Lyman, 78, the town founder’s grandson. A week before the raids, he was inducted into the Utah Tourism Hall of Fame. Another was a physician, Dr. James Redd. He killed himself a day after the raids. A week later, another of the raid’s defendants, a man from Santa Fe, committed suicide.

Those arrested the morning of June 10 told friends and relatives that they had opened doors to the barrels of automatic weapons. There were at least eight to 10 armed agents per home.

Winston Hurst, a private archeologist in Blanding, said “they put them in leg chains and shuffled them off to jail like they were Saddam Hussein.”

The U.S. Department of Justice has defended the strong show of force, saying many of those arrested were known to have guns. One had made a statement to the informant that he would shoot rather than go to jail.

A tradition of treasure hunts

This acrimonious storm over old pots and stone knives would have been unthinkable when Mormon pioneers struggled across the jagged canyons that are now Lake Powell to reach this arid land. It was littered with the artifacts of everyday life, abandoned by the Ancestral Puebloans who mysteriously disappeared from the area 700 years ago.

Some of the pioneers collected items. But there were — and still are — so many ruins and artifacts that often, they were simply plowed under or discarded.

Every rain turns over new items, and residents say they can’t add a carport or string a fence line without encountering kiva walls or unearthing baskets and pots.

The 1906 Antiquities Law attempted to preserve such ruins by putting protections on artifact-strewn public lands, but there are many reasons the anti-looting laws had little impact. Blanding residents say their ancestors were paid by museums to find artifacts.

Ted Black said his mother’s family used the abundant ancient pottery as its dishware. He said practically every home in Blanding now has china-hutch and mantle displays of artifacts, many of them handed down and others collected during the common practice of Sunday after-church “treasure hunt” outings.

“I’m proud of my little collection,” said Blanding resident Wendy Bunting, who still goes out looking for surface pottery pieces and arrowheads.

In 1979, the Archeological Resources Protection Act added penalties of jail time and fines for taking artifacts from public and tribal lands.

And many residents say they believe looting and selling artifacts, particularly from graves, is wrong.

But in San Juan County, where unemployment stands at 10 percent and the per-capita income is $14,000, the taking of artifacts for commercial gain has continued and helped to fuel a thriving trade in artifacts, including on eBay.

There are also inconsistencies in the handling of artifacts that add to ambivalence about the laws. The Bureau of Land Management has been known to smash pots and rock objects when there was no place to store them. And BLM and U.S. Forest Service agents were implicated in one of the recent search-warrant affidavits for taking and selling items themselves — an allegation the U.S. attorney’s office won’t comment on.

San Juan County Sheriff Mike Lacy said he has tried in the past to get BLM agents to investigate artifacts he found in the course of drug arrests. But those things are still sitting in his evidence locker.

Locals also express frustration that archeologists dig up artifacts that go into boxes at the University of Utah or to the Smithsonian Institution and are thus lost to local history.

Blanding’s Edge of the Cedars Museum is trying to educate people about why they shouldn’t pick up those items. The museum, which houses an estimated million artifacts confiscated from looters or donated by collectors, has a front room dedicated to explaining the laws and the reasons why, once items are removed without detailed archeological study, they lose their scientific context.

A fight for more education

There are glimmers that the message is getting out. Boy Scouts who hold an annual summer camp in Blanding traditionally have dug up planted artifacts to earn their archeology merit badges. Camp director Jed Tate nixed that practice a week after the raids. The Scouts instead gathered in the museum with archeologists to learn about identifying, cataloguing and dating artifacts.

“We have taken a different approach. We don’t want to send the wrong message to anybody,” Tate said.

San Juan County Commissioner Bruce Adams said much more education needs to be done and more opportunities need to be created for people to see artifacts in their natural state rather than under museum glass.

“People want to be out in the landscape. They don’t want to be inside getting lectured,” Adams said.

But he said the BLM has been slow to act on any proposals to open up areas for interpretative views of artifacts in their natural state. Adams, along with many others in Blanding, say the recent raids have set back anti-looting lessons.

Sheriff Lacy said that is because the treatment of those arrested, including one of his brothers, was “appalling.”

“I could have gone out and handed summonses to those folks without any guns being drawn,” Lacy said.

Lacy is investigating the raids and is turning over his findings to Utah’s Republican senators and congressional representatives, who have been asking for justifications for the heavy use of force. They are also calling Interior Secretary Ken Salazar to task. He flew to Salt Lake City to announce the raids.

“I have to deal with the aftermath of all this now,” Lacy said. “I have people in the county afraid of having anything to do with the BLM.

“And I have a lot of anger out there.”

Nancy Lofholm: 970-256-1957 or nlofholm@denverpost.com