Two days after Trump claims wind farms cause cancer, Iowa leaders push for more wind energy investment in the state
CLOSE President Donald Trump, while speaking at a rally in Cedar Rapids on June 21, 2017, shared his views on wind energy. Register file video

Gov. Kim Reynolds and Iowa business leaders announced a renewed push to expand wind energy in the state Thursday, two days after President Donald Trump bashed wind power and suggested there's a link between the noise from turbines and cancer.

Reynolds applauded the state as a "renewable energy powerhouse" and outlined the need for continued wind energy growth during the news conference to introduce Power Up Iowa, a coalition of state and community leaders that will push for government policies that grow investment in wind energy.

While Reynolds did not address the president's comments, others took the opportunity to challenge Trump's claims directly.

"The research clearly shows that what the president said yesterday is not accurate," said Jay Byers, CEO of the Greater Des Moines Partnership. His comment drew a round of applause from those in attendance.

Iowa Gov. Kim Reynolds speaks at a press conference Thursday announcing Power Up Iowa, a coalition of leaders advocating for policies to grow wind energy in Iowa. (Photo: Special to the Register)

Speaking at a National Republican Congressional Committee dinner Tuesday, the president attacked wind turbines, calling them a "graveyard for birds" and saying they lower property values.

"And they say the noise causes cancer," Trump told NRCC members.

Sen. Charles Grassley on Wednesday called Trump's cancer claim "idiotic."

Reynolds on Wednesday addressed the president's remarks with reporters by touting the positive role wind energy plays in the state, but declined to say whether she thinks wind turbines can cause cancer.

"That's not my place," she said.

There's no evidence to suggest cancer and wind farms are linked.

► Do wind farms cause cancer? Some claims Trump made about the industry are just hot air

Reynolds and Lt. Gov. Adam Gregg did not take reporters' questions during Thursday's news conference at the Des Moines Area Community College's Ankeny campus.

Reynolds trumpeted Iowa's leadership in wind energy and the desire to push for more opportunities and workers in the growing field.

Iowa generated nearly 37 percent of its energy from wind in 2017, leading all states, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. It ranks second only to Texas in the amount of wind power installed.

Reynolds said the industry employs between 7,000 and 8,000 Iowans, adding the state's approach to affordable renewable energy has played a role in attracting tech companies like Facebook, Apple, Google and Microsoft.

"Iowans are certain about wind energy and wind power," said Dan Culhane, president and CEO of the Ames Chamber of Commerce.

► Previously: Wind turbine technicians are hard to find. With rising pay and a thriving Iowa future, they shouldn't be.

► Real news, brought to you by real Iowans. Support our local journalists.

Power Up Iowa is an initiative of the American Wind Energy Association. The governor's office said its goal is to educate and raise awareness to push for continued growth in wind power.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The coalition includes more than 60 leaders in the wind industry, business, education and local government sectors.

Others who spoke Thursday included Matthew Sexton, Facebook's community development and regional manager, and Scott Ocken, DMACC's vice president of academic affairs and dean of industry and technology.

Read or Share this story: https://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/news/2019/04/04/trump-wind-energy-turbines-cancer-iowa-power-up/3364738002/