Luke Thomas Hoyer Obituary
Memories Luke Thomas Hoyer

Bridgette Beinecke Dearest Family, Friends and Classmates of Luke Hoyer.

This Saturday I will be holding a poster with a picture of Luke as I march with all those who are coming together in Austin, Texas to seek the end of gun violence.

I am joining a group of my friends who are part of Buddist Action Now. I will be walking in silence in order for people to see Luke rather than me. I will be holding this poster with the greatest respect for Luke and for each of you.



I do not want to do anything that would increase your pain. If you would prefer that I not use his photo, please feel free to post your preference on this site and I will check back before Saturday morning. The photo is the one used by the press to identify him.



As a parent of two adult sons, I can only imagine the depth of your grieving. Please know that I am holding you compassionately in my heart and mind.

Luke's spirit inspires my resolve to do my part in preventing such a deep loss and expressing the need for a change in the gun laws.



After the June 2015 shooting at the Emmanuel AME Church, I sent a Haiku poem to dear friends and the citizens of Charleston S.C. I am writing a new one to put beneath Luke's photo. Here is the one for Charleston.



prayer vigil

hearts swarming

seeking infinite peace



With a bouquet of MENTAL HUGS,

Bridgette B.







Amber DeFord I knew Luke. There was a time where I talked to him every single day but more recently it was only every once in a while. No one who knows him personally knows who I am because I met him online about 2 years ago. When I saw his face and heard his name on that list I cried for days without stopping. I have started to be involved in the efforts for gun control in my state. I miss talking to him, I wish I could have said more. I hope that no one ever has to go through the loss of a friend or a loved one due to a shooting ever again.

Camille Marro My heart hurts everyday. I wish I could reverse this for your family. I pray everyday for you and keep Luke in my thoughts. I know he is around you still shining his light and beauty. My prayers are with your family.

Christian Touhey We will never forget you Luke.

May God bless you and your family in this time of sorrow. R.I.P. Luke

Josie Little My deepest condolences to your family and your son, Luke. I am a freshman myself, and share the same birthday as Luke. I can’t imagine what this pain is like, to lose a child. I am deeply sorry for your loss. You are in my thoughts and prayers, and now every single year of my birthday, which is on October 25, Luke will forever be in my heart. I remember when I talked to Luke on instagram, and he was being so sweet. He will forever live on and so will all the other 16 victims of the Florida shooting. RIP Luke Thomas Hoyer. I will never forget the day we started talking and became friends. You will be missed by not only by hundreds, but by thousands, and millions. Rest In Peace, Luke. Your legacy will live on forever. You will be missed.😞😞😢😢❤️❤️

Tangela S My deepest condolences to the family of Luke Hoyer. May the precious memories of the time spent together with your son, brother, grandson and cousin help ease the pain of your loss. Take comfort knowing that in the near future, tragedies like the one that ended the life of Luke too soon, will be no more. Psalms 37:10 & 11

Barb, Alan, Matthew and David Rosenbaum Gena and Tom , Abby and Jake, we were horrified to realize that you lost Luke in this senseless act of terror. Our hearts and prayers go out to you as you mourn and know that we are thinking of you all at this time .

LC May the love of friends and family carry you through your grief.Praying for all of you.

C W I'm sorry for your loss. Please accept my condolences, hope you are comforted by this few words. you will be able to see Luke again.(ACt 24:15) I will keep the whole family in my prayers.

LOAD MORE

The White Fmily It's a horrible thing to lose a loved one in death. Especially when it seems so senseless. Please know that you are not alone in your feelings. Even our Heavenly Father is feeling the pain. May he be a constant part of your daily routine, through heartfelt prayer, he is ready and willing to listen. May the constant love of our caring God, your family, and friends help to soften your sadness. Please know that you are in our prayers. Mia Thompson My deepest sadness to the Hoyer family. Things like these should never be able to take place Lynne Bedenbaugh Prayers for our entire family. May God comfort in the following day. I love you Tom, Gena, Abby and Jake. Sheryl Brown I am so so sorry for the senseless loss of your dear heart son Luke. I can't imagine what you guys are going through right now, but I will tell you this. He's with God now. No more pain, and no more suffering. God took all of that away. Please find comfort and peace from that. God bless you guys, and the country mourns with you. I have a son. I can't fathom what you guys are going through. Please draw strength from one another in the days to come.



God bless you! Monique Vetrano My deepest sympathy to your family. I will always keep your beautiful son in my heart and prayers. Kathe My heart and prayers go out to the family of Luke. Such a tragic loss of life of one taken so young. I will continue to pray for peace in your hearts, timely healing for your souls, mercy for the days that seem unbearably difficult and for the love and support to surround you in the moments when you feel overwhelmed with sadness and emptiness with the loss of Luke. Just breath, take one day at a time ... embrace the precious memories of your dear Luke. (Jeremiah 29:11) Pray for a new tomorrow when life will not be burdened with senseless tragedies such as this but all will live in peaceful unity. Jen Verstandig Luke God rest your soul. I will be your voice u will never be forgotten. You remind me of my son. I eill never forget you. JOY HUGGETT My heart goes out to you and your family at this difficult time Doreen Dudley I'm so sorry for your loss. May God wrap you in his arms with comfort and love during this time. I know words can't explain how you are feeling but know that you are in my prayers during this difficult time. Love and peace to all.

From Fallston, Maryland Louisa Cruz-Acosta YOUR LIGHT Will shine on forever, we honor and miss you.

LOAD MORE

kimmie mcgowan this should never have happened so sorry but u r with god & jesus he saw u getting tired he reached out his hand & said u need 2 come home now u r at peace now hun The DiMario Family We will remember. Always. We will honor you, Luke, and your family, every day in our words and actions. It will never be enough but it will be done with Love. Sincere condolences to the family for your loss. May God comfort you during this difficult. ....will continue to keep Luke and your loving family in my prayers...Leslie Belford Liz Pittinger Gina, My sincerest condolences go to you and your entire family. My flesh and my heart may fail, but God is the strength of my heart and portion forever. Psalm 73:26 Brooke Ellison We never met but you have been on my mind day and night non stop and well as the other innocent lives that were took and i love you so much.Rest Easy Luke.❤My thought and prayers to your family. #NeverAgain Denise Williams Like so many others on that day, you left this Earth so early, part of the youngest generation. You carry more

than you were ever aware, Luke; billions in your wake. We will strive to make you proud. God bless.

Bridget Taylor Take comfort in knowing that now you have a special guardian angel to watch over you. Timm Becker Brandhorst Tom, Joan and family, I am so sorry for your loss. Luke's photo looks so much like you at that age, Tom... You are in our thoughts AND actions as we push to make a positive change in our laws. Remember: the ones we love live on in our hearts forever. Dina Belafqih Rest in peace Luke, heaven has gained another angel. I hope you are in a better place.

LOAD MORE

Amanda Annen My thoughts and prayers are with you all during this difficult time. My heartfelt condolences go out to you for the tragic loss of your son. It is my prayer that the God of all comfort calm your heart and bring you solace. ~Patricia Minnesota

Morgan Waibel im so very sorry for your loss. may God be with you during this difficult time :( Alex Harris So very sorry to hear about this terrible loss. My thoughts and prayers go out to your family. May he rest in peace. Allison Rains Coach So very sorry for your loss. No parent should have to endure what you've endured. Will continue to keep you in my prayers. Anderen Cooper With Love and regards to you and your Family Luke. I hope and pray god finds you and buys you lots of donuts, rest in pieces brother. Darlene Stone My prayers to this young mans' family and friends. I am so very sorry for your loss. May God give peace and comfort today and in days ahead. Fredna Hughes Gena, my thoughts and prayers are with you and your family. My heart is so broken for you. I love you always. I love you, Luke. I never met you but, I love you and many more people love you too. I wish I was there so I could have protected you. I wish I could have held your hand. I love you, RIP. From someone who just lost my daughter (from cancer) there are no words. My heart goes out to you and your family. Enough is Enough. No More Guns. May he RIP.

Estelle Rattner, Mount Laurel, NJ

LOAD MORE

Kaitlyn I never met you, but you're always on my mind. When I go to sleep, when I wake up, and when I do daily things. I never met you, but I wish I was there to have tried and protect you. I wish I was there to hold your hand and remind you how loved and how much worth you have. I would do anything to go back to last Wednesday and be able to protect. I am 17 years old and I promise that I will NEVER forget you. I promise that we will not stay quiet. I never met you, but I will let you live through me. I hate chicken nuggets, but every year on your birthday, I will eat chicken nuggets for you. I never met you, but I love you. SO many people have never met you, but they love you. Petria Boutin My heart aches for the loss of your beautiful son. Our thoughts and prayers are with you and your family. Jason Roth Our thoughts and prayers are with your family and all those affected by this tragedy. We offer our sincere condolences to Tom, Gena, Abby and Jake as they find a way through this dark chapter of their lives. Rest well Luke, you are loved and will always be remembered. "We lifted your name up in prayers at Westover United Methodist Church. May Gods' loving arms hold you all dear." Phyllis Danskin, Raleigh, NC Judie Volpe There are no words to express how heavy my heart is for your loss. You are in my thoughts and prayers. Debbie Williams Gena

I am so sorry for the unimaginable pain you and your family are going through. Your Lukey Bear is such a cutie and I can tell by that sweet face that he was a good person too, just like his mama. Sending my love and prayers....may God give you peace and comfort xoxo Nadine Nicolas Tom, Gena, Abby and Jake,

We share your grief during this somber time. There is no pain more far-reaching and deeper than loosing a child. May God's Love heal your broken hearts and replace your heartache with loving memories of your precious Luke.

With our deepest, heartfelt condolences,

Dr Nadine Nicolas and staff

M Connell In our thoughts and prayers forever. Kelly Brown May God continue to heal you all. My heart is aching right now. I pray you find comfort in the upcoming days. Jessica Wallace Take comfort in knowing that now you have a special guardian angel to watch over you.

LOAD MORE

Cathy Cox I am so, so sorry for your loss. My heart goes out to you and your family. May you find some peace and love in your hearts in time. Wendy Hood Neufeld To the Hoyer Family,



I am holding you in the light, during this difficult time. Darlene Sanders Gena I am so sorry for your loss of Luke! He was a very handsome young man! My heart breaks for you as a mother and for your husband and family! I cant imagine what your going through. But I know we have a God in Heaven who does know and hes there to comfort and give you peace in knowing that Luke is with him and looking down and saying mom its ok because Hes in a safe place and being taken good care of! I know the days ahead will be tough and I pray God wraps his arms around you All and gives you the strength to carry on . Remember one thing, Luke may not be standing in front of you But Hes Always in your Heart ❤ Steve and I are lifting you all up in our prayers ! Laticia Brown I'm so sorry for your loss, as a parent I know this is a difficult time for you. I will continue to keep your family in prayer. Omaira Salazar The pain and sorrow we have for everyone of this students is unbearable, we are sending you our prayers,may the time heal all of you. Mike Udermann Heartfelt condolences on the loss of your son. I work for Jim Tucker and Luke's death has left a deep void in our world. Sandy Foster Mr. & Mrs. Hoyer I am so sorry for your loss of Luke after seeing the pictures of the children I want you to know I will never see another head of curly hair that I will not remember Luke your handsome beautiful curly headed son.

I will remember! God Bless. Lucy Muench May God strengthen and carry your family in this time of sorrow. My heartfelt sympathy is with you. I am so sorry. I have joined the fight against this, along with the rest of the United States. Your Son and Community WILL NOT go forgotten! We will fight for the safety of all Children! My God be with you in this time of need!



Prays from my students in Tulum, Mexico Sharon Parsons you will be missed by all

LOAD MORE

Donna Dixon God Bless You and all of Luke's family. It should never have happened. You're in my prayers. I will do my very best to make sure we get MEN in our Government to make new gun laws. The Brown family Rest among the Angels John Walden My heart truly breaks for the pain your family is going through. My deepest condolences to everyone who loved this special young man, and all those so deeply affected by this tragedy. L T As the days and weeks pass, and as you return to life's routine, may you continue to feel comforted by the love and support of family and friends. Cali Tans May light and love full your hearts at this time of sadness. His legacy will live on in millions of hearts across the globe. Bev Cannon Gena, I am so sorry for the loss of Luke. My heart is so very heavy for you and your family. You are in my thoughts and prayers. I am Walt Cannon's older sister. Our family is praying for you. Paul Abry My love and prayers go out to all of you. May we all have the resolution to stop this madness. Love, Brigida Peddicord Rest In Peace. Prayers for the family The Neal Family Our hearts are breaking for you and your family. Please know you are in the thoughts and prayers of many during this horrible time. May God grant you much strength during this horrific time. God Bless ! ❤ Tiffany Red I am so sorry for your loss. May the Lord Jesus comfort, keep, cover & be with you and your family during this very difficult time in your lives. I have a child myself, 17 y/o and I deeply hurt and empathize with you all. I am so so hurt and my prayers are with you.



Tiffany

LOAD MORE

Phil Ford Gena and Family,

Your old friends and neighbors from Cross Roads and Five Forks have been praying for you.

JESUS said,"Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden,and I will give you rest." and "Blessed are they that mourn:for they shall be comforted." Bob Harwell Tom, Gena, Abby, and Jake, words cannot express my sympathy for your loss. I will continue to pray for each one of you and ask for God's healing and help in the days to come. I never met Luke but he looked like a great young man. May peace be with all of you! Brenda Johnson My deepest sympathy goes out to each of you in this times of loss. I pray that God will give each of you comfort and strength knowing that His embrace will carry you through this time. Lean on Him. God has big shoulders. He will carry you through this. Love you all. Nadine Griffith-Kelly Gena, my heart is absolutely broken for you & your family! Im at a loss for words & i know there's no words that can take away your pain right now. Just hold on to Jesus & let Him carry you thru! Please get in touch with me, when you feel like talking, venting or just someone to listen! (864) 561-3239 Please know y'all are & will continue to be in my prayers & i love you! monica mylonopoulou I am so sorry for the tragedy that stroke your family. I will not say I understand , cause who does , have they not been through something similar... But , I do want to send to you and your son all the love I can possibly send... Again , I am terribly sorry... Debbie Rickman So very sorry for your loss. I too am from Louisville, CO. Your son is amazing and will continue to be with you always. My thoughts and prayers are with you. Rhonda Patterson Bates My heart is broken for you guys!! I pray God will wrap his arms around you and comfort you through this extremely difficult time in your life. I pray you feel the love and support from everyone around you !! Jim, Karen & Austin Hannon Tom, Gena, Abby, Jake and all the Hoyer & Stroud families,

I can't even find words to write here. Our hearts cry in deepest sorrow for the loss of Luke. You all are the the sweetest, kindest friends I've ever known and this is just unbelievable.

We love you and we are so sorry for your loss. We pray that someday your pain will be less, but your sweet memories with Luke will be vivid.

All our love,

Jim, Karen, and Austin COURTNEY SANCHEZ My deepest condolences for your family on this day. I see his smile and hear the words spoken on what a happy child he was.. and I know he was taken way too soon ... DEBORAH GIPSON Please accept my condolence, may the God's of all comfort make your grief bearable , letting you Know we all feel your pain and can sympathize with you.

LOAD MORE

What a handsome boy. Our hearts break for you and your family. May love and light surround you during the difficut days ahead. We will fight along with you so this tragedy does not happen to another family. Washington Family Prayers and deepest condolences from my family to yours. Jenny Soto Tom, My heartfelt condolences; you and your family are in my prayers. Andrea Cacciatore So very sorry for your horrific lost. Those here in New Jersey are praying for all the families affected by this tradey and hope that through family and friends' strength and support that you will find comfort at some point May the love of friends, and family carry you through your grief. Greg Galloway Gena

My thoughts and prayers are with you and your family. May God comfort you during this most tragic time.

Greg Galloway Ellinor Andersen I'm deeply saddened by the news of your loss.

My most sincered condolences❤❤ Darlene Stone I am so very sorry for your loss. My God give peace and comfort during these most difficult days and days ahead. In my prayers. Ellen Supnick So very sorry for your loss, there aren't enough words to say to comfort you. He looked like like a fine young man. So sorry again, Ellen Supnick Kathy Russell-Sullivan My heart breaks for your family, may God hold you all in his arms for strength and comfort.

LOAD MORE

Patricia Fulton-Lawr My heart is broken. I am so very sorry for the loss of your special boy. May God hold him close in his arms and welcome him home. May his memories live with all of you in the stories and love you share. Linda and Rudy Slavec We are so sorry for the of your son Luke. Our thought and prayers are with you and your family.



Linda and Rudy Slavec

Denver, CO Becky Durham So very sorry for your loss your family will be in my thoughts and prayers Mickey @Nancy Poag Our hearts are broken. May the lord keep you in his arms Steve Rattner I am so sorry for your loss. My thoughts and prayers are with you and your family at this very difficult time. Kirby & Kanece Trim We are so so sorry for your painful loss. We pray that you will find comfort in your memories each passing day. Phil Steen Gena and family I am so sorry for your loss. It just doesn't make sense right now at this hour,but god knows what's best he will comfort all of you though this rough time. May god bless each and everyone of you including Joan and Ron and your parents..we will keep all of you in our prayers love you'll... Beth Schmidt My heart is crying as I write. I am Rachael Schmidt's Mother-In-Law and just wanted to let you know our hearts are bleeding in The Villages, FL along with the entire Country! We are more than sorry for your irreplaceable loss. Please know we will be working to do whatever possible to change this current mess! WE STAND WITH THE TEENS IN PARKLAND!!!!!!!

LUKE IS NEVER TO BE FORGOTTEN!!!!!!!❤❤❤❤❤❤

His bright light will continue to shine. God will see to it that Luke will be at peace wrapped in His Heavenly Love for eternity. What a handsome young man. My heart bleeds for you. I pray that you be comforted day by day through prayers, support of others and memories. May the promises in God's word also offer comfort such as Psalms 145:18,19. His Word will come true.





Know that we care!

Your Neighbors in Missouri Tessy Ashmore I am so sorry for your loss! Our prayers are with you and your Family!

LOAD MORE

Gena and family: I am so very touched by this and have been remembering your family in my prayers. Carla Lopez Our hearts are shattered over the loss of you and your fellow peers. We are praying for all the families & friends. Luke, although I never met you, all I have seen and read you made an great impact on so many people in your short life on this earth. You are an ANGEL.



RIP Luke Hoyer Ruth Sklar I am so sorry for your loss of this beautiful boy. I am heartbroken for you. The whole world is. Sending you love and peace. Ruth Debi Elfast-Kelly Words cannot express your loss, as a parent I can't begin to understand your loss, but please know that so many people are praying for your family and Luke. God Bless Luke and his family through this trying time. Amy Knowlton Please know the sorrow and devastation of this tragic loss to the extended Stroud family has blanketed the Stevens Aviation facility in shock and sadness. Our hearts hurt for your family! Bill Bensley So sorry for your loss. Your family is in our family's thoughts and prayers. The Ditto Famiy Sorry for the loss of your beautiful child My deepest sympathy for your family at this time. May psalms reach your heart Becky Moore So very sorry for your loss. Praying for your family. Elise Wahl Dear Hoyer family... there are truly no words to lessen the heartbreak of your tragic loss but please know that I'm thinking of you all and sending love, courage and strength to you at this time. My deepest sympathy goes out to you all.

LOAD MORE

Lorri Bell Hoyer Family, You don't know me. I'm a total stranger. I am so very sorry for your loss. Such a terrible loss. Lorri J. Bell Mike, Annie, Jered, & Rylee Latham We are truly sorry for your loss. Our family is praying for you all. May God give you some kind of peace during this tragic time. Sammy Jo I am so sorry with the loss of your son. I'm praying for your family. My heart breaks for all of you. I couldn't imagine Howard Gillespie My deepest sympathies and prayers of comfort to the family and friends during this terribly difficult time. Hang in there. Liliana Castaneda My sincerest condolences. Extremely heavy-hearted but praying God almighty fills your family with the peace that surpasses all understanding until you reunite with your precious baby once again.

My Father's house has many rooms; if that were not so, would I have told you that I am going there to prepare a place for you? John 14:2 Debbie LaMotta Gena and the Hoyer family

We are so so sorry for the loss of your some Luke. Jesse has such great memories spending time with him. How Luke made him laugh and giggled all the time. We pray you can heal knowing he made all around him smile. Sending lots of hugs to you. Stefani Kauffman Tom, no words are adequate, but I want you to know that you and your whole family are in my thoughts and prayers. My deepest sympathies and heartfelt condolences go out to each of you. I always enjoyed working with you at eDiets and have such respect for you; I'm so very sorry for your beautiful family's loss. May God provide you and your family with comfort and strength during this very difficult time. Sandy Chase Rest In Peace, Luke. I'm keeping your family in my thoughts during this tragic time in our country. Praying for peace and solace, and that your death will not be in vain. I didn't know you but you look like a super great, friendly person and I'm sure you will be missed greatly. Tara Leibovitch Our sympathy to you, may God give you strength in this time.

We grieve with you for your beautiful child.

Sam and Tara Leibovitch. Brian Adams Tom and Gena, Linda and I cannot express enough how sorry we are for your loss.. Sending you hugs and love..

LOAD MORE

Sam Pino Tom

So sorry for your loss... Lizbeth Juan I'm so saddened by this senseless tragedy.. My heart goes out to your family Luke. May you always be their light in the darkness, and may God bring your family peace during this somber time. You will be missed. So sorry for your loss. I did not know Luke but he looks like a nice fine young man....

My prayers go out to Luke's Family and all the families that have lost loved ones to these senseless killings.

God Bless All of you.



Sincerely Colleen A Wilson

Springfield, Ohio







Debbie Munro As the days and weeks pass, may you continue to feel comforted by the love from Jesus Christ. Praying for your family. Debbie/ Guardian Ad Litem/Broward County Office K Cooksey What a lovely person he was. I'm so sorry for your lost. My thoughts and prayers are with you. Suzanne Ryan May Your love for Luke shine forever. May his memory forever be in your hearts. Wendy Schack Dear Hoyer Family,



I did not know your dear son, but I know Jennifer through a Secret Sisters gift exchange she began online. As a mother, my heart is broken for you and the other parents. I would like to make a donation in your son's memory to my local Make-A-Wish chapter, as I have been a wishgranter for 8 years. Eliane Schlicht-Farias My condolences to the entire family. Luke will be missed. Eleanor Demarzo I'm so sorry for your loss I did not know Luke my heart is broken every time I see his handsome face on FB May god bless his family and friends RIP angel from New Jersey Cassandra Singletary So very sorry for your loss.My heart indeed hurts for the Hoyer family.Please know that my prayers are going out for the family.Also be assured that God knows your sorrow and hurt and he is the God of tender mercies and is and will always be there for you.

LOAD MORE

Prayers from South Carolina Richard Outram We extend our sincere condolences to Gena, Tom and the Hoyer family for your loss of dear Luke. Our thoughts and prayers are with you.



Love and blessings always,



The Outram Family The Silcox Family The Hoyer Family,

No words can express how heartbroken we are for your family for this senseless loss. We have only the fondest of thoughts and memories of Luke, as well as the entire family, and want you to know our prayers are with you now and forever. Kristin Rodriguez My deepest condolences, my thoughts and prayers are with you all... Kim Walters-Ludlow So sorry for your loss. There are no words to express the amount of sorrow I feel. Keeping you and your family in my thoughts and prayers. Lynda & Lewis McDonald Gena , Tom and all Luke's family and friends, Know that our thoughts, prayers and deepest sympathy are with you in this horrible, senseless loss. May God bless you with all strength, comfort and peace needed in the days ahead. Joyce Grogan RIP God Bless. Your were taken too soon. My family and I send condolences to Luke's entire family and friends.Words are truly inadequate,but many prayers are going up in our little towns of Clinton and Joanna,South Carolina.

Mary Jean Timmerman and Family Christine Luke I know your memory and spirit will live on through all who knew, loved and cared for you. I pray that somehow your loved ones will find solace with and through each other as WE as a community work to make sure your life of only 15 years will continue on beyond your time spent with us. Your light will shine forever Luke. RIP. We will never forget you as you will live in our hearts forever. Urban Kantola Tom - No words seem right. All I know we are heartbroken. My wife and I are praying for your family. Please reach out for anything. Urban

LOAD MORE

Jenna Strauss Such a terrible loss but my condolences are with his family and friends! Toni & Albert Petrangeli Gena, Tom & Family,

We are so very sorry. Please know that we are praying for peace and comfort for you, your family & friends of Luke's. Sending Love & Hugs!

Al & Toni Petrangeli Liz Corritore Tom and Gena, my husband Bob and I are friends of Joan and Jim. We are absolutely devastated for you and your entire family. May your beautiful son rest in peace. Roger & Susan (Best) Rodriguez and family Many thoughts and prayers are with you and your families. We are truly heartbroken and grieve for you during this very difficult time.

May the many memories you have help to ease the pain of your loss.

Rest In Peace Luke Thomas Hoyer

With our deepest heartfelt sympathy Gena & Tom, I am sure there are no words to say to ease your pain. I truly am so very sorry your family is having to go through this. Please know I am praying for you all!! Love, Christi Capps Karen and Coach Scott and Brock Allen Windell We are so sorry for your loss. Luke was a amazing young man. No words can describe what you must be going through. Our prayers are with your family. BArbara Profit Dearest Luke and family,

Praying for all of you from New York. Your sweet angel was taken from you too soon and he now is resting comfortably in the hands of God. May Gods grace provide you with comfort and strength in the days that lie ahead. Luke will remain in our prayers forever... Tammy & Patrick Duvall God's peace be with you and your family. Shani Nuckols This isn't fair. I don't know you personally, but please know that we are heartbroken that this has happened to your son and your family. I am so so deeply sorry. Karen Holburn I am so sorry for the devestating loss of your son.

LOAD MORE

Susan Havelka With heartfelt sympathy for Luke's family and friends. We are so very saddened by your sudden and senseless loss. There are not enough words to heal your pain. Sending the Hoyer family our sincerest condolences. RIP Luke.

Martine, Carly, and Shawn Kahres Mr. Bodine Tom, Gena, family and extended family. 113 - 117 Stanwick, two homes but one big family. On behalf of Stewart and Kristin, we send our deepest LOVE and Utmost sympathy. Rebecca Dahl Nothing can take away the pain. I hope the students of this county can help make a change that will save other young people's lives. Tom, Gena and Family, we are so sorry for your loss. Our thoughts and prayers are with you and your family. We send our love and strength.



The Kirschenbaum Family Helen Downey We are so sorry for your loss. Our hearts are breaking for you, and your family will be in our prayers every single day. We are sending you our love and condolences. Madison McCarthy Hoyer family, I am sorry to hear the loss of your son Luke. He was a very good person to all of you guys. May Luke be in your hearts and let him enjoy his time in eternal heaven. God bless you hoyer family!! Terry Lopez My deepest and sincerest condolences for your loss, may God give you strength you and you family have been in my thoughts and prayers Mary Renfro I'm so so very sorry about the loss of your son. This brings so much sadness. Prayers and hugs. Mary Renfro and family Rob Drago Tom:



Although our time together at eDiets was limited, as crazy as that place was at times I think it made the personal relationships there even stronger. I'm not sure I can adequately communicate how very sorry I am for you and your family, so please accept my sincerest condolences and those of your former eDiets family.

LOAD MORE

Brian Ballis How do parents bury their own? I'm not from this state however,my heart still aches just the same. My heart goes out to his family and especially his friends. My thoughts and prayers are with you all. Gena,Tom and family, we are so sorry for your loss! We lived down the road from you all when you were growing up. Jean and Walt Miller, Jackie and Johnny Miller. We just lost touch w/you as you grew up. We just cannot imagine the grief you are going through at this time. Please know that we are praying for all of you. Tell Janice and Eddie and Joan that we're thinking of them also. Love, Walt and Jean Miller Belton, S.C. 29627

Please get in touch w/ us when you can. Brokenhearted Mom I am so sorry... Lisa Evans Luke,

I only know of you through this tragedy. My heart goes out to you, your family, and your friends. May you rest Peacefully at God's side now, and may your families & friends receive the Blessing of peace and strength to get through this, the most difficult time in their lives right now, knowing that in the days and weeks ahead, although much too difficult to see now, the pain will always be there, but life will get a little bit easier for them, with support, and most of all, with love. I'm so sorry this had to happen to all of you. These are my own personal thoughts and words from my heart, and I will be placing my words on each of the pages of the 17 lives that were lost.

Rest Peacefully, Luke.

Respectfully, Lisa Evans Alison Kairuz My deepest condolences go to the family. I pray the Lord guides you thru this very difficult moment. I left a little something at the advocates for the victim's desk at the park where the memorial is being held. God bless you and know you have an angel watching over you.

Cindy Myers I am saddened by the loss of your son, I will pray for you and your family during this very difficult time. Know that Luke is in Heaven in the warm embrace of God and all of his angels. With my deepest condolences, Cindy Tom,

Words seem inadequate. My heartfelt sympathies to you and your family.

Jean-Anne (Evans) McMahon P. Sterry So very sorry for your loss, May the lord give your family the strength to get through this very difficult time. you are in our prayers. David Heath May God bless you and your family in this time of sorrow. Laurie LeChevalier Mr. And Mrs. Hoyer, Jake and Abby,

I am so very sorry for your loss! Luke was beloved by so many! May you find some comfort and peace in the coming days if only in the arms of the Angels! God Bless you all!

LOAD MORE

Laura Armstrong I am so so sorry for your loss. I will be praying for your family. Words cannot express my sadness. Renee, Brett, Shane and Tyler Porter Dear Gena, Tom, Jake and Abby, We are so sorry for the loss of Luke. Our hearts are broken with yours. We cannot and will not ever stop thinking of your family. Love, Renee, Brett, Shane and Tyler Porter Brian M thoughts and prayers go out to lukes's family and friends and may god hold luke in his arms forever. Cheryl McGinnis Dear Mr and Mrs. Hoyer, Words escape me please accept my sincere and deepest condolences for this loss of your beautiful son, Luke. All of New York City is thinking of you and him. You lost your son, which is inconceivable, and America lost a bright, shining star for its future. Gabi Harrell My family is so, so sorry for your loss - our thoughts and prayers are with you and your family during this terrible time. Barbara Stowe So sorry for you loss. My prayers are with you. I am Karen Edwards cousin. Jennie Meadowcroft Our love and God bless!

Jennie and Jeffrey Meadowcroft

Greenville, SC Scott Chamberland Please accept my Deepest Sympathies Robyn Gabe I am truly sorry for your loss. I am not affiliated with The Bobby Resciniti healing hearts foundation, but I know they offer free counseling for parents in your situation. Stephanie Poore-Brown Gena and family,

I am so very sorry for your unbearable loss. I am praying for comfort that only God can bring...there are no words. He had your beautiful smile. With love and deepest sympathy, Stephanie Poore Brown

LOAD MORE

Cathy Reaves Gena and Tom,

My heart hurts for you. I am and will continue to pray for you. Melody Curtis My thoughts and prayers are with you during this difficult time. Praying for peace for your beloved family!!! My heart is broken. Steve Wind The thing I remember most about Luke was his huge smile. What a great kid. It's a huge and senseless lost. Big hugs from the Wind Family. Melody, Jessica, Joshua, and Jacob Meyer Gena, Tom, Abby and Jake, we are so sorry and wish there were words to ease your pain. You are such a wonderful family - loving, kind, and fun. May your memories of Luke bring you comfort. We will continue to pray for you all. Polly Frampton Our family would like to express our deepest sympathies to you and your family at this difficult time. We are heartbroken for your loss, and pray the Lord will wrap his arms around you in comfort now and always. Sara Tobias Tom and Family,

We are all thinking of your family. There are no words we can say to express the sadness caused by this tragic event. From the bottom of my heart, I am truly sorry for the loss of such an AMAZING young man. Whose life was taken way too soon in such a horrible way. From Utah, sending thoughts and prayers to the family and the friends of Luke Hoyer. May you rest in peace. And God Bless. Stephanie Weinsier Our thoughts and prayers are with the Hoyer family as you find some way to cope with this loss. All our love,

The Weinsier Family Jimmy and Shirley Ann McKee Our prayers are lifted for comfort and peace for all of your family during this difficult time, and our hearts ache for the loss of your precious Luke during this terrible tragedy. We went to high school with Janice and Eddy in Clinton. Mele K. Prayers and thoughts go out to your family during this hard time. Luke seemed like such a great boy, and I'm sure he was. So very sorry for your loss. May he rest in peace. Lots of love.

LOAD MORE

The Collins Family Abby and Family,

Our hearts and prayers are with you and your family. There are just no words that will ease this loss, but we hope that you can treasure the wonderful memories. Love to you and our deepest sympathy to your Family. Cindy Kushner Tom, I am heart broken and so sorry for your loss. Sending much love, and prayers; and hope you find strength and comfort in celebrating Luke's life. Daniel Pileggi Please accept my family's condolences. I wish I had words to ease your pain. Your entire family is in our prayers. so sorry. sending lots of love and prayers for your family Carla Cox Tom,



It's terrible to hear about your loss and my family expresses our sincere sympathy to you and your family. There are no words we can say to express the sadness caused by this tragic event.



Our deepest condolences.



Carla Cox and family

EDiets Nhory Carter RIP angel in heaven. So very sorry for your loss. Francoise$ Daniel Abensour So sorry for your lost Love and prayers for your family Francoise & Daniel Abensour Sending you our sincere condolences Love and prayers for your family Roshelle Jones-Hirvonen God Bless Cindy Friedman We are so truly sorry for your loss. Our heart breaks for Luke's family and friends.

We are sending love, prayers and condolences.

LOAD MORE

Tracey (Turnquist) Cook Tom and Gena and family - I am so so sorry about the loss of your precious son. It is impossible to make sense of this tragic and devastating event. Hugs and prayers for all of you through this difficult time... Ryan & Holly McMahon Gena and Tom,

Words seem inadequate to express the sorrow felt by the loss of Luke. Our hearts and prayers are with you. Jodi Flayman So, so sorry for your loss. I am keeping your family in my heart as a fellow PGCC neighbor. I hope, eventually, your happy memories of your son can lift your spirit & make you smile. I am not sure if we ever met, but Luke and my son Sammy were good friends...there are no words...sending lots of love, strength and prayers to your family.



Much Love,

Sharon Cooper and Family Lynn & Jack Fisher We never had the pleasure of knowing Luke but as parents, grandparents and great grandparents we grief with you for the loss of your beloved child. God must have run out of angels and so these innocent full of life children now are with him. The Fishers of Pembroke Pines Fl. Jennifer Weisberg Tom and Gena, we are so sorry for your loss. Our hearts break for you and your family. Luke was a sweet, polite and quiet boy who was a pleasure to be around. We will always remember watching our boys play basketball together and the joy on their faces when they finally won their first championship game. You will All forever remain in our hearts and we will continue to pray that your faith in God will bring you the strength you need to live each day the way Luke would have wanted you to. With sympathy and love- Mike, Jennifer, Dylan and Mikayla Brooke Wachsman Gena--

I'll never forget your baby, Luke! He was the happiest, cutest little guy and was growing up to be just like all the Hoyers, kind and caring with that glowing smile you all have. The world feels your pain and he will never be forgotten. All our love, Brooke & Seth Wachsman, Alexa and Julia W R My condolences to the Hoyer family. May the God of comfort strengthen you during this time of need. Lori Wyner I am so heartbroken for your family. You are all in my thoughts. Sending you all strength during this horrible time. Deborah Sanner So very very sorry for the loss of your loved one! Words will never express your grief! I do pray I could help in some small way... Just to let you know You are all in my thought and prayers! He is a gift from God taken back too soon! Love and prayers to your family and all Luke's friends and family friends... my heart is breaking for all of you.

We just had a boy who was going to do the same thing in our school district, and gratefully a person overheard conversation and reported to police. Went to house and had so many guns and knives. Thank God the person was not afraid to report it! Again I pray for you all in yoir grief!

LOAD MORE

Tammy Blalock I am so sorry for the loss of your loved one, someone this young has not even begun to live, and that right was taken away from them. Just know that they are in a better place, and that you will be together again. Prayers for all of the Families, impacted by this tragedy. My heart and prays go out to you at this time Bryan Glenn Mueller Tom,



I am so sorry for the tragic loss of your son, Luke. Please accept my sincere condolences. Though our paths crossed only briefly at eDiets, I want you to know that I have always held you in the highest esteem. In what was many times a volatile work environment, you were always a consummate professional. Nobody should have to endure an unspeakable tragedy like this, much less a dignified man like yourself. There are no words to adequately express my sorrow, but please know that I will be praying for your entire family. Stephanie Mason Condolences to your family ernest beard R.l.P.! Joseph Brand Tom and family, my thoughts and prayers are with you all at this terrible time. I'm at a loss for words and my heart aches, but can only hope you find peace. My heartfelt condolences. Ruthy Watson Tom, I am friends with Roshelle Hirvonen. I am so sorry for the loss of your son in this tragedy. I don't know what words I can say to comfort you but I am praying for you and your family during this time. Rebecca I never knew Luke, but I will never forget his name and what he meant to his friends and family. So very sorry for your loss. The LORD gives strength to his people; the LORD blesses his people with peace.

-A sixteen year old from upstate NY Dennise Heinsen Tom- My heart goes out to you and your family in this devastating and difficult time. You are in my thoughts and prayers. Sending my deepest condolences. pam ofstein Tom and Gena,



I can't find the words to express my families love to all of you. To happen to friends and wonderful people and families - yours - cannot be put in words. Know we are here for you and the community is there to support you as you hope to try and heal from this....love Pam & Dave Ofstein and family

LOAD MORE