Endorsement: For 12th District: Danny O’Connor favored for open seat
A central Ohio congressional district that doesn’t get a lot of turnover is about to get a new representative in the first of two elections for the seat vacated in January by Rep. Pat Tiberi.

In a special election Aug. 7, voters will choose between state Sen. Troy Balderson, a Republican, and Franklin County Recorder Danny O’Connor, a Democrat, to fill the seat for the remainder of this year. In November, Balderson and O’Connor will square off again for a full two-year term beginning in January.

Voters will like some of what each has to offer, though each also has limited experience. We give the edge to O’Connor.

At 31, O’Connor is a year older than John Kasich was when elected to this seat in 1982. Now of Clintonville, he grew up in Sidney.

The rural community is conservative but his family’s influence to “do better” for others and his experience with the Jesuit Volunteer Corps between college at Wright State University and law school at Syracuse University pointed O’Connor toward Democratic politics. He worked for Franklin County Prosecutor Ron O’Brien, a Republican, though, before practicing family law in a small Columbus firm, Weis and O’Connor, and being elected recorder in 2016. He’s engaged to marry a Republican who calls herself a “Dannycrat.”

In the recorder’s office he reduced the time to file documents from weeks to days and enhanced free filing of military veterans’ discharge documents by connecting veterans with civilian job opportunities. He has proposed recording vital documents for the homeless and domestic violence victims to preserve access to important information for transient populations.

Balderson, 57, is a Zanesville native and a state legislator for nine years. His path to politics started under the hood of a truck he was fixing in his family’s motor sales business when the vehicle’s owner, then state Rep. Jim Aslanides, told him, “You should run for my seat.”

Until then, Balderson said he had “never thought about politics.” He was elected in 2008 and won re-election in 2010 with no opposition. In 2011 he went from representing two counties to nine with an appointment to the senate and kept the seat in 2012 elections. Redistricting that year meant major changes for his district, but he was re-elected without opposition in 2016.

It’s not unlike his past challenges, Balderson says, to now seek the congressional seat of his mentor, Tiberi. “Train to be uncomfortable” is the motto he likes to share.

Current views of the two men differentiate their approach to the open seat.

O’Connor calls for new leadership in Congress. “We need change on both sides of the aisle,” he says, and sees his youth and “fresher perspective” as a way to break the influence of special interests that are “dictating the conversation.” It’s why his campaign is not taking contributions from corporate PACs.

He favors rebuilding roads and bridges instead of a border wall (although he favors strong border security through enforcement), would raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour and work to assure access to health care. “If you’re willing to work 40 hours a week, you shouldn’t live in poverty.” He views Medicare and Social Security as earned social contracts and would not raise eligibility ages.

Calling for common-sense solutions to gun violence, O’Connor would support a “red flag” law to take guns away from those judged to be a threat, which Balderson rejects. O’Connor advocates applying the federal no-fly list to deny guns to those deemed too dangerous to board airplanes.

Balderson unabashedly supports President Donald Trump and declines to criticize other than to acknowledge not liking his tweets. He supports building Trump’s wall for border security, sees the tax cuts enacted this year as a “huge” positive and says, “I don’t have any heartache over his policy.”

A strong supporter of the Second Amendment, Balderson would not take guns even temporarily from licensed carriers in mental distress, although he calls for more mental-health services and would keep those who are mentally ill from acquiring guns in the first place.

On entitlements, Balderson did not support Ohio’s Medicaid expansion and would raise the age of eligibility for Medicare and Social Security. He favors repealing and replacing the federal health reform Affordable Care Act known as Obamacare, which he says has caused southeast Ohio to lose physicians. He would retain a requirement, though, for health insurance to cover pre-existing conditions.

Both candidates favor a pathway to citizenship for the Dreamers brought to this country illegally as children and would like another look at the North American Free Trade Agreement.

By all accounts, both O’Connor and Balderson are decent, successful men who would work hard for voters of the 12th District.

But one supports a reasonable, thoughtful approach to addressing the important issues facing Congress and our country, and the other supports a president who uses tactics and pushes policies that this Editorial Board has denounced. Our endorsement goes to Danny O’Connor.