Voter Registration in Illinois
Your country needs your vote. Here's how to register in Illinois.

Find all the information you need to finish your moving requirements with the DMV.

You can check the status of your voter registration and find your polling place in IL by looking up your information on the Registration and Polling Place Information page.

A person is not eligible to vote while incarcerated. After completing your sentence your voting rights will be restored .

To qualify for voter registration in Illinois, you must:

To participate in Illinois elections, you must register to vote with the Illinois Board of Elections. You may also obtain a voter registration form and register to vote through the IL Secretary of State (SOS) when you apply for a driver's license .

Voter information and identification requirements may change prior to an election. Please check with the Secretary of State website to make sure you have the most current information.

How to Register to Vote in Illinois

You must register to vote at least 27 days before the next election.

In Illinois, you can register to vote online, by mail, as well as in person at your county election authority. You can also process your voter registration at your local IL driver license office when you apply for a new driver's license.

Register to Vote Online

You can register to vote online using the state's Online Voter Registration Application.

Be prepared to answer basic information about yourself just as you would if you were applying by mail or in person, and follow all submission instructions at the end of the process.

You can also change your registered name and/or address using this website.

Register to Vote By Mail

To register to vote by mail in Illinois, you will need:

A completed Illinois Voter Registration Application (Form SBE R-19) (Spanish-language version also available).

2 documents proving identification. 1 document must show your current address. Either a copy of your valid photo identification , such as your: Driver's license. ID card. OR

The last 4 digits of your SSN and a valid photo identification. A copy of a document proving your residential address , such as your: Current utility bill. Bank statement. Pay check.



Send the above to your local election authority or to:

State Board of Elections

Voter Registration Department

2329 S. MacArthur Blvd.

Springfield, IL 62704

Once your application is processed, you will be mailed an IL voter identification card.

In Person

You can register to vote in person at:

Board of Election Commissioner's Office.

Locations designated by the election authority.

County Clerk's Office.

City and Village Offices.

Military Recruitment Offices.

Township Offices.

Schools.

Public Libraries.

Locations specifically designated by the election authority.

You will need to have:

A completed Illinois Voter Registration Form (Form SBE R-19). You can also download a Spanish-language version.

2 documents proving identification. 1 document must show your current address. Either a copy of your valid photo identification , such as your: Driver's license. ID card. OR

The last 4 digits of your SSN and a valid photo identification. A copy of a document proving your residential address , such as your: Current utility bill. Bank statement. Pay check.



Once your form has been processed, your IL voter identification card will be issued.

NOTE : You can also register to vote in person at your local Illinois DMV office when you apply for a driver's license or ID card.

Illinois Military or Overseas Voters

If you're an IL resident currently on active-military duty or residing overseas, you can register to vote in federal elections through the Federal Voting Assistance Program.

Just complete the Voter Registration and Absentee Ballot Request Federal Post Card Application (Form 76) and submit it to your local election office.

You can also register to vote online at the Illinois State Board of Elections website. The online system will allow you to also request absentee ballots for upcoming federal elections.

How to Register as an Illinois Absentee Voter

As long as you are a registered voter and meet the state's qualifications, you can register as an “absentee voter" by mail using an early ballot or in person following the state's early voting process.

Refer to the state's section on voting before the election for more information on who can vote by mail (or early), how to obtain a ballot or locate an early voting location, and dates your ballot must be received or when you must vote early.

Change Your Illinois Voter Information

To update the name or address on your voter registration, you must re-submit the Illinois Voter Registration Application to your local Board of Elections office.

If you changed your name more than 27 days before the election but have not re-submitted a voter registration form, you cannot vote unless you're still living in the same precinct. If you are living in the same county, you must sign an affidavit at your polling place confirming your identity.