Driverless Testing of Autonomous Vehicles
Z7_KIDE1HG0KG5LA0AKHHOVEV2G56

DMV-Hidden

Driverless Testing of Autonomous Vehicles

Information for Manufacturers Applying for Driverless Testing of Autonomous Vehicles Permit

The autonomous vehicles driverless testing regulations establish an Autonomous Vehicle Driverless Tester Program that is administered by the department's Occupational Licensing Branch. Effective April 2, 2018, DMV can begin approving applications for autonomous vehicle testing without a driver and deployment (public use).

You may view the requirements and application process for manufacturers to obtain DMV's approval prior to testing driverless autonomous vehicles on California public roads by clicking on the link below:

Application Requirements for a Driverless Autonomous Vehicle Tester Program

Driverless Testing Regulations

The regulations adopted by the Office of Administrative Law on February 26, 2018, create the regulatory text for driverless testing.

Approved February 26, 2018

Adopted Regulatory Text (PDF)

Final Statement of Reasons (PDF)

Driverless Permit Holders

As of October 30, 2018, there is one Autonomous Vehicle Driverless Testing Permit holder.



Autonomous Vehicles Collision Reports

Under the testing regulations, manufacturers are required to provide DMV with a Report of Traffic Collision Involving an Autonomous Vehicle (form OL 316) within 10 business days of the incident.

Autonomous Vehicle Collision Reports submitted to the department will be posted on the DMV website. Each OL 316 will be redacted of information that is not appropriate for disclosure under the California Public Records Act.

Autonomous Vehicles Disengagement Reports

The California Autonomous Vehicle Testing Regulations require every manufacturer authorized to test autonomous vehicles on public roads to submit an annual report summarizing the disengagements of the technology during testing. This "disengagement report" is due by January 1 of each year. The first report covers the period from the date of issuance of the Testing Permit to November 30 of the following year. Subsequent reports cover the period of December 1 to November 30.

A new Annual Report of Autonomous Vehicle Disengagement (OL 311R) (PDF) is now required for all permit holders. The new form should be used for the January 1, 2019 report.

Autonomous Vehicle Milestones

For more information on autonomous vehicle history in California, visit the Milestones in the Development of Driverless Testing and Deployment Regulations.

Background on Autonomous Vehicles

For more general information about autonomous vehicles, visit Autonomous Vehicles in California.

Autonomous Vehicles Industry News Bulletin



For the latest DMV bulletins regarding the autonomous vehicle industry, visit Autonomous Vehicles Industry News Bulletin.