AIM Photonics
American Institute for Manufacturing (AIM) Photonics

Summary Established: July 2015

Lead: Research Foundation for The State University of New York (RF SUNY)

Hub location: New York

Members: 96

Federal Funding: $110 M

Cost Share: $502 M

Details

This Institute is focused on developing an end-to-end integrated photonics ecosystem in the U.S., including domestic foundry access, integrated design tools, automated packaging, assembly and test, and workforce development. The Institute will develop and demonstrate innovative manufacturing technologies for:

Ultra-high-speed transmission of signals for the internet and telecommunications

New high-performance information-processing systems and computing

Compact sensor applications enabling dramatic medical advances in diagnostics and treatment

Multi-sensor applications including urban navigation, free space optical communications and quantum information sciences

Other diverse military applications including electronic warfare, analog RF sensing, communications, and chemical/biological detection

All of these developments will require cross-cutting disciplines of design, manufacturing, packaging, reliability and testing. The Institute brings government, industry and academia together with the goals of organizing the current fragmented domestic capabilities in integrated photonic technology and better positioning the U.S. relative to global competition. Activities under the Institute will enable universities and small-to-medium enterprises to participate in the integrated photonics revolution.

IP-IMI Solicitation Process

On October 3, 2014, the President announced the launch of a new Institute for Manufacturing Innovation on Integrated Photonics. The Department of Defense also released a formal notice of intent.

On November 5, 2014, the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) officially released the Funding Opportunity Announcement for an Integrated Photonics Institute for Manufacturing Innovation (IP-IMI). Interested consortiums are able to submit a concept paper (due December 19, 2014) for an Integrated Photonics IMI. Offerors with the most promising concept papers will be invited to submit a full proposal. The selectee coming out of the full proposal evaluation will enter into a Cooperative Agreement with the government for the purpose of establishing an Institute for Manufacturing Innovation (IMI) in support of a domestic integrated photonics manufacturing hub. The full text of the FOA is provided here.

For more information: