Donald J. Trump for President
About The 45th President of the United States

Donald J. Trump "We will make America strong again. We will make America proud again. We will make America safe again. And we will Make America Great Again!" - President Donald J. Trump Donald J. Trump is the very definition of the American success story, setting the standards of excellence in his business endeavors, and now, for the United States of America. A graduate of the Wharton School of Finance, President Trump has always dreamed big and pushed the boundaries of what is possible his entire career, devoting his life to building business, jobs and the American Dream. This was brought to life by a movement he inspired in the people of America when he announced his candidacy for President of the United States in June 2015.

This movement would ultimately lead to one of the most unique Presidential campaigns in history. Ever the leader, Trump followed no rule book and took his message, “Make America Great Again” directly to the people. Campaigning in historically democratic states and counties across the country, Trump was elected President in November 2016 in the largest electoral college landslide for a Republican in 28 years. President Trump is working hard to implement his ‘America First’ platform, continuing his promise to the American people to lower taxes, repeal and replace Obamacare, end stifling regulations, protect our borders, keep jobs in our country, take care of our veterans, strengthen our military and law enforcement, and renegotiate bad trade deals, creating a government of, by and for the people. He is making America First, again, restoring our nation’s faith, ushering in a bright, new future now and for generations to come.

The 48th Vice President of the United States

Michael R. Pence Born in Columbus, Indiana, Mike Pence had a front row seat to the American Dream. A family of Irish immigrants, Vice President watched his grandparents and parents build everything that matters – a family, a business, and a good name. He was raised to believe in the importance of hard work, faith, and family. After meeting the love of his life, Second Lady Karen Pence, and graduating law school, Vice President Pence led the Indiana Policy Review Foundation and hosted a syndicated talk radio show focused on Indiana public affairs. Along the way, he became the proud father to three children. In 2000, he launched a successful bid for his local congressional seat, entering the United States House of Representatives at the age of 40. After serving in Congress for 12 years, Vice President was elected the 50th Governor of Indiana in 2012. It was Indiana’s success story, his record of legislative and executive experience, and his strong family values that prompted President Donald Trump to select Mike Pence as his running mate in July 2016. Since being elected on November 8, 2016, Vice President Mike Pence remains grateful for the grace of God, the love and support of his family, and the blessings of liberty that are every American’s birthright. He looks forward to working with the American people as together they seek to Make America Great Again.