​Donald J. Trump Announces Expansion of Nomination Efforts Under Convention Manager Paul Manafort
- April 07, 2016 -

​Donald J. Trump Announces Expansion of Nomination Efforts Under Convention Manager Paul Manafort

(New York, NY) April 7th, 2016 – Today Donald J. Trump is announcing that he is consolidating the functions related to the nomination process and assigning them to Convention Manager, Paul Manafort. In this capacity, Mr. Manafort will oversee, manage, and be responsible for all activities that pertain to Mr. Trump’s delegate process and the Cleveland Convention.



Working closely with Campaign Manager Corey R. Lewandowski and Deputy Campaign Manager Michael Glassner, Mr. Manafort will direct the campaign’s activities in areas including delegate operations, Washington, DC outreach and the DC office opening next week.



Mr. Trump stated, “My campaign continues to receive tremendous support from voters all across the country. We have won far more states, far more delegates, and millions more votes than any other candidate. The nomination process has reached a point that requires someone familiar with the complexities involved in the final stages. I am organizing these responsibilities under someone who has done this job successfully in many campaigns. This will allow the rest of my team to deal with the increasing needs of a national campaign for both the pre-Convention phase and most importantly, the general election. Paul is a well-respected expert in this regard and we are pleased to have him join the efforts to Make America Great Again.”



Mr. Manafort commented, “Securing the Republican nomination is an intricate series of steps that requires a comprehensive strategy. As part of the campaign team, my job is to secure and protect Mr. Trump’s nomination and that is what we will do. In this regard, I will be working closely with Mr. Lewandowski and Mr. Glassner to ensure Mr. Trump’s nomination. I am honored that he has allowed me to join him in this effort. Mr. Trump has created a historic campaign that has moved the American people. He is on the verge of an incredible victory.”



Mr. Trump will continue to expand his team as the national convention nears and he moves to consolidate his nomination. He is expected to announce several new hires and promotions within the campaign in the weeks ahead.



Mr. Trump is currently campaigning in New York, where he hosted a rally attended by several thousand last night and maintains substantial leads in all the polls, with the most recent survey showing Mr. Trump with 52% support, nearly thirty points ahead of his nearest competitor.