Statement On The Rigged System
- October 18, 2016 -

Statement On The Rigged System

“It’s no secret the media has coordinated their personal attacks on Mr. Trump in order to rig the election on behalf of Hillary Clinton. Just last week we saw 23 times more coverage of the unfounded accusations against Mr. Trump than we saw of Crooked Hillary’s email revelations on issues voters do care about, like open borders and bad trade deals for American workers. We have also seen recent voting irregularities across the country from Pennsylvania to Colorado and an increase in unlawful voting by illegal immigrants. It is vital that our democratic process not be hijacked, and as a campaign, we will remain vigilant in ensuring a high level of integrity.” - Jason Miller, Senior Communications Advisor



RIGGED SYSTEM BACKGROUND:

RECENT VOTING IRREGULARITIES



PEW RESEARCH:

“Approximately 24 million—one of every eight—voter registrations in the United States are no longer valid or are significantly inaccurate.” (Pew Center on the States, “Inaccurate, Costly, and Inefficient,” Study, Accessed 10/17/16)

“More than 1.8 million deceased individuals are listed as voters.” (Pew Center on the States, “Inaccurate, Costly, and Inefficient,” Study, Accessed 10/17/16)

“Approximately 2.75 million people have registrations in more than one state.” (Pew Center on the States, “Inaccurate, Costly, and Inefficient,” Study, Accessed 10/17/16)



ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS VOTING:

“More than 14 percent of non-citizens in both the 2008 and 2010 samples indicated that they were registered to vote. Furthermore, some of these non-citizens voted. Our best guess, based upon extrapolations from the portion of the sample with a verified vote, is that 6.4 percent of non-citizens voted in 2008 and 2.2 percent of non-citizens voted in 2010.” (Jesse Richman and David Earnest, “Could non-citizens decide the November election?” Washington Post, 11/24/14)

Estimated Voter Turnout by Non-Citizens 2010: Self reported and/or verified – 13 (3.5%); Self reported and verified – N.A.; Adjusted estimate – 8 (2.2%) (Jesse Richman and David Earnest, “Could non-citizens decide the November election?” Washington Post, 11/24/14)

Estimated Voter Turnout by Non-Citizens 2008: Self reported and/or verified – 38 (11.3%); Self reported and verified – 5 (1.5%); Adjusted estimate – 21 (6.4%) (Jesse Richman and David Earnest, “Could non-citizens decide the November election?” Washington Post, 11/24/14)

“Because non-citizens tended to favor Democrats (Obama won more than 80 percent of the votes of non-citizens in the 2008 CCES sample), we find that this participation was large enough to plausibly account for Democratic victories in a few close elections. Non-citizen votes could have given Senate Democrats the pivotal 60th vote needed to overcome filibusters in order to pass health-care reform and other Obama administration priorities in the 111th Congress. Sen. Al Franken (D-Minn.) won election in 2008 with a victory margin of 312 votes. Votes cast by just 0.65 percent of Minnesota non-citizens could account for this margin. It is also possible that non-citizen votes were responsible for Obama’s 2008 victory in North Carolina. Obama won the state by 14,177 votes, so a turnout by 5.1 percent of North Carolina’s adult non-citizens would have provided this victory margin.” (Jesse Richman and David Earnest, “Could non-citizens decide the November election?” Washington Post, 11/24/14)



PENNSYLVANIA:

“More than 700 Pennsylvania voters might have cast two ballots in recent elections, the secretary of State said Thursday.” (Brad Bumsted and Aaron Aupplee, “731 Pennsylvania Voters May Have Cast 2 Ballots Or Voted Elsewhere, Secretary Of State Says,” Trib Live, 1/8/15)

“A person in Philadelphia named “Joe Cheeseboro” voted twice in a 2007 election, according to a report by the city's election commissioner. A Democratic congressional candidate in Maryland withdrew from the 2012 race when allegations arose that she voted in Maryland and Florida in previous elections.” (Brad Bumsted and Aaron Aupplee, “731 Pennsylvania Voters May Have Cast 2 Ballots Or Voted Elsewhere, Secretary Of State Says,” Trib Live, 1/8/15)

“Our investigation set out to determine if voting irregularities occur in Philadelphia County elections by examining the 2012 Primary. We identified seven distinct types of voting irregularities, all involving illegal voting practices impacting the vote totals for multiple races throughout Philadelphia and Pennsylvania. These findings reveal the need for meaningful reforms that should be implemented by our Department.” (Philadelphia Commissioner Al Schmidt, Report to City Commissioners: Voting Irregularities, Accessed 10/17/16)

There were more than 150 Voter Slips citywide from the 2012 Primary. Twenty-three of these Voter Slips came from individuals who were not registered to vote at the time of the election, but voted on the Voting Machine.

In the 2012 Primary, there is documentation that many voters participated in the incorrect party’s Primary. Since these votes were cast on the machines, they were included in the Certified Election Results, thus impacting the vote totals for multiple races throughout Philadelphia and Pennsylvania.

In 2012 alone, the Philadelphia Voter Registration Office has already cancelled the registrations of 19 illegally-registered voters in Philadelphia County who are not U.S. citizens. Of the 19 illegally-registered voters, 7 have voted in at least one election over the past 10 years, as recently as the 2012 Primary.

On the 2012 Primary Election Day, she illegally voted on two different Voting Machines, in two different divisions, at two different polling locations.

These two voter registration applications have the same name, the same birth date, the same handwriting – but completely different signatures.



COLORADO:

“Election sleuthing by Brian Maass of KCNC-TV in Denver exposed multiple instances in recent years where dead Coloradans were still voting. A dead World War II veteran named John Grosso voted in a 2006 primary election, and a woman named Sara Sosa who died in 2009 cast ballots in 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013. Mrs. Sosa’s husband Miguel died in 2008, but a vote was cast in his name one year later.” (Douglas Ernst, “Colorado Voter Fraud Revealed: Slew Of Ballot Cast By The Dead Spark Investigation,” Washington Times, 9/23/16)

“The CBS affiliate noted that voter fraud is important because often times a race is decided by a slim margin. Colorado’s 7th Congressional district came down to 121 votes out of more than 175,000 that were cast in 2002, the station reported.” (Douglas Ernst, “Colorado Voter Fraud Revealed: Slew Of Ballot Cast By The Dead Spark Investigation,” Washington Times, 9/23/16)



VIRGINIA:

“Harrisonburg officials and the FBI are investigating allegations of voter registration fraud after officials say almost 20 voter applications were turned in under the names of dead people.” (Graham Moomaw, “Investigation launched after dead people are registered to vote in Harrisonburg,” Richmond Times-Dispatch, 9/29/16)

Harrisonburg Registrar Debbie Logan said Thursday that investigators have found from 18 to 20 potentially fraudulent registrations. The Rockingham County Commonwealth’s Attorney’s Office confirmed Thursday that an investigation is underway, but offered no additional details on the case. (Graham Moomaw, “Investigation launched after dead people are registered to vote in Harrisonburg,” Richmond Times-Dispatch, 9/29/16)



INTIMIDATION:

“A firebomb tore through the Republican Party headquarters in North Carolina’s Orange County on Saturday night, and graffiti warning its members to flee town was painted on the walls of a neighboring building, the party and police officials said on Sunday.” (Liam Stack, “North Carolina G.O.P. Building Is Firebombed,” New York Times, 10/16/16)

“The bombing occurred at a tense moment in American politics, just three weeks from Election Day and near the end of a divisive presidential campaign that has seen deepening hostility and suspicions between supporters of Hillary Clinton and those of Mr. Trump, who has repeatedly said that he believes the vote will be ‘rigged’ against him.” (Liam Stack, “North Carolina G.O.P. Building Is Firebombed,” New York Times, 10/16/16)



MEDIA INFLUENCE:

“Add it all up, and one presidential candidate's negative news of the day was somehow covered more than 23 times more than another candidate's negative news of the day.” (Joe Concha, “Trump Has A Point With Media Criticism,” The Hill, 10/14/16)

“But a story winning the lead over another is one thing. Devouring it to the point of almost total omission via a more than 23:1 ratio is quite another.” (Joe Concha, “Trump Has A Point With Media Criticism,” The Hill, 10/14/16)

“‘NBC Nightly News’ with Lester Holt devoted zero seconds to the Democrat and Wikileaks on Thursday night.” (Joe Concha, “Trump Has A Point With Media Criticism,” The Hill, 10/14/16)

“‘ABC World News Tonight’ with David Muir gave it the same time as a shot clock in college basketball: 30 seconds. “(Joe Concha, “Trump Has A Point With Media Criticism,” The Hill, 10/14/16)

“‘CBS Evening News’ with Scott Pelley when 27 seconds with the story. (Joe Concha, “Trump Has A Point With Media Criticism,” The Hill, 10/14/16)

“Somewhere around 23 million people absorbed Trump getting pulverized for 23 minutes across the Big Three broadcast network evening newscasts. Less than a minute combined was devoted to damaging documents pertaining to Clinton. When looking at the numbers, Trump may actually have a point.” (Joe Concha, “Trump Has A Point With Media Criticism,” The Hill, 10/14/16)



"96% of presidential campaign contributions from media went to Hillary Clinton." (Dave Levinthal, "Journalists shower Hillary Clinton with campaign cash," Public Integrity,10/17/16)



CLINTON E-MAIL SCANDAL COLLUSION:

"According to the records, an FBI official, whose name is redacted, told investigators that Patrick Kennedy, the State Department's most senior manager, repeatedly "pressured" the FBI to declassify information in one of Clinton's emails....Soon after, one of the official's colleagues at the FBI received a call from Kennedy in which Kennedy "asked his assistance in altering the email's classification in exchange for a 'quid pro quo.'" (Jonathan Allen, "U.S. State Dept official 'pressured' FBI to declassify Clinton email: FBI documents,"Reuters,10/17/16)