​PENCE STATEMENT ON TRUMP’S NEW SCHOOL CHOICE POLICIES
- September 08, 2016 -

​PENCE STATEMENT ON TRUMP’S NEW SCHOOL CHOICE POLICIES

GOV. PENCE:“A Bold Set Of Policies That Will Increase Accountability And Lead To Better Results For Our Nation’s Children…”

“The school choice proposals unveiled today by Mr. Trump are a bold set of policies that will increase accountability and lead to better results for our nation’s children. These policies prove once again that Mr. Trump is the only person running for president who has the leadership required to Make America Great Again!” – Gov. Mike Pence

New School Choice Policies Unveiled Today By Donald J. Trump :

PROPOSAL: Mr. Trump’s first budget will immediately add an additional federal investment of $20 billion towards school choice. This will be done by reprioritizing existing federal dollars. Specifically, Mr. Trump’s plan will use $20 billion of existing federal dollars to establish a block grant for the 11 million school age kids living in poverty. Individual states will be given the option as to how these funds will be used.

PROPOSAL: As President, Mr. Trump will establish the national goal of providing school choice to every American child living in poverty. That means that we want every disadvantaged child to be able to choose the local public, private, charter or magnet school that is best for them and their family. Each state will develop its own formula, but the dollars should follow the student.

PROPOSAL: To achieve this long-term goal of school choice, Mr. Trump make this a shared national mission – to bring hope to every child in every city in this land. Mr. Trump will use the pulpit of the presidency to campaign for this in all 50 states and will call upon the American people to elect officials at the city, state and federal level who support school choice.

PROPOSAL: Mr. Trump will also support merit-pay for teachers, so that great teachers are rewarded instead of the failed tenure system that currently exists, which rewards bad teachers and punishes good ones.