The gas king turned media mogul
“I CONSIDER the sale of Forbes Ukraine the end of the project in its current form,” wrote Vladimir Fedorin, the publication’s editor-in-chief on June 22nd. “I am convinced the buyer is pursuing one of three goals (or all three): 1) to shut journalists up before the presidential election; 2) to whitewash his reputation; 3) to use the publication for purposes that have nothing to do with the media business.” When news broke about the sale of the owner of Forbes Ukraine, United Media Holding (UMH), to Sergei Kurchenko, a secretive 27-year old multimillionaire believed to be a straw man, Mr Fedorin did not mince words.

Get our daily newsletter Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.

It was Forbes Ukraine that first introduced the previously unknown Mr Kurchenko to the world. In an article titled “The Gas King of All Ukraine”, Forbes.ua exposed how in a few months his company, GazUkraine-2009, had become one of the country's largest petroleum product importers and a liquified petroleum gas major. It also revealed ties to firms involved in gas smuggling and links between Mr Kurchenko and the son of the prosecutor general, Viktor Pshonka. Both have denied the links.

As Ukraine's second largest media holding—boasting a quarter of the print audience, 45% of online readership, and such prestigious titles as Korrespondent, the country's most widely read weekly—UMH is a strategic prize ahead of presidential elections in 2015. It is also the last media group not to be owned by an oligarch until the deal, estimated at $400m-$500m, is finalised in early 2014.

Conflicting interests mean that oligarch-owned media cannot maintain its independence, says Mr Fedorin. He is planning to resign on October 1st, two months before his contract ends, to “give the people [he] hired the time to decide, whether to leave or to stay”.

But Mr Kurchenko, the owner of one of Ukraine's top football clubs, Metalist Kharkiv, is no ordinary oligarch. His energy holding, renamed VETEK, recently bought for $300m a strategic oil refinery from Lukoil, a Russian energy firm, and is expected to soon become a direct importer of Russian gas. This only makes sense if you have top level political backing, argues Arkadiusz Sarna, an analyst at OSW, a Warsaw think tank. All signs point to the president. “There are no accidental players on this market,” he says.

“Mr Kurchenko is Mr Nobody,” says Taras Berezovets, director of Berta Communications, a political consultancy. He says the youthful oligarch is a front for “The Family,” a group of loyalists surrounding the son of the president, Oleksandr Yanukovych. So far the group had expanded into energy and finance, but still lacked any serious media companies. Mr Berezovets believes the TV channels of StarLightMedia Group, Ukraine's largest media holding owned by billionaire Victor Pinchuk, make it the next logical target.

Fears the president's “family” was taking over UMH were not calmed when MAKO, Oleksandr Yanukovych's holding, unexpectedly issued a denial two days before anyone had heard of the deal.

A stagnant economy has depressed the ratings of Viktor Yanukovych, the president. Polls have him losing a second round to the two main opposition leaders. Investigative articles, such as those run by Forbes Ukraine showing Oleksandr Yanukovych as the biggest recipient of government contracts, have not helped. There are also worries that UMH publications could now be used to target opponents.

For observers it is clear the media market is being prepared for the election in 2015. The largest TV channel, Inter, was sold by Valery Khoroshkovsky, a former security services head, to the head of the presidential administration, Sergei Levochkin, and Dmitri Firtash, a billionaire. Meanwhile, the last opposition channel, TVi, finally collapsed in April amid a murky ownership transfer, after months of licensing and tax problems.

Ukraine's current rulers see the 2004 Orange Revolution, which overturned a rigged election outcome in favour of Viktor Yanukovych, as the result of political technologies and media manipulation of the populace, says Viktoria Siumar from the Institute of Mass Information, a watch dog. “They cannot leave any independent outlets this time,” she says.

Mr Kurchenko has denied the allegations of being a straw man, and promised to maintain editorial independence, in addition to investments of $100m. Some have called to give him the chance to prove himself, and that spending half a billion dollars for a couple of articles is unreasonable.

But by jailing Yulia Tymoshenko, the former prime minister, Mr Yanukovych broke the unwritten law of Ukrainian politics, that you do not prosecute your predecessors, says Mr Berezovets. Losing in 2015 could see him take her place. To avoid prison and destitution, one can argue, no price is too high to pay.