Lawyers, advocates protest Tornillo shelter; 100 migrants left at Greyhound bus station
Buy Photo Two separate protests at the Tornillo detention site for immigrants joined forces to demand an end to family separations and detentions. One was organized by Hope Border Institute and the other by a group of immigration and civil rights attorneys. (Photo: Mark Lambie/El Paso Times file)Buy Photo

Prominent immigration lawyers and advocates Saturday protested outside the Tornillo detention center housing hundreds of unaccompanied migrant children — a day after the federal government left more than a hundred migrants seeking asylum at a Downtown bus station.

The protest by more than 40 people was held in the morning outside the Tornillo detention center.

The migrants were left late Friday night at a Greyhound bus station in Downtown El Paso. Officials at the bus station then called Annunciation House, an immigrant advocacy organization.

“We have received quite a few people who have been released from detention centers who are family units seeking asylum,” said Taylor Levy, legal coordinator at Annunciation House. “They are released after background checks, fingerprinting and are released with ankle bracelets with GPS monitoring. Yesterday (Friday), we received about 180 people who were preplanned and we were ready for.”

She added: “Then, immigration officials took the choice to drop off around 100 people at the bus station with no advanced notice to us or the city. So, once we found out, we sprang into action to make sure they were treated with dignity and respect.”

More: 1,500 unaccompanied immigrant children at shelter in Tornillo; FBI checks delay release

Officials with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement could not be reached for comment.

Levy said Annunciation House, which is helping reunite immigrant families, found shelter at Holy Family Church for the migrants, gave them food, an opportunity to shower and medical treatment.

She added that the migrants will move throughout the country to be with family members already living in the U.S. while their asylum cases are pending.

The protest Saturday, which was set up by the Lawyers for Migrant Families organization, also focused on the expansion of the Tornillo detention center, which was supposed to be a temporary shelter built to house migrants mostly from Central America who crossed the border seeking asylum.

Members of the Hope Border Institute also protested Saturday.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-351-1677. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The Tornillo shelter currently houses more than 1,600 children between 12 and 17 years old, according to the Texas Department of Health and Human Services.

“When it (the Tornillo detention center) was first created in June, it was created to be a temporary shelter where children could be placed for a very short period of time,” immigration attorney Albert Armendariz Jr. said. “That was the purpose in June, when there were 400 beds at that time. By September, there were 1,200 beds, and they have expanded it three times. You would — since it was a temporary shelter to house children until they were reunited with their families and the unification deadline came and passed — think this place would be empty now, but it has actually tripled.”

Armendariz said that keeping children in the shelter is having a massive negative impact on them, including causing psychological problems and preventing them from getting an education. However, he said that the government has started to bring in teachers for the children.

The main issue facing immigration lawyers is getting access to the children to help them get asylum and reunite them with family members in the U.S., he said.

“Until this week, the government had not provided attorneys for these children and they have been taking them to immigration court all by themselves with no lawyer, no parents, no relatives,” Armendariz said. “They take them in front of an immigration judge, and they are facing deportation proceedings all alone. They are 12, 13, 14 years old.”

He added, “Just this week, the government started allowing local charitable organizations to provide these children with legal representation.”

More: Shelter at Texas port to add thousands of beds for unaccompanied immigrant children

Linda Rivas, executive director and managing attorney for Las Americas Immigrant Advocacy Center, said one of the hardest legal struggles for the migrants is getting due process in court while parents are searching for their children.

“Due process is very hard when you can’t focus on your case because you are worried about where your kid is, not being able to talk to your child and worrying that your kid is suffering as they are being detained and that you may never see them again,” Rivas said.

Buy Photo Two separate protests at the Tornillo detention site for immigrants joined forces Saturday to demand an end to family separations and detentions. One was organized by Hope Border Institute and the other by a group of immigration and civil rights attorneys. (Photo: Mark Lambie/El Paso Times)

She added that some parents have even agreed to be deported if they get their children back, which hasn’t happened and has resulted in the parents being deported while their children remain in detention centers.

“Some people didn’t pass their (asylum) fear exam because they were starting to give up so they could just see their children again,” Rivas said. “We also saw people who wanted to be deported because they were tricked into thinking that asking to be deported would reunite them with their children sooner, but that wasn’t the case.”

More: Tornillo shelter for unaccompanied immigrant children

Advocates are asking for the community's help in aiding the migrants being released. Annunciation House is asking for donations of blankets, toiletries and clothing.

Anyone interested in donating can call the organization at 545-4509 or visit annunciationhouse.org.

Aaron Martinez may be reached at 546-6249; aamartinez@elpasotimes.com; @AMartinez31 on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: https://www.elpasotimes.com/story/news/immigration/2018/10/27/tornillo-shelter-draws-protest-100-migrants-left-bus-station/1790901002/