Downtown El Paso redevelopment is a story of two pioneers and one deteriorating portfolio
Share This Story Tweet Share Share Pin Email

Downtown El Paso redevelopment has largely been a tale of three men.

Two prominent businessmen — Paul Foster and Lane Gaddy — jump-started Downtown redevelopment years ago, pouring millions of dollars into the renovation of several historic buildings.

William "Billy" Abraham Tuesday filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection for himself and Franklin Acquisitions LLC, one of his companies listed as owner of several Downtown properties, including the Caples Building, in the background.

(Photo: RUBEN R. RAMIREZ/EL PASO TIMES FILE)

On the opposite end, William “Billy” Abraham has held on to a portfolio of at least 15 buildings, including several prominent, historical ones, that's become more of a sore spot in recent years as projects by Foster, Gaddy, and others have begun to improve portions of the once-neglected Downtown landscape.

"He has sat on these buildings a long, long time, and for the most part, they would be better off in someone else's hands," Foster said in a recent telephone interview.

Foster said having Abraham's buildings sit dormant for years "slowed the redevelopment process" in Downtown because some of his buildings likely would have been restored by other owners.

Gaddy agreed that Abraham's vacant buildings "set back the pacing of (Downtown) development" for several years.

MORE: City to move ahead with issuing 2 bids for Downtown arena

"A lot of important properties have been locked up for a long period of time," Gaddy said. "It would be exciting to see them sold," and hopefully the buyers would redevelop them, he said.

Some of Abraham's buildings could be auctioned off soon as the result of court battles.

A foreclosure sale and a sheriff’s sale have been scheduled for Feb. 6 to possibly sell as many as 11 El Paso properties owned by Abraham and his companies, including six Downtown buildings.

Redeveloping downtown Chapter 1

Downtown El Paso was a vibrant place in the early 20th Century when many of its historic, architectural treasures were built, according to "Plan El Paso," the comprehensive plan adopted by City Council in 2012.

El Pasoan Paul Foster ranks 1,477th on Forbes' latest list of world billionaires. Foster is shown near the Plaza Hotel building, right, which he is having renovated into a modern, boutique hotel. He also owns the Centre Building, left, and the adjoining Mills Building.

(Photo: MARK LAMBIE/EL PASO TIMES FILE PHOTO)

"El Paso’s Downtown is an overlooked urban design treasure that must be promoted in order to establish stable economic prosperity for the area," according to the plan, developed by Dover, Kohl & Partners, a Florida-based urban design firm.

Many Downtown El Paso buildings had begun to deteriorate by the late 1980s, but Downtown was still relatively vibrant prior to the major Mexican peso devaluation in early 1994, which brought fewer shoppers from across the border and hurt Downtown retailers, including some national chains.

The exit of hundreds of El Paso Natural Gas jobs in 1996, and then the company’s final exit from the city in 2001 further depressed the Downtown business environment, and left the company’s Blue Flame building vacant for years.

Then, in 2007, Foster became a Downtown redevelopment pioneer when he began renovation of the vacant, 12-story Mills Building, one of many historic Downtown buildings designed by the renowned, late architect Henry Trost.

More: Your complete guide to shopping in Downtown El Paso

Foster, a billionaire who made his fortune by buying and growing the former Western Refining, which last year was sold to a San Antonio company, spent untold millions of dollars renovating the 106-year-old building. The Mills opened in 2011 as a first-class office building with retail and an upscale restaurant, owned by Foster.

He also had the adjacent Centre Building remodeled and connected to the Mills Building.

Lane Gaddy talks about his Downtown redevelopment plans during a 2015 tour of some of his properties.

(Photo: EL PASO TIMES FILE PHOTO)

Foster has now turned his focus to the $78 million renovation of the Plaza Hotel, also designed by Trost. The long-vacant building, one of the first hotels built by Hilton Hotel founder Conrad Hilton, will become a 131-room boutique hotel.

Foster several years ago told the El Paso Times that he's a big believer in Downtown redevelopment and, he said, "part of it is putting my money where my mouth is in supporting that effort."

Gaddy, chief executive officer of W Silver Recycling, a large El Paso company founded by his great-grandfather almost 100 years ago, got into the redevelopment act in 2012 when he and a group of investors bought several Downtown buildings and made plans to renovate them.

In late 2015, Gaddy completed renovation of the 100-year-old Martin Building into loft apartments. He and his investors are renovating the Bassett Tower into a hotel, and they have future plans to redo the five-story Banner Building at Mesa and Mills.

"Our goal was never to acquire properties for properties' sake," Gaddy said. "We wanted to spark interest and show a way for projects to get done. I feel we've done that pretty well. I definitely think a larger and diverse group of investors Downtown is necessary and good."

The Kress Building in Downtown El Paso is being considered for purchase by eminent domain.

(Photo: RUBEN R. RAMIREZ/EL PASO TIMES, Victor Calzada / El Paso Tim)

Such investments are among those that are juxtaposed against several, deteriorating buildings owned by Abraham and others.

Abraham's portfolio has several prominent buildings, including: The former Kress store with its intricate Spanish-style architecture, located across the street from San Jacinto Plaza; the Trost-designed Caples Building, where notable Mexican political figures were headquartered during the Mexican Revolution; the Toltec Club, the trapezoid-shaped building where El Paso’s elite met in the early 1900s; and the Trost-designed former Newberry Department Store.

Abraham, the son of the late, prominent El Paso criminal defense lawyer Joseph "Sib" Abraham. for years has said he has a master plan to redevelop his Downtown buildings. But he's not implemented that plan, and his buildings continue to deteriorate.

He continued to hold onto his buildings even as he served 1½ years in state prison in a 2010 pedestrian death.

Abraham declined an interview for this article.

What to do with the Abraham buildings? Chapter 2

If any of Abraham's buildings get auctioned at the sheriff's and foreclosure sales, scheduled for Feb. 6, it would be good for Downtown, El Paso Mayor Dee Margo, Foster, and Gaddy said in interviews with the El Paso Times.

William "Billy" Abraham reports he received a past sale offer of $5 million for the 107-year-old Toltec Club building at 717 E. San Antonio, according to federal bankruptcy court filings.

(Photo: RUBEN R. RAMIREZ/EL PASO TIMES FILE)

The sheriff's sale is aimed at paying a $1.03 million court judgment against Abraham tied to a contract dispute with the son of late singer Juan Gabriel for a 2015 concert by the performer. Abraham's Toltec Club Building is also scheduled for a Feb. 6 foreclosure sale to pay off a delinquent loan.

City officials are again pushing Abraham through renewed inspections of some of his buildings. In January, the city announced inspections of three of his buildings for possible safety and code violations. Inspection reports won't be completed for several weeks, a city official said.

City officials have said an 18-month-old legal battle with Abraham over the so-called American Furniture building had stalled enforcement efforts on his other buildings. The legal fight continues because Abraham in January appealed a state judge's November order for him to pay $1.2 million of a $2.16 million fine issued by the city for code violations at the Trost-designed building, which is vacant except for one retail tenant.

"He's been a problem child for a long time," Margo said. "His track record is pretty pathetic."

MORE: Abraham ordered to fix historic American Furniture building, pay $1.2 million fine

Joe Gudenrath, executive director of the Downtown Management District, said the city has not done enough to get deteriorating Downtown buildings owned by Abraham and a few others up to city code.

"I am not saying the city is not interested in enforcing codes, and I recognize they've had some (legal) challenges," he said. "But they are enforcers of the codes, and we (the public) rely on them to get that done."

Margo said since he became mayor in June, the city has been more aggressive in trying to "force the issue" with Abraham over his buildings.

Foster said he's tried to talk to Abraham about selling some of his buildings over the years, but Abraham never showed interest.

Now, Foster said, he's considering placing bids in the scheduled sheriff's sale of some of Abraham's buildings. Gaddy said he has no plans to bid on Abraham's buildings.

What's next? Chapter 3

Foster and Gaddy helped get Downtown revitalization moving, Gudenrath said. But it's no longer just them involved in remaking Downtown, he noted, adding that Jim Scherr, Madhi Nahir and Stewart Meyers are doing significant Downtown projects.

The city has done major projects and other private developers are doing smaller projects, he said.

The Plaza Theatre

(Photo: RUDY GUTIERREZ/EL PASO TIMES)

The city revamped the Plaza Theatre, donated by the El Paso Community Foundation; built the Downtown minor-league baseball stadium on the site of the demolished City Hall; and redid San Jacinto Plaza.

The Meyers Group, a Miami-based multifamily-housing development company headed by Stewart Meyers, who has El Paso family ties, is doing the $70 million renovation of the Hotel Paso Del Norte, formerly the Camino Real Hotel.

More: Meyers Group not giving up on county incentives for Downtown El Paso hotel renovation

That area, which includes the Mills and Plaza Hotel buildings, is ground zero in Downtown redevelopment.

But other areas are also transforming.

Scherr, an El Paso lawyer, renovated what was dubbed "Hotel Baghdad" into a newDoubleTree by Hilton hotel, and is now building the Courtyard by Marriott Hotel next to it at Santa Fe Street and Interstate 10.

Madhi Nair's family-owned company renovated a vacant hotel building at 325 N. Kansas St., into the hip Hotel Indigo.

Also, two organizations and a private developer last year opened three Downtown apartment complexes: The 27-unit Savoy Lofts, at Stanton and Overland, above the Dollar Tree store; the 51-unit Roderick Artspace Lofts at 601 N. Oregon; and the 87-unit Campbell Apartments at 501 S. Campbell.

The El Paso Housing Authority bought the Blue Flame Building from Foster for $2.5 million and has announced plans to renovate it into an apartment complex for mostly low-income residents.

MORE: Blue Flame, first lit in 1955, will light up Downtown El Paso skyline again

Across the street from the Blue Flame, Gaddy's investors groups are renovating the 15-story, art-deco Bassett Tower into an Aloft Hotel, which is expected to be completed in February.

Blue Flame building at 120 N. Stanton St. and Texas Avenue in Downtown El Paso.

(Photo: RUDY GUTIERREZ/EL PASO TIMES)

Gaddy in late 2015 completed renovation of the 100-year-old Martin Building at Mills and Stanton Street into 40 loft apartments, and he and his investors plan to redo the 107-year-old, mostly vacant, five-story Banner Building at Mesa and Mills, across the street from San Jacinto Plaza and next to the vacant Kress building, which Abraham owns.

Gaddy and his investors also own three retail buildings on South El Paso Street and plan to buy three other properties on the busy Downtown retail street where, Gaddy said, he has plans for retail and office projects that will be announced in the future.

Gudenrath pointed to the momentum, while addressing concerns about the challenges caused by Abraham and other property owners who don't improve their properties, an issue he says has kept some investors out of Downtown.

"With all the great things happening Downtown, it makes you wonder what more we could be achieving if we didn't have these properties dormant and not up to code," Gudenrath said.

Vic Kolenc may be reached at 546-6421; vkolenc@elpasotimes.com; @vickolenc on Twitter.

William "Billy" Abraham's portfolio

Downtown El Paso buildings owned by William "Billy" Abraham and his companies:

· 300 E. San Antonio Ave. (Caples Building)

· 211 N. Mesa St., and 100 E. Mills Ave. and Oregon Street (Kress building)

· 105 N. Oregon St. and San Antonio Avenue (American Furniture building)

· 117-119 W. Overland Ave. and Santa Fe Street (Haymon Krupp & Co. building)

· 107 S. Kansas St. (24 Hour Bail Bonds building)

· 200 N. Mesa St. (Stevens Building – a former Walgreens)

· 201 N. Stanton St. (Newberry building)

· 101 N. Mesa St. (Imperior Real Exclusive Boutique)

· 212 W. Overland Ave. (former El Pisto restaurant)

· 408 E. San Antonio Ave. (The Tap bar)

· 410½ E. San Antonio Ave. (The Press Bar)

· 416 E. San Antonio Ave. (former McGrath Realty office)

· 209 Texas Ave. (Lion’s Den gym)

· 717 E. San Antonio Ave. (Toltec Club building)

· 910 E. First Ave. (former warehouse)