Congressman O'Rourke live-streams House sit-in
CLOSE

Buy Photo U.S. Rep. Beto O'Rourke, D-El Paso (Photo: Victor Calzada/El Paso Times)Buy Photo

After Republicans shut down the live stream from inside of the U.S. House of Representatives on Wednesday during a staged sit-in by Democrats, U.S. Rep. Beto O'Rourke opened it back up using his cellphone and Facebook.

Meetings inside the House are usually live-streamed by C-SPAN cameras, but when the Democrats took over the House floor with a sit in, Republicans adjourned, thus cutting off the C-SPAN live stream because the meeting was over.

By shutting down the live stream, viewers could no longer see what the Democrats were doing inside the chamber as they tried to force a vote on gun control legislation.

That's when O’Rourke, D-El Paso, and California U.S. Rep. Scott Peters stepped in, using social media to end the C-SPAN blackout.

From the House floor, O’Rourke used Facebook to live-stream while Peters used Periscope — effectively enabling C-SPAN to link to the sites in order to regain a continuous video feed of the proceedings.

"I want what we do here to be worthy of the people we represent," said O'Rourke during his time at the podium late Wednesday night.

O'Rourke also talked about his children and mentioned that Thursday is his daughter Molly's birthday.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-351-1677. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

O’Rourke is known for using social media to reach constituents. The congressman regularly uses Twitter, Snapchat and Facebook to communicate with the public.

Recent attempts to pass gun control legislation following the deadliest mass shooting in the U.S. at a Florida nightclub failed in the Senate.

Read or Share this story: http://www.elpasotimes.com/story/news/national/2016/06/22/democrats-stage-sit--shut-down-chamber-over-gun-laws/86254614/