Ted Cruz ad 'misleading,' says attorney behind Beto O'Rourke ethics complaint
William “Bill” Sanders. (Photo: Special to The El Paso Times)

Editor's note: This story originally published September 23, 2018

AUSTIN — An ad attacking U.S. Rep. Beto O'Rourke for a 12-year-old El Paso redevelopment plan that raised the possibility of eminent domain is misleading and distorted, said the attorney who first challenged the former city councilman on the issue.

The attorney, who in 2006 filed two ethics complaints against then-city council member O’Rourke, said recent ads launched by Sen. Ted Cruz targeting his opponent in the race for U.S. Senate don't take into account the Democrat's abstention on key votes and that the ethics complaints were ultimately dismissed.

“The ads are misleading and do not present the issue in proper context,” Stuart Blaugrund, a Dallas-based attorney, told the El Paso Times. “I’m someone who was in the middle of the trenches, so I know the ins and outs. The ads are completely misleading."

The advertisements released this month by Cruz and the Club for Growth, a national conservative advocacy group, target O’Rourke for supporting a downtown El Paso revitalization plan that was pushed by a group of real estate developers — including his father-in-law Bill Sanders.

They focus on an element of the plan that allowed for the use of eminent domain and they paint O’Rourke as being under the control of Sanders and other business leaders who promoted the planned redevelopment.

“As a councilman, Beto carried water for his wealthy father-in-law, the developer behind a downtown redevelopment scheme, pushing the city to bulldoze an historic Hispanic neighborhood using eminent domain,” the narrator says in the ad.

The advertisement shows people criticizing O’Rourke at different public meetings in El Paso during the early 2000s. It ends with the question: “If Beto O’Rourke’s own El Paso constituents couldn’t trust him then, why would the rest of Texas trust him now?”

O’Rourke declined to be interviewed for this article. He has long argued that his decisions were informed by his district’s needs, not personal relationships.

The plan was not enacted as envisioned, the ethics complaints filed against O'Rourke were dismissed and other El Paso leaders argue that opposition to the proposal was overblown — but the Democrat has continued to face questions about the issue.

Cruz spokeswoman Catherine Frazier said the advertisement produced by the campaign presents points that "are factual and represent Beto's record in context."

"It is true that he supported using eminent domain to condemn homes for private development," she said in a statement. "It is true that his constituents urged him to recuse himself. And it is true that his family stood to benefit from the project had it moved forward. That is cronyism at its worst and should cause deep concern to Texas voters.”

Campaign attack not an issue for El Paso voters, Beto supporters say

The 2006 plan called for redeveloping parts of Downtown El Paso, including the iconic Segundo Barrio neighborhood of El Paso, which sits on the U.S.-Mexico border. It proposed dividing the city's Downtown into several districts with names like "Mercado District" and "Lifestyle District."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-351-1677. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Some districts would have housed new condos, restaurants and hotels while others would have included entertainment venues. It also included an "Arts Walk."

IS BETO RUNNING IN 2020? O'Rourke did little to make his presidential plans clearer

The plan, presented to the El Paso City Council by the Paso del Norte Group, called for $250,000 investments each from the city, private sector contributors and the federal government to complete the redevelopment.

It faced resistance the moment it was introduced because of questions about how land and property would be acquired and whether current residents would be displaced.

New Cruz Web Ad Highlights O’Rourke’s Support of Eminent Domain to Enrich His Family and Displace Low-Income El Pasoans --> https://t.co/fBXbQL9VHa#TXSen — Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) September 10, 2018

Veronica Escobar, a longtime political ally of O'Rourke who won the Democratic nomination in March to replace him in Congress, said the latest advertisements from Cruz and his supporters overstate the frustration in the El Paso community at the time.

RELATED: Here's what Trump and Beto O'Rourke's El Paso rallies actually looked like

She said Cruz is attacking O'Rourke on issues that have long been settled.

“For Cruz to portray him as not having the support of El Paso is ridiculous and laughable,” said Escobar, who pointed to O’Rourke’s numerous successful campaigns as evidence of support from El Paso.

Buy Photo Former El Paso County Judge Veronica Escobar said the advertisements show overblown opposition to the plan. (Photo: RUBEN R. RAMIREZ/EL PASO TIMES FILE)

In 2007, one year after the plan was proposed, O’Rourke won re-election to his council seat with 69 percent of the vote.

Five years later, O’Rourke challenged sitting U.S. Rep. Silvestre Reyes, a Democrat who had held the seat for 16 years, and won the primary with 50.4 percent of the vote.

The victory came after a contentious campaign, during which Reyes used O'Rourke's support for the downtown plan in an advertisement attacking his challenger. The narrator in the video said that O'Rourke voted to use eminent domain to "destroy homes in Segundo Barrio."

CLOSE Former Rep. and Senate candidate Beto O'Rourke spoke Monday at a protest to President Donald Trump's El Paso rally. Chris Kolenc, Special to the El Paso Times

In May, O'Rourke, a popular politician in El Paso, bested two other candidates in the Democratic Primary election for U.S. Senate with 90 percent of the vote in the border county.

“Whenever you work on big ideas or big projects, you will always have your fair share of detractors,” Escobar said. “He and I and others wanted a vibrant, healthy downtown where there was a place for everybody. That meant upending the status quo. When you do that, you make certain groups angry or unhappy.”

While Blaugrund criticized the ads launched by the Cruz campaign, he said the “idea that there was only a small opposition to the downtown plan is fallacious.”

Eminent domain: A key issue for El Paso

At the time the plan was proposed, elected officials, business owners and community leaders sparred over details and questions related to how certain properties within the 300-acre area should be acquired.

The plan was met with instant resistance from some in the community because it included a proposal that sought the use of eminent domain to reach its proposed development goals in the Segundo Barrio neighborhood.

Sanders said at the time that using condemnations to acquire land for the development would be a necessity, because, “without that, it will be impossible to implement this plan.”

Several downtown business owners opposed to the project formed a group called the Land Grab Opponents and threatened to pose a legal challenge to any effort by the city of El Paso to pursue land acquisitions using eminent domain.

PROSECUTORS: Beto O'Rourke on hit list of Coast Guard lieutenant in domestic terror case

Blaugrund represented the organization and filed his first ethics complaint against O’Rourke in September of 2006. The complaint stated that O’Rourke had both personal and professional conflicts of interest that should prevent him from voting on the redevelopment plan.

When questions first arose about a potential conflict of interest, Sanders said he would not invest his own money in the plan. Months later, he announced that he would invest in the plan after all, in order to encourage other people to contribute. He pledged not to take any profits.

Stuart Blaugrund, a Dallas-based attorney, filed two ethics complaints against Beto O'Rourke. (Photo: Courtesy of Stuart Blaugrund)

The complaint argued that O'Rourke could still feel pressure to vote in a way that would protect his father-in-law's investment.

It also pointed to work O'Rourke's company, Stanton Street Technology, did for the group, which included registering and operating websites on its behalf.

“O’Rourke cannot realistically separate his personal interests from his duties to the citizens of El Paso because they are inextricably intertwined,” the complaint reads.

MORE: Texas GOP uses Beto O'Rourke skating, band, arrest photos in Twitter attack

For his part, O'Rourke said he was focused on his constituents.

“I take this job very seriously,” O’Rourke told the El Paso Times in September 2006, after Land Grab Opponents submitted its first complaint. “I am not and never will be influenced by anything other than what is best for El Paso. If that means we implement 100 percent of (the Paso del Norte Group’s) plan or choose an alternate plan altogether, that’s what I’m going to do.”

Beto O'Rourke recused himself from votes on failed redevelopment plan

Jerry Rosenbaum, president of the Land Grab Opponents, told the El Paso Times in 2006 that O’Rourke’s assurances weren’t enough.

“We’re asking him to recuse himself,” he said in September 2006. “That’s what we have been asking for all along. He said he does not believe he has a conflict of interest. It’s nice that he believes that, but I’m not sure he should be judging himself.”

Rosenbaum could not be reached for comment on the Cruz campaign ad.

The ethics commission dismissed the complaint after a hearing and later dismissed a second complaint filed by the organization.

BETO O' ROURKE: planning stops in 2020 battleground Midwest

Blaugrund said while he felt the optics of O’Rourke’s support for the plan were less than ideal, he was pleased with the Democrat’s decision to recuse himself on certain votes.

“I’m very content that the opposition was heard and, even though I thought the optics were bad, from my point of view he did the right thing,” he said. “He recused himself from some of the key votes relating to the implementation of the plan.”

Although O’Rourke voted in support of the plan, he abstained on votes related to the use of eminent domain and other specifics of the project, including a December 2006 vote the council took pledging not to consider the use of eminent domain to enact the plan over a two-year period.

Debate over the revitalization effort marked a particularly contentious time in El Paso politics, but the proposal was not enacted according to plan

Some officials said the plan “fizzled” and many saw the state’s adoption of a constitutional amendment restricting the use of eminent domain in 2009 as the final nail in its coffin.

El Paso ISD trustee Susie Byrd, who served alongside O’Rourke on City Council, said the conversations that happened in the city at the time helped bring about positive changes.

“The debates we engaged in were all about thinking about what it is we want for our community,” Byrd said in an interview. “If you want to make change for your community, you’ve got to make some tough decisions. That’s what community building is, having uncomfortable conversations in public, but it’s so important.”

MORE: Willie Nelson and Beto O'Rourke to reunite on stage at Austin rally in September

Madlin Mekelburg is a reporter with the USA Today Network Austin Bureau; she may be reached at 512-479-6606; mmekelburg@elpasotimes.com; @madlinbmek on Twitter.

The El Paso Times isn't just another subscription. With our digital pass, you can get unlimited access to coverage on Beto O'Rourke, the border wall and more local news. Extend your support today for just $1 a month for the first 3 months.

Read or Share this story: https://www.elpasotimes.com/story/news/politics/elections/2018/09/18/ted-cruz-ad-misleading-says-attorney-behind-beto-orourke-eminent-domain-ethics-complaint/1257920002/