Clean Power Plan for Existing Power Plants
Basic Information Federal Register Citations: 79 FR 34829

79 FR 57492

79 FR 64543

79 FR 65481

79 FR 67406

80 FR 64662

80 FR 64966 Effective Date

Rule Summary

On February 9, 2016, the Supreme Court stayed implementation of the Clean Power Plan pending judicial review. The Court’s decision was not on the merits of the rule. EPA firmly believes the Clean Power Plan will be upheld when the merits are considered because the rule rests on strong scientific and legal foundations. For the states that choose to continue to work to cut carbon pollution from power plants and seek the agency’s guidance and assistance, EPA will continue to provide tools and support. We will make any additional information available as necessary.

On August 3, 2015, President Obama and EPA announced the Clean Power Plan – a historic and important step in reducing carbon pollution from power plants that takes real action on climate change. Shaped by years of unprecedented outreach and public engagement, the final Clean Power Plan is fair, flexible and designed to strengthen the fast-growing trend toward cleaner and lower-polluting American energy. With strong but achievable standards for power plants, and customized goals for states to cut the carbon pollution that is driving climate change, the Clean Power Plan provides national consistency, accountability and a level playing field while reflecting each state’s energy mix. It also shows the world that the United States is committed to leading global efforts to address climate change.

Rule History

August 3, 2015 – Clean Power Plan Final Rule

EPA finalized the Clean Power Plan Rule to cut carbon pollution from existing power plants

January 11, 2017 – Clean Power Plan Petitions for Reconsideration and Administrative Stay

Following a process outlined in the Clean Air Act and after careful review, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is denying most of the petitions for reconsideration and all of the petitions for administrative stay the agency received on the Clean Power Plan. Over the past year, EPA considered the variety of technical and legal issues that petitioners raised and has determined that the petitions failed to satisfy one or both of the legal conditions necessary to grant reconsideration. Learn more

August 3, 2015 – Proposed Federal Plan for the Clean Power Plan

EPA proposed a federal plan for the Clean Power Plan that will also serve as a model rule for states developing their state plans.

Previous Actions:

Additional Resources