Lead and Copper Rule
On this page:

Rule Summary

Rule History

The Lead and Copper Rule can be found in the Code of Federal Regulations.

Long Term Revisions

EPA is considering Long-Term Revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule to improve public health protection by making substantive changes and to streamline the rule requirements.

Short Term Revisions

In 2007, EPA revised the Lead and Copper Rule to enhance implementation in the areas of monitoring, treatment, customer awareness, and lead service line replacement. The update also enhanced public education requirements and ensured drinking water consumers receive is: meaningful, timely and useful information. These changes are also known as the “Short-Term Revisions to the Lead and Copper Rule.”

Minor Revisions

In 2004, EPA published minor corrections to the LCR to reinstate text that was inadvertently dropped from the rule during previous revisions.

In 2000, EPA published revisions to the LCR to address implementation issues arising from legal challenges to the 1991 rule. The revisions also streamlined and reduced monitoring and reporting burden.

The 1991 Rule

In 1991, EPA published the LCR to minimize lead and copper in drinking water. The rule replaced the previous standard of 50 ppb, measured at the entry point to the distribution system.

The rule established a maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG) of zero for lead in drinking water and a treatment technique to reduce corrosion of lead and copper within the distribution system.

Lead and Copper Rule Historical Documents

Top of Page

Additional Resources

Quick Reference Guides

These documents provide a simple and straightforward description of the Rule. It includes deadlines and requirements for public water systems (PWSs) and states, and information on monitoring requirements.

Drinking Water Regulations Under Development or Review

You will need the free Adobe Reader to view some of the files on this page. See EPA's PDF page to learn more. If you need help accessing these PDF documents below, please contact EPA's Safe Drinking Water Hotline at 1-800-426-4791 .

Water Supply Guidance Manual

EPA periodically issues memorandums which clarify drinking water policies and regulations. These policy memos have been collected into a water supply guidance (WSG) manual which is made available to states and public water systems to assist in implementation of the Safe Drinking Water Act.

Top of Page