Criteria Air Pollutants
The Clean Air Act, which was last amended in 1990, requires EPA to set National Ambient Air Quality Standards (40 CFR part 50) for pollutants considered harmful to public health and the environment. The Clean Air Act identifies two types of national ambient air quality standards. Primary standards provide public health protection, including protecting the health of "sensitive" populations such as asthmatics, children, and the elderly. Secondary standards provide public welfare protection, including protection against decreased visibility and damage to animals, crops, vegetation, and buildings.

The EPA has set National Ambient Air Quality Standards for six principal pollutants, which are called "criteria" air pollutants. Periodically, the standards are reviewed and may be revised. The current standards are listed below. Units of measure for the standards are parts per million (ppm) by volume, parts per billion (ppb) by volume, and micrograms per cubic meter of air (µg/m3).

Pollutant

[links to historical tables of NAAQS reviews] Primary/

Secondary Averaging Time Level Form Carbon Monoxide (CO) primary 8 hours 9 ppm Not to be exceeded more than once per year 1 hour 35 ppm Lead (Pb) primary and

secondary Rolling 3 month average 0.15 μg/m3 (1) Not to be exceeded Nitrogen Dioxide (NO 2 ) primary 1 hour 100 ppb 98th percentile of 1-hour daily maximum concentrations, averaged over 3 years primary and

secondary 1 year 53 ppb (2) Annual Mean Ozone (O 3 ) primary and

secondary 8 hours 0.070 ppm (3) Annual fourth-highest daily maximum 8-hour concentration, averaged over 3 years Particle Pollution (PM) PM 2.5 primary 1 year 12.0 μg/m3 annual mean, averaged over 3 years secondary 1 year 15.0 μg/m3 annual mean, averaged over 3 years primary and

secondary 24 hours 35 μg/m3 98th percentile, averaged over 3 years PM 10 primary and

secondary 24 hours 150 μg/m3 Not to be exceeded more than once per year on average over 3 years Sulfur Dioxide (SO 2 ) primary 1 hour 75 ppb (4) 99th percentile of 1-hour daily maximum concentrations, averaged over 3 years secondary 3 hours 0.5 ppm Not to be exceeded more than once per year

Menu of Control Measures for NAAQS Implementation

The Menu of Control Measures (MCM) provides state, local and tribal air agencies with the existing emission reduction measures as well as relevant information concerning the efficiency and cost effectiveness of the measures. State, local and tribal agencies will be able to use this information in developing emission reduction strategies, plans and programs to assure they attain and maintain the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). The MCM is a living document that can be updated with newly available or more current data as it becomes available.