Natural Gas Extraction - Hydraulic Fracturing
Natural gas plays a key role in our nation's clean energy future. The U.S. has vast reserves of natural gas that are commercially viable as a result of advances in horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing technologies enabling greater access to gas in shale formations. Responsible development of America's shale gas resources offers important economic, energy security, and environmental benefits.

EPA is working with states and other key stakeholders to help ensure that natural gas extraction does not come at the expense of public health and the environment. The Agency's focus and obligations under the law are to provide oversight, guidance and, where appropriate, rulemaking that achieve the best possible protections for the air, water and land where Americans live, work and play. The Agency is investing in improving our scientific understanding of hydraulic fracturing, providing regulatory clarity with respect to existing laws, and using existing authorities where appropriate to enhance health and environmental safeguards.

On this page:

Improving our Scientific Understanding of Hydraulic Fracturing

April 2012 Memorandum of Agreement among the U.S. Departments of Energy and Interior and U.S. EPA about Collaboration on Unconventional Oil and Gas Research (PDF)

EPA's study of hydraulic fracturing and its potential impact on drinking water resources: EPA studied the relationship between hydraulic fracturing for oil and gas and drinking water resources. The study includes a review of published literature, analysis of existing data, scenario evaluation and modeling, laboratory studies, and case studies. EPA released a progress report in December 2012; a final draft assessment report for peer review and comment in June 2015; and the final report in December 2016. EPA’s report concludes that hydraulic fracturing activities can impact drinking water resources under some circumstances and identifies factors that influence these impacts. Read the final assessment Learn more about the study at epa.gov/hfstudy.



Top of Page

Providing Regulatory Clarity and Protections against Known Risks

Stress on surface water and ground water supplies from the withdrawal of large volumes of water used in drilling and hydraulic fracturing;

Contamination of underground sources of drinking water and surface waters resulting from spills, faulty well construction , or by other means;

or by other means; Adverse impacts from discharges into surface waters or from disposal into underground injection wells; and

Air pollution resulting from the release of volatile organic compounds, hazardous air pollutants, and greenhouse gases. Although the national study should enhance our scientific knowledge, some concerns associated with overall natural gas and shale gas extraction, including hydraulic fracturing, are already well known. These operations can result in a number of potential impacts to the environment, including:

Because natural gas development is increasing rapidly in many regions, prudent steps to reduce these impacts are essential now even as further research to understand potential risks continues. EPA is:

Ensuring that hydraulic fracturing using diesel fuels is properly permitted

A core element of the Safe Drinking Water Act's (SDWA) Underground Injection Control (UIC) program is setting requirements for proper well siting, construction, and operation to minimize risks to underground sources of drinking water. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 excluded hydraulic fracturing, except when diesel fuels are used, for oil, gas or geothermal production from regulation under the UIC program. This statutory language caused regulators and the regulated community alike to raise questions about the applicability of permitting practices.

EPA has developed revised UIC Class II permitting guidance specific to oil and gas hydraulic fracturing activities using diesel fuels. Although developed specifically for hydraulic fracturing where diesel fuels are used, many of the guidance’s recommended practices are consistent with best practices for hydraulic fracturing in general, including those found in state regulations and model guidelines for hydraulic fracturing developed by industry and stakeholders. Thus, states and tribes responsible for issuing permits and/or updating regulations for hydraulic fracturing will find the recommendations useful in improving the protection of underground sources of drinking water and public health wherever hydraulic fracturing occurs.

EPA is issuing the guidance alongside an interpretive memorandum, which clarifies that Class II UIC requirements apply to hydraulic fracturing activities using diesel fuels, and defines the statutory term “diesel fuel” by reference to five chemical abstract services registry numbers. The guidance outlines for EPA permit writers, where EPA is the permitting authority, (i) existing Class II requirements for diesel fuels used for hydraulic fracturing wells, and (ii) technical recommendations for permitting those wells consistently with these requirements.

Top of Page

Ensuring the safe management of wastewater, stormwater, and other wastes from hydraulic fracturing activities

As the number of shale gas wells in the U.S. increases, so too does the volume of shale gas wastewater that requires disposal. Wastewater associated with shale gas extraction can contain high levels of salt content also called total dissolved solids total dissolved solidsThe quantity of dissolved material in a given volume of water. or TDS. The wastewater can also contain various organic chemicals, inorganic chemicals, metals, and naturally occurring radioactive materials (also referred to as technologically enhanced naturally occurring radioactive material or TENORM). In partnership with states, EPA is examining the different management methods employed by industry to ensure that there are regulatory and permitting frameworks in place to provide safe and legal options for disposal of flowback and produced water. These options include:

Addressing air quality impacts associated with hydraulic fracturing activities

There have been well-documented air quality impacts in areas with active natural gas development, with increases in emissions of methane, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and hazardous air pollutants (HAPs). EPA, the Department of the Interior, other federal agencies and states are working to better characterize and reduce these air emissions and their associated impacts. Through the Natural Gas STAR program, EPA and partner companies have identified technologies and practices that can cost-effectively reduce methane emissions from the oil and natural gas sector in the U.S. and abroad. Through the Clean Construction USA program, EPA is promoting newer, more efficient technology and cleaner fuels to innovate the ways in which hydraulic fracturing equipment and vehicles reduce emissions. EPA also administers Clean Air Act regulations for oil and natural gas production, including regulations on reporting greenhouse gas emissions.

Top of Page

Assuring Compliance

EPA targets enforcement to ensure compliance with laws and regulations, with an emphasis on correcting violations with significant potential harm to human health and the environment. In addition to self-directed investigations, EPA receives thousands of leads and incident reports relating to oil and gas activities that could impact air or water quality. EPA works with state and local governments to respond to incidents, encourage diligent accident prevention, and provide effective and prompt response when emergencies occur. EPA's offices around the nation ("Regions" or "Regional offices") provide guidance and grants to state regulators, perform inspections, conduct enforcement actions, and issue permits and information request letters, in order to ensure that existing laws are effectively implemented.

Top of Page

Promoting Transparency and Conducting Outreach

Within the federal government, EPA has played a lead role in conducting stakeholder outreach to individual citizens, communities, tribes, state and federal partners, industry, trade associations and environmental organizations that have a strong interest in the Agency's work and policies related to hydraulic fracturing and shale gas extraction. EPA is also committed to promoting informed decision making and transparency regarding chemicals and mixtures used in hydraulic fracturing activities.