Superfund Remedial Annual Accomplishments
Through cooperative agreements, EPA provides states with funding to conduct work under the Superfund program including site assessment, remedial action, review of remedy decision documents, and enforcement action. In FY 2018, EPA provided approximately $52 million to states to conduct activities at NPL sites, and to support state Superfund programs. States play a significant role in identifying and assessing sites to determine the most appropriate cleanup program to address the site. In FY 2018, states developed 449 (68 percent) of the 664 Superfund remedial site assessments across 40 different states.

Additionally, EPA launched the Human Exposure Dashboard on the Superfund website to provide real-time human exposure status for all NPL and Superfund Alternative Approach sites. The dashboard provides a breakdown of the number of sites where human exposure is under control. It also includes a searchable, sortable table that lists each site’s human exposure status along with detailed explanations. Visit the Human Exposure Dashboard at https://www.epa.gov/superfund/superfund-human-exposure-dashboard .

EPA identified best management practices to more effectively manage environmental indicators and identified and prioritized actions to bring additional sites under control within accelerated timelines. In FY 2018, EPA brought a net total of 32 sites under control, compared to 24 in FY 2017.

Through Superfund’s optimization program, teams of independent technical experts identify opportunities to improve the effectiveness and cost efficiency of Superfund remedies. In FY 2018, Superfund completed 17 optimization projects with another 39 underway. When applied to site management, these techniques and the decisions they support show a significant return on investment.

EPA conducted 252 five-year reviews, including 34 at federal facility sites, to ensure that remedies built at these sites continue to protect communities.

In FY 2018, Superfund identified 51 additional sites as having all long-term protections, including institutional controls, in place to meet Superfund’s Sitewide Ready for Anticipated Use (SWRAU) measure, the highest annual result since FY 2013. This brings the cumulative total of SWRAU sites to 887. Redevelopment of Superfund sites has brought thousands of jobs to communities. Many sites that EPA has designated as ready for reuse in previous years now host parks, business districts, renewable energy facilities, commercial and industrial facilities, and wildlife habitat.

“Construction completion” is a site-wide measure that documents the completion of all physical construction of cleanup actions, including actions to address all immediate threats and to bring all long-term threats under control. In FY 2018, all physical construction of the cleanup remedy was completed at 10 NPL sites and two SAA sites. EPA and other project leads have now completed construction of all remedies at 1,205 NPL sites and SAA sites.

EPA and other project leads completed 87 remedial construction projects. This total includes 28 government-led projects, 34 PRP-led projects (28 NPL sites and six SAA sites) and 25 federal facility sites.

EPA was unable to fund new construction work at 20 NPL sites that would have otherwise been ready for construction in FY 2018. Unfunded Superfund construction projects result when a PRP is not found or cannot pay, and no other funding sources are available.

EPA and other project leads conducted construction or provided oversight at 479 remedial construction projects started in prior fiscal years, including 128 government-led projects, 196 PRP-led projects (190 NPL sites and six SAA sites) and 155 federal facility-led projects.

To protect communities and promote reuse, EPA and other project leads started 73 new remedial construction projects, including 34 government-led projects, 18 PRP-led projects, one SAA project, and 20 federal facility-led projects.

Approximately 60 percent of ongoing remedial construction projects are being performed by PRPs.

EPA’s cleanup enforcement program protects human health and the environment by getting those responsible for a contaminated site to either clean it up or reimburse EPA for its cleanup work. In FY 2018, through enforcement instruments, EPA obtained over $453 million in commitments to clean up Superfund sites and to reimburse the Agency approximately $80 million of EPA’s past costs from cleanup work at Superfund sites. Additionally, EPA billed PRPs approximately $80 million for oversight costs associated with cleanup work performed by PRPs at Superfund sites.

Funds to clean up sites come from several sources, including congressional appropriations, states, and PRP settlements. In FY 2018, EPA obligated approximately $390 million for construction and post-construction projects. More than $54 million of this total came from infrastructure funding for Superfund remedial construction work that was part of FY 2018 appropriations. EPA used these funds for projects at 11 sites where EPA has the lead due to a lack of viable responsible parties.

As of the end of FY 2018, more than $4.2 billion has been disbursed or obligated for Superfund cleanups from special accounts.

In FY 2018, EPA disbursed or obligated more than $220 million, including reclassifications, from Superfund special accounts for site-specific work.

EPA obligated approximately $390 million in appropriated funds, state cost-share contributions and potentially responsible party (PRP) settlement resources for construction and post-construction projects.

EPA obligated about $220 million in resources to conduct and oversee site assessments and investigations, selection and design of cleanup plans, and support for state, tribal, community involvement and other activities.

As of November 2018, there were 48 sites with active Superfund Alternative Approach (SAA) agreements and 15 additional sites that have completed construction work under SAA.

EPA placed 15 sites on and proposed 19 sites to the NPL. At the end of FY 2018, the NPL had 53 proposed, 1,338 final and 412 deleted sites.

EPA completed 664 remedial site assessments, for a cumulative total of 96,093. These efforts determine whether a site warrants short- or long-term cleanup.

EPA completed or provided oversight at 242 removal actions to address imminent and substantial threats to communities. Removal responses address sites where contamination poses an immediate threat to human health and the environment.

At a net total of 29 additional sites, EPA controlled the migration of contaminated groundwater through engineered remedies or natural processes, bringing the cumulative total to 1,198 sites.

EPA actions at a net total of 32 additional sites controlled potential or actual human exposure risk, bringing the cumulative total at the end of FY 2018 to 1,507 sites.

EPA’s Superfund program tracks the following measures on an annual basis to keep the public and internal and external stakeholders apprised of the program’s progress in cleaning up sites and supporting their return to beneficial use.

Fiscal Year 2017 Superfund Remedial Program Accomplishments Report

View PDF version of Superfund's FY2017 Accomplishments (PDF)(16 pp, 20 MB)

On this page:

What is Superfund?

Congress created the Superfund program in 1980 to protect human health and the environment by responding to releases or threatened releases of hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants.

Research has associated Superfund cleanups with up to a 25 percent reduction in birth defects for those living within approximately a mile of a site. Cleanups of lead-contaminated soil have contributed to documented reductions in children’s blood-lead levels across the country.

In addition, Superfund cleanups often spur development, recreational and ecological projects. These projects can facilitate job creation, increase property values, and enhance local tax bases. Independent research found that residential property values within three miles of Superfund sites increased 19 to 24 percent when sites are cleaned up and deleted from Superfund’s National Priorities List.

Much like EPA’s Brownfields program, EPA puts Superfund sites back into productive use. EPA’s Superfund Redevelopment Initiative has economic data at more than 450 sites in reuse. In FY 2017, these sites supported more than 6,600 businesses that employed more than 155,000 people earning in excess of $11 billion in annual employment income.

Top of Page

Highlights

This report is focused primarily on the fiscal year 2017 accomplishments of the Superfund remedial program, which is responsible for long-term cleanups of contaminated sites. In addition, we will also share a few of our removal program’s many accomplishments. The Superfund removal program conducts emergency and shorter-term responses when contamination poses an imminent and substantial threat to human health or the environment.

Prioritizing the Superfund Program and Establishing the Superfund Task Force

On May 22, Former EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt issued a memorandum, “Prioritizing the Superfund Program.” The memorandum outlined three actions:

It established the Superfund Task Force to provide recommendations on an expedited timeframe.

To promote increased oversight, accountability and consistency in remedy selections, the administrator is retaining authority previously delegated to the assistant administrator for Office of Land and Emergency Management and the regional administrators to select remedies estimated to cost $50 million or more.

Regional administrators and their staffs shall more closely and more frequently coordinate with the administrator's office throughout the process of developing and evaluating alternatives and selecting a remedy, particularly at sites with remedies estimated to cost $50 million or more.

On July 25, Former Administrator Pruitt issued the Task Force’s report outlining 42 recommendations under five overarching goals:

Expediting Cleanup and Remediation;

Re-invigorating Responsible Party Cleanup and Reuse;

Encouraging Private Investment;

Promoting Redevelopment and Community Revitalization; and

Engaging Partners and Stakeholders.

Learn more about the Task Force and its progress to date on the Superfund Task Force website.

Redevelopment of Superfund Sites Leads to Billions in Sales and Income

Superfund cleanups provide significant economic benefits to communities. EPA’s data for FY 2017 shows that at 487 Superfund sites in reuse, 6,622 businesses generated $43.6 billion in sales and employed 156,352 people who earned a combined income of $11.2 billion.

The annual sales total of $43.6 billion in FY 2017 at these sites is more than four times the $10.2 billion, adjusted for inflation, that EPA has spent cumulatively at these sites.

Over the last seven years (2011-2017) these businesses’ ongoing operations generated at least $206 billion (inflation adjusted) in sales, which is more than 20 times the $10.2 billion that EPA spent.

Estimates of National Beneficial Economic Effects Since 2011 Year Sites in Reuse

with Economic

Data

Number of

Businesses Annual

Sales (billions)* Jobs Annual

Employment

Income (billions)* 2011 135 271 $9.6 24,308 $1.8 2012 276 972 $21.3 46,475 $3.5 2013 363 2,216 $34.3 70,270 $5.1 2014 450 3,474 $32.6 89,646 $6.2 2015 454 3,908 $30.0 108,445 $8.1 2016 458 4,720 $34.7 131,635 $9.4 2017 487 6,622 $43.6 156,352 $11.2 Total $206.1 $45.3 *Adjusted to 2016 USD using the Consumer Price Index.

EPA Adds Subsurface Intrusion Pathway to NPL Scoring System

On Jan. 9, 2017, the Federal Register published EPA’s rulemaking that added a scoring mechanism to the Hazard Ranking System (HRS) to evaluate sites with subsurface intrusion contamination for placement on the Superfund National Priorities List (NPL).

The HRS is the principal mechanism EPA uses to place environmental releases on the NPL. It is a numerically based screening system that uses information from initial investigations to assess the relative potential of sites that pose a threat to human health or the environment.



The most common form of subsurface intrusion is vapor intrusion, which occurs when vapor-forming chemicals migrate from the subsurface into an overlying building.

In extreme cases, the vapors may accumulate in dwellings or occupied buildings to levels that may pose near-term safety hazards from explosion or acute health effects.

In buildings with lower concentrations of vapor-forming chemicals arising from vapor intrusion, the main concern is whether the chemicals may pose an unacceptable risk of health effects due to long-term exposure.

See:

EPA Adds and Proposes New NPL Sites

On Aug. 3, EPA added seven sites and proposed addition of four sites to the National Priorities List (NPL). EPA adds sites to the NPL when contamination threatens public health and the environment. The NPL guides EPA in determining which sites warrant further investigation and/or cleanup. Sites posing an unacceptable level of risk to human health or the environment are remediated.

The new NPL sites are:

The Battery Recycling Company in Bo. Cambalache, Puerto Rico;

Former Custom Cleaners in Memphis, Tennessee;

Highway 18 Ground Water in Kermit, Texas;

Microfab Inc. in Amesbury, Massachusetts;

Old HWY 275 and N. 288th Street in Valley, Nebraska;

Post and Lumber Preserving Co. Inc. in Quincy, Florida; and

Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics in Village of Hoosick Falls, New York.

The sites proposed for addition to the NPL are:

Newark South Ground Water Plume in Newark, Delaware;

American Creosote DeRidder in DeRidder, Louisiana;

Mississippi Phosphate Corporation in Pascagoula, Mississippi; and

Eagle Industries in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.

See also:

EPA Completes Deletion Activities at Six NPL Sites

EPA may delete a final National Priorities List site if it determines that no further response is required to protect human health or the environment.

In FY 2017, EPA deleted two sites from the NPL, bringing the total of deleted sites to 394.

In addition, EPA partially deleted four sites in FY 2017. There have now been 86 partial deletions at 65 NPL sites. See:

EPA and HUD Sign MOU to Improve Communication

In January, EPA and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development signed a Memorandum of Understanding regarding “Improving Communication About Certain Public and HUD-Assisted Multifamily Housing Near Superfund Sites.”



EPA and HUD entered into this MOU to facilitate communication, information exchange, and EPA access to HUD properties when further investigation is appropriate.

EPA accomplishments during FY 2017 include:

Identified hundreds of Superfund sites where public housing, or subsidized multifamily properties, were within the site footprint or nearby. These sites were reviewed to ensure there were no immediate risks to the residents.



Expanded its investigational footprint at one site and accelerated investigational timelines at two more to address potential risks to residents.



Added public housing and subsidized properties to EJSCREEN, EPA’s environmental justice mapping and screening tool, to enable quick and reliable identification of potentially impacted residents.



Provided training and communications materials to Superfund remedial project managers and community involvement coordinators to facilitate communications between the agencies.

Superfund Sites Redeveloped for Alternative Energy Generation

Many active and former Superfund sites are now home to alternative energy facilities. As of September 2017, alternative energy facilities located at 50 Superfund sites provided an installed capacity of more than 316 megawatts.

Wind, solar and landfill gas facilities make up about 90 percent of the projects, and 62 percent of these efforts have an installed capacity of 1 megawatt or more. About 32 percent of these projects offset on-site energy demands of cleanup efforts or directly power site-related cleanup activities.

EPA Responds to Hurricanes

The 2017 hurricane season included three of the most destructive storms in U.S. history — Harvey, Irma and Maria. EPA deployed response teams to all three events to help residents recover.

On Aug. 25, Hurricane Harvey struck the Texas coast as a Category 4 hurricane. It would go on to dump more than 50 inches of rain on parts of Southeast Texas and cause $125 billion in damage.

EPA Region 6 immediately activated the Regional Emergency Operations Center and deployed personnel to begin coordination with the state of Texas on emergency response activities. The Agency rapidly responded to the state’s request for support.

EPA field operations included identification and assessment of impacts to drinking water and wastewater critical infrastructure; response to oil and hazardous materials discharges and releases; assessments to identify and evaluate discharges and releases; collection and disposal of accumulations of orphaned containers; and assessment of damages to oil and chemical facilities.

Hurricane Irma made landfall on the Florida Keys on Sept. 10 with 130 mile-per-hour winds. EPA personnel integrated into unified operations with the United States Coast Guard and Florida Department of Environmental Protection.

Landfill technical specialists provided assistance with debris management in the Keys and performed more than 240 site visits. The EPA Container Recovery Group collected more than 120 items including drums, oil containers and propane tanks. EPA’s water teams, along with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, completed 2,227 assessments of drinking water and wastewater facilities.

Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands on Sept. 20. The storm has resulted in more than 500 fatalities and $92 billion in damage.

EPA has deployed a large response team to help island residents in the aftermath of Maria as well as Irma, which also caused significant damage in the region. As of February 2018, EPA had more than 350 personnel deployed to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

EPA is focused on environmental impacts and public health threats as well as ensuring the safety of those in the affected areas. EPA’s work includes the collection of household hazardous waste and debris management, oil and chemical spill response, vessel recovery, management of medical waste, and activities to restore drinking water and wastewater services.

Top of Page

Key Measures

EPA uses two types of response authorities to address polluted sites under Superfund: removal and remedial. Superfund responds to chemical releases and other urgent situations under its emergency response and time-critical removal authorities. Superfund’s remedial program conducts long-term cleanups of contaminated sites, and in many cases, returns them to beneficial use.

Sites EPA cleans up under the Superfund remedial program fall under either the National Priorities List (NPL) or the Superfund Alternative Approach (SAA).

The NPL is the list of national priorities among the known or threatened releases of hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants. It is intended to guide EPA in determining which sites warrant further investigation and/or cleanup. Sites posing an unacceptable level of risk to human health or the environment are remediated.

The SAA is an alternative to listing a site on the NPL. SAA sites have the same investigation and cleanup standards as NPL sites, but are led and funded by a cooperative and capable potentially responsible party under an enforceable agreement with EPA. It can save time and resources compared to listing a site on the NPL.

EPA’s Superfund program tracks the following measures on an annual basis to keep the public and internal and external stakeholders apprised of the program’s progress in cleaning up sites.

For additional information on these topics, see:

Protecting communities' health and ecosystems*

* Includes both National Priorities List and Superfund Alternative Approach sites.

In FY 2017, a net total of 24 additional sites were designated as “Human Exposure Under Control,” bringing the cumulative total at the end of FY 2017 to 1,475 sites. The “Human Exposure Under Control” category describes sites where EPA assessments indicate there are currently no unacceptable human exposure pathways anywhere on site. This is generally because either the entire site has been cleaned up to levels that do not adversely affect public health, or controls have been implemented that prevent human exposure to contamination. For current data and additional information, see:

EPA controlled the migration of contaminated groundwater through engineered remedies or natural processes at net total of 14 additional sites, bringing the cumulative total to 1,169 sites.

Safeguarding communities from imminent threats

EPA completed or provided oversight at 255 removal actions to address imminent and substantial threats to communities. Removal responses address sites where contamination poses an immediate threat to human health and the environment.

Preparing for future cleanup efforts

EPA completed 747 remedial site assessments, for a cumulative total of 95,416. Remedial assessments are performed to determine if cleanup may be needed under a Superfund-managed or -monitored program. The 747 assessments resulted in the following outcomes:

452 , or 61 percent, required no further work under Superfund;

, or 61 percent, required no further work under Superfund; 235 , or 31 percent, need further assessment; and

, or 31 percent, need further assessment; and 60 , or 8 percent, were referred to a cleanup program.

, or 8 percent, were referred to a cleanup program. See Superfund Site Assessment Process

EPA placed seven sites on and proposed four sites to the National Priorities List. At the end of FY 2017, the NPL had 49 proposed, 1,342 final, and 394 deleted sites. See:

EPA selected 34 cleanup remedies and amended 34 cleanup plans. See:

EPA obligated approximately $210 million in appropriated funds, state cost-share contributions, and potentially responsible party settlement resources to conduct and oversee:

Site assessments and investigations;

Selection and design of cleanup plans; and

Support for state, tribal, community involvement activities, and other activities.

See Finding Potentially Responsible Parties (PRPs)

Funding Superfund work

In FY 2017, EPA obtained approximately $1.2 billion in commitments from potentially responsible parties (PRPs) to clean up Superfund sites, and EPA billed PRPs approximately $99 million in oversight costs associated with cleanup work at sites in FY 2017. See:

Additionally, PRPs committed to reimburse approximately $143 million of EPA’s past costs from cleanup work at Superfund sites. The amounts EPA recovers are either placed in site-specific special accounts for future cleanup work or deposited into the general Superfund Trust Fund to be used for sites where viable, liable parties either do not exist or lack the funds or capabilities needed to conduct the cleanup. See:

EPA obligated approximately $442 million in appropriated funds, state cost-share contributions, and PRP settlement resources for construction and post-construction projects. See:

Special account funds may be used to partially reimburse parties performing CERCLA response work at a site, pay for EPA’s future cleanup-related costs at a site, or pay for EPA’s past cleanup-related costs at a site (i.e., reclassification).

The Agency's goal in establishing and using special accounts is to ensure PRPs pay for cleanup at Superfund sites. This conserves annually appropriated resources from the Superfund Trust Fund for sites where there are no liable or viable PRPs.

In FY 2017, EPA disbursed or obligated more than $357 million, including reclassifications, from Superfund special accounts for site-specific work.

As of the end of FY 2017, more than $4.0 billion has been disbursed or obligated for Superfund cleanups from special accounts.

Conducting construction work

EPA and other project leads started 75 new remedial construction projects, including 22 government-led projects, 30 potentially responsible party-led projects (25 NPL sites and 5 SAA sites), and 23 federal facility-led projects. See:

EPA and other project leads conducted construction or provided oversight at 472 remedial construction projects started in prior fiscal years, including 133 government-led projects, 193 potentially responsible party-led projects (184 NPL sites and 9 SAA sites), and 146 federal facility-lead projects. See:

EPA was unable to fund new construction work at 18 National Priorities List sites that would have otherwise been ready for construction in FY 2017. Unfunded Superfund construction projects result when a potentially responsible party is not found or cannot pay, and no other funding sources are available. See:

Completing remedial construction projects

EPA and other project leads completed 97 remedial construction projects. This total includes 30 government-led projects, 38 potentially responsible party-led projects (33 NPL sites and 5 SAA sites), and 29 federal facility sites. Remedial construction (often referred to as remedial action) is how the Superfund program implements solutions to the environmental problems at uncontrolled hazardous waste sites. There can be multiple remedial actions to be performed at each site. All of these actions must be performed in order for a site to be deemed to have completed construction. See:

Completing construction work

“Construction completion” is a site-wide measure that documents the completion of all physical construction of all cleanup actions, including actions to address all immediate threats and to bring all long-term threats under control. In FY 2017, all physical construction of the cleanup remedy was completed at seven National Priorities List sites and three Superfund Alternative Approach sites. EPA and other project leads have now completed construction of all remedies at 1,195 National Priorities List sites and 13 Superfund Alternative Approach sites. See:

Ensuring long-term protection

EPA conducted 257 five-year reviews, including 33 at federal facility sites, to ensure site remedies remain protective. Five-year reviews are generally required when hazardous substances remain on site above levels that permit unlimited use and unrestricted exposure. Five-year reviews provide an opportunity to evaluate the implementation and performance of a remedy to determine whether it adequately protects human health and the environment. See:

Getting sites ready for redevelopment

In FY 2017, Superfund identified 43 additional sites as having all long-term protections, including institutional controls, in place to meet Superfund’s Sitewide Ready for Anticipated Use measure, bringing the cumulative total to 836. See:

The Superfund Redevelopment Initiative ensures EPA and its partners have the tools to return Superfund sites to productive use. See the Highlights section above for data on the Initiative’s economic impact. In FY 2017, EPA began five new reuse projects under the Initiative and continued support on another six ongoing reuse projects.

Optimizing Superfund work to increase program efficiency

Through Superfund’s optimization program, teams of independent technical experts identify opportunities to improve the effectiveness and cost efficiency of Superfund remedies. In FY 2017, Superfund completed 25 optimization projects and had a total of 68 underway. See:

Top of Page

Other Program Accomplishments

Report Provides Trends in Remedy Decisions

EPA published the 15th edition of the Superfund Remedy Report to provide information on remedies EPA selected to address contamination at Superfund National Priorities List and Superfund Alternative Approach sites.

The report informs stakeholders in Superfund communities about the program’s remedy decisions, and helps federal, state and tribal remediation professionals select remedies. Furthermore, analyzing the trends in remedy decisions provides an indication of the future demand for remedial technologies.

Some key findings:

Contaminated groundwater and soil are the most commonly addressed media at Superfund sites.



Superfund sites and remedies are generally complex. A majority of sites address multiple media (i.e., soil, groundwater) and types of contaminants, with multiple remedial approaches.



Almost 80 percent of sites with remedies include treatment of the source materials (i.e., soil or sediment), groundwater or both.



More than half address volatile organic compounds (VOCs), semi-volatile organic compounds, and metals.



With regard to technologies to treat groundwater contamination, in situ treatment is increasing, and pump and treat is decreasing.



Almost all sediment decision documents include excavation or dredging.



Active depressurization was the most frequently selected technology for vapor intrusion mitigation.



Institutional controls continue to be selected in most new remedy decision documents.

Superfund Releases Best Practices Document to Inform Work at Abandoned Mines

In July, the Superfund program issued Planning for Response Actions at Abandoned Mines with Underground Workings: Best Practices for Preventing Sudden, Uncontrolled Fluid Mining Waste Releases Reference Document (PDF)(70 pp, 4 MB)

In an effort to minimize the potential for sudden uncontrolled releases of fluid mine waste resulting from its response actions, EPA will use these best practices, as applicable, before carrying out Superfund activities at hardrock-mining and mineral-processing sites with fluid-release hazards.

EPA compiled these best practices as a follow up to recommendations made by EPA’s internal review and the Department of Interior’s review of the 2015 Gold King Mine release near Silverton, Colorado.

Superfund Documents Recent Optimization Reviews

EPA released the Superfund Optimization Progress Report 2011-2015 (PDF)(75 pp, 2.7 MB). The report describes EPA’s optimization efforts to make its cleanups more efficient and effective.

Optimization is a systematic site review by a team of independent technical experts. It identifies opportunities to ensure remedy protectiveness and cost efficiency, and to facilitate progress toward cleanup completion.

The Superfund program released the National Strategy to Expand Superfund Optimization Practices from Site Assessment to Site Completion in September 2012. The strategy instituted changes to technical approaches at Superfund remedial sites to use tools and strategies that promote more effective and efficient cleanups.

The body of knowledge on applied optimization techniques and their use throughout the cleanup lifecycle is substantial and has grown markedly since the strategy was released. When applied consistently and systematically to site management, these techniques and the decisions they generate show a significant return on investment.

Superfund Provides Job Training for Cleanup Work

The Superfund Job Training Initiative (SuperJTI) is a job-readiness program that provides training and employment opportunities for people living in communities affected by Superfund sites. EPA’s goal is to help these communities develop job opportunities that remain long after a Superfund site has been cleaned up.

In 2017, EPA conducted three SuperJTI projects at sites in Hillsboro, Illinois; East Chicago, Indiana; and Klamath Falls, Oregon. Thirty-eight trainees completed the program and are ready to go to work. See:

Superfund Program Redesigns Site-Profile Pages

Every National Priorities List and Superfund Alternative Approach site has its own site-profile page on the web. In 2017, Superfund staff from across the nation worked together to redesign the site-profile page template.

The team put the needs of Superfund communities first to develop an easy-to-navigate design that aligned with EPA’s overall web look-and-feel. You can view the redesigned site-profile pages by searching for NPL and SAA sites on the Sites Where You Live page.

Superfund Issues Sediment Sites Directive

In January, EPA released a contaminated sediment sites directive containing 11 recommendations based on current best practices for characterizing sediment sites, evaluating remedial alternatives, and selecting and implementing appropriate response actions.

The memorandum also included updated operating procedures for the Contaminated Sediment Technical Advisory Group.

Cleanup Work Advances at Sites Nationwide

In FY 2017, EPA completed its work or made major progress at removal and remedial sites across the country, including:

Portland Harbor

On Jan. 6, EPA released its cleanup plan, or record of decision, for 10 miles of the Lower Willamette River within the Portland Harbor Superfund site which runs through the economic heart of Portland, Oregon.

EPA’s plan addresses contaminated sediments through dredging, capping, enhanced natural recovery, and monitored natural recovery, including removal of over three million cubic yards of contaminated sediments.

The plan also addresses contaminated groundwater that could re-contaminate the river and river banks.

Approximately 1,774 acres of the site with lower contaminant levels are expected to recover naturally over time.

Active cleanup work at the site is now expected to take as much as 13 years and cost approximately $1 billion. See:

U.S. Smelter and Lead Refinery

EPA continued to clean up residential areas of the U.S. Smelter and Lead Refinery, Inc. Superfund site in East Chicago, Indiana.

This construction season, soil and interior dust cleanup work was conducted at residential properties. As of Nov. 30, 2017, EPA completed soil cleanups at 229 properties and interior dust cleanings at 62 properties.

This brings the total over the last two years of work to 284 soil cleanups and 88 interior dust cleanings.

EPA’s community involvement team made more than 1,200 contacts with residents and provided Superfund for Communities training for residents in the affected area.

In addition, EPA began a feasibility study for the West Calumet Housing Complex property to support a potential remedy change due to the pending demolition of the housing complex.

San Jacinto River Waste Pits

In the wake of Hurricane Harvey, EPA divers conducted a damage assessment of the armored cap materials at the San Jacinto River Waste Pits site in Channelview, Texas.

Approximately 20 dives were performed over three days in the Northwest Cap Area, which contains relatively steep capped slopes over dioxin waste extending into the San Jacinto River.

During the cap assessment, EPA divers also selected 14 locations of possible cap damage for surficial sediment sampling. At the same time, commercial divers collected similar samples at collocated positions.

On Oct. 11, EPA approved the cleanup plan to address highly toxic dioxin contamination at the site.

The selected remedy will protect human health and the environment by removing highly contaminated material from the site and securing less contaminated areas. EPA’s cleanup plan includes installing engineering controls such as cofferdams before excavating almost 212,000 cubic yards of dioxin-contaminated material for disposal.

The plan provides certainty to people living near the site by permanently addressing risk posed by the contamination.

Jacksonville Ash and Brown's Dump Sites

Years of coordinated efforts in Jacksonville, Florida, have transformed four once-contaminated areas in low-income, environmental justice neighborhoods into safe places for locals to live, shop, work and play.

The Jacksonville Ash and Brown’s Dump sites are areas where incinerator ash was deposited.

Cleanup efforts have included soil removal, surface covers and institutional controls to prevent contact with contaminated soils. About 50 properties have been cleaned up to date, addressing more than 90 percent of all site areas.

The city of Jacksonville worked with EPA to allow residential and commercial uses to continue during cleanup. Community facilities – a public park, middle and high school, and two elementary schools – also remained open. The school properties were cleaned up during the summer months when students were on their break.

The cleanup has spurred new development as well. The sites now support an animal care center, several residential projects, a church, community centers, and the 11-court MaliVai Tennis Center. Future plans include additional park facilities.

Kinta/Elk City Oil Spill

During spring 2017, parts of Oklahoma suffered heavy rains. On Apr. 30, the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality (ODEQ) requested EPA assistance responding to reports of oil contamination impacting residential properties in Kinta. Leading up to the incident, there were flash floods and moderate to major river flooding.

That day, EPA assessed the extent of oil contamination while working with Haskell County officials. EPA investigated and identified multiple sources of oil spills. Due to the lack of a clear responsible party, EPA initiated cleanup activities including excavation of oil-impacted soils; removal of oiled vegetation on both private and public property; removal of oil from the concrete drainage canal and unnamed tributary creek; and recovery of multiple orphaned oil containers.

On May 18, ODEQ requested EPA assistance again after a tornado struck Elk City. Two 300-gallon storage tanks were thrown 200 yards near an unnamed creek which flowed into Elk Creek and the Washita River.

EPA identified a responsible party that assisted with cleanup efforts. On May 19, EPA completed cleanup of a drainage ditch and contained the source oil, preventing further contaminants from reaching Elk Creek. The team then restored the area back to pre-spill conditions.

Morgan Materials

EPA Region 2 received a referral from the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) to undertake a cleanup at the Morgan Materials site in Buffalo in November 2016.

The site consisted of several warehouses where hazardous and nonhazardous products were improperly stored.

EPA identified manufacturers’ names and addresses that sold products to Morgan Materials. Over 30 companies voluntarily removed their chemicals and waste products from the site in 2017.

As of the end of FY 2017, over 3,300 tons of waste products and over 8,400 drums and small containers were removed to off-site disposal facilities.

Brunswick Wood Preserving

In August 2017, EPA completed the second five-year review of the remedy for the Brunswick Wood Preserving site in Brunswick, Georgia. It confirmed that the cleanup remains protective of human health and the environment.

The site’s remedy included construction of two containment cells to contain and isolate contamination at the site. The cells consist of subsurface barrier walls surrounding the former creosote pond areas, solidified and stabilized site soils and sediments from Burnett Creek, and engineered caps.

In 2015, EPA installed a water extraction/treatment system to control the water level in the eastern containment cell. In 2016, EPA conducted additional remediation of creosote remaining in the shallow subsurface outside the western containment area.

Commencement Bay

In 2017, EPA Region 10 completed all the anticipated active remedial actions to reduce groundwater contamination emanating from the Commencement Bay, South Tacoma Channel Superfund site in Tacoma, Washington.

The site is contaminated with chlorinated solvents and petroleum.

Significant achievements of the interim remedial action include 88 percent reduction in mass discharge of contaminants of concern, 99 percent reduction in mass discharge of parent compounds (1,1,2,2-PCA, PCE, and TCE), and five of the six contaminants of concern reduced to below maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) in the Groundwater Extraction Treatment System influent.

Navail Air Station Oceana

On May 11, the Naval Air Station Oceana experienced a discharge of approximately 96,000 gallons of fuel from its fuel farm in Virginia Beach, Virginia, due to an open tank filter. The cleanup effort was led by the U.S. Navy, working with the U.S. Coast Guard.

On May 16, the U.S. Coast Guard contacted EPA Region 3 for assistance. Region 3 reached out to the Superfund program’s Environmental Response Team (ERT) to provide air monitoring support to determine potential air contamination.

On May 18, ERT mobilized to the site with 24-hour air monitoring equipment. The goal was to set up those instruments to monitor for volatile organic compounds coming off the fuel. ERT conducted air monitoring at several locations in the surrounding area of the spill, and ERT provided human health data for those affected.

Once the numbers were below the agreed-upon action level, the Navy and Coast Guard allowed the residents to return to their homes.

West Odessa Tire Fire

On Apr. 9, EPA received notification of a large fire occurring at a tire disposal facility in West Odessa, Texas. Adjacent to a large chemical blending facility and within a half mile of a residential community, the fire created a large plume of smoke that became a public health hazard for downwind populations.

The local fire departments did not have the specialized resources needed. Therefore, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) requested EPA assistance.

EPA mobilized to the incident and formed a unified command with TCEQ and Ector County Emergency Management. EPA also activated resources to extinguish the fire and assess any threats to the public arising from the smoke plume.

The Ector County Health Department established a voluntary shelter-in-place for areas immediately surrounding and downwind of the fire. EPA also initiated air monitoring along the perimeter and within the dispersion area of the plume.

After approximately one week of unified operations, the joint team contained the fire. Approximately 1,000 yards of dirt was applied to the fire pit area before the fire finally extinguished. EPA used the infrared camera to verify that no hot spots remained.

North Ridge Estates

During the second construction season at North Ridge Estates, a residential asbestos cleanup site in Klamath Falls, Oregon, EPA removed 150,000 cubic yards of asbestos-contaminated soil from 14 residences.

The completed properties were then backfilled and revegetated. This has readied 10 homes for restoration for resale or for lease as office and living space.

Cleanup construction at the site is expected to be completed in the next 18 months.

Indiana, North Carolina and Virginia Win Redevelopment Awards

EPA developed the State Excellence in Supporting Reuse award in 2014 to recognize state partners whose work has led to lasting benefits that enhance community quality-of-life and ensure the long-term protectiveness of site remedies. The 2017 awardees are:

Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM): IDEM has provided critical support for cleanup and redevelopment efforts at Superfund sites across Indiana. IDEM has worked with EPA to help developers understand how to fit redevelopment efforts within a site’s remedial constraints. They have been instrumental in ensuring that implemented institutional controls do not unnecessarily hinder potential redevelopment opportunities. Highlighted sites:

North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality (NC DEQ): In addition to their involvement in the cleanup and reuse planning processes at Superfund sites, NC DEQ has also collaborated with EPA to promote redevelopment in an innovative way. They have worked with EPA to use geographic information systems (GIS) to provide important information to potential developers on site use limitations. Highlighted sites:

Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (VADEQ): VADEQ has long been a team player, working with EPA and other parties to achieve protective reuse and redevelopment of Superfund sites. By prioritizing the return of sites to productive use, outstanding redevelopment successes have been realized across the commonwealth of Virginia over the past several decades. These successes illustrate that the benefits of Superfund redevelopment are here to stay. Highlighted sites:

Superfund Clears Path for Redevelopment

Every year, new Superfund sites become ready for redevelopment and new businesses relocate to previously contaminated property. View the Highlights section above for the overall economic impact of the Superfund Redevelopment Initiative.

Here are just a few examples of sites that are providing benefits to their surrounding communities.

Iron Horse Park

The Iron Horse Park site in Billerica, Massachusetts, is a leading example of contaminated-site revitalization and transformation.

Three solar projects with a total capacity of 16 megawatts provide power to four school systems and the local government.

Nine commercial and industrial businesses are currently active at the site. Site businesses generated over $57.1 million in annual sales and employed over 350 people, providing annual employment income of $21.3 million to the local community.

Kennecott South Zone

The Kennecott South Zone in Salt Lake County, Utah, serves as a national model for the use of the Superfund Alternative Agreement, which is an alternative to listing a site on the NPL that can save time and resources. EPA approved the cleanup plan, setting the stage for the site’s cleanup and redevelopment.

Open communication, extensive collaboration and innovative thinking helped contribute to the transformation of this industrial site into a thriving residential area and regional economic hub.

Operable unit (OU) 7 and surrounding areas support Daybreak, the largest master-planned community in Utah. The site provides a wide range of commercial, industrial, public service, residential and recreational reuses. Businesses located in OU7 employ about 914 people, providing nearly $38 million in annual employment income and generating an estimated $143.2 million in annual sales.

Torch Lake

Quincy Smelter is part of the larger Torch Lake Superfund site in Franklin Township, Michigan.

EPA worked closely with the National Park Service, the Keweenaw National Historical Park Advisory Commission, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, Franklin Township and local partners to support Quincy Smelter, a 25-acre area located in Keweenaw National Historical Park, becoming part of the Quincy Mining Company National Historic Landmark.

Reuse plans for the area include a waterfront recreation area and historical tours of the landmark, which is considered the best-preserved copper smelter in the country.

PJP Landfill

The PJP Landfill site in Jersey City, New Jersey, has been transformed from a contaminated landfill into an economic hub and ecological asset.

Four businesses operate at the site — a paper product manufacturing company, a distribution facility for an online grocery supplier, a trucking company, and a gas station.

The area also includes over 32 acres of restored green space along the Hackensack River that supports wildlife.

Site businesses employ about 1,225 people and provide estimated annual employment income of nearly $51 million.

Chisman Creek

The Chisman Creek site in York County, Pennsylvania, is home to two popular athletic parks used by several sports leagues.

These high-quality recreation facilities have been a tremendous asset to the citizens of York County. Since the parks opened, they have hosted thousands of games and visitors.

Top of Page