Food Dollar Series
The food dollar series measures annual expenditures by U.S. consumers on domestically produced food. This data series is composed of three primary series—the marketing bill series, the industry group series, and the primary factor series—that shed light on different aspects of the food supply chain. The three series show three different ways to split up the same food dollar. See:

All statistics reported in the dollar bill images represent a percentage of an average annual food dollar expenditure (see Glossary). The same statistics reported in total dollar denominations are available in downloadable tables (see Download the Data).

Data are available from 1993 to 2017 and are updated annually. The principal data source of the food dollar series is released every even-numbered year such as 2016 (see Inter-industry relationships (Input/Output matrix)). For interim (odd-numbered) years, preliminary estimates of all the nominal food dollar series are reported based on a secondary data source (see Industry Economic Accounts: Input-Output Accounts). On the following even-numbered year, the preliminary estimates are revised and one additional year of data is added (see Documentation).

Roughly every 5 years since 1997, a new benchmark data source is published (see Industry Economic Accounts: Benchmark Input-Output Accounts) that is based on the U.S. Economic Census and U.S. Agricultural Census. With a new benchmark, all data in the food dollar series covering years since the previous benchmark undergo a final revision. For example, in 2014, the 2007 benchmark data were published, so all data from 1993 to 2013 in the food dollar series have been reconciled to benchmark data for the years 1997, 2002, and 2007. Beginning with the food dollar updates published in 2014, 16 additional commodity-specific tables have been added to the food dollar data series that report only benchmark-year statistics (see Commodity Tables in the Glossary).

Due to the lapse in Federal funding, revisions to the food dollar series based on the 2012 benchmark data have been postponed.