Data Files: U.S. and State-Level Farm Income and Wealth Statistics
These are the latest data concerning the farm income forecast, including the forecasts for the income statement for the U.S. farm sector, value added, cash receipts and value of production, government payments, farm production expenses, and the balance sheet. Included are historical U.S. and State-level farm income and wealth statistics. Historical/State data cover the topics of net value added and net farm income, net cash income, cash receipts and value of production, government payments, farm production expenses, and the balance sheet.

These data are released three times a year: in February, August, and November. The U.S.-level calendar-year forecast is first provided in February, and is updated in August and November. The August release converts the prior year’s farm income and balance sheet forecasts to estimates, adds State-level farm income estimates, and revises previous years' estimates. The November release updates the current year's forecast and revises previous years' estimates, as needed.

Note: The lapse in Federal funding that began on December 22, 2018, and lasted 35 days, delayed the availability of some data used to produce the forecasts and temporarily halted production of the Farm Income and Wealth Statistics. As a result, the release scheduled for February 6, 2019, was postponed to March 6, 2019.

Data are as of March 6, 2019, unless noted. The next scheduled forecast release is August 30, 2019. These tables cover the full history of data through 2019F, where available.

Summary of U.S. Farm Income Financial Indicators

Farm Income Statements, U.S. and States

Cash Receipts

Government Farm Program Payments

Production Expenses

Farm Balance Sheet and Financial Ratios, U.S.

Average (Farm-level) Net Cash Income, U.S.

Charts and Maps Data Visualizations

Download All Data in CSV File Format

Archive of Suspended Tables

The estimation of State-level balance sheet and liquidity/efficiency and solvency/profitability ratios has been suspended. Data for 1960-2003 for all 50 States are included in a ZIP file.