Schumer, Clinton: Key Senate Panel Approves $69,036 for Cornell University's Golden Nematode Project
Washington, DC -- Senators Charles E. Schumer and Hillary Rodham Clinton announced today that a Senate panel has given preliminary approval for $69,036 for the Golden Nematode project at Cornell University.

The news came as the Senate Appropriations Committee approved the FY 2005 Agriculture Appropriations bill. The bill will now proceed to the Senate floor. The bill must then go into conference with the House version before a final bill is approved by Congress.

"I'm extremely proud to fight for these funds, which will hopefully ensure that New York's potatoes will be devoured at the kitchen table and not destroyed in the fields by these insects," said Schumer. "With New York's crops being threatened by unseasonal temperatures, disastrous storms, and other factors we cannot control, we owe it to New York's farmers to make sure the funds are available to prevent losses that can be stopped. This funding will meet that goal."

"The Golden Nematode bug poses a significant threat to New York's potato growers," Senator Clinton said. "Right now, the last thing our farmers need is to worry about the threat of insects and diseases. These funds will help ensure that we take every precaution necessary to prevent the potentially devastating impact that this pest could have on our environment and our agricultural industry."

In October 2001, the Agriculture Research Service at the US Department of Agriculture, in conjunction with Cornell University and Penn State University, developed a potato that resists the golden nematode bug. The golden nematode, when uncontrolled, can reduce potato crop yields by up to 80 percent. Currently, this tiny worm only attacks potato crops located in NY State and the golden nematode quarantine program only exists in NY State. Currently, there is a shortage of new nematode resistant potato varieties available to growers because of the lack of resources for the program run by Cornell. It is estimated that there may not be any seed potatoes available in two years as it takes a number of years to breed new seed stock that can be used by farmers.





###