Clinton Welcomes Victory for Children's Health Bill Transforming Pediatric "Rule" Into Pediatric Law
Law Will Protect Countless Children from Unnecessary Risk Washington, DC - Today Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton welcomed news that the President signed into law the Pediatric Research Equity Act of 2003, to restore the protections of the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) 1998 Pediatric Rule - guaranteeing that drugs prescribed to children are tested and labeled for safety and effectiveness in children.

"I couldn't be more pleased. Through bipartisan collaboration and a genuine concern for the welfare of America's children we made this a reality and parents across the nation will now have great peace of mind," Senator Clinton said.

Under the Clinton Administration, in 1998 the Food and Drug Administration adopted a "Pediatric Rule" that required drug manufacturers to provide guidelines for the safe use of their products by children. However, in March of last year, the FDA announced that it would suspend enforcement of this rule. Although it reversed its decision soon thereafter, in October 2002 a court order raised new concerns - a District Court Judge blocked enforcement of the rule and found that Congress had to give explicit authority to the FDA to enforce it. This prompted Senator Clinton and several of her colleagues, including Mike Dewine (R-OH) and Christopher Dodd (D-CT) to work quickly on developing legislation.

"It was important to ensure that no future administration and no court of law could stand in the way of a sensible measure designed to protect our children," the Senator said.

Senator Clinton noted that this is much more than an administrative or legal issue. "Studies show that the failure to properly label and test prescription medications provided to children costs lives."

"We now begin an era when doctors no longer have to prescribe untested drugs to children or occasionally withhold life-saving medications from children, out of fear that they had too little information about the drug's effect," Senator Clinton said.





###