State leaders point to Dallas ISD as model for struggling schools
DALLAS — In his first days as principal of Edward Titche Elementary School, routinely rated as one of Dallas ISD’s lowest-performing campuses, Damien Stovall established the most basic of expectations for students: how to walk in the hallways.

For Stovall, restoring order at Titche started there. When he toured the school months earlier in the spring of 2017, Stovall found children — prekindergarteners included — aimlessly wandering the building during class hours. Inside the classroom was not much better, he said.

“You had students using profanity, teachers arguing back and forth with the kids. The description of students from teachers to me was awful,” Stovall said.

A little more than a year later, on a recent Thursday morning, students quietly moved, single-file, through the halls as elevator music played outside the school’s library and front entrance. In classrooms, they were attentively taking tests and tending to worksheets, their teachers offering assistance.

RELATED: Opponents skeptical of East Central ISD quest for gun proposal input

A new principal and the replacement of nearly all of Titche Elementary’s educators with highly-rated teachers had restored order and, along the way, Titche’s academic standing. After five consecutive years of an “improvement required” rating under the state’s academic accountability system, the campus scored an 88 this year, equivalent to a B grade.

The remarkable improvement at Titche and several other chronically low-performing Dallas schools has earned acclaim from Texas education leaders and politicians in recent months, and has the potential to help shape education policy across the state. As Texas legislators consider overhauling the state’s much-maligned school finance system next year, several key players are pushing to create policies that reward districts for adopting similar campus transformation methods.

“Most of their campuses really did knock the roof off, which is pretty amazing,” said Texas Education Commissioner Mike Morath, who served as a Dallas ISD board member from 2011 to 2015. “It really speaks to the idea that demography is not destiny. … Even students from the most challenging circumstances can perform at extraordinarily high levels.”

Dallas’ turnaround initiative, known as Accelerating Campus Excellence, or ACE, is built on a simple premise: putting the best educators in front of the neediest kids.

Large, urban school districts have struggled for decades to entice high-performing teachers to work in high-poverty neighborhoods, where students often present greater academic and behavioral challenges.

In Houston ISD, for example, students in the district’s highest-need schools are half as likely to have a teacher rated “highly effective” when compared to their peers, even after educators were offered $5,000 bonuses to work at those campuses.

Dallas has bucked that trend at its 10 ACE campuses, home to about 6,000 students. A few Texas school districts — including Houston ISD — already have adopted similar tactics for raising achievement at chronically lower-performing schools.

Other efforts have sprung up elsewhere. San Antonio ISD last year started a “master teachers” incentive program, paying stipends of up to $15,000 to teachers with track records of success based on evaluations and student data.

To avoid hiring master teachers who have only taught high-performing students, SAISD looks at candidates’ rates of student test score growth. They must also show leadership experience and go through a demo lesson. The master teachers are assigned the lowest-performing students at 25 schools and work extended hours in a district-wide attempt to reduce the number who are held back.

FIND OUT FIRST: Get San Antonio breaking news directly to your inbox

The teachers’ stipends are funded by a property tax increase that voters approved two years ago and $2.3 million from a federal grant. SAISD plans to shoulder the financial burden once the grant runs out and is tryng to preserve the program in the face of budget shortfalls that caused it to lay off 132 teachers this year. Master teachers were exempt from the layoffs.

Garland and Richardson ISDs, which both border Dallas, have implemented versions of ACE in their districts this school year. Garland uses the initiative at two campuses and Richardson has phased it in at four schools.

Under the ACE model, Dallas leaders replaced each campus principal with an experienced administrator with a record of results in other long-struggling schools. The district then empowered the principals to replace virtually their entire teaching staffs with educators who scored well on the district’s rigorous, data-driven evaluation model, known as the Teacher Excellence Initiative.

To entice employees to work in ACE schools, the district offered top-rated educators bonuses ranging from $6,000 to $12,000, depending on the teacher’s evaluation rating. Dallas also refurbished each campus, provided additional funding for social services and extended the school day by one hour.

The initiative remains relatively new — six schools started the program in 2015, with four more added in 2017 — but the early returns are promising.

The 10 schools averaged a B-level grade, with one school earning an A, under Texas’ accountability ratings.

In- and out-of-school suspensions are down at all 10 campuses, highlighted by Titche Elementary cutting its total from 245 in 2016-17 to 29 the following year. And teachers at most ACE schools reported levels of satisfaction with campus culture and trust that exceeded district averages last year.

“When we shifted the proficient teachers to schools like Titche, we saw the dramatic shift,” said Shatara Stokes, director of the ACE schools program. “It takes the focus away from what kids can’t do. Now, it’s what they can do and the conditions they need to succeed.”

Turning promise into policy

Several state leaders have suggested other school districts should implement similar practices. Gov. Greg Abbott highlighted Dallas’ success in a presentation this fall on school finance reform, as first reported by the Texas Tribune. Morath often cites the district’s efforts in public speeches.

In July, members of the Texas Commission on Public School Finance, a bipartisan group of legislators, educators and advocates appointed by Abbott to make recommendations for system reforms, suggested the state should employ “specific systemic incentives” to ensure “a sufficient number of our better teachers” work in high-need schools. Commission members cited Dallas’ ACE initiative, writing that it has shown “the tremendous potential of this strategy.”

“It’s no secret in education circles that schools surrounded by generational poverty, in neighborhoods with lots of challenges, have a hard time keeping the best teachers. That’s just fact,” said state Rep. Diego Bernal, D-San Antonio, vice chair of the House Public Education Committee and a school finance commission member. “(Districts) have to figure out how to crack that code, and Dallas ISD has done that.”

RELATED: Opinion: The high cost of low Texas taxes

Still, turning Dallas’ reforms into statewide policy could face roadblocks. Legislators and education leaders largely agree that districts should receive more state funding if they implement systems similar to ACE, but they have not crafted any parameters for qualifying for money.

“I think there’s bipartisan support for doing something like this, but the approach seems to matter to people quite a bit,” Bernal said. “It would have to be done delicately.”

One point of contention could be the extent to which lawmakers require districts to employ teacher evaluation tools in exchange for increased state funding. Abbott and other Republican leaders often couple their praise of Dallas with commendation of the district’s teacher evaluation and merit pay systems. Some teachers’ unions, however, argue that such tools can be unfair and overly reliant on students’ standardized test scores.

The progress is not caused by evaluation tools, but rather because evaluators “have been forced to go into classrooms and work with teachers again,” said Rena Honea, president of the Alliance-AFT, a union representing about 5,500 teachers and support staff in Dallas. “That interaction and those conversations have helped, for the most part.”

Rep. Dennis Bonnen, an Angleton Republican who is expected to become Speaker of the House next year, has said school finance reform is his top legislative priority headed into the 2019 session, though success is far from certain.

At HISD, which has faced potential state sanctions tied to chronically low performance at several campuses the past two years, district officials last year adopted some reforms that mirror ACE under a program called Achieve 180: staff salary incentives, more professional development opportunities, increased supports for students’ emotional and social well-being.

HISD initially spread its initiative across 42 schools, compared to Dallas’s six campuses. The district also offered smaller teacher salary bonuses of $5,000, and it did not require teachers to possess strong performance ratings to work in Achieve 180 schools. HISD also reported average first-year staff turnover of nearly 50 percent at Achieve 180 campuses, significantly lower than Dallas.

HISD saw some positive results from the program. Prior to Achieve 180’s implementation, 25 schools covered under the initiative failed to meet state academic standards in 2017; that number fell to 10 in 2018. Most schools saw positive growth in math and reading compared to prior years — though few matched the immediate turnaround of Dallas’ ACE schools.

As Dallas and Houston officials have trumpeted their successes, they have had to pinch pennies elsewhere to cover the costs. HISD dedicated about $16 million in new spending on Achieve 180 in 2017-18, which required offsetting cuts as the district grappled with a budget shortfall of about $100 million. Dallas leaders, who allocated about $7 million on ACE in 2017-18, will partly fund it going forward with a property tax increase voters approved in November.

“I think the community responded positively to the results,” Stokes said. “It helps restore trust in the district to say you’re making decisions that are really for students.”

Staff Writer Alia Malik contributed to this report from San Antonio. | jacob.carpenter@chron.com | twitter.com/chronjacob