Governor says another 1,000 Texas Guardsmen headed to border
Gov. Greg Abbott said Monday that Texas would send more than 1,000 additional National Guard troops to the border in response to President Donald Trump’s request to support federal agencies there.

Abbott, in an interview on KTSA-AM, said 250 troops were now on the ground and that the force “would be ramped up to more than 1,000 in the state of Texas alone.” He said Texas would add about 300 guardsmen a week to the border “until we get it staffed up,” and noted that the mission would be open-ended.

Aides to Abbott said the total assignment eventually could grow, to total up to 1,400 troops, and his office agreed with that as a possible “range” but could confirm no specific number.

Trump said last week that the troops would remain along the Rio Grande until a border wall is built. Abbott told the talk show “Fox and Friends” on Monday that the troops would amount to “a virtual and personnel wall” on the border.

Back to Gallery Governor says another 1,000 Texas Guardsmen headed to border 30 1 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 2 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 3 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 4 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 5 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 6 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 7 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 8 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 9 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 10 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 11 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 12 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 13 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 14 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 15 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 16 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 17 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 18 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 19 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 20 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 21 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 22 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 23 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 24 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 25 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 26 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 27 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 28 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 29 of 30 Photo: Getty Images 30 of 30 Photo: Getty Images



























































“From my understanding and in multiple conversations with the secretary of Homeland Security as well as the president, this is something where we may be in this for the long haul,” the governor told KTSA’s Trey Ware, a San Antonio talk-show host. “The goal is what the president articulated from the very beginning of his campaign and during his administration, and that is to make sure that the United States of America does a better job of securing its border.”

The guard had said Friday night that it would send 250 troops to the Texas-Mexico border immediately, with an unspecified number to follow. Guard organizations in New Mexico and Arizona also said they would send soldiers to their borders following Trump’s call last week for a stronger military presence.

Trump’s plan calls for a force of as many as 4,000 troops in four states and is expected to be modeled on two previous operations launched by Democratic and Republican presidents. While New Mexico, Arizona and Texas have agreed to support the president’s request, California has not yet responded.

“As you know, he hoped to get funding that would provide greater security on the border, he didn’t get exactly what he wanted, so this is a different tool in the toolbox of a president as I’ve indicated earlier that presidents in the past have used, and so this is something that’s not going to be ending in June or July, as I understand it,” Abbott said. He added that the operation “will be ongoing until Congress steps up and takes the action” Trump thinks is needed.

The Texas Guard has had troops on the border in supportive roles for years and has helped federal and local authorities under a program led by Abbott called Operation Secure Texas. Its current footprint is small compared with past efforts, though, with only about 100 soldiers and airmen serving in a variety of roles until last weekend. The state of Texas has paid for those troops this year, at around $1 million a month, but the federal government will now cover their expenses, as well as for soldiers and airmen in the other participating states.

As in past operations led by Abbott, then-Gov. Rick Perry and Presidents Barack Obama and George W. Bush, the guardsmen are armed for self-defense but not allowed to make arrests. Texas Guard commanders, in interviews Friday, wouldn’t rule out the possibility of using them for those purposes.

Obama’s Operation Phalanx, which started in 2010, involved 1,200 soldiers, while Bush’s Operation Jump Start saw 6,000 go to the border in 2006.

National Guard forces under state authority are not covered by the Posse Comitatus Act, which forbids GIs serving under federal authority from making arrests, searches or seizures in the U.S. unless the president invokes the Insurrection Act. But the guard rarely acts in law enforcement roles. They did get that authority in New Orleans by Louisiana’s governor after Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

Abbott has the power to use troops under his authority in the same way, but suggested they’d serve in an “observe and report” status, not act in a law enforcement capacity. He said that “whenever they are in a position where they could be confronted by someone who is very dangerous, they will be armed. Our National Guard will be able to fully defend themselves.

“The point that you’re talking about is that we want to downplay any notion — that would be misinformed — that our National Guard are showing up with military bayonets trying to take on anybody’s coming across the border, because that is not their role,” Abbott told Ware, the KTSA talk-show host.

The governor went on to say the guard would help federal authorities by providing “a support role, providing that surveillance, providing other levels of activity so that there will be more Border Patrol boots on the ground who are actively engaged in the apprehension process.”