Liberal billionaire George Soros backs Nico LaHood's Democratic opponent
Four years ago, Bexar County District Attorney Nico LaHood gained a critical edge in his bid to unseat an incumbent when a wealthy donor infused his uphill campaign with more than $1.2 million.

The outsized support from personal injury attorney Thomas J. Henry helped push LaHood to unlikely victory — but now the district attorney might be getting a taste of his own medicine.

Liberal billionaire George Soros, through an organization called the Texas Justice & Public Safety PAC, has contributed $6,000 in “research” to the campaign of Joe Gonzales, LaHood’s opponent in the March 6 Democratic primary.

It was unclear on Monday whether the Soros-funded PAC would continue to support Gonzales. The 87-year-old hedge fund tycoon, though, has a record of sweeping reform-minded candidates to victory.

In 2016, Soros spent nearly $11 million to help 12 Democratic candidates in district attorney races across the country; 10 won. One Texas victor, Harris County District Attorney Kim Ogg, reaped more than $583,000 from Soros in her race to unseat an establishment Republican.

Soros scored another upset in 2017, spending $1.4 million in Philadelphia to help progressive civil rights attorney Larry Krasner trounce a Republican DA.

Gonzales embraced Soros’ support on Monday.

“I am pleased to have the support of the Texas Justice & Public Safety PAC,” the defense attorney said in a prepared statement. “This organization, much like myself, is committed to true criminal justice reform and clearly my platform resonates with their desire to protect and serve our community.”

Gonzales has called for bail reform, including a greater use of “personal recognizance” bonds for nonviolent offenders who can’t afford to post bond. In response, LaHood has stated that “the vast majority of the inmates held in our County Jail are charged with serious violent felonies and pose a continuing danger to our community.”

LaHood’s conservative views might have made him a target for Soros; the district attorney is openly intolerant of Islam and has declared on talk radio that he does not support sanctuary cities.

In any case, it’s fitting that Soros, a Hungarian-American immigrant who has fueled countless right-wing conspiracy theories, is now targeting a district attorney who himself has espoused such theories, including a false claim that Muslim-Americans tried to establish a “Sharia court” in Irving near Dallas.

In a sign LaHood might be paranoid about the looming primary, the district attorney has hired a new political consultant: Colin Strother, a local Democratic operative with a reputation as a bomb-thrower. Former Mayor Ivy Taylor hired Strother last year when her re-election campaign began to founder; he was behind an attack labeling Mayor Ron Nirenberg as “Liberal Ron.”

On Monday, Strother insisted the LaHood camp had nothing to do with anti-Gonzales “robocalls” received by voters this past weekend. Lacking a campaign disclaimer required by law, the prerecorded messages claim Gonzales is “an attorney that specializes in defending sexual predators and domestic violence abusers.

“He advertises to and seeks out the most shameful of clients like child rapists, child pornographers, sex offenders, and men who violently abuse women and children,” the message warned. “Visit his website, www.joegonzales.com, and see for yourself.”

LaHood first launched this attack back in November. On Monday, before I asked him about the robocalls, Strother echoed the criticism.

“Joe Gonzales is a weird dude, man,” Strother said. “Literally, on his webpage, he has a thing called ‘recent victories,’ and if you go through it, as a dad, it’ll turn your stomach. He’s proud of getting these people off of aggravated sexual assault. It’s his thing.”

Strother then denounced the robocalls after I brought them up.

“It definitively is not coming from our campaign,” he told me. “We are not running any robocalls right now. Whoever is doing it, we would ask them to stop. What they’ve done, it’s illegal, and we don’t condone it in any way. And in fact, we condemn it.”

bchasnoff@express-news.net