‘This is a knife fight.’ Rep. Hurd’s race with Democrat Ortiz Jones may be costliest in Texas
HONDO - U.S. Rep. Will Hurd’s drive to hold his swing district could be complicated by the likes of Victor Moreno, a former Immigration and Customs Enforcement agent and special ops soldier who has said adios to the Republican Party.

Last election, Moreno used social media to persuade friends to vote for Hurd, whom he still admires. But Trump administration policies along the border and around the world prompted Moreno to switch parties in the spring.

“The Republican Party has lost its identity,” said Moreno, who showed up last week at a campaign event for Hurd’s Democratic challenger, Gina Ortiz Jones.

“Yeah, Hurd is one of the few Republicans who stood up to Trump. But the majority of his votes support the president,” said Moreno, 42.

Hurd, 40, of San Antonio, is among Republican moderates trying to survive a potential Democratic tide fueled by an unpopular and erratic president.

He is a former undercover CIA officer in his second term who cites his bipartisan dealings as a strong reason for his re-election. He made news last month by accusing Trump of “getting played” by the KGB at the summit with Vladimir Putin. He was among the first in his party to decry the separation of migrant families at the border, labeling it “bad policy” after touring a detention center in Tornillo.

Jones, 37, a Filipina-American and former Air Force intelligence officer from San Antonio, has mounted a well-funded challenge after crushing Democratic primary opponents. She points to her work on security and trade issues in the Obama administration and says she would bring urgency to health care and other matters vital to Texans. She would be the first openly gay member of Congress elected in Texas.

The 23rd Congressional District in which they’re running is massive, stretching from west San Antonio to the outskirts of El Paso and taking in over 820 miles of border with Mexico. Hurd likes to say it takes ten and a half hours driving 80 mph to traverse its most distant points.

Besides big, the Hispanic-majority district is famous for being fickle. Until 2016, when Hurd won re-election, it had changed hands three times in three elections. Leading handicappers call the Hurd-Jones race a “toss-up,” or leaning slightly to Hurd.

The race is drawing national attention and cash as a top prize for Democrats, who may be within striking distance of capturing the 23 seats they need to regain control of the House. A GOP-aligned super PAC has an office in San Antonio. Jones was among 10 House candidates who recently split $2.4 million from Democrat Party financiers. Millions of dollars in ads already are booked for the stretch run.

In 2016, Hurd’s defense against former Rep. Pete Gallego became the most expensive Texas House race ever with at least $20 million spent by candidates, political parties and super PACS.

Rallying campaign staff and volunteers in San Antonio last weekend, Hurd predicted this year’s total will surpass $25 million.

“This is a knife fight. Period. End of story,” he said.

Hurd: Running like a ‘good’ Republican

The biracial Hurd stands out in a caucus notably short on diversity - he is one of just two African Americans in the House GOP - one reason his party has armed him with enviable committee assignments and cash.

Hurd, a computer science major at Texas A&M, is a Capitol Hill leader on cybersecurity and IT issues. He achieved his signature legislative success last year with an overhaul of the federal government’s outmoded, $80 billion-a-year computer-purchasing system.

He has been in the thick of Congress’s tortured immigration fights, organizing moderates in high-profile efforts to rescue the Trump-rescinded Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals Program protecting young immigrants brought to the United States as children. Those efforts thus far have gone for naught, with DACA kept alive by court injunctions.

Hurd said he believes the DACA issue will be resolved as early as December when election results are known.

“Here’s what I tell my colleagues: If the Republican Party of Texas doesn’t start looking like Texas, there won’t be a Republican Party in Texas,” he said in an interview.

Jones outraised Hurd almost 2-1 in the most recent quarter — $1.2 million to $684,000 — which Hurd’s campaign attributes to her far-flung support. Hurd was not among six Texas GOP House members who received campaign cash last month from Trump’s re-election committee.

“When you raise more money from Massachusetts than you do from Texas, that is not a good indication of your broad-based support,” Hurd said of Jones.

Her retort: “Does it matter if I’m taking money from a grandmother in California when Will Hurd takes money from the gun lobby, which, I think, contributes to his lack of moral courage to speak on the need for safer gun laws?”

Hurd insists that he knows how to run in a district nearly evenly split between Republicans and Democrats.

“In this race, there is only one person who has proven the ability to actually do things in a bipartisan way. My opponent has not shown a willingness to deviate from her party. There has been nothing that she has done that shows that she is going to work in Washington, D.C., in a bipartisan way,” he said.

Hurd’s approach includes being attentive to constituents, which he practiced last weekend knocking on doors of undecided voters.

“I’m the former CIA guy who has represented this district for three-and-a-half years,” he said at one west San Antonio doorstep.

Hurd was received warmly wherever he went, but the response from Guadalupe Nettles, 65, underscored the threat with anti-Trump feelings running strong.

“If you’re a good Republican, then maybe you can convert the rest of them,” she said.

Jones: Seeking a series of firsts

Gina Ortiz Jones enters politics with an appealing story: She is the daughter of an immigrant, single mother who became a domestic helper despite a college education. She overcame a modest upbringing to achieve academic successes, serve in the Iraq War and land a job in the Obama administration as a security adviser on global trade.

“I know there are not a lot of kids who go from reduced lunch to the executive office of the president,” she said in Hondo, plying her message about the need to create and protect opportunities.

Jones told her story in New Orleans last week at a Netroots Nation conference, featuring an array of left-leaning politicians, among them presidential hopefuls. Her GOP detractors assert that Jones’ liberal leanings are out of step with the predominantly rural district she wants to represent.

“I look forward to being the first out-member of Congress from Texas. I look forward to being the first Iraq War veteran to serve in Congress from Texas. I look forward to being the first Filipina-American ever in Congress,” she said in New Orleans.

Jones, who had not sought public office before, showed political instincts and easy rapport with people she met last week from Hondo to Eagle Pass.

“She’s honest, she has integrity and she’s so genuine,” said Elizabeth Packer, 61.

Echoed Denise Lynn, 65, “She’s out, she’s proud and she says what she thinks.”

In an interview, Jones said that more people approach her about children with special needs than about her achieving firsts.

“I think there are some people who are excited about it and that’s great, especially when you look at the direction of the policies in this administration for LGBT, which is very, very concerning, especially as it relates to LGBT members of the military,” she said.

She noted that Hurd voted last year for an amendment that was narrowly defeated seeking to end the Pentagon’s policy of providing gender-reassignment surgeries and other treatment for transgender service members on active duty if deemed medically necessary by doctors.

“It’s a military readiness issue. If one person on the team is not 100 percent, the unit is not 100 percent and the unit is at risk,” she said.

Referring to Hurd, she added: “You can’t talk to me about national security when you’re taking active votes that threaten our national security.”

At another point, she said: “You ask Will Hurd what time it is and he will find a way to tell you he was in the CIA for nine-and-a-half years.”

Jones could benefit from national trends. In recent polling, Democrats held a 6.9 percent advantage when voters were asked which party they supported in congressional races, according to an average tallied by Real Clear Politics.

Female voters could play an especially strong role in November, surveys suggest. An NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll last month found that separating migrant families is especially troubling to mothers. By a margin of 63-28 percent, mothers with a child under 18 at home disapproved of the Trump administration policy.

David Wasserman, who analyzes House races at the nonpartisan Cook Political Report, nonetheless sees the race leaning Republican.

He observed that unlike other House Republicans in Texas who could be in jeopardy in November, Hurd has run a modern campaign. He notes, too, the Texas Democratic Party’s difficulty every election turning out Hispanic voters.

Jones understands the challenge, which is why she exhorts audiences at every stop to reach out to families and friends.

“We know this is going to be a close one,” she told the crowd in Hondo.