KKK Lynched 3,446 Blacks in 86 Years – Abortion Claims That Many Black Babies in ‘Less Than Four Days’
Walter Hoye, founder and president of the Issues4Life Foundation, spoke at a press conference on May 14, 2013 at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C. (CNSNews.com/Penny Starr)

(CNSNews.com) – Over 86 years, the Ku Klux Klan lynched 3,446 blacks – a figure matched in less than four days if tallying the number of black babies who are aborted.

Walter Hoye, founder and president of the Issues4Life Foundation, shared those statistics at a press conference on Tuesday where black clergy and other leaders gathered in response to the guilty verdict in the trial of abortionist Kermit Gosnell, who was convicted of murdering three newborn babies.

“Right now to give some of us just a perspective of the impact of abortion on demand in the black community, according to the archives of the Tuskegee Institute, from 1882 to 1968 – 86 years – the Ku Klux Klan lynched 3,446 Negroes,” Hoye said. “While it took the Klan 86 years to accomplish this, abortion on demand in America accomplishes that is less than 4 days.”

Hoye's numbers are based on the Guttmacher Institute's fact sheet on induced abortion in the United States. That fact feet shows that in 2008, 1.2 million abortions were performed in the U.S. Of those, 432,000 of those abortions were performed on black women. Using those figures, in three days 3,550 black babies were aborted. In four days, the total would be 4,734 aborted black babies.

The data collected on lynchings was compiled by Tuskegee University's Records and Research Division.

Hoye said that over 20 million of the more than 50 million abortions that have taken place since the Supreme Court Roe v. Wade ruling legalized the procedure are performed on black women.

Star Parker, president and founder of the Center for Urban Renewal and Education, held a press conference on the effects of abortion on the black community and the verdict in the murder trial of abortionist Kermit Gosnell on May 14, 2013 in Washington, D.C. (CNSNews.com/Penny Starr)

“Since 1973, abortion on demand in black America has taken more lives than homicides, heart disease, diabetes, cancer and HIV/AIDS combined and has become the No. 1 cause of death in the black community,” Hoye said.

“The facts are clear,” he said. “The numbers don’t lie. Abortion on demand is a holocaust.”

Hoye joined about two dozen other black leaders and Star Parker, founder and president of the Center for Urban Renewal and Education (CURE), which hosted the event at the National Press Club.

The press conference was held ahead of a legislative briefing where CURE and a nationwide coalition of black pro-life leaders asked lawmakers to hold congressional hearings into the U.S. abortion industry following the grisly revelations in a Philadelphia grand jury report and criminal trial that detailed how Gosnell would sever the spinal cord of newborn babies and how women were treated in unsanitary and blood-stained rooms by unlicensed personnel.

Rev. Ceasar LeFlore III came with three other pastors from Chicago to attend both events.

Rev. Ceasar LeFlore III spoke at a press conference on May 14, 2013 where black leaders called on Congress to investigate the abortion industry in the United States in the wake of the guilty verdict for Kermit Gosnell, the abortionist convicted of murder of three babies at his Philadelphia clinic. (CNSNews.com/Penny Starr)

“We’ve come here to express common outrage at our federal and state governments for continuing to turn blind eyes, and exhibiting mind-boggling indifference to the ongoing tragedies that are occurring as a result of unrestrained, unregulated callousness imbued within the business practices of our nation’s abortion providers,” LeFlore said.

Alveda King, niece of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and director of African American Outreach for Priests for Life, said she and her colleagues “pray for the soul of Kermit Gosnell” and others who are in “this heinous industry.”

King said the Gosnell trial has shown America “that abortion does murder women and babies.”

“We are here to say that not just today, but we are not going to rest, as they didn’t rest during the Civil Rights movement until it was finished, as the abolitionist did not rest with that crime against humanity during slavery.

“We will not rest,” Parker said.