This is Trump's stance on student loans — and it could hurt poor students
If Donald Trump becomes president, his stance on student loans could spell trouble for liberal arts majors — unless they can afford not to care.

Sam Clovis, a Trump policy advisor, told Inside Higher Ed that Trump would remove the government from the student loan system and have private banks lend money to college students instead.

By the way, this diverges from Trump’s original stance in 2015, when he said a “governmental program” would be the “only way” to help low-income students, reported the Washington Examiner.

Furthermore, said Inside Higher Ed, Trump would make colleges share greater risk, so when deciding which students to admit or offer loans to, they favor those who are more likely to earn more post-graduation.

This doesn’t seem to include those intending to major in the liberal arts.

“If you are going to study 16th-century French art, more power to you. I support the arts,” said Clovis, who mentioned that the liberal arts can be worthwhile supplements to professions like engineering or business. “But you are not going to get a job.”

Sheila Bair, president of Washington College, disagrees.

“Yes, we also have English, Philosophy and (gasp) fine arts majors, yet they find good jobs in finance, technology or go on to graduate or professional schools,” Bair wrote in Fortune Magazine.

Bair also believes Trump’s proposals — which haven’t yet been fully fleshed out — will put low-income students at a disadvantage, especially because of his strong opposition to government involvement in student loans. Several times, in his book Crippled America and in an interview with The Hill, Trump has disagreed with the idea that the government profits from student loans. He’s also said in a town hall that the Department of Education — which gives federal aid and Pell grants — could and should be “largely eliminated.”

This could prove difficult for low-income students.

“Without access to federal aid, low-income students will have to forgo pursuing a liberal arts degree unless they are able to access scholarship money or worse, take out expensive non-federally-backed loans,” said Bair.

Trump’s plan also rejects both Hillary Clinton’s proposal for debt-free public colleges and President Obama’s free community college plan, according to Clovis, who believes that community college is already “damn near free” and that “almost anyone can afford community college.”

To combat student debt then, Trump said he’ll “do something with extensions and low-interest rates,” though it’s not yet clear what that “something” is.

Or he’ll “solve the problem” by creating more jobs, reports the Washington Examiner. “I often tell my supporters I’ll be the greatest jobs president that God ever created.”