Spotted: Malia Obama moving in to Harvard
They grow up so fast, don’t they?

It’s been 10 years since the nation was introduced to Malia Obama as her dad, former President Barack Obama, successfully campaigned to become our 44th commander in chief. Now, she’s a Harvard freshman.

Malia was spotted on the Cambridge, Mass., campus Tuesday moving in for her first year at the prestigious Ivy League school after spending a gap year traveling, interning at the Weinstein film company and enjoying life as a private citizen outside of the presidential spotlight.

Dorms opened for freshmen Tuesday morning, and the former First Daughter appears to have arrived to relatively little fanfare. Her parents Barack and Michelle Obama, both Harvard Law graduates, were also spotted helping their oldest daughter with the move.

College Move In Day! Good luck to #MaliaObama and the rest of the incoming freshmen starting their first year at university. pic.twitter.com/7lv9zcRJvn — B. Scott (@lovebscott) August 22, 2017

Boston Globe reporter Steve Annear approached Malia on campus Tuesday as she chatted with classmates, but she declined to be interviewed. She was “just another freshman,” according to his account of the encounter — and Annear reports that’s how her peers treated her, too.

Malia will likely be living in Yards, a group of four residential neighborhoods reserved for first-year students that, according to the university’s website, have housed “the earliest Harvard students as well as George Washington’s troops.”

As for her roommate?

Social media shipped a Malia-Yara Shahidi pairing when news broke in June that the actress and activist would also attend Harvard. But Shahidi ultimately pushed back the start of her freshman year to shoot a spinoff of ABC’s Black-ish called Adult-ish, so she won’t be on campus until 2018.

Harvard offers a number of housing arrangements for first-year students, from classic double rooms to suites that can house three to six students. But considering more than half her life has been spent in the public eye, there’s a chance Malia snagged one of the few single rooms available to freshmen for some well-earned privacy.

Freshman orientation events officially kick off Tuesday evening, but classes don’t start until Aug. 30, giving the 19-year-old time to explore campus and mingle with classmates. If social media is any indication, they’re pretty pumped to get to know her.

MALIA OBAMA IS MOVING INTO HER DORM LIKE 30 YARDS FROM MINE AS IM TYPING THIS AKBEJXJEJE — Lactaid (@KyleD477) August 21, 2017

y'all i'm like 20 ft away from malia obama in the dining hall wowwwwww i'm shook — crooked daniel (@primadonnagvrl) August 22, 2017

I CANT BELIEVE I JUST SAW MALIA OBAMA — ang (@angelacaitlyn00) August 22, 2017

The current First Family also has a member headed to school this week: Tiffany Trump, the president’s youngest daughter, will attend Georgetown Law School.