Freep Heroes
Hero: Nina Turner



“We can't have testimony without a test, and we are being tested right now for whether or not we've got courage enough, hope enough, fight enough and love enough to do what is necessary. Donald Trump's election was a wake-up call—it's up to all of us to keep our mission for social, economic and political justice alive,” pronounced former Ohio State Senator and Minority Whip Nina Turner, chosen as this month's Free Press hero for resurrecting the true legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. in her rousing speech at his memorial on January 14. King's legacy, above all else, is activism in the name of social justice and Nina Turner is calling for a new mass movement of the people.



Heroes: Hundreds protesting at airports after Muslim ban



Our Freep Heroes are all of those individuals who spontaneously raced to JFK and other US airports to protest Trump's most recent racist, fascist policy of banning people from traveling to our nation based on their Muslim religion. All US citizens should stand in support of the US Constitution, freedom of religion and our principles of no discrimination based on race, creed, color, religion and national origin.



Salute: John Lewis and Congress members who boycotted the inauguration



“I don't see this president-elect as a legitimate president,” stated U.S. Representative John Lewis as he and nearly 70 other lawmakers boycotted the inauguration January 20. Lewis was a prominent member of America's civil rights movement and a key organizer of the 1963 March on Washington who was beaten by police during the infamous Selma-Montgomery voting rights march of 1965. The Free Press salutes our elected officials who have the courage to stand up for their principles.



Enemy of the People: Betsy DeVos



Trump's nominee for Secretary of Education Betsy DeVos, who has direct links to two of America's most far-right corporations Amway and Blackwater, is an ardent foe of public education. She also refuses to agree that schools are no place for guns, appears unaware of laws protecting disabled students, dodged questions on sexual assault on campuses, and is opposed by all major teacher unions. She must stopped from carrying our her long-held mission of destroying the public school system and bringing forward private and preferably Christian charter schools.