Despite rumors, 82nd Airborne has not deployed troops to border
The 82nd Airborne Division has not deployed to the U.S. southern border and is under no orders to do so, officials said.

Lt. Col. Ramon Osorio, a spokesman for the division, said rumors that paratroopers had been sent to the border to stop a caravan of Central American migrants were false.

The rumors have been spread across social media in recent days and championed on some online forums. According to some accounts, President Donald Trump ordered the division and other troops to deploy on Monday.

The 82nd Airborne Division, which includes approximately 18,000 soldiers at Fort Bragg, trains to deploy on short notice. Its paratroopers form the core of the nation’s Global Response Force, which is postured to respond anywhere in the world in a matter of hours.

The division, also known as the All Americans, has received no orders to prepare for a trip south, Osorio said. But, he did note that a contingent of soldiers from the division is currently training at Fort Bliss, Texas near El Paso.

The training, involving the 2nd and 3th Brigade Combat Teams, is unrelated to border security, officials said.

"The 82nd Airborne Division has about 1,400 Paratroopers supporting a previously scheduled training exercise at Fort Bliss, Texas until the first week of November," Osorio said. "This exercise was planned six months ago in order to help prepare the Division to leverage cutting-edge technology to fight on tomorrow's drop zones."

The rumors of the 82nd Airborne Division deployment have become more common in recent days, as the migrant caravan has approached the border.

Trump has repeatedly tweeted about the situation. On Wednesday, he said the U.S. “will never accept people coming into our Country illegally!”

Also on Wednesday, the Associated Press reported that the Trump administration has not settled on a plan for what to do if the caravan arrives at the border. The 7,000-person caravan is currently at least 1,000 miles away.

The AP reported that some in the administration are advocating for finding a diplomatic solution while others have pushed for declaring a state of emergency or rescinding aid to some of the nation’s southern neighbors.

Military editor Drew Brooks can be reached at dbrooks@fayobserver.com or 910-486-3567.