Federal Business Opportunities: Opportunities
Opportunity History Original Synopsis

Solicitation Number : AES2009 Notice Type : Presolicitation Synopsis : Description:







The Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE), intends to negotiate with Jonathan Gruber, Ph.D. on a sole sources basis for technical assistance in evaluating options for national healthcare reform. The basis for restricting competition is the authority 13.106-1(b) because only one source is reasonably available to satisfy agency requirements. The anticipated contract period will be for one year.







ASPE requires technical assistance in examining the impacts of alternative health policy reforms on insurance coverage and costs to the government. The information will facilitate the Office of Health Reform’s efforts to develop proposals to increase access to affordable health insurance for all Americans.







Dr. Gruber is uniquely positioned to provide the analytic work ASPE requires based on his experience and the fact that Dr. Gruber is a recognized expert in health policy in economics including being widely published in peer-reviewed academic and health policy literature on the effects of changes in health benefit designs on the cost of enrollment in health insurance. Moreover, in order to estimate the impacts, Dr. Gruber developed a proprietary statistically sophisticated micro-simulation model that has the flexibility to ascertain the distribution of changes in health care spending and public and private sector health care costs due to a large variety of changes in health insurance benefit design, public program eligibility criteria, and tax policy. Finally, Dr. Gruber’s ongoing advisory role with the Office of Health Reform strongly positions him to meet HHS’ requirements the most efficiently, which is a key requirement in order for well-developed legislative proposals to be put forth for Congressional consideration as soon as possible.







The purpose of this synopsis is to determine whether there may be other sources with the necessary expertise and qualifications to perform the work described above. Any source capable of performing the work should submit a statement of capabilities with documentation supporting its ability to meet the Government’s requirement as articulated above. Any interested source, in order to meet HHS requirements will need to demonstrate and address in their capability statement (1) A recognized expert in health policy and economics with special expertise on the effects of changes in health benefit design on the cost of enrollment in health insurance (2) a proven micro-simulation model with the flexibility to ascertain the distribution of changes in health care spending and public and private sector health care costs due to a large variety of changes in health insurance benefit design, public program eligibility criteria, and tax policy (3) the ability to seamlessly and immediately begin working with ASPE and the Office of Health Reform No solicitation document is available. Capability statements should be submitted by March 11 at 11:00 a.m. eastern time to the point of contact listed in this announcement. Contracting Office Address : Parklawn Building Room 5-101

5600 Fishers Lane

Rockville, Maryland 20857

Primary Point of Contact. : Clint D Druk clint.druk@psc.gov Phone: 301-443-0403