Sen. Tammy Baldwin introduces Made in America bill, says Trump would support it
CLOSE

Buy Photo U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin listens to Five Giddings & Lewis executives Thursday, July 5, 2018, during a tour of the Fond du Lac manufacturing plant. (Photo: Sophie Carson/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)Buy Photo

FOND DU LAC - American manufacturing jobs could be saved if federal projects used more U.S. products.

That was the message Sen. Tammy Baldwin hoped to convey Thursday in Fond du Lac.

Baldwin toured the Fives Giddings & Lewis plant to promote her new bill that would ensure the federal government use only American-made steel, iron and manufacturing products in its infrastructure projects.

RELATED: Sen. Tammy Baldwin meets with local authorities, officials about opioid abuse

RELATED: Mercury Marine buys Menomonee Falls company in $910 million deal

RELATED: Donald Trump touts trade and defends tariffs as he oversees groundbreaking of Foxconn in Wisconsin

Fives executives — who said they're the country’s last manufacturer of large metal cutting machinery — talked with Baldwin about leveling what they called the uneven playing field for American workers on the international stage.

“Woe is us if we stop having the capacity to do these critical things,” Baldwin said of American manufacturing. “What happens to us if we ignore them, and they go away?”

The proposed Made in America Act would extend provisions of the 1982 Buy America Act, which required federal infrastructure projects such as railroads and highways use only American-made manufacturing products.

Baldwin’s new bill, whose co-sponsors include Sens. Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Tina Smith of Minnesota, would make sure these regulations apply to all federal agencies. The government spends $10 billion a year on projects not covered in the the existing Buy America Act, Baldwin said.

Buy Photo U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin laughs during a news conference Thursday, July 5, 2018, at Fives Giddings & Lewis in Fond du Lac. (Photo: Sophie Carson/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)

Thursday's announcement marked Baldwin's latest effort to introduce legislation related to American-made manufacturing products.

She has previously supported all-American-made products in revamping drinking water infrastructure in the U.S. and in the shipbuilding industry. This new bill would be a blanket measure.

The drinking water legislation, a provision eventually taken out of a larger water bill, made waves in Washington because it represented a trade rift in Washington: congressional Republicans versus President Donald Trump and the Democrats.

Trump said in an April 2017 interview with TMJ4 in Milwaukee that he supported Baldwin’s provision “100 percent.” Baldwin said Thursday she and Trump have talked about keeping jobs from going overseas and said she believes Trump would sign the Made in America Act if it came across his desk.

The hang-up is congressional Republicans, Baldwin said, and Trump could be the key to bridging that divide.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-5040. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

“He should make it clear to (Senate) Leader (Mitch) McConnell and (House) Speaker (Paul) Ryan that he wants it included in the final water infrastructure bill that gets to his desk,” Baldwin said. “This should not be a partisan issue.”

State Sen. Leah Vukmir, a Republican hoping to unseat the former congresswoman, said Baldwin’s proposed policy is not sustainable.

“She backs big-labor mandates and giveaways that drive up infrastructure costs for Wisconsin taxpayers,” Vukmir said in a statement. “We can’t build roads, no matter where the materials are from, if we can’t afford them in the first place.”

A spokeswoman for Kevin Nicholson, another Republican Senate candidate, said Baldwin's track record doesn't reflect a commitment to jobs.

“Senator Baldwin has backed years of taxation, spending and trade policy that have burdened our nation with debt and disadvantaged American manufacturing and agricultural producers," Ronica Cleary said. "If Senator Baldwin was serious about helping Wisconsin industry... she would be pushing back on foreign tariffs in China and Canada that have long disadvantaged Wisconsin’s industry."

Read or Share this story: https://fondul.ac/2KTrYd5