OUTRAGE: Before Leaving, Obama Enacts Rules to Take $3,000 From EVERY American
Even thought President Barack Obama only has less than two months left in office, he hasn’t stopped his liberal agenda, and he hasn’t learned that the American people are tired of regulations.

American Action Forum reported that America has just passed an important milestone — the 10-year regulatory burden on Americans has now passed $1 trillion.

New Environmental Protection Agency regulations on trucks were what finally pushed the regulation costs over $1 trillion.

Put another way, each American now will have to fork over a one-time payment of $3,080 for these new regulations, or an annual cost of about $540.

Thanks, Obama!

TRENDING: Joy Behar Comes Unglued, Links Trump to 9/11 Terrorists

These “payments” could come in any number of ways, such as fewer jobs and higher taxes — pretty much all of the negatives associated with having a bloated and corrupt federal government.

As if that wasn’t bad enough, thanks to all these new regulations, the estimated number of hours for all the paperwork is 754,208,700 hours, according to the report.

There are 8,760 hours in a year, so the paperwork for these regulations would only take roughly 86,097 years for one person to complete — or, more realistically, the paperwork would require over 377,000 people working full-time at 2,000 hours per week to process. None of their work will add any value to the U.S. economy.

And Obama is probably going to try to push through more regulations before he leaves office.

Can we make the lives of Americans even more miserable before Obama moves out of the White House? “Yes, we can!”

This is exactly why the Founders wanted to keep the size of government small. Trump promised during the campaign, and it was posted on his website, that he would cut back federal regulations drastically.

We can’t afford this much regulation. While there is no arguing that some regulation is a necessary evil, the federal government has gone completely off the rails with the number of regulations being enacted, almost all of them by un-elected career bureaucrats.

RELATED: Finally: GOP Senators Move to Investigate Dossier Author

It’s time to cut back these regulations, ease the financial burden on taxpayers and let the economy grow once again. Trump better follow through on his promises — or else America is in serious trouble.

H/T Washington Examiner

Share this on Facebook and Twitter and let us know what else you think Obama has planned before he leaves office.

Which regulations would like to see Trump rollback? Scroll down to comment below!