Contribution limits
The limits on contributions to candidates apply separately to each federal election in which the candidate participates. A primary election, general election, runoff election and special election are each considered a separate election with a separate limit. (A special election may itself involve separate primary, general and/or runoff elections, each with a separate contribution limit.)

Party caucus or convention

A party caucus or convention constitutes an election only if it has the authority under relevant state law to select a nominee for federal office. (Notable examples of these types of conventions are those held in Connecticut, Utah and Virginia.) Otherwise, there is no separate limit for a caucus or convention; it is considered part of the primary process. When the caucus or convention does constitute a primary election, reports must be filed for the convention as they would for the primary.

Candidates who lose in the primary

A candidate is entitled to an election limit only if he or she seeks office in that election. Thus, a candidate who loses the primary (or otherwise does not participate in the general election) does not have a separate limit for the general. If a candidate accepts contributions for the general election before the primary is held and loses the primary (or does not otherwise participate in the general election), the candidate’s principal campaign committee must refund, redesignate or reattribute the general election contributions within 60 days of the primary or the date that the candidate publicly withdraws from the primary race.

Primary vs. general election

Campaigns must adopt an accounting system to distinguish between contributions made for the primary election and those made for the general election. Nevertheless, the campaign of a candidate running in the general election may spend unused primary contributions for general election expenses. The contributions would continue to apply toward the contributors’ limits for the primary. The campaign of a candidate running in the general election may use general election contributions for primary election debts; the contributions would still count against the contributor’s general election limits. Should the candidate lose the primary, contributions accepted for the general must be refunded, redesignated or reattributed within 60 days and may not be used to repay primary election debt. Therefore, candidates should ensure they have enough cash on hand to make those refunds if needed.

Independent and non-major party candidates

Even when independent and non-major party candidates are not involved in an actual primary, they are entitled to a primary limit. They may choose one of the following dates to be their “primary” date, and, until that date, they may collect contributions that count towards the contributor’s primary limits.

The last day on which, under state law, a candidate may qualify for a position on the general election ballot; or

The date of the last major primary election, caucus or convention in that state. Non-major party candidates may also choose the date of the nomination by their party as their primary date.

Independent and non-major party candidates must file the pre-election report applicable to their state and any 48-Hour Notices for contributions of $1,000 or more, even if they are not actually participating in a primary election or nominating convention.

Unopposed candidates; elections not held

A candidate is entitled to a separate contribution limit even if:

The candidate is unopposed in an election;

A primary or general election is not held because the candidate is unopposed; or

The general election is not held because the candidate received a majority of votes in the previous election.

The date on which the election would have been held is considered the date of the election. The campaign must file pre-election reports and, in the case of a general election, a post-election report.

Unopposed candidates must file the pre-election report applicable to their state and any 48-Hour Notices for contributions of $1,000 or more, even if they are not actually participating in a primary election or nominating convention.