FEMA Announces 100 Percent Reimbursement Extension For Debris Removal And Emergency Protective Measures
AUSTIN, Texas -- The presidential disaster declaration for Hurricane Ike has been amended to add an additional 30 days to the 100 percent funding period for emergency protective measures and debris removal, the Federal Emergency Management Agency announced today.

In an amendment to the Sept. 13 declaration approved Oct. 8, the President determined that damage occurring in Southeast Texas between Sept. 7 and Oct. 2 was of "sufficient severity and magnitude that special conditions are warranted" regarding the cost-sharing arrangement.

The 100 percent funding was set originally to last two weeks after the declaration. The 30-day extension from Sept. 26 does not affect the cost sharing arrangement for FEMA's Hazard Mitigation Grant Program and the funds provided to the state for the Other Needs Assistance component of FEMA's disaster relief for individuals.

"The challenges in this disaster warrant extraordinary action," said Federal Coordinating Officer Sandy Coachman. "The state and local governments have been asking for this special relief. We are pleased to be able to provide it."

"This is welcome news for our communities, particularly for the smaller cities which suffered greatly in this disaster," said State Coordinating Officer Joan Haun. "I'm happy the federal government is being responsive to our needs."

The extension applies to the 29 counties declared for Public Assistance, which goes to state and local governments and certain private nonprofit organizations. Designated counties include Angelina, Austin, Brazoria, Chambers, Cherokee, Fort Bend, Galveston, Grimes, Hardin, Harris, Houston, Jasper, Jefferson, Liberty, Madison, Matagorda, Montgomery, Nacogdoches, Newton, Orange, Polk, Sabine, San Augustine, San Jacinto, Trinity, Tyler, Walker, Waller and Washington.

More information is available online at www.fema.gov or www.txdps.state.tx.us/dem.

FEMA coordinates the federal government's role in preparing for, preventing, mitigating the effects of, responding to, and recovering from all domestic disasters, whether natural or man-made, including acts of terror.