Meet Alyssa Carson, The 17-Year-Old Girl Trained By NASA To Become The First Human On Mars

People have been fascinated with space since the dawn of the day when space travel became possible, and according to historians, even before. With Elon Musk’s SpaceX rocket launch and movies like Star Wars and Star Trek gaining popularity more than ever before, the interest in colonizing other planets has never been higher. And one girl is living the dream of millions of people.

Alyssa Carson is just 17 years old and she comes from Baton Rouge, Louisiana. NASA is training her to become an astronaut, and her dream is to be the first person to set foot on Mars. She is training for the first human mission on Mars that is set to take place in 2033, and she certainly has everything she needs to get there. She is the first person to complete the NASA Passport Program because she went to all 14 NASA Visitor Centers, and she is also the youngest person to be accepted and graduate from the Advanced Possum Academy. Alyssa is officially certified to go to space and to be an astronaut trainee. Apart from the astronaut training, she is also learning four languages in school: English, Chinese, French, and Spanish.

“The biggest challenge is time and getting everything done at such a young age while also still attending high school. Continuing to train at a young age will also be further difficulties for me but I have done great with it so far.” – says Alyssa.

She is well aware that she can’t get married and have a family, but she understands it all and she is determined to achieve her dream.

The 17-year-old is also a public speaker, and she aims to draw interest in space exploration, as well as to encourage everyone to seek their dreams. She is inspired by all astronauts, especially women astronauts that have made the road for her to follow.

Alyssa Carson aims to be the first human on Mars in 2033

Her first thoughts of visiting Mars came when she was just 3 years old after she saw the TV show “The Backyardigans”

Her father enrolled her in the United States Space Camp in 2008

She became the first person to visit all NASA Space Camps

She was the first person to complete the NASA Passport Program, and she is the youngest person to be accepted and graduate from the Advanced Possum Academy

She is not able to apply to be an astronaut before she turns 18, but she is the youngest applicant to the International Space University. She has also started the “Blueberry Foundation”, named after her call sign Blueberry. It aims to encourage kids to chase their dreams and to give them the opportunities they wouldn’t otherwise have. Watch the video below to see her journey and goals.