Phantoms In The Snow: Canadians’ Use Of Health Care Services In The United States
To examine the extent to which Canadian residents seek medical care across the border, we collected data about Canadians’ use of services from ambulatory care facilities and hospitals located in Michigan, New York State, and Washington State during 1994–1998. We also collected information from several Canadian sources, including the 1996 National Population Health Survey, the provincial Ministries of Health, and the Canadian Life and Health Insurance Association. Results from these sources do not support the widespread perception that Canadian residents seek care extensively in the United States. Indeed, the numbers found are so small as to be barely detectible relative to the use of care by Canadians at home.

This paper by Steven Katz and colleagues depicts this popular perception as more myth than reality, as the number of Canadians routinely coming across the border seeking health care appears to be relatively small, indeed infinitesimal when compared with the amount of care provided by their own system. Katz is an associate professor in the Departments of Medicine and Health Policy and Management at the University of Michigan. Karen Cardiff is a research associate at the University of British Columbia’s Centre for Health Services and Policy Research. Also at the University of British Columbia are Morris Barer, professor and director at the Centre for Health Services and Policy Research’s Department of Health Care and Epidemiology, and Robert Evans, professor at the Centre for Health Services and Policy Research’s Department of Economics. Marina Pascali is a Dallas-based health care consultant.

Throughout the 1990s, opponents of the Canadian system gained considerable political traction in the United States by pointing to Canada’s methods of rationing, its facility shortages, and its waiting lists for certain services. These same opponents also argued that “refugees” of Canada’s single-payer system routinely came across the border seeking necessary medical care not available at home because of either lack of resources or prohibitively long queues.

PROLOGUE: Over the past three decades, particularly during periods when the U.S. Congress has flirted with the enactment of national health insurance legislation, the provincial health insurance plans of Canada have been a subject of fascination to many Americans. What caught their attention was the system’s universal coverage; its lower costs; and its public, nonprofit administration. The pluralistic U.S. system, considerably more costly and innovative, stands in many ways in sharp contrast to its Canadian counterpart. What has remained a constant in the dialogue between the countries is that their respective systems have remained subjects of condemnation or praise, depending on one’s perspective.

For more than a decade anecdotal reports of waiting lists for elective procedures in Canada and of hordes of Canadian “Medicare refugees” crossing the border in search of medical care in the United States have provided emotive fuel for critics of the Canadian health care system from both sides of the border.1 American opponents of universal public coverage have argued that global constraints on capacity and funding force many Canadians to cross the border in search of services that are unavailable or in short supply in their own country.2 Some have gone so far as to suggest that the widening health care spending gap between Canada and the United States is partly the result of counting expenditures by Canadian Medicare refugees in the U.S. rather than the Canadian expenditure totals, although there is an extensive body of evidence showing that the sources of the spending gap lie elsewhere.3

The Medicare refugee story is harnessed in Canada to promote the message that the Canadian health care system (known as Medicare) is chronically under-funded; the refugees are but one prominent symptom. The Canadian “under-fundists” are, however, divided as to the appropriate response. The many who support the fundamental principles on which Canadian Medicare is built argue that Canadian waiting lists and care seeking in the United States demonstrate the need for new public funds to increase capacity and services. While “evidence” in the form of Medicare refugees might be new, this debate about the level of public funding has been part of the dialogue between Canadian providers and provincial payers throughout Canadian Medicare’s history.4

But the putative refugees are also pawns in a debate driven by Canadian opponents of universal public funding, who wish to expand the role of private financing. This debate grew more intense during the 1990s as provincial payers increasingly constrained their health care budgets.5 News headlines suggesting that Canadians spend more than $1 billion annually south of the border have been cited to bolster the argument that private funding would reduce the pressure on the public system, thus reducing both public waiting lists and the flow of Canadians heading south for care. As a bonus, that $1 billion would stay at home.6

Unfortunately, this persuasive image of Canadian refugees survives in a virtual vacuum of evidence. How many Canadians actually head to the United States to seek medical care that they cannot obtain, or are unwilling to wait for, in Canada? What kinds of services do they receive? Where do they get these services, and how do they pay for them?

The paucity of answers to these questions is a result of large conceptual and empirical challenges facing researchers who attempt to fill in the gaps. Tens of thousands of Canadians enter the United States each year for a number of reasons unrelated to medical care seeking, such as holidays, business, education, or shopping. Any of these visitors might require medical care coincidentally while outside Canada. Thus, one must identify the context of Canadians’ medical care use in the United States to separate Medicare refugees from business travelers, “snowbirds,” and holiday seekers.

Paying for out-of-country medical care. As part of a more widespread strategy to reduce public health care spending during much of the past decade, some provincial governments have imposed tighter limits on their financial liability for residents’ medical care received in the United States. Payment limits for emergency hospitalizations in 2000 varied somewhat across provinces: Per diem payments ranged from as little as Can$75 for residents of British Columbia to as much as Can$570 in Manitoba and Prince Edward Island. Outpatient emergency services are generally reimbursed at provincial fee-schedule rates, which are far below fees in the United States.7 But several provinces such as Ontario and Manitoba have also limited payments for outpatient emergency visits to as little as Can$50–$100. These restrictions have motivated more Canadians to obtain insurance for health care expenses incurred while traveling for extended periods in the United States. In selected circumstances, more formal arrangements have been negotiated between provincial payers and U.S. providers. Provinces have always reimbursed individuals, subject to preapproval and negotiated payments, who are required to travel to the United States to obtain highly specialized services not available in their home province. More recently, several Canadian provincial payers have established temporary contracts with U.S. providers for specific services available but subject to unacceptable delay in Canada.

Research objectives. In this study we attempt to quantify, across all sources of payment, the services provided to Canadians in U.S. regions located near the three most heavily populated Canadian provinces. Within these regions we examined data from two different types of sources: three states’ hospital discharge records and a survey of selected ambulatory care sites. In addition, we surveyed “America’s Best Hospitals” because they might serve as “magnets” for Canadians.8

Analytic framework. Canadians might receive care in the United States for a number of reasons: (1) Services are available in Canada but often involve extensive wait times (wait-listed services). Examples often include magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), radiation oncology treatment, and selected surgical procedures such as total knee replacements, cataract surgery, and coronary artery bypass surgery. (2) Leading-edge technology services are unavailable in Canada. Examples include gamma knife radiation and proton beam therapy for some cranial tumors and specialized programs to treat severe brain injuries. (3) Services are available in Canada, but U.S. health care centers are more conveniently located for some Canadians (proximal services). Examples include some residents of rural border regions in Saskatchewan, Manitoba, New Brunswick, or western Ontario seeking primary care in U.S. settings; and some residents of urban centers such as Thunder Bay, Ontario, seeking secondary or tertiary care south of the border. (4) Services are provided to Canadian snowbirds, who live in the United States during the winter months, or to other periodic business and leisure travelers to the United States (coincidental services). (5) Services are available in Canada but are perceived by the patient to be of higher quality in specific U.S. medical centers such as those listed as one of “America’s Best Hospitals” (magnet services). Across these categories, the sources of funding for care vary considerably. For example, patients in the fourth category will generally have their costs covered by varying combinations of provincial health insurance and private insurance. Services in the second category, approved by a provincial plan, would be paid in full by that plan at rates negotiated with the U.S. care center. Some services in the first and third categories may be provided under a contract between the provincial Ministry of Health and the U.S. providers. Other services in these two categories, as well as those in the fifth, require direct out-of-pocket payment by Canadian patients.