Governor Scott Signs Legislation to Keep the Public Informed About Pollution Incidents
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. – Today, Governor Rick Scott signed SB 1018. This bill requires public notification within 24 hours of pollution incidents and provides additional resources for pollution prevention and recovery. Governor Scott plans to hold a ceremonial bill signing in the coming weeks.

Governor Scott said, “I am proud to sign this legislation today to strengthen Florida’s pollution notification laws. The sewage spill in Pinellas County and pollution incident at Mosaic last year demonstrated the importance of a 24-hour public notification requirement following pollution incidents. Floridians deserve to know about these types of events and every Florida resident should enjoy clean water and a healthy environment. I appreciate the Florida Legislature and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection for their work on this legislation.”

Florida Department of Environmental Protection Secretary Noah Valenstein said, “Thank you to Governor Scott for signing this legislation today. The safety of Floridians and our environment is a top priority for the department and informing residents of pollution incidents quickly could potentially help prevent health and environmental issues in the future. I’m pleased to see this law take effect and further our efforts to serve Floridians.”

Senator Denise Grimsley said, “I want to thank Governor Scott for signing this important piece of legislation today that will benefit families across the state. It is so important that we make the health of Floridians a priority and with this bill, we can ensure they are immediately notified of any risks when pollution incidents occur.”

Senator Bill Galvano said, “I want to thank Governor Scott for signing this good bill today. This bill will help increase requirements for pollution prevention and give residents the security that they will be notified when pollution occurs. Keeping residents informed of potential health and environment concerns is extremely important.”

Representative Kathleen Peters said, “I am grateful to Governor Scott for signing this legislation today. This bill will give Florida residents the peace of mind that they will be informed if pollution occurs in their community. We will keep working to ensure that safety of our families and preservation of our environment is a top priority.”

Representative Charlie Stone said, “Thank you, Governor Scott, for signing this legislation today. This important bill ensures that any potential pollution concerns will be addressed quickly and those responsible will be held fully accountable. Communities all across Florida will be able to stay informed and safely enjoy our state’s natural resources.”

To view the transmittal letter, click HERE.

###