Covering The Uninsured In 2008: Current Costs, Sources Of Payment, And Incremental Costs

Next Section Abstract People uninsured for any part of 2008 spend about $30 billion out of pocket and receive approximately $56 billion in uncompensated care while uninsured. Government programs finance about 75 percent of uncompensated care. If all uninsured people were fully covered, their medical spending would increase by $122.6 billion. The increase represents 5 percent of current national health spending and 0.8 percent of gross domestic product. However, it is neither the cost of a specific plan nor necessarily the same as the government’s costs, which could be higher, depending on plans’ financing structures and the extent of crowd-out.

The cost of expanding coverage to the 16 percent of Americans who are uninsured would add 5 percent to national health spending.

Previous Section Next Section Expanding health insurance coverage is a major issue in the 2008 presidential campaign. This study addresses three sets of questions that are critical to the policy debate. First, how much care do the uninsured receive? Second, how much of their care is “uncompensated,” and who pays for that care? Third, if the uninsured were covered, what would be the cost of the additional medical care they would use? The first two questions set the baseline for the policy debate and identify payment sources that might be tapped to help fund expanded insurance coverage. The third question focuses on the additional resource cost to society. Importantly, this cost is not the cost of a specific plan to expand coverage, nor is it a measure of the cost to government. Study data and methods. Following earlier studies, we used two distinct and independent methodologies to develop estimates of the uninsured’s current medical care use and financing.1 The first analyzes household data on more than 102,000 people interviewed as part of the 2002–2004 Medical Expenditure Panel Surveys (MEPS), a nationally representative survey of the civilian, noninstitutionalized population. The second approach draws on data from government budgets and health care provider surveys, including the 2007 American Hospital Association (AHA) Annual Survey of Hospitals; surveys of office-based private physicians; and budget and program data from Medicare, Medicaid, and other government programs that serve the uninsured. We adjusted the MEPS data to make 2008 projections that are consistent with spending estimates from the National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA). Briefly, we inflated the 2002–2004 MEPS spending data to 2008 dollars using NHEA projections of personal health care spending per capita and projected the numbers of insured and uninsured people, by age, to 2008 from the 2004–2006 Current Population Surveys (CPS).2 We calibrated the MEPS spending data to the NHEA by source of payment, using a detailed reconciliation of the differences between MEPS and the NHEA.3 MEPS does not measure indirect payments to providers, such as Medicare and Medicaid disproportionate-share hospital (DSH) payments, tax appropriations, public and private grant programs, or providers’ profits from treating privately insured patients. Since these sources implicitly subsidize some of uninsured people’s care, we estimated their contribution to uncompensated care as the difference between the payments providers would expect to receive if the person were covered by private insurance and actual payments received from explicit private sources (out-of-pocket payments from the uninsured and payments from other private sources and other unidentified sources) measured by MEPS. We added the amount of implicitly subsidized care to the MEPS data on total spending and estimated two-part medical spending models for children and adults on samples of all people uninsured for any portion of the year plus insured people with incomes under 400 percent of poverty.4 We restricted the insured sample to lower- and lower-middle-income people because their behavior is more likely to reflect the uninsured’s medical care use if insured. Analysis. The key independent variable measures the percentage of the year the person is insured. Its coefficients indicate how the probability of using any care and the amount of care received increase as insurance status varies from being uninsured all year to being fully insured. Because the insurance coverage variable does not measure individual plans’ specific benefits, it reflects the average experience of people with different types of private and public coverage. Consequently, our estimates of the incremental resource cost of full coverage assume that the uninsured person’s new benefits would be similar to the distribution of benefits now held by lower- and lower-middle-income people with either private or public coverage. Other independent variables control for the effects of demographic characteristics (age, sex, and race/ethnicity); socioeconomic characteristics (education, marital status, family income relative to the federal poverty level, metropolitan residence, and census region); and self-reported health characteristics (general health status, measures of various types of limitations, indicators of the presence of specific health conditions, and an indicator of whether the person died or was institutionalized during the year).5

Previous Section Next Section MEPS Estimates Of Medical Care Received By The Uninsured Compared to people with full-year private coverage, the full-year uninsured receive less than half as much care but pay a larger share out of pocket (35 percent versus 17 percent). Implicitly subsidized care (the difference between the amount a privately insured person would be expected to pay for the same care and an uninsured person’s actual payment) amounts to $536 per capita for the full-year uninsured, and care provided by other public and private sources adds $567 per capita (Exhibit 1⇓). The total amount of uncompensated care, defined as all care not paid for out of pocket by the uninsured, comes to $1,103 per person. View this table: EXHIBIT 1 Medical Spending Per Capita, By Insurance Status And Source Of Payment, All Nonelderly Americans, Projected, 2008 The part-year uninsured receive $2,983 in care—31 percent less care than the privately insured. However, more than 85 percent of their care is received during months they report having insurance coverage. Private insurance and Medicaid are the two largest sources of third-party payments, with relatively small amounts paid for by Medicare, other public sources, and other private sources. Care received while uninsured is $382 per person, with out-of-pocket payments and implicitly subsidized care responsible for very similar amounts (about $150 per person). In the aggregate, out-of-pocket payments while uninsured by the full- and part-year uninsured total almost $30 billion. Among people with full-year insurance coverage, those with private insurance spend the least ($3,915); Medicaid recipients spend about 23 percent more; and those with Medicare only or various combinations of coverage spend the most for care (Exhibit 1⇑). These differences presumably reflect differences in health conditions across groups, especially for the “other” category, which includes Medicare-covered people with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) or disabilities.

Previous Section Next Section Uncompensated Care Estimates From MEPS People uninsured any time during the year receive $54.3 billion of uncompensated care (care received but not paid for by either the uninsured themselves or by a health insurer), with just over half ($27.8 billion) paid for by implicit subsidies (Exhibit 2⇓). Payments from explicitly identified public and private sources are $11.4 billion and $15.1 billion, respectively. Adults, who constitute more than 80 percent of the uninsured, account for 87 percent of the uncompensated care received. Not surprisingly, the full-year uninsured receive 85 percent of all uncompensated care and 81 percent of all implicitly subsidized care. View this table: EXHIBIT 2 Total Uncompensated Care Received By The Uninsured, By Sources Of Financing, Projected, Billions Of 2008 Dollars

Previous Section Next Section Uncompensated Care Estimates From Provider And Government Sources Using independent data from health care providers and government sources, we estimated that uncompensated care in 2008 is $57.4 billion: $35.0 billion provided by hospitals, $14.6 billion by community-based providers, and $7.8 billion by private office-based physicians. Given the similarity between these and the MEPS estimates, we conclude that the cost of uncompensated care is between $54.3 billion and $57.4 billion, or roughly $56 billion. The hospital uncompensated care estimate comes from the AHA’s 2007 Annual Survey of Hospitals inflated to 2008.6 The estimate for community providers and direct care programs includes care provided to the uninsured by the Veterans Health Administration (VHA), the Indian Health Service, community health centers, the Maternal and Child Health Bureau, the HIV/AIDS Bureau, and the National Health Service Corps. In general, we estimated the amount of acute care services (excluding public health and long-term care and inflated to 2008) provided to the uninsured by each of these sources. We also included state and local governments’ spending for tax appropriations allocated to hospitals and medical care delivered by public assistance programs. Physicians’ uncompensated care is based on data from the 2005 Community Tracking Study (CTS) Physician Survey, which suggested that little has changed since 2001 in total hours of charity care provided.7 Therefore, we simply inflated our 2004 estimate of physicians’ charity care to 2008. Although a recent study nets out excess payments that physicians sometimes receive from the uninsured, our estimate only accounts for the losses on uninsured patients.8 We assumed that profits from all patients subsidize these costs.

Previous Section Next Section Sources Of Funding For Uncompensated Care Uncompensated care is subsidized by various public programs and private sources (Exhibit 3⇓). Overall, public funds directed to the uninsured could account for as much as $42.9 billion—approximately 75 percent of total uncompensated care. If some public money is poorly targeted to providers who treat the uninsured—that is, overcompensating some and undercompensating others—then not all of the $42.9 billion spent in the name of the uninsured may actually finance uncompensated care. Consequently, private funding could be somewhat higher than $14.5 billion. Although impossible to develop exact estimates, it seems clear that public sources underwrite the dominant share of uncompensated care costs. View this table: EXHIBIT 3 Sources Of Funding Available For Uncompensated Care To The Uninsured, Projected, Billions Of 2008 Dollars Medicaid. Medicaid has two major programs that help fund the cost of hospital uncompensated care: DSH payments and supplemental payment programs. These programs also offset low Medicaid reimbursement rates in hospitals that receive DSH payments. Medicaid DSH payments support both hospitals and long-term care facilities that treat large numbers of poor patients. To estimate the amount available for acute care hospitals’ uncompensated care, it is necessary to subtract DSH payments that go to mental hospitals, nursing homes, and other providers and then adjust for the share of the state contribution that represents intergovernmental transfers and other financial transactions whose purpose is to increase federal matching dollars. These types of state funds are generally transferred back to state treasuries without actually being spent on care. Starting with data on total federal Medicaid DSH allotments and associated state matching funds and making the adjustments needed to identify new funding for hospitals, we estimated federal DSH spending to be $8.6 billion in 2008, with another $2.0 billion paid to acute care hospitals from state matching funds.9 States also use supplemental provider payment or other similar mechanisms to channel money to selected classes of hospitals by raising their rates above Medicaid payment rates, but no higher than Medicare levels. As with Medicaid DSH, it is necessary to estimate the amount of supplemental payments that go to hospitals (excluding nursing homes) and the amount of state dollars that truly come from general revenues (as opposed to intergovernmental transfers).10 With these adjustments, we estimated that Medicaid payments to hospitals are $13.1 billion ($12.2 billion federal and $0.9 billion state) in 2008. Finally, to estimate the amount potentially available to subsidize uncompensated care, we subtracted a portion of Medicaid DSH and supplemental provider payments that implicitly compensates some hospitals for low Medicaid payment rates. Inflating AHA data on medical underpayments to 2008 produced an estimate of $12.8 billion ($11.2 billion from federal payments and $1.6 billion from state payments).11 Subtracting these amounts from the estimates reported above resulted in a final estimate of $10.9 billion ($9.6 billion federal and $1.3 billion state) in Medicaid hospital payments available for uncompensated care in 2008. Medicare. Medicare subsidizes uncompensated care through its Medicare DSH payments and indirect medical education (IME) hospital payments. Medicare’s DSH adjustment is applied to the payment rate for hospitals that treat a large number of poor patients. Although this is justified on the grounds that low-income patients are more costly than others to treat, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC) studies show that a hospital’s low-income patient share is only loosely tied to higher Medicare cost per case and that DSH payments are distributed across a large number of hospitals, while hospital uncompensated care is concentrated in relatively few hospitals.12 Given this apparent misallocation of Medicare DSH payments, we assumed that only half of Medicare DSH payments ($5.1 billion in 2008) actually support uncompensated care. Medicare’s IME adjustment recognizes higher costs in hospitals with graduate medical education (GME) programs, in part because these hospitals provide a large amount of care to the poor. MedPAC finds similar asymmetries in the distribution of these funds: the 10 percent of hospitals with the highest uncompensated care levels provided more than 40 percent of all uncompensated care but received just 15 percent of IME payments.13 Because the IME adjustment, unlike Medicare DSH payments, is only indirectly intended to support uncompensated care, we assumed that one-third of IME payments ($2.1 billion in 2008) can be attributed to care for the uninsured. Other federal, state, and local government spending. State and local governments also provide tax appropriations to support uncompensated care and operate indigent care or public assistance programs. Based on data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), we estimated that state and local tax appropriations that support uncompensated care (as opposed to other hospital functions) are $8.6 billion in 2008.14 CMS data also report that state and local public assistance programs spent $5.5 billion on medical care in 2005, or $6.5 billion in 2008 dollars ($2 billion through public assistance programs and $4.5 billion to other state and local community providers). Federal dollars constitute the largest share ($8.8 billion) of the $14.6 billion in uncompensated care spending by direct care programs (Exhibit 3⇑). State and local spending ($5.3 billion) accounts for most of the remainder. When these sources are combined with the estimates of spending on uncompensated care by Medicaid and Medicare, and funding through state and local tax appropriations and public assistance programs, total government spending on uncompensated care is an estimated $42.9 billion, which covers roughly 75 percent of the total cost of uncompensated care. Federal programs pay $25.6 billion, mainly through Medicaid ($9.6 billion), Medicare ($7.2 billion), and the VHA ($5.4 billion). State and local governments spend $17.2 billion on care for the uninsured.

Previous Section Next Section Private Sources Of Funding For Uncompensated Care Various private sources help subsidize uncompensated care. Physicians’ donated time and forgone profits amount to $7.8 billion. After government payments to hospitals are subtracted, private philanthropy and profit margins are responsible for at least an additional $6.3 billion.15 The amount of private funding could be higher if government payments are more poorly targeted than we assumed—that is, if Medicare/Medicaid dollars overpay some hospitals for uncompensated care while underpaying others. Thus, the total amount of government ($42.9 billion) and private (at least $14.5 billion) funding potentially available to pay for care received by the uninsured apparently exceeds the $54.3 billion in uncompensated care estimated from the household survey data.

Previous Section Next Section Cost Shifting And Premiums For Private Insurance It is commonly argued that the privately insured pay for uncompensated care through cost shifting—that is, health care providers offset uncompensated care “losses” by charging higher prices to privately insured patients.16 However, data presented in Exhibit 4⇓ suggest that cost shifting as a result of uncompensated care probably has only a very small impact on private insurance premiums. We estimated that approximately $14.1 billion (Exhibit 3⇑, excluding community providers) could be financed by cost shifting. (Our estimate is much lower than the Families USA estimate because we included several government sources omitted by its analysis, and we assumed that some providers absorb the cost of uncompensated care in the form of lower profits because they are unable to shift uncompensated costs to private payers.)17 Given that total private health insurance expenditures in 2008 are estimated to be $829.9 billion (from NHEA projections), the amount potentially associated with cost shifting represents at most 1.7 percent of private health insurance costs. View larger version: Download as PowerPoint Slide EXHIBIT 4 Hospitals’ Percentage Markup Of Private Payments Above Costs, Percentage Of Expenses For Uncompensated Care, Uninsurance Rate, And Hospitals’ Total Margin, 1986–2005 Focusing on hospitals, where most cost shifting occurs, all generally agree that hospitals receive higher payments from privately insured than from other patients and that they use profits from privately insured patients to support other missions. However, this does not mean that they raise charges in response to increased demand for care by the uninsured. If this were so, we would expect hospitals’ uncompensated care costs to rise with the uninsured’s share of the population. Uncompensated care has been a relatively stable 6 percent of hospital costs for many years, despite a steady increase in the percentage of people uninsured (Exhibit 4⇑). Increases in hospitals’ ratio of private payment to cost, the primary mechanism for shifting costs, are unrelated to increases in uncompensated care and the percentage who are uninsured.18 Rather, private-payer markups have fluctuated probably in response to the rise and fall of aggressive private managed care and perhaps to fluctuations in Medicare and Medicaid payment rates.19 Undoubtedly, some hospitals, especially major teaching hospitals, in some geographic areas have sufficient market power to negotiate higher payments from private insurers. (Some large physician groups may have similar negotiating leverage.) However, Exhibit 4⇑ suggests that this is not the dominant pattern. Although the explanations for the fluctuations in markups to private payers remain controversial, it seems reasonably clear that uncompensated care is at most a minor player in the dynamics of hospital cost shifting.20

Previous Section Next Section The Incremental Cost Of Care Used By The Uninsured If They Were Covered How much more care would the uninsured receive if they were fully covered by insurance? To answer this question, we estimated two-part statistical models of medical spending and simulated how much more care the uninsured would receive if they had full-year insurance coverage. These models allow the effect of insurance coverage to vary with a person’s health status while controlling for the effects on spending of demographic, health, and socioeconomic characteristics. Since many of the uninsured are younger and healthier than the insured, they would be expected to have lower medical spending independent of their lack of insurance. These statistical models adjust for the effects of these other factors when we predict how much more the uninsured would spend if insured. The simulations suggest that people who are uninsured at any time during the year would increase their total spending per person by 70 percent, from $2,290 to $3,885 per person (Exhibit 5⇓). The percentage increase in spending is much larger for the full-year insured (118 percent) than for the part-year insured (38 percent). The increase in spending is also much greater for adults (75 percent) than for children (37 percent), presumably reflecting differences in the incidence and costliness of adults’ and children’s health problems. View this table: EXHIBIT 5 Simulated Increases In Total Spending By The Uninsured If They Were Fully Insured, By Age, Projected, 2008 In the aggregate, total spending would increase by $122.6 billion to $298.7 billion, compared to the uninsured’s current total spending of $176.1 billion (which includes insured spending by people with part-year coverage). Most of the increase in spending goes to the full-year uninsured and to adults, who make up most of the uninsured population and have a much larger increase in per person spending than is the case for children.

Previous Section Next Section Comparisons With Other Estimates Prior estimates (using MEPS data) of the incremental resource cost of covering the uninsured ranged from $34 billion to $69 billion in 2001 (2.8 to 5.6 percent of total national health spending), depending on whether the expanded coverage was primarily through Medicaid or through private insurance.21 If we assume that 60 percent of the expansion was through the private insurance system, the weighted average of these 2001 estimates would be about $55 billion, or 3.7 percent of total national health spending, in 2001. Our current incremental cost estimate of $122.6 billion represents 5.1 percent of projected total national health spending for 2008, which is toward the higher end of the 2001 range of estimates. The increase of about $68 billion in seven years in the cost of covering the uninsured is attributable to several factors: rapid increases in health care costs, continuing growth in the number of uninsured people, and changes in the characteristics of the uninsured population. Between 2001 and 2008, per capita health care spending, which incorporates changes in both price and use, grew by 52.8 percent—more than twice the 22.3 percent increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI).22 Inflating the $55 billion estimate for 2001 to 2008 by the increase in per capita health spending boosts the incremental cost estimate to $84 billion. Thus, inflation in health care costs and per capita use accounts for more than 42 percent of the difference between the 2001 and 2008 estimates. The remaining difference between the $84 billion and our current estimate reflects a combination of an increase in the number of uninsured people and changes in their characteristics. Using the CPS data to illustrate the increase in the number of uninsured Americans, the size of the uninsured population grew by almost 3.4 percent per year between 2001 and 2006, from 39.7 million to 47 million.23 Extrapolating to 2008 at the same rate results in a projected uninsured population of 50.2 million people—an increase of 26.4 percent over 2001. Applying this increase in the size of the uninsured population raises the incremental cost estimate from $84 billion to $106.2 billion, which accounts for another one-third of the difference between our current estimate and the 2001 estimate. We believe that the remaining difference of about 25 percent ($16.3 billion) is attributable primarily to changes in the characteristics of the uninsured populations between the two time periods (Exhibit 6⇓). The 2001 estimates were based on MEPS data from 1996–1998, while our current 2008 estimate is based on MEPS data from 2002–2004. First, the full-year uninsured make up a larger share of the total uninsured population—53.4 percent in the 2008 sample, compared to 51.4 percent in the 2001 sample. Since the incremental cost of covering someone who was uninsured all year is $841 higher than expanding coverage for someone uninsured for part of the year (Exhibit 5⇑), total incremental cost also increases. View this table: EXHIBIT 6 Selected Characteristics Of Uninsured Samples, 2008 And 2001 Second, the 2008 uninsured sample is both older and in poorer health (Exhibit 6⇑). Given that much more is spent on older people than on children at every health status level and that people in fair or poor health spend much more than those in excellent to good health, these changes likely explain the higher level of spending per newly insured person in 2008 ($3,885) compared to 2001 ($3,751 in 2008 dollars).24 Other substantive factors that may also contribute to the higher incremental cost estimate for 2008 are the decline of tightly managed care, which might have restricted use by the insured in the earlier period, and poorer access to care by the uninsured in the later period. A coverage expansion in a tightly managed care environment would produce a smaller incremental effect of having coverage on spending by the uninsured. Conversely, poorer access to care in the later period would increase the size of the initial spending gap between the uninsured and the insured. Methodological factors that may influence the 2008 estimate include improved measurement of spending while uninsured by people who are uninsured for only part of the year, the discrepancy between the MEPS data and the CPS data in their estimates of the number of uninsured people, and possible measurement error in reporting insurance status. More accurately assigning a larger share of the part-year uninsured’s spending to the months when they are insured in effect increases the estimated effect of having insurance coverage on spending in the statistical models. From a more technical perspective, this result could be thought of as a type of endogeneity bias—that is, uninsured people who expect to incur medical spending have an increased incentive to seek insurance coverage. This behavior would tend to overstate the effect of insurance on spending. As noted above, the CPS reports fewer uninsured people than MEPS reports. According to the CPS, 47.0 million Americans were uninsured in 2006, which we generally regard as a point-in-time or full-year-equivalent estimate. Projecting the 2006 number to 2008 yields 50.2 million uninsured people. The comparable number for MEPS for 2008 is 54.9 billion, or 10 percent higher. Thus, using the CPS estimate of the number of uninsured Americans would reduce our estimate by about $12 billion. Finally, Brent Kreider and Steven Hill investigated the effects of reporting errors in measuring insurance coverage.25 They found that even though there is uncertainty about the number of people lacking insurance, under reasonable non-parametric assumptions, estimates from MEPS of the maximum cost of covering the uninsured are not much affected by this uncertainty.