Gov. Scott Announces the Appointment of Jon Steverson as Secretary of DEP
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. – Governor Rick Scott today announced the appointment of Jonathan P. Steverson as Secretary of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, effective December 29th.

Governor Rick Scott said, “Florida is home to an abundance of natural resources that not only make our state beautiful but also support our growing economy. We have worked hard to bring stakeholders together to develop solutions for decades-old problems that have plagued our environment. We have made historic progress on Everglades restoration, funding springs restoration and protecting our citrus industry. I am proud of the strategic investments we have made over the last four years but we still have more work to do. Jon has dedicated his career to serving Floridians through the protection of our state’s water and natural resources and he is committed to our goal of protecting Florida’s natural treasures so future generations and millions of tourists can enjoy our state’s beauty.”

Jon Steverson said, “Governor Scott has made the environment a top priority and I look forward to serving the citizens of Florida as the Secretary of Department of Environmental Protection. Florida’s natural resources are an important part of what make our state the best place in the nation. I’m honored by the opportunity to work with the Governor, Legislature, state and local agencies, and other stakeholders to safeguard our state for future generations.”

Steverson has served as Executive Director of the Northwest Florida Water Management District since 2012 where he oversaw a restructuring of the agency and its budget that resulted in numerous benefits to the natural resources and communities in the Panhandle. Under his leadership, the District made tremendous progress in priority areas such as protection of the Apalachicola River and Bay watershed, springs restoration and preservation, and water supply development to ensure Floridians have a clean and safe supply of water. Prior to that, he served at DEP from 2011 to 2012 as Special Counsel on Policy and Legislative Affairs and acting Deputy Secretary for Water Policy and Ecosystem Restoration. Jon also served in the Executive Office of the Governor from 2005 to 2009 in multiple roles including Environmental Policy Coordinator.

This appointment is subject to Cabinet confirmation.