Accused Jacksonville-Madden tournament shooter David Katz: Search for answers is on
CLOSE 24-year-old David Katz is accused of going on a shooting rampage during a video game tournament before taking his own life. USA TODAY

JACKSONVILLE, FL - AUGUST 26: Jacksonville Sheriff's officers patrol around the ships at Jacksonville Landing on August 26, 2018 in Jacksonville, Florida. A shooting rampage during a Madden 19 video game tournament at the site claimed four lives, with several others wounded, according to published reports. (Photo by Mark Wallheiser/Getty Images) (Photo: Mark Wallheiser, Getty Images)

Little was known Sunday about David Katz, the 24-year-old Baltimore, Maryland, man accused of shooting and killing two people before turning the gun on himself and taking his own life.

Katz, who also stands accused of wounding several others in the spree, reportedly was upset about losing an intense game of Madden NFL where he went by the moniker “ravens2012champs.” A number of photos have emerged on social media of Katz participating in the game and one has him holding a Buffalo Bills jersey saying “Madden Champ.”

More: Jacksonville shooting at Madden tournament: 1 suspect dead, multiple fatalities reported

More: Jacksonville shooting at Madden tournament: What we know so far

More: Jacksonville shooting suspect was in 'rampage mode,' according to eyewitness

Katz, playing using the nickname Bread, won the Buffalo Bills Madden Club tournament in February 2017, according to the EA Sports website. He won $10,000 during that event.

One witness, a game participant, is quoted in media reports saying that after besting Katz, in what was described as an intense match, Katz refused to shake hands and instead stared at him blankly.

In Baltimore late Sunday, federal agents from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives descended upon what was believed to be Katz’s residence, near the city’s famed Inner Harbor, and were conducting a search.

Check back for updates to this story.

Contact Price at 321-242-3658 or wprice@floridatoday.com. Twitter @Fla2dayBiz

Support local journalism: To sign up for a special summer sale offer for new subscribers, visit floridatoday.com/subscribe

Read or Share this story: https://on.flatoday.com/2BPeRtj