Scott calls Nelson a 'socialist,' then Nelson aide says Scott 'just makes stuff up'
CLOSE Gov. Rick Scott made a campaign stop in Titusville Wednesday morning at Shiloh's Steak and Seafood. Malcolm Denemark, FLORIDA TODAY

Buy Photo Florida Gov. Rick Scott made a stop in Titusville on Wednesday in his campaign for U.S. Senate. He met with a group of supporters at Shiloh's Steak & Seafood. Brevard County Sheriff Wayne Ivey, standing behind the governor, attended the event in support of the governor. (Photo: MALCOLM DENEMARK/FLORIDA TODAY)Buy Photo

Gov. Rick Scott brought his campaign for U.S. Senate to Titusville on Wednesday, slamming his opponent, incumbent Sen. Bill Nelson.

Scott, a Republican, is completing his second four-year term as governor, and cannot seek re-election because of term limits. Instead, he is challenging Nelson, a Democrat, for Nelson's U.S. Senate seat.

"We can't have the other side" get elected, Scott told about 50 people at a private campaign event at Shiloh's Steak & Seafood restaurant in Titusville. "Bill Nelson and Andrew Gillum — they're socialists."

Nelson is seeking his fourth six-year term as senator. Gillum, the Democratic mayor of Tallahassee, is running for governor against Republican Ron DeSantis, who resigned from his U.S. House Representatives seat last week to focus on his campaign for governor.

Buy Photo Rick Sarmiento of the Bikers United Coalition, attired in a flag-themed shirt and hat, watches Gov. Rick Scott speak during a campaign stop in Titusville for his U.S. Senate race against incumbent Bill Nelson. (Photo: MALCOLM DENEMARK/FLORIDA TODAY)

Scott did not expand on his remarks about Nelson and Gillum during his 20-minute talk. But he did explain them further after the event, in an interview with FLORIDA TODAY.

"They want big government and socialism," Scott said. "They're both into higher taxes. Gillum said he's going to raise corporate taxes 40 percent. Nelson said that, if the Democrats get control, he's going to go back and raise the taxes. They don't believe that the tax cuts that we did this year are good for our state. If you look at their programs, they just want government to run everything."

Dan McLaughlin, senior communications adviser for the Nelson campaign, said Scott is way off-base in calling Nelson a socialist.

More: Rick Scott vs Bill Nelson's Senate race: Where do they stand on space policy?

More: Bill Nelson, Rick Scott point fingers at each other about Florida's environmental woes

"Bill Nelson is not a socialist. Rick Scott calling one of the more moderate and independent senators a socialist is a clear sign that he's at the helm of a campaign that is running off the rails. That's such a nonsensical claim," McLaughlin said. Scott "is just so far over the top. Every day, Rick Scott makes up something else. He's making phony allegations from one day to the next. It's not surprising that he would say something like that. The guy just makes stuff up."

McLaughlin cited, for example, Scott's implications that Nelson is not working hard or is not physically fit for the job of U.S. senator.

McLaughlin said this is the first time he has heard of Scott calling Nelson a socialist.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 877-424-0156. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

But, in some other campaigns in Florida and elsewhere, Republican candidates have gone to the same playbook by describing their Democratic opponents as socialists.

McLaughlin said, since the election of Donald Trump as president, he has seen "more of slinging of wild charges and use of innuendo" in political campaigns.

McLaughlin said he is not surprised to see it coming from the Scott campaign, since Scott "is one of President Trump's best political pals."

On other topics during Scott's remarks to supporters in Titusville:

• Scott said he has "turned this state around" during his two terms as governor, with an improved economy, increased tourism and a lower crime rate.

"There's no place like Florida now," Scott said.

• Scott told rally attendees that he would "work hard and I'll represent you," while saying that Nelson "represents Chuck Schumer," the Democratic U.S. Senate minority leader.

"I'm going to go up there, I'm going to work hard, and I'm going to represent the great state of Florida," Scott said.

• Scott said his campaign workers are working hard to contact voters, urging them to support his campaign, with more than 200,000 phone calls and more than 100,000 personal visits in the last week alone.

The widely followed political website Real Clear Politics classifies the race as a "tossup." Its tracking of six recent polls shows that Scott has an average support of 46.3 percent of those surveyed; Nelson has an average support of 44.7 percent; and the rest are undecided.

• Scott thanked Brevard County Sheriff Wayne Ivey, who was among the attendees, for the sheriff's support. Scott said Ivey is among the Florida sheriffs who are aggressively working "to making sure we have good laws" and is supportive of school safety legislation approved by the Florida Legislature earlier this year.

In his own comments during the event, Ivey said Scott has always been accessible to him as governor, and "there is nobody else we want to send to Washington except Gov. Rick Scott."

Among the other elected officials at the event were Brevard County Property Appraiser Dana Blickley and Canaveral Port Authority Chairman Wayne Justice.

Blickley said after the event that she appreciated the governor's comments in support of the military and veterans, as well as his emphasis on making the area a safe place to live.

Justice said he thought Scott has done "an incredible job as governor," and "we couldn't ask for a better person" to go to Washington and represent Florida in the U.S. Senate.

While Scott's Titusville appearance went smoothly, that was not the case at scheduled campaign stops earlier this week.

His campaign canceled an event Tuesday in his hometown of Naples after protesters angered by recent red tide issues on Florida's west coast waterways confronted him in Venice.

Naples Lumber and Supply was expecting Scott on Tuesday morning, but Scott's regional political director, Katie Larsen, called the business about 5 p.m. Monday to cancel without explanation, a Naples Lumber representative said.

The cancellation came just hours after dozens of red tide protesters showed up at Scott's rally in Venice, forcing the governor to enter the venue through the back door and leave the same way after 10 minutes as members of the crowd shouted “coward," according to the Sarasota Herald-Tribune.

The protesters blamed "Red Tide Rick" and his environmental policies for creating the toxic red tide algal bloom that's plagued the west coast of Florida, including Naples and other parts of Collier County, for almost a year.

Scott spokesman Chris Hartline did not say the cancellation of the Naples event was related to the red tide or the negative reception in Venice.

CLOSE In this excerpt from a recent FLORIDA TODAY forum, Democrats Mel Martin and Pam Dirschka, running for the Florida Senate and House, discuss the label of “socialist” often attributed to Democrats. WEFS

Lisa Conley of the Naples Daily News contributed to this report.

Dave Berman is government editor at FLORIDA TODAY.

Contact Berman at 321-242-3649

or dberman@floridatoday.com.

Twitter: @bydaveberman

Facebook: /dave.berman.54

Support local journalism: Special offer for Florida residents starting at 99 cents per week. New subscribers sign up at floridatoday.com/subscribe.

Read or Share this story: https://on.flatoday.com/2NrJ72L