Medicaid Expansion Did Not Result In Significant Employment Changes Or Job Reductions In 2014
Medicaid expansion undertaken through the Affordable Care Act (ACA) is already producing major changes in insurance coverage and access to care, but its potential impacts on the labor market are also important policy considerations. Economic theory suggests that receipt of Medicaid might benefit workers who would no longer be tied to specific jobs to receive health insurance (known as job lock), giving them more flexibility in their choice of employment, or might encourage low-income workers to reduce their hours or stop working if they no longer need employment-based insurance. Evidence on labor changes after previous Medicaid expansions is mixed. To view the impact of the ACA on current labor market participation, we analyzed labor-market participation among adults with incomes below 138 percent of the federal poverty level, comparing Medicaid expansion and nonexpansion states and Medicaid-eligible and -ineligible groups, for the pre-ACA period (2005–13) and the first fifteen months of the expansion (January 2014–March 2015). Medicaid expansion did not result in significant changes in employment, job switching, or full- versus part-time status. While we cannot exclude the possibility of small changes in these outcomes, our findings rule out the large change found in one influential pre-ACA study; furthermore, they suggest that the Medicaid expansion has had limited impact on labor-market outcomes thus far.

In January 2014, under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), twenty-five states and the District of Columbia expanded Medicaid eligibility to individuals ages 19–64 with family incomes below 138 percent of the federal poverty level; by January 2016 six additional states had expanded eligibility. 1 This represents the largest coverage expansion to low-income adults since the inception of Medicaid in 1965.

The ACA Medicaid expansion has greatly increased insurance coverage among low-income nonelderly adults in states that implemented the expansion. According to administrative data, Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) enrollment increased by 12.2 million nationally between October 2013, when the initial ACA Marketplace open enrollment period began, and March 2015. 2 Furthermore, analyses of several national surveys estimate that the increase in coverage among low-income individuals was 5.2–6.9 percentage points higher in expansion states than in nonexpansion states. 3–5

Expansion of public insurance coverage has the potential to reduce incentives to work because low-wage nondisabled workers no longer need to rely on employment to obtain insurance. Since health insurance is typically offered only to full-time employees, public coverage expansion may also give workers incentives to transition from full-time to part-time employment. This could reduce earnings among these workers, and reductions in labor input and consumption could impair economic growth.

At the same time, the availability of an insurance option outside the workplace could enable workers to switch jobs more easily and could also ease workers’ moving to jobs that do not provide insurance but match better with their skills. As opposed to the potential work reductions discussed above, enhanced flexibility in the labor market—also known as reduced job lock (when employees are unable to freely leave a job because they would lose their health benefits)—could improve economic efficiency.

Examining the distribution of employment and insurance in the low-income population prior to the ACA provides guidance on the magnitudes of effects we might expect. Exhibit 1 shows the size of the US nonelderly adult population who are living below 138 percent of poverty and the proportions of those individuals who are full-time and part-time workers and how many hold employer-sponsored insurance coverage in their own name. Roughly two million low-income workers who hold own-name employer coverage are potentially eligible for Medicaid in expansion states.

Exhibit 1 Distribution Of Employment And Health Insurance Status In The Low-Income US Population Before The Affordable Care Act, 2013 Expansion states Nonexpansion states Employment and health insurance status Population (thousands) Ratio to no. of nonelderly adults with income <138% FPL Population (thousands) Ratio to no. of nonelderly adults with income <138% FPL No. of nonelderly adults with income <138% FPL 17,722 100.0% 17,188 100.0% No. of those with jobs 7,124 40.2 7,319 41.3 No. those with full-time jobs 4,306 24.3 4,661 26.3 No. of those with part-time jobs 2,836 16.0 2,641 14.9 No. of those with ESI in their own name 1,949 11.0 1,896 10.7 Total no. of all nonelderly adults with jobs 70,269 63,184

The evidence from previous research on how Medicaid expansion affects labor-market outcomes is mixed. Using data from 2009, a randomized controlled trial of Oregon’s Medicaid expansion in 2008 found small and insignificant effects of coverage on employment and wages. 6 A study of Wisconsin’s Medicaid program found a statistically significant decrease of 2–10 percentage points in employment over two years among those gaining Medicaid. 7 In contrast to these modest or nonsignificant estimates, a study of Medicaid disenrollment in Tennessee found that about 60 percent of disenrollees gained jobs within two years after losing public insurance. 8

These issues have major policy implications for the ACA. Early in 2014 the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) updated its estimates of the ACA’s labor-market effects, reflecting the results from these recent studies and other changes to its model. The CBO predicted that the ACA, including the Medicaid expansion, will reduce the number of full-time-equivalent workers by two million by year 2017. 9 Evidence of the ACA’s impact on labor markets in the program’s first fifteen months can shed light on whether or not these projections are likely to be accurate. Moreover, any changes in job markets and labor participation are key elements to evaluating the ACA’s overall policy impact.

The objective of this study was to assess whether and to what extent the ACA Medicaid expansion has altered labor-market outcomes among low-wage workers in the first fifteen months after its implementation.

Study Data And Methods

Study Design

We estimated effects of the ACA Medicaid expansion on labor-market outcomes among nonelderly adults by comparing changes in outcomes before and after the policy went into effect between expansion states (treatment group) and nonexpansion states (control group), as well as between initially ineligible and eligible income groups (within-state treatment and control groups, respectively). We used a difference-in-differences research design, which allowed us to disentangle the effect of the Medicaid expansion from preexisting differences between expanding and nonexpanding states, as well as secular changes in the national labor market that are common between the two sets of states. We tested whether the pre-2014 trends in our study outcomes were similar for the expansion and nonexpansion states; these results, reported in online Appendix Exhibit 1, 10 offer support for our study design. We tested the robustness of our findings through a triple-differences strategy that uses higher-income adults not eligible for Medicaid as an additional within-state control group.

We implemented our difference-in-differences analysis using data on changes in labor-market outcomes experienced by the same individuals from one year to the next. This approach was statistically more powerful than pooling repeated cross-section data and provided richer context to the decisions made by individual workers. Our results indicated whether individuals became more likely to change their labor-market status after the Medicaid expansion, instead of whether the number of individuals with a certain labor-market status increased or not.

Our main analysis examined the full impact of the ACA Medicaid expansion on nonelderly adults below 138 percent of poverty, including the “welcome-mat” effect (an increase in Medicaid take-up at the time of new expansion among those who were already eligible). We also reestimated our models, removing those who were likely eligible for Medicaid (based on state criteria) prior to 2014. Finally, we also investigated whether the law’s effects were concentrated among childless adults, since they were much less likely than parents to be eligible for Medicaid prior to the ACA.

Our analysis focused on individuals whose baseline family income fell below the ACA Medicaid income eligibility threshold of 138 percent of poverty. We used baseline income in the first year because of the potential for the Medicaid expansion to affect reported income in the second year by changing individuals’ employment status. In sensitivity analyses, we repeated our analysis using individuals below 100 percent of poverty as the study sample, since premium and cost-sharing tax subsidies through the Marketplace are available for those with family incomes of 100–138 percent of poverty in nonexpansion states. In an additional sensitivity analysis related to how we defined our sample, we examined those individuals who did not complete their high school education as our study population because those with lower educational attainment are more likely than others to be eligible for Medicaid and education is likely unaffected by the Medicaid expansion, at least in the short run. Our main results were largely unchanged in both sensitivity analyses. Results of the sensitivity analyses are discussed below and in Appendix Exhibit 4. 10

There are also potentially complex income incentives related to Medicaid. Traditionally, research on Medicaid concerned the so-called Medicaid notch, the possibility that those whose income might otherwise be above Medicaid eligibility thresholds might work less to qualify for Medicaid. 11 However, this is not a concern in the ACA context because residents in all states were eligible for heavily subsidized coverage in the Marketplace at incomes above 138 percent of poverty. In contrast, individuals in nonexpansion states whose initial incomes were below Marketplace eligibility (100 percent of poverty in those states) have an incentive to increase earnings above 100 percent of poverty and qualify for subsidies. Thus, some in the control group (Medicaid nonexpansion states) may have become more likely to seek new employment and to increase their work hours. If anything, this pattern would make it more likely that our analysis would detect a relative decrease in labor-force participation in our treatment group (Medicaid expansion states).

Data And Sample

Our data came from the Current Population Survey (CPS) basic monthly data, which interviews approximately 60,000 households each month about demographic and employment information. These data become available approximately one month after the time of the interview, forming a valuable real-time source for examining labor-market effects of the ACA. Our data extended through March 2015.

The CPS interviews households according to a rotating structure: interviews for four months, then no interviews for eight months, followed by four more months of interviews. This structure enabled us to construct a set of two-year panels at the individual level to measure changes in relevant outcomes over a twelve-month period, 12 as has been done in several previously published studies. 13,14 We used the data from January 2005 to March 2015 to construct our nine two-year panel data sets (2005–06, 2006–07, and so forth, through 2014–15). Our study sample consisted of individuals whose baseline family incomes fall below 138 percent of poverty ( N = 352 , 556 ).

Because the CPS basic monthly data contain annual income in $5,000 categories only, we conducted sensitivity analyses using the continuous income information available in the CPS Annual Social and Economic Component (ASEC) supplement by merging individual information from the ASEC into our two-year panel data, as discussed in detail in the Appendix; 10 we refer to the matched data as “ASEC-matched sample” hereafter. Because of the CPS interview structure, our ASEC-matched sample ran only from December to June of each year, with the latest data being June 2014. The CPS basic monthly data therefore offered a larger sample size and served as our primary model, while the ASEC offered more precise income data. We analyzed both sources to maximize our chances of detecting any changes in outcomes.

Outcomes

We analyzed the following three outcomes.

Job Loss:

This outcome measured transitions from employment to unemployment or out of the labor force in a twelve-month period. This variable, defined for those who were employed in the first year, equals 1 if an individual was employed in a given month of the first year but was unemployed or out of the labor force twelve months later, and 0 otherwise.

Job Switching:

This outcome measured whether the monthly rate of job transitions increased in the second year relative to the first year. Respondents were asked whether they switched jobs during the past month. Thus, our measure of job switching was defined for those who were employed in both years; it equals 1 if an individual reported having just switched jobs in his or her second CPS interview but not in his or her first CPS interview, and 0 otherwise.

Part-Time Status:

This outcome measured switching from full- to part-time employment. This variable, defined for those who worked full time in the first year, equals 1 if an individual became employed part time in the second year, and 0 otherwise.

Statistical Analysis

We examined the impact of the Medicaid expansion on labor-market outcomes by first estimating a difference-in-differences linear probability model. The model includes an indicator variable for our treatment group (Medicaid expansion state) and an interaction of this term with an indicator variable for the postpolicy intervention period (which depended upon the start date of each state’s Medicaid expansion). This variable captured the effects of the ACA Medicaid expansion. We included state fixed effects to control for time-invariant state-specific characteristics that affect individuals’ labor-market behavior. We included fixed effects for each baseline year and each baseline month to account for time trends, seasonality, and the post-ACA period.

We controlled for sociodemographic characteristics such as age, sex, race and ethnicity, marital status, and educational attainment. We also included in our model the year-to-year change in state-level unemployment rates (for the full income range) to capture any changes in local economic conditions, although our models were not sensitive to excluding this variable, which might itself be affected by the Medicaid expansion. We used sample weights to generate nationally representative estimates and robust cluster-correct standard errors at the state level. 15

A critical assumption of a difference-in-differences strategy is that the trends in outcomes would have been the same between the treatment and control groups if there were no policy intervention. We tested whether the trends were similar between these two groups before the ACA Medicaid expansion, using the prepolicy intervention data (2005–13). We estimated a regression similar to our main model that tested whether the time trend in the period prior to reform was similar across expansion and nonexpansion states. The results of these tests, presented in Appendix Exhibit 1, indicate no significant divergence in employment outcomes before 2013 in these two sets of states. 10

As a final step, we conducted a triple-differences estimation in which we introduced a within-state control group (those with family incomes of 138–400 percent of poverty) to our difference-in-differences specification above. This model assumed that those with higher initial incomes were not directly affected by the Medicaid expansion but faced similar differential trends in labor markets across states. This approach provided an additional method of filtering out potential secular trends in each state’s economy unrelated to the Medicaid expansion decision.

We also conducted several sensitivity analyses to focus on subgroups of low-income adults whose labor-market decisions might have been most likely affected by the ACA’s Medicaid expansion: those with employer-sponsored insurance, those who did not meet pre-ACA state Medicaid eligibility criteria, and childless adults. These are discussed below and shown in Appendix Exhibit 4. 10

Limitations

Our study had several limitations. We used data from the first fifteen months after the ACA Medicaid expansion to examine its early effects, but longer-term effects could be different from our estimates. If individuals take time to adjust their labor-market behavior, long-term effects could be larger and statistically significant. In addition, coverage gains under the Medicaid expansion are expected to increase over time, 16 which would increase the likelihood of creating detectable changes in employment.

Another potential limitation was that our income measure was imprecise because it was constructed from the categorical variable available in the CPS basic monthly data. We used our ASEC-matched sample, and the results were similar when we used a continuous income variable.

Lastly, in the linkage of the observations from two consecutive years in the CPS data, only 73.5 percent of the observations from the first year that we expected to be linked actually had a match in the second year. This linkage rate is comparable to that of previous studies using the CPS data, likely as a result of survey attrition and mismatched identification numbers. 12 It is possible that Medicaid has a differential impact on individuals who are more likely to move or drop out of the survey, but the direction of this bias is unclear.

Study Results

Descriptive Statistics

Appendix Exhibit 2 shows the descriptive statistics for our sample of nonelderly adults with family incomes below 138 percent of poverty. 10 Through the full study period from January 2005 to March 2015, 14.7 percent of employed individuals transitioned to being unemployed or out of the labor force twelve months later. Among those who were employed, 2.3 percent reported no job switch in year 1 but a job switch in year 2. On average, 9.5 percent of full-time employees switched to part-time employment twelve months later during our study period.

Trends Of Outcome Variables

In Exhibit 2 we present time trends of the mean rate of transition from employment to either unemployment or out of the labor force for Medicaid expansion versus nonexpansion states before and after the expansion. The rates trended similarly between the two groups of states before 2014, which is consistent with the results of our statistical test described in the Appendix. 10 After 2014 the data points for expansion versus nonexpansion states continued to have overlapping 95 percent confidence intervals, although there was a slight but nonsignificant divergence between the two in the first quarter of 2015. We tested these changes more precisely with regression analyses, as discussed below. Exhibit 2 Probability Of Transitioning From Employment In The Baseline Year To Unemployment Or Out Of The Labor Force In The Next Year Among Individuals Whose Baseline-Year Family Incomes Fall Below 138 Percent Of The Federal Poverty Level, 2006–15 SOURCE Authors’ average yearly estimates from the Current Population Survey monthly basic data, 2005–15 (the estimate for 2015 used data from January–March 2015, not the full year). NOTES The x -axis scale refers to the second year of each person’s inclusion in the survey. The blue vertical solid lines are the 95% confidence intervals of the estimates for the Medicaid expansion states, and the red vertical dashed lines are the 95% CI of the estimates for the Medicaid nonexpansion states.

Exhibit 3 shows the time trends of transitioning from full- to part-time employment among individuals in Medicaid expansion states and nonexpansion states, while Appendix Exhibit 3 shows the same for job switching. 10 As in Exhibit 2 , these rates in the expansion states and nonexpansion states trended closely with each other throughout the study period. Exhibit 3 Probability Of Transitioning From Full- To Part-Time Employment Among Individuals Whose Baseline-Year Family Incomes Fall Below 138 Percent Of The Federal Poverty Level, 2006–15 SOURCE Authors’ average yearly estimates from the Current Population Survey monthly basic data, 2005–15 (the estimate for 2015 used data from January–March 2015, not the full year). NOTES The x -axis scale refers to the second year of each person’s inclusion in the survey. The blue vertical solid lines are the 95% confidence intervals of the estimates for the Medicaid expansion states, and the red vertical dashed lines are the 95% CI of the estimates for the Medicaid nonexpansion states.

Regression Results

Exhibit 4 presents our difference-in-differences regression estimates showing the effects of the ACA Medicaid expansion on labor-market outcomes. The association between the ACA Medicaid expansion and the likelihood of transitioning out of employment was not statistically significant. Neither was the association between the ACA Medicaid expansion and the rate of job switching. Finally, the likelihood of transitioning from full- to part-time employment was very small and not statistically significant (0.3 percentage points).

Exhibit 4 Effects Of The Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansion On Labor-Market Outcomes Among Individuals Whose Baseline-Year Family Incomes Fall Below 138 Percent Of The Federal Poverty Level Unadjusted means (%) Difference-in-differences estimates from regression Preexpansion Postexpansion Difference p value Transitioned from employed to unemployed or out of labor force a Expansion states 14.9 13.9 Nonexpansion states 15.0 13.3 DD 0.933 0.16 More job switching relative to baseline year b Expansion states 2.2 2.5 Nonexpansion states 2.4 2.5 DD 0.408 0.33 Switched from full-time to part-time employment c Expansion states 10.2 9.8 Nonexpansion states 9.0 8.3 DD 0.283 0.68

We also tested the hypothesis of any labor-market effects in these three outcomes by testing jointly whether the three coefficients in Exhibit 4 differed significantly from zero; they did not.

Tests of the preexpansion trend did not show any evidence that labor-market outcomes were significantly diverging in expansion versus nonexpansion states prior to 2014 (Appendix Exhibit 1). 10

Sensitivity Analyses

Our results are robust to various alternative specifications (Appendix Exhibit 4). 10 These include when we used a sample of nonelderly adults whose first-year income was below 100 percent of poverty (instead of 138 percent of poverty) and a sample of nonelderly adults whose educational attainment was less than a high school diploma. We also found that our results were not affected by whether we adjusted for changes in each state’s overall unemployment rate.

Results using the ASEC-matched sample (which allowed for more precise income measurement) yielded results quite similar to those from the CPS basic monthly data. When using insurance coverage information from the ASEC data to limit our sample to those who had employer-sponsored insurance coverage in their own name in the baseline year, again we found no statistically significant effects for any of the three outcomes. We note that the latest insurance coverage information available in the ASEC data pertains to 2013; thus, we were unable to analyze the effect of the expansion on Medicaid coverage post-ACA.

Finally, we analyzed the impacts of the Medicaid expansion among those who were most likely to benefit from the ACA’s new eligibility. First, we excluded from our sample all individuals who—based on income, parental status, and state of residence—were likely eligible for Medicaid before the ACA. As a result, our sample was reduced by about 30 percent. We found that the ACA Medicaid expansion was associated with a 1.6-percentage-point increase (of borderline significance) in the likelihood of transitioning out of employment ( p = 0.09 ), while the effects on our other two outcomes, the rate of job switching and the likelihood of transitioning from full- to part-time employment, were not statistically significant ( p = 0.14 and p = 0.86 , respectively). Second, we excluded all parents from our primary sample and found that the results among childless adults were similar to those in our main specification.

Appendix Exhibit 5 shows the results of a triple-differences specification, where we included a within-state control group (those with baseline income between 138 percent and 400 percent of poverty). 10 The associations between the Medicaid expansion and all three outcomes remained small and statistically nonsignificant.

Discussion

The ACA Medicaid expansion has already produced important changes in health insurance coverage, 3–5 but here we found no major changes in labor-market behavior among low-income adults associated with the first fifteen months of the Medicaid expansion. We found no significant changes in transitions from employment to nonemployment, the rate of job switches, or transitions from full- to part-time employment among low-income nonelderly adults in ACA Medicaid-expansion states, compared to those in nonexpansion states. These results hold across a variety of subgroup and sensitivity analyses.

When one considers these findings in the context of prior work, our results are consistent with the findings from Oregon’s 2008 Medicaid expansion, which found no statistically significant effect on employment and wages. 6 Our results differ slightly from the small but significant findings from a 2009 Medicaid expansion in Wisconsin and more dramatically from the large changes seen in the 2005 contraction of Medicaid in Tennessee. 7,8

The magnitude of our results can be assessed in two ways. First, we can consider the individual-level impact of gaining coverage on the likelihood of employment. Putting the magnitude of the Medicaid coverage gains in 2014 together with our labor-market results yields a population-level confidence interval of roughly −20 to +3 percentage points in the likelihood of employment for a person gaining Medicaid coverage. This result is calculated by multiplying the confidence interval for the reduction in employment from Exhibit 4 (95% CI: −0.37, 2.24) by 47 percent, the probability of employment in our sample, and dividing this by 5.2 percentage points, the fraction of low-income adults who obtained insurance coverage from the Medicaid expansion. 3 Thus, our confidence interval includes Katherine Baicker and colleagues’ statistically insignificant estimate of a 1.6-percentage-point reduction in employment in Oregon and Laura Dague and colleagues’ findings of decreases of 2.4–10.5 percentage points in employment in Wisconsin’s 2009 Medicaid expansion. 6,7 However, our findings are inconsistent with the 60-percentage-point change detected in Craig Garthwaite and colleagues’ study of Tennessee Medicaid. 8

An alternative approach is to consider the population-level effects on employment among all low-income adults (whether or not they signed up for coverage). Although the effects in our study were not significantly different from zero, we consider here the implications of the confidence intervals for labor-market changes that our study may have been underpowered to detect. The 95 percent confidence intervals of our estimates are precise enough to rule out population-level effects among low-income adults larger than a 2.2-percentage-point increase in the likelihood of transitioning from employment to either unemployment or out of the labor force, a 1.2-percentage-point increase in job switches, and a 1.6-percentage-point increase in the likelihood of transitioning from full- to part-time employment, as a result of the ACA Medicaid expansion.

These confidence intervals are broadly consistent with the updated CBO projection, which relates to the change in hours worked instead of the probability of employment. The CBO projection suggests that ACA implementation will decrease the total number of hours worked by 1.5–2.0 percent in the 2017–24 period. The CBO notes that the magnitude of the reduction through the Medicaid expansion will be relatively modest. 9 Our results appear to confirm that population-level labor changes resulting from the Medicaid expansion—if there are any at all—will be modest. In part, this reflects the fact that the number of low-income individuals with full-time employment and employer coverage prior to the ACA does not constitute a large fraction of the workforce.

One potential reason why our results differ from some previous studies could be the differences in income eligibility thresholds: The thresholds of the ACA Medicaid expansion and the Medicaid expansion in Oregon were 138 percent of poverty and 100 percent of poverty, respectively, while the threshold of the Medicaid expansion in Wisconsin was 200 percent of poverty. Eligibility for the Medicaid program in Tennessee did not depend on income, and only those who were either uninsured or uninsurable were eligible. It is possible that those with lower incomes are less likely to work in the first place or have lower propensity to purchase health insurance, making them less likely to change their labor-market behavior in response to insurance coverage expansion.

Another potential difference is that individuals may respond asymmetrically to the loss of coverage (as in the Tennessee study) versus gaining coverage, which could be plausible given evidence from behavioral economics on loss aversion.

One might also question whether it is simply too soon to see any labor-market changes from the Medicaid expansion with only fifteen months of follow-up. Oregon’s Medicaid expansion study used a somewhat similar time frame as ours (its postimplementation period ranged approximately from twelve to twenty months) and found no statistically significant effects on employment. 6 However, the Tennessee study that reported the largest employment effects related to Medicaid coverage found that changes in coverage led to nearly immediate changes in job-seeking behavior and a steady increase in employment over the two-year period. Our study’s time frame allows us to confidently reject short-term changes in employment from the ACA’s Medicaid expansion as large as those seen in the Tennessee study. 8

Conclusion

While the evidence to date has shown that the ACA Medicaid expansion has improved insurance coverage among low-income individuals, our results suggest that these improvements have been achieved thus far without large impacts on labor-market behavior. Future research will be needed to evaluate the expansion’s longer-term effects.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Benjamin D. Sommers was supported by a research grant from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) (Grant No. K02HS021291). The authors thank Robert Kaestner, Bowen Garrett, Thomas Selden, Joel Cohen, and Steve Cohen; and seminar participants at Columbia University, Purdue University, Vanderbilt University, and AHRQ for helpful comments. The authors also thank the Department of Labor Scholars Program for funding the related earlier research. Sommers currently serves part time as an adviser to the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), but this article was written in his capacity as a Harvard University employee. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not represent the views of HHS or the AHRQ.

NOTES