Little Change Seen In Part-Time Employment As A Result Of The Affordable Care Act
There has been speculation that the Affordable Care Act’s coverage provisions and employer mandate have led to an increase in part-time employment. Using the Current Population Survey for the period 2005–15, we examined data on weekly hours worked by firm size, reason for working part time, age, education, and health insurance. We found only limited evidence to support this speculation.

Since the passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), there has been speculation that employers would reduce work hours to avoid the mandate that they must offer health insurance to full-time employees. If this were true, one would expect to find increases in employment at the “kink” just below the thirty-hour threshold. There has also been speculation that the ACA, by expanding access to means-tested public and publicly subsidized coverage, would create work disincentives. Changes in incentives for part-time employment might be particularly strong in jobs where full-time employment confers eligibility for employer-sponsored insurance, given that this eligibility generally makes workers ineligible for subsidized Marketplace coverage. Exhibit 1 presents trends in weekly hours worked by adults under age sixty-five in their main jobs (adjusted to hold state unemployment rates fixed). We did not observe a substantive increase in the adjusted probability of working either 25–29 hours or fewer than 25 hours in 2013, 2014, or 2015. Exhibit 1 Adjusted Probability Of Working In Each Weekly Hour Range Among Employed People, 2005–15 SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data from the Basic Monthly Current Population Survey for January–June of each year in the period 2005–15. NOTES The sample is all employed people ages 19–64, except self-employed people and those with imputed work hours. Work hours are defined as weekly hours usually worked on a main job. The y axis is interrupted to account for the large spread between the highest category and the lower four categories.

The ACA expanded means-tested access to affordable coverage in two main ways: through Medicaid, for people with incomes of up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level (in states that chose to expand eligibility for Medicaid); and through subsidized coverage in the health insurance Marketplace, for people ineligible for public or affordable employer-sponsored insurance whose incomes are 100–400 percent of poverty.

The ACA’s provision for employer shared responsibility requires that starting January 1, 2015, large firms (those with 100 or more full-time-equivalent [FTE] employees) must offer affordable health insurance to their full-time workers (people working thirty or more hours per week) or pay a penalty. Implementation of the mandate has been postponed until 2016 for midsize companies (those with 50–99 FTE employees). Small firms (those with 49 or fewer FTE employees) are exempt from the mandate.

Economic theory suggests that means-tested public benefits and employer mandates can create a variety of employment disincentives. 1–5 Regarding the ACA, questions of interest include whether workers have voluntarily reduced the hours they work because of expanded Medicaid or Marketplace subsidies and whether employers have reduced the hours they offer workers to avoid the mandate that they cover full-time employees. 6–9 In this article we provide updated estimates and extend the literature by examining employment just below and just above the thirty-hour threshold, by stratifying results by main job and firm size, and by incorporating information on voluntary versus involuntary part-time work, previous coverage through employer-sponsored insurance, educational attainment, and age.

Study Data And Methods

We followed previous research in using nationally representative data from the Current Population Survey (CPS), conducted by the Census Bureau, to examine trends in the frequency of part-time work among employed people under age sixty-five. As Bowen Garrett and Robert Kaestner did, 7 we used state-level variation in unemployment rates to account for variations in hours as a result of economic fluctuations. We estimated regressions that controlled for state monthly unemployment rates, state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. We then calculated the adjusted probabilities of working in each weekly hour range, with the unemployment rates held fixed at 2015 levels (details of the estimation are provided in the online Appendix). 10

Our estimates are for the first six months of each year in the period 2005–15, which included the 2014 increases in access to affordable coverage resulting from Medicaid expansions and subsidized Marketplaces and the 2015 implementation of the employer mandate for large firms. 11

The online Appendix presents estimates and standard errors for all exhibits. 10 All changes discussed in the text are significantly different from zero ( p ≤ 0.05 ) unless otherwise noted.

For some analyses, we obtained firm size data by linking to the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) from the CPS in the previous March. Some employees may have changed jobs in the interim, but using these data helped us identify the group most affected by the employer mandate. Similarly, for some analyses we used these data for information on insurance. This provides us with a lagged measure of insurance coverage, because the ASEC’s insurance questions referred to coverage held up to two years before the point at which we were measuring work hours.

Study Results

All Workers

As noted above, the trends shown in Exhibit 1 are not consistent with the postulated increase in the adjusted probability of part-time work. We did not see increases in 2015 in the probability of working either 25–29 hours or fewer than 25 hours per week. Moreover, the increased prevalence from 2013 to 2014 in working 25–29 hours, while significant, was small (0.18 percentage points) and reflected an upward trend that began before passage of the ACA. We also did not observe a large reduction in 2015 (or in 2014, for that matter) in the frequency of working 30–34 hours, as one might expect if employers affected by the mandate reduced hours for workers just above the 30-hour threshold.

Some workers might have worked more hours than they preferred before 2014 to maintain their eligibility for employer-sponsored insurance. Other workers, facing high employee premium contributions, 12 might have reduced their hours starting in 2014 to qualify for Medicaid or for Marketplace subsidies. However, the lack of a meaningful increase in part-time work in 2014 ( Exhibit 1 ) is not consistent with either of these theories.

Part-Time Employment By Firm Size

Trends in hours worked among employees at firms of all sizes may mask the true effect of the mandate, because small firms are exempt from the mandate and because implementation of the mandate for midsize firms was postponed to 2016. Instead of an increase, we found a slight downward trend in working 25–29 hours per week among employees of large firms between 2012 and 2015 ( Exhibit 2 ). Moreover, the only decrease in the adjusted probability of working 30–34 hours per week among employees of large firms was a 0.25-percentage-point reduction in 2015 (for details, see Appendix Exhibit A5). 10 Exhibit 2 Adjusted Probability Of Working 25–29 Hours Per Week, Among Employed People, By Firm Size, 2012–15 SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data from the Basic Monthly Current Population Survey for January–June of each year in the period 2012–15 matched with firm size data from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the previous March’s Current Population Survey. NOTES The sample is all employed people ages 19–64, except self-employed people and those with imputed work hours. Work hours are defined as hours usually worked on a main job.

Voluntary And Involuntary Part-Time Employment

For people whose hours on all jobs they worked totaled less than thirty-five hours per week, the CPS distinguishes between involuntary part-time work (wanting to work full time but working part time because of “slack work/business conditions” or because the person “could only find PT [part-time] work”) and voluntary part-time work (either not wanting to work full time or wanting to work full time but working part time for such reasons as “school/training” or “family/personal obligation”). 13 Part-time employment resulting from the employer mandate is more likely to be involuntary, whereas part-time work resulting from the increased availability of affordable substitutes for employer-sponsored insurance is more likely to be voluntary.

The adjusted probability of working 25–29 hours per week for involuntary reasons was low between 2012 and 2015 for main jobs at all firm sizes ( Exhibit 3 ). Moreover, changes over time were small and either negative or not significant. The adjusted probability of voluntary part-time employment with 25–29 hours per week spent at the current main job did not change appreciably in 2014 or 2015 ( Exhibit 4 ). For the adjusted probabilities of voluntarily working 30–34 hours per week by firm size, see Appendix Exhibit A6. 10 Economic theory yields no strong a priori predictions regarding these trends, and none of the differences between 2012 and 2015 was significant. Exhibit 3 Adjusted Probability Of Working 25–29 Hours Per Week For Involuntary Reasons, Among Employed People, By Firm Size, 2012–15 SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data from the Basic Monthly Current Population Survey for January–June of each year in the period 2012–15 matched with firm size data from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the previous March’s Current Population Survey. NOTES The sample is all employed people ages 19–64, except self-employed people and those with imputed work hours. Work hours are defined as hours usually worked on a main job. The sample is further limited to people who worked fewer than thirty-five hours per week (on both main and other jobs), because the information we used to define involuntary and voluntary part-time employment (both terms are explained in the text) was available only for such workers. Exhibit 4 Adjusted Probability Of Working 25–29 Hours Per Week For Voluntary Reasons, Among Employed People, By Firm Size, 2012–15 Work hours are defined as hours usually worked on a main job. The sample is further limited to those who worked fewer than thirty-five hours per week (on both main and other jobs), as explained in the Notes to SOURCE Authors’ analysis of data from the Basic Monthly Current Population Survey for January–June of each year in the period 2012–15 matched with firm size data from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the previous March’s Current Population Survey. NOTES The sample is all employed people ages 19–64, except self-employed people and those with imputed work hours.are defined as hours usually worked on a main job. The sample is further limited to those who worked fewer than thirty-five hours per week (on both main and other jobs), as explained in the Notes to Exhibit 3

Workers With Low Educational Attainment

Compared to employees with higher educational attainment, employees with low attainment might have experienced larger-than-average reductions in hours worked, to the extent that their productivity was low relative to their employer’s cost of providing insurance. The benefits that lower-paid workers received from the preferential tax treatment of employer-sponsored insurance would also have been smaller compared to those of higher-paid employees, and their lower average wages may have placed them closer to the Medicaid eligibility threshold or caused them to be more strongly affected by means-tested Marketplace subsidies. Thus, because of incentives facing both employers and workers, one might speculate that workers with low educational attainment would have experienced larger-than-average increases in part-time employment.

Among workers with no more than a high school diploma, we observed an increase in the probability of working 25–29 hours from 2.44 percent in 2013 to 3.00 percent in 2015 (Appendix Exhibit A7). 10 Part of this increase may have reflected an ongoing trend that predated passage of the ACA, in which hours of work among workers with low educational attainment were declining for other reasons. To the extent that the ACA accelerated this trend, results shown in Appendix Exhibit A8 10 by firm size and by voluntary versus involuntary status suggest that the increase was associated more with workers’ responses to the 2014 coverage expansions than with employers’ responses to the employer mandate.

Older Workers

Part-time employment might have differentially increased among older workers (those ages 60–64). Their above-average expected health care costs make them relatively expensive to cover, and they may be more likely than younger workers to reduce hours if they can enroll in Medicaid or subsidized Marketplace coverage. Among older workers, the probability of working 25–29 hours per week increased between 2013 and 2015, rising from 2.09 percent to 2.59 percent (Appendix Exhibit A7). 10 There was little increase in involuntary part-time employment. Increases in voluntarily working 25–29 hours per week appear to have occurred in firms of all sizes, though our estimates of voluntary part-time employment by firm size were not precise enough for us to draw strong conclusions (Appendix Exhibit A9). 10

Workers Who Did Not Report Employer Coverage In Previous Year

One might expect the employer mandate to have had larger-than-average effects among large firms that had not previously offered coverage or among employees who had not previously taken up coverage for which they were eligible. The CPS did not collect data on employer offers or employee eligibility for most of our study period. Thus, we explored this hypothesis by excluding workers who reported holding employer-sponsored insurance from their own jobs in the previous year’s ASEC. We also excluded those with dependent employer-sponsored insurance coverage, because they might have had employer-sponsored insurance offers but chose to be covered instead by spousal plans. This sensitivity analysis had little effect on our results (see Appendix Exhibit A10). 10

To further investigate possible effects of the employer mandate, we limited the sample to workers without employer-sponsored insurance in large firms who worked 30–34 hours per week in the previous year. This number of hours is just above the 30-hour employer mandate threshold, but perhaps not enough to have qualified workers for employer-sponsored insurance. The frequency of working 25–29 hours among this group did rise between 2013 and 2014, but by 2015 it had dropped to approximately its 2013 level (Appendix Exhibit A11). 10

Workers Who Reported Employer Coverage In Previous Year

Workers in large firms who reported in the ASEC that they had insurance from their employers were unlikely to have been affected by the 2015 employer mandate, yet they might have voluntarily reduced hours starting in 2014 to become eligible for Medicaid or subsidized Marketplace coverage. This is especially true if they had employer-sponsored insurance despite working fewer than 40 hours a week. Among workers who worked 35–39 hours per week in the previous year and reported in the previous year’s ASEC that they had insurance from their employers, we saw no evidence of shifting to a lower number of hours in 2014 or 2015 (for hours worked for this group, see Appendix Exhibit A12). 10

Holding Multiple Jobs

Our analyses focused on main jobs and thus potentially missed employment changes that involved increases in the number of part-time secondary jobs. Using data on all jobs (main and other), we examined the number of part-time jobs as a percentage of all jobs dating back to 2005. We used linear regression to standardize for changes in state unemployment rates. The adjusted ratio remained approximately stable over time, with only a modest increase between 2013 and 2015 (Appendix Exhibit A13). 10

Sensitivity Of Results To Rounding Error

CPS respondents might have reported working thirty hours when in fact they worked just under that amount. As a sensitivity test, we reexamined our main results interpreting thirty hours as twenty-nine and thirty-five hours as thirty-four. Our findings were largely unchanged (Appendix Exhibit A14). 10

Discussion

Our analysis of data from the CPS in general revealed no evidence consistent with the thesis that the ACA caused an overall increase in part-time employment in the United States. Our evidence came from data through 2015, the first year of the employer mandate and the second year of expanded access to coverage through Medicaid expansion and the Marketplaces. As a result, both employers and employees may have still been adjusting to provisions of the ACA.

One possible exception to our general findings may be a modest increase in working 25–29 hours per week, starting in 2014, among workers with low educational attainment. This result mirrored a key finding by Garrett and Kaestner. 7 Another possible exception is modest increases in part-time employment, in firms of all sizes, among workers ages 60–64.

Conclusion

Although we found little evidence that the ACA had caused increases in part-time employment as of 2015, its impact on labor markets is likely to continue to be a subject of policy interest. Future research should examine longer periods to capture the phasing in of the employer mandate and any lagged effects of the ACA on employment. Future research should also examine workers with greater health risk, which would make it possible to assess the ACA’s effects on employment among workers who would be more expensive to insure, compared to all employed individuals, and who would have above-average demand for coverage.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are grateful for the helpful suggestions of Steven Machlin, Joel Cohen, and Steven Cohen. Any remaining errors are those of the authors. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors, and no official endorsement by the Department of Health and Human Services or the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is intended or should be inferred.

NOTES