Former Google Chairman Eric Schmidt Announces New Science Fellows
Adam Schultz

Former Alphabet executive chairman Eric Schmidt and his wife Wendy Schmidt are no strangers to scientific philanthropy. Since 2006, the couple have given hundreds of millions of dollars to support causes from ecological agriculture to oceanic research, globally and within the U.S..

On Monday April 23, the couple, in partnership with the Rhodes Trust — home of the prestigious Rhodes Scholarships at the University of Oxford — announced the first members of the Schmidt Science Fellows program at the Alexandria Center for Life Science in New York City. The post-doctoral fellowship, funded by the Schmidts, officially launched last October. It’s aimed at promoting scientific leadership and interdisciplinary research. A total of 14 fellows were selected — 8 men and 6 women, who together span 9 nationalities and are graduates of 12 different universities, including Cambridge University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

“The next frontiers of scientific discovery will be pioneered by those who can transcend the traditional boundaries of science, using techniques from multiple scientific fields to tackle society’s long standing challenges,” Eric said in a statement. The program is designed to allow for interdisciplinary thinking, support up-and-coming scientists, promote leadership training and to address market failures around basic research, Eric described in an op-ed for the San Francisco Chronicle.

Through an initial commitment of at least $25 million for the first three years, the fellowship is part of a broader $100 million drive to fund scientific research. While the program is fully funded by the Schmidts, The Rhodes Trust acts as a central partner, coordinating the selection process, mediating with partner universities, and assisting in the post-doctoral placements of fellows. Fellows, whose areas of study span the natural sciences, engineering, mathematics, and computer sciences, are given $100,000 to study a field outside their core research, and take a series of advanced courses and networking programs. They will pursue a 14-month post-doctoral fellowship beginning in July this year.

The first component of the program will be an 11-month or longer postdoctoral research study in a laboratory at one of a number of leading scientific research universities around the world. Fellows will later come together for four global meetings, the first of which will be held at the University of Oxford.

The fellowship, administered by Schmidt Futures — a philanthropic initiative that uses tools such as gifts, grants, investments, and startup activity for charitable, educational, and commercial efforts with a public purpose — is betting on young scientists, rather than veterans, to drive research. “So much of science today encourages people to specialize, to bet on people that have track records,” said Eric Braverman, the chief executive of Schmidt Futures. “But what we know of the future is that it requires people to work together in unusual ways and that’s the best way to start. This fellowship is about finding some of the world’s best young leaders and bringing them together from the beginning where they can move across disciplines themselves.”

The Schmidts set up the Schmidt Family Foundation in 2006 to promote the “wiser use of energy and natural resources.” As a result of joining Google in its early days as its CEO, Eric accumulated enough Google stock to make him a multi-billionaire. Forbes estimates his net worth at $13.7 billion. The Schmidts’ foundation has $453 million in assets and distributed $27 million in grants in 2017.

In 2009, the couple founded The Schmidt Ocean Institute, a nonprofit pursuing technologically-advanced ocean exploration. It funded the construction of research vessel, Falkor, for oceanic research. Since its launch in 2012, Falkor has hosted nearly 500 scientists from 29 countries. The foundation is also home to The 11th Hour Project, a grantmaking arm that supports more than 150 non-profit organizations around the world in areas including renewable energy, ecological agriculture, human rights, and a maritime connection through its 11th Hour Racing program.

Since stepping down as executive chairman of Alphabet in January, Eric has been keeping busy. He joined the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in February as a visiting innovation fellow and will be involved in the institution’s efforts to spur human and machine intelligence development, serving as an advisor to the newly launched MIT Intelligence Quest — an Institute-wide initiative to discover the foundations of human intelligence research.

The Schmidts are looking ahead to the future of science. “Philanthropy is about energy and velocity — adding fizz to the drink,” Wendy Schmidt said at the event. “Today is really the culmination of the efforts of a group of people and years of thought, research, program design and implementation, and a team of people supporting the work Eric and I are hoping to do — this radical reinvestment in science at a time when public funding has been so dramatically reduced.”

Editor's note: This post has been corrected to clarify the relationship of the 11th Hour Project to The Schmidt Family Foundation. It's also been updated to show the new number of scientists that have been affiliated with the Schmidt Ocean Institute.