Delaying The Seating Of Senator-Elect Jones Would Be Partisan And Unconstitutional
Senate Republicans, led by Republican Majority Leader McConnell, may well intend to delay the seating of Senator-elect Douglas Jones to finish their business this year, especially the tax bill, without the bother of respecting the constitutionally empowered Alabama voters.

McConnell said on Tuesday before the election was decided that acting Sen. Luther Strange would remain in the seat through the end of the Senate session.

The results of the election need to be certified, but any further delay would be partisan and unconstitutional.

To be sure, those interested in delaying the seating of Jones would describe the delay as just a normal part of the process. State election officials take time to officially compile and decide the local election results and issue a certificate of election to the winner. That could involve delays in local results getting to the state level. There might even be situations where the state level bounces results back to the local level for further inspection.

The overseer of the process is Alabama Secretary of State John Merrill. (As Riddick’s Senate Procedure states, “The credentials of a Senator-elect must, under the law, be signed by the executive of the State and attested by the Secretary of State.”)

The Alabama secretary of state has already stated, unofficially but seriously and significantly, that Doug Jones is the winner. So Merrill predicted that Jones would be certified the winner between Dec. 26 and Jan. 3. That raises some questions. Suppose the Senate is in session during any of that period. (Normally the Senate would not be in session between the Christmas and New Year’s holidays, but this year anything is possible.) If there were a Dec. 26 certificate, why not seat Jones immediately?

Even more dubiously, a possible monkey wrench in the process would be if Roy Moore continued to refuse to concede. That might embolden his party allies, at the state level or in the Senate or both, to extend the period before they are ready to seat Doug Jones.

So many key issues have piled up in the end of December that a number of these may be kicked down the road into January and February. Until the Senate seats Jones, the vote for the junior Senator from Alabama would continue to be cast by should-be-gone temporary appointee Sen. Luther Strange, the Republican appointed by the state governor to fill Jeff Sessions’ seat until the election.

With the Senate so closely divided, the Republicans might win some legislation-passing Senate votes by a margin of 50-50 (counting Luther Strange, a Republican vote with Vice President Pence’s tie vote) that they should lose by 49-51 (counting Doug Jones as a Democratic vote).

Under Riddick’s Senate Procedure, the seating of Jones is highly privileged, as Senate rules state that the presentation of the credentials of Senators-elect “shall always be in order.” It could be argued that for Senator elect Jones to present his credentials and take his oath is so highly privileged that it cannot be delayed for anything. It certainly cannot be delayed for partisan smoothing of the progress of the tax bill, let alone for key votes kicked into the beginning of 2018. And the refusal to seat him takes away both his constitutional rights and those of Alabama's voters.

If you will pardon my mentioning it, I am the author of the thousand-page treatise, Congressional Practice and Procedure. I have written extensively on Senate procedure, including the 2015 book, The Polarized Congress. I suggest that Riddick’s Senate Procedure (especially as reformulated and updated by Alan S. Frumin) is the place to start on an issue like this. I am sure more will be heard on this issue in the days to come.