Cigna Will Continue To Sell Obamacare In Six States
Cigna will continue to offer individual coverage in 2018 under the Affordable Care Act on public exchanges in six states, largely maintaining the markets it has been in this year.

Cigna’s decision to sell Obamacare plans in Colorado, Illinois, Missouri, North Carolina, Tennessee and Virginia makes it the latest of the big-name insurance companies to confirm plans given this week’s deadline for insurers to disclose what coverage they will offer for next year. Cigna said in June that it would not, however, be filing in Maryland to provide ACA-compliant coverage next year.

“We have taken a thoughtful and measured approach, considering the volatility of the current marketplace and regulatory environment, to our participation in these exchanges," Cigna said in its statement. "True to our mission, we remain focused on providing our customers with the best combination of quality care and overall value in the markets we serve.”

Across the country, most Blue Cross Blue Shield companies are also announcing that they will continue to offer individual coverage on the ACA's public exchanges. Take Health Care Service Corp, for example, which said Wednesday it will continue to offer its Blue Cross and Blue Shield branded products "both on and off the individual marketplace in 2018 in all our five health plan states," which are Illinois, Texas, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Montana. "Specific plan, network and benefit information will be available closer to the open enrollment period that begins on November 1, 2017," Health Care Service said.

The announcements by Health Care Service and Cigna come two days after the collapse of the Republican-led effort to repeal the ACA. Cigna, Centene, Anthem and myriad Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans continuing to offer Obamacare are hoping Congress can resume a bipartisan approach to shoring up the ACA’s public exchanges by funding cost-sharing subsidies for low income patients.

Health insurers have lobbied for the so-called CSRs to keep their customers from paying 20 to 25% rate increases. CSRs help purchasers of subsidized silver plans with their co-payments and deductibles and President Donald Trump hasn't committed to funding them.