North Carolina's Bathroom Bill Flushes Away $630 Million In Lost Business
NC’s state race will be watched closely Tuesday because of its ‘Bathroom Bill’ which was signed by Governor Pat McCrory in March and has cost the state at least $630 million in business. Opponent Roy Cooper, who is the state’s Attorney General, wants to repeal it.

The bill is now law and requires citizens to use the public facility that corresponds with their ‘biological’ gender, which flies in the face of LGBT protection policy. Recent cancellations were reported because operations were in progress, but soon there won't be business to cancel. “Economic recruiters tell us that many companies are taking NC off their list because of HB2, so we really don’t know the extent of the damage,” says Cooper. The following figures are based on estimates from local news, policy reports and interviews.

PayPal signed a legal document with 67 other companies against HB2 and cancelled plans to open a Charlotte center, which would have added 400 jobs, with $20.4 million in annual salaries. An unnamed tech company also cited the bill, ending its NC move.

Bruce Springsteen cancelled his concert in protest. Lionsgate, which filmed the first Hunger Games installment in the state to the tune of $60 million, won’t be back until HB2 is repealed. Other networks have followed suit and the state’s previously prosperous film industry hasn’t seen renewed business.

The forlorn revenue of cancelled sports events are easier to estimate because they happen every year. The NBA, NCAA and ACC all pulled their tournaments out of the state. Charlotte Hornets owner Michael Jordan came out staunchly against the law.

CoStar Realty, a real estate research firm, cited HB2 when it picked Richmond, VA over Charlotte for its $250 million investment, thanks to the bill. Google Ventures won’t invest in any NC companies despite many life-science companies in the Research Triangle being ripe for venture capital.

Deutsche Bank froze plans to bring 250 jobs to its Cary headquarters, which would have paid an average salary of $85,600.

Not all dissidents are pulling out of the state in protest. Dixie Chicks played their summer show, distributing anti-HB2 hats to its audience. Braeburn Pharmaceuticals decided to move forward building a research and manufacturing facility after meeting with Attorney General Roy Cooper. North Carolina voters, whose economic fates are tied to North Carolina’s prosperity, will decide which candidate will sit atop the Governor’s porcelain throne on Tuesday.