Q&A Branko Milanovic: How China, India & The Super Rich Are Shaping Global Inequality
Who’s to blame for inequality? In the West, particularly in the US this election year, the favorite punching bags are: China, globalization, and the “1%”. The reality, according to economist Branko Milanovic, is more complicated. First China, and now India, are decreasing inequality among nations. Yet, within China and India, like in the West, inequality is increasing year after year. We thus face a paradox; inequality is looming large in a world that’s becoming more equal. I was fortunate enough to catch up with Milanovic recently at an inequality workshop hosted by the City University of New York’s Luxembourg Income Study Center, where Milanovic is a senior scholar and visiting professor. His new book Global Inequality is expansive and thought-provoking. Our conversation left me wondering about the future of inequality, but clear about the moral questions that confront us as global citizens.

In your book you talk about the great reshuffling of incomes. What do you mean by that?

Branko Milanovic: The upper middle classes of many developing countries have had a very good period. But the lower middle classes of rich countries have had a period of no growth in their incomes or, at best, single-digit cumulative growth between 1988 and 2011. If you rank people by their incomes globally, those who have benefitted during this period have leapfrogged over a large number of people. In 1988, for example, if you were a middle class urban Chinese you were at the 44th percentile of the global income distribution. Now you are at the 74th percentile. You have thus leapfrogged over 30% of the world population or some 2 billion people.

How has China affected global inequality levels?

BM: China was really the only force that stopped global inequality from rising between 1985 and 2000. After that period, global inequality has declined even without China. The reason is India. Now India, because it has such a high growth rate and is poorer than China, is having a big effect on decreasing global inequality. But let’s not overlook other Asian countries like Indonesia, Vietnam, and Thailand that also have a positive impact in terms of narrowing the gap with developed economies.

What’s happening in the background of this convergence between high-growth Asia and the West?

BM: The reality is that even though global inequality is declining because of large high-growth economies, it’s still extremely high. It is, in fact, higher than inequality within any individual country. A person born in Congo will have a very different level of income during his lifetime than if he were born in the West. From a political philosophy standpoint, one can ask: is there a justification for these large differences in income levels between nations and between individuals? Are they acceptable or not?

As citizens and voters, people are concerned with national, not global, inequalities. No one is addressing income inequalities between nations. Migration can be an important tool for reducing global inequality. Let me add a caveat though. If a poor Indian villager goes on to become Bill Gates, well, that would increase global inequality. But such examples are few and far between.

This is a good segue into the super-rich. What’s their effect on global inequality?

BM: It’s hard for me to quantify the effect of the millionaires and billionaires on inequality. We study income distribution across entire populations, and household surveys typically underestimate the incomes of the top 1-5%. However, it’s safe to say that the bulk of the increase in global GDP between 1988 and today went into the hands of the top 1%. The reason why this is still compatible with reduction in global inequality is because the gaps between the top and the median are enormous. Remember, the median of the global income distribution is only $5-6 dollars a day. This median is so much below the incomes of the super-rich that even if the average person gets significantly better off in relative terms -- say, their income doubles -- the absolute gains of the rich will easily dwarf the absolute gains of the people at the global median.