Here's Why Authorities Searched The Offices Of Controversial Autism Doctor Bradstreet
According to a federal government warrant, the offices of controversial autism doctor Jeff Bradstreet were the target in June of a search related to an experimental drug for autism. The compound, globulin component macrophage-activating factor, known as GcMAF, is one that Bradstreet reportedly used in “over 2000 children” with autism. Bradstreet, according to authorities in Rutherford County, NC, committed suicide there on June 19, after the search warrant was executed in late June.

According to the copy of the warrant provided to me by the United States Attorney’s Office of the Northern District of Georgia, the search warrant was executed at Bradstreet’s Buford, GA, ‘wellness center’ because authorities were seeking information related to “evidence of a crime and contraband, fruits of crime, or items illegally possessed” associated with violations of interstate commerce statutes covering food, drug, or other products that are “adulterated or misbranded” and with “frauds and swindles” by “wire, radio, or television.” Punishments for those convicted of these crimes can include fines and up to 20 years in prison.

The warrant specifically references GcMAF and any records related to sale, shipping, billing, and delivery of GcMAF. It also covers Bradstreet’s financial records and Internet activities.

GcMAF is thought in some circles to modulate the immune system in ways that make it a treatment for everything from autism (which some believe is immune related) to cancer. Bradstreet was the focus of GcMAF and autism in online communities, with discussions centered around “doing the GcMAF through Bradstreet” in online forums. One forum references a link to Bradstreet’s blog as having “several posts” related to GcMAF, but a search of the site in its current iteration turns up no GcMAF-related hits (ETA: Those posts apparently were deleted, but you can read some of at these links here, here, here, here, and here). At least some users who discussed doing GcMAF treatments through Bradstreet appear to have been US based and discussed traveling to his offices for the shots. The shots appear to have cost about $50 each.

Bradstreet’s name and GcMAF for autism are closely linked in online searches. He also published a paper in a now-defunct journal on the subject, and a video of Bradstreet talking about using GcMAF for autism is available on YouTube. Three studies related to GcMAF as a treatment for everything from autism to cancer have been retracted in the last year, and the UK government issued a warning about the manufacture of GcMAF after discovering that one factory producing the protein was using plasma marked, “not to be administered to humans or used in any blood products,” according to the research publication watchdog site Retraction Watch.

Bradstreet’s death has led to a swirl of online speculation about a conspiracy to murder alternative medicine practitioners, fueled by reports of the murder of Florida doctor Teresa Sievers, who is described as being known for her work with transgender patients, and the death of another Florida doctor, Bruce Hedendal, 67, who was found dead in his car, reportedly of natural causes. Hedendal reportedly served a prison term in the early 2000s for tax evasion. Bradstreet also had Florida ties.

A Bradstreet family member has set up a GoFundMe campaign site “to find the answers to the many questions leading up to the death of Dr Bradstreet,” and I have reached out through the site to that family member for comment.