The State Of Venture Capital In Utah
Utah, its startup scene, and its venture capital industry have been featured in every major business publication this year. The state attracted broad attention after ranking 7th in the nation in 2014 for total seed to later stage investments, a heady achievement for a state with just 3 million inhabitants. Per capita, Utah raised more venture capital funding than New York. Utah companies raised over $800 million in 2014, more than twice the $316.2 million raised in 2013, according to a report from PwC/NVCA MoneyTree. Some of these deals were substantial, like Qualtrics raising $150 million. That has been followed up in 2015 with other large investment deals like Health Catalyst ($70 million), InsideSales.com ($60 million), and Instructure, which raised $40 million in preparation for its recent IPO which secured it over $80 million in additional funding. Based on the PwC/NVCA MoneyTree tool, Utah is looking to end 2015 with a slightly lower but still respectable $700 million or so in funding.*

Why Utah?

Earlier this month Signal Peak Ventures hosted a venture capital roundtable and invited me to moderate a discussion regarding the conditions of the venture capital industry and startup scene in the state. In attendance were Jeff Burningham, Managing Director at Peak Ventures; Chris Calder, Associate at EPIC Ventures; Ben Capell, Partner at Peterson Ventures; Peter Harris, Partner at University Growth Fund; Scott Petty, Managing Director at Signal Peak Ventures; and Greg Warnock, Managing Director at Mercato Partners. Here are selected highlights from our conversation.

Moving Past Insecurity

Greg Warnock: Between 2000 and 2010 I was still feeling that to a great degree, that Utah’s entrepreneurs...lost courage after hearing the message so many times of “how can you be sizable and successful in Utah? You, of course, need to move to Silicon Valley or to some other place where you can attract a different style of talent and have a different style of leadership.” But I think we’ve sort of moved past that...

Scott Petty: Years ago there was a little bit of a mentality of entrepreneurs would do kind of the subpar exits or maybe the early exit and kind of checkout and buy the ranch or whatever, and you never saw that kind of repeat serial entrepreneurialism that you did in other markets, but I think that’s very much changed today. I see successful entrepreneurs here who are on their second, third, or fourth gig. Today I think we could all list off six, seven, eight, nine companies that have either filed, going public, or have the potential to go public, or will go public over the next six months or a year or so.

Jeff Burningham: When you have companies here like Omniture, Pluralsight, Inside Sales, Qualtrics and Vivint and those founders like Ryan Smith and Aaron Skonnard, etc. are active in the community it opens people’s eyes.

Chris Calder: Ninety percent of my friends who are VCs out in the Bay Area know Utah, they know the companies, they’re coming out here looking for deals. Every time I see them they’re asking me, “What’s the new hot deal in Utah?” I think Utah kind of has an inferiority complex that it shouldn’t have, but outside of Utah, the perception is that we have great companies, we have great valuations, we have the best inside sales force in the country.