The Apollo 11 Astronauts Left A Lot Of Junk On The Moon
NASA

You can't see it in any of the iconic pictures, but the Apollo 11 landing site is littered with... well, litter. From the poignant to the almost comically mundane, here's what the Apollo 11 astronauts left behind on the Moon when they lifted off on July 21, 1969.

The descent stage of the Eagle lunar landing module still rests where it settled in the Sea of Tranquility, with a plaque attached to one leg proclaiming "Here men from the planet Earth first set foot upon the Moon. July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind." A golden replica of an olive branch underscores the "we come in peace" point. Nearby, an aluminum capsule holds a tiny silicon disc containing messages from four U.S. presidents and 73 other heads of state, etched in microscopic lettering.

NASA

Those are the official markers. Armstrong and Aldrin also left an Apollo 1 mission patch, in memory of astronauts Roger Chaffee, Gus Grissom, and Edward White, who died when their command module caught fire during a test in January 1967. The tragedy prompted NASA to design future spacecraft -- including Apollo 11 -- with more fire-resistant interiors and easier to open hatches, potentially saving many more lives. Although the Apollo 1 crew never reached the Moon, it will always hold a reminder of their sacrifice.

NASA

Even at the height of the Cold War, mutual respect among those who faced the dangers of space exploration was occasionally stronger than their political rivalries between their nations. The American crew left behind two medals awarded to Russian cosmonauts Yuri Gagarin and Vladimir Komarov (link contains disturbing images). Their widows had given the medals to American astronaut Frank Borman, who passed them on to the Apollo 11 crew.

Welcome to the Toss Zone

Lunar Legacy Project / USGS

Armstrong and Aldrin also left behind about a hundred far less sentimental objects on the moon: tools, gear, and trash. NASA wanted the mission to bring back as many samples of lunar rocks and dust as possible, which meant the crew needed to leave behind everything they didn't actually need for the trip back to Earth.

So the Passive Seismic Experiment, which used seismic readings from meteoroid impacts to map the inner structure of the Moon, is still up there, discarded along with a laser reflector that helped measure the precise distance from the Earth to the Moon. There's also an assortment of tongs, sample scoops, and scales lying around, along with a hammer and various containers and brackets.

NASA

Most of that discarded stuff lies off to the west of the actual landing site, in an arc of space-litter known as the Toss Zone. It's also home to two pairs of discarded lunar overshoes, two A7L portable life support systems, and a couple of empty food bags. The Lunar Legacy Project at New Mexico State University has a detailed list of everything the crew left behind, complete with a map.

You could build a pretty cool Moon fort with some what the crew left behind in the Toss Zone: four armrests from the lander, a few days' worth of food packets, a TV camera, and an insulated blanket. But if you needed to use the facilities, you'd have to take your chances. There's no official word on whether the four urine containers, four "defecation collection devices", and four airsickness bags the crew left on the moon were full.