What's Included (And What's Not) In The $1.3 Trillion Omnibus Bill
Despite differences between Republicans and Democrats in Congress, government leaders agreed on $1.3 trillion omnibus bill and presented it to the President. After threatening a veto, the President signed the bill into law.

To see how your Senator voted, click here.

To see how your Representative voted, click here.

The omnibus, which provides money for everything from border security to funding the census, is huge. To put the numbers into context, it's roughly equivalent to the gross domestic product (GDP) of Russia.

So what's in and what's out? Here are some of the highlights:

Tax Administration. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) finally gets funding. After years of cuts, the bill allocates $11.4 billion to IRS, $196 million more than last year. The money is to be used to improve customer service and fund a "business systems modernization program" meant to bring IRS systems into the 21st century. Also included in that number is an extra $320 million "to be used solely for carrying out" the new tax law passed in December.

The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) finally gets funding. After years of cuts, the bill allocates $11.4 billion to IRS, $196 million more than last year. The money is to be used to improve customer service and fund a "business systems modernization program" meant to bring IRS systems into the 21st century. Also included in that number is an extra $320 million "to be used solely for carrying out" the new tax law passed in December. Border Security. The bill provides $1.6 billion in funding for border security. However, don't start mixing up the plaster just yet: The funding can't be used for "the wall." Language in the bill only allows fencing similar to what's already in place.

The bill provides $1.6 billion in funding for border security. However, don't start mixing up the plaster just yet: The funding can't be used for "the wall." Language in the bill only allows fencing similar to what's already in place. Opioid Crisis. The bill includes $500 million to fund research on opioid addiction and billions more in other programming and studies (including those related to opioid alternatives). Lest you doubt the impact of the crisis on the economy, the word "opioid" appears 24 times in the bill. Yes, a federal government spending bill.

The bill includes $500 million to fund research on opioid addiction and billions more in other programming and studies (including those related to opioid alternatives). Lest you doubt the impact of the crisis on the economy, the word "opioid" appears 24 times in the bill. Yes, a federal government spending bill. Elections. The bill includes $380 million for states to shore up voting systems, including electronic enhancements.

The bill includes $380 million for states to shore up voting systems, including electronic enhancements. Military. Medical care for veterans, including Medical and Prosthetic Research, gets a bump under the bill. There is also more money for troops (including a 2.4% pay raise, the largest since 2010).

Medical care for veterans, including Medical and Prosthetic Research, gets a bump under the bill. There is also more money for troops (including a 2.4% pay raise, the largest since 2010). Space . The National Aeronautics & Space Administration (NASA) was a big winner, getting far more than the agency requested, including for space technology and exploration.

. The National Aeronautics & Space Administration (NASA) was a big winner, getting far more than the agency requested, including for space technology and exploration. Science. Many federal science and technology programs received funding raises, including the Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation.

Many federal science and technology programs received funding raises, including the Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation. Arts. While the White House proposed eliminating funding for the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA), Congress instead boosted funding by $3 million (ditto for the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH)). Spending for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting is retained.

While the White House proposed eliminating funding for the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA), Congress instead boosted funding by $3 million (ditto for the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH)). Spending for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting is retained. Interior. Funding stays about the same from 2017, though notably, the National Park Service (NPS) gets a boost, including $138 million to address the maintenance backlog.

And it wouldn't be a bill about spending without fixes and corrections. Here are some of the most noteworthy:

"Grain glitch." The bill contained a fix to the "grain glitch." Under tax the new tax reform law, grain farmers had a tax incentive to sell to farm co-ops rather than independent agriculture businesses, potentially putting the latter out of business. It also allowed some farmers to dramatically reduce their tax bills and created incentives for the wealthy to look to farms as conduits for tax reduction. Language in the omnibus corrected these issues.

The bill contained a fix to the "grain glitch." Under tax the new tax reform law, grain farmers had a tax incentive to sell to farm co-ops rather than independent agriculture businesses, potentially putting the latter out of business. It also allowed some farmers to dramatically reduce their tax bills and created incentives for the wealthy to look to farms as conduits for tax reduction. Language in the omnibus corrected these issues. "Fix NICS." Sen. John Cornyn (R-TX) has been pushing "Fix NICS" to ensure that federal and state authorities report relevant criminal history records to the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS). That language was included in the omnibus. The fix did not impose additional checks or restrictions on gun ownership.

Sen. John Cornyn (R-TX) has been pushing "Fix NICS" to ensure that federal and state authorities report relevant criminal history records to the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS). That language was included in the omnibus. The fix did not impose additional checks or restrictions on gun ownership. Technical corrections. There are technical corrections galore, including amendments relating to Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes Act of 2015; the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016; Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act; Surface Transportation and Veterans Health Care Choice Improvement Act of 2015; and ... well, you get the picture.

Here's a look at what didn't make it into the bill:

Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA). As widely reported (and tweeted by President Trump), there was no movement on DACA in the omnibus.

As widely reported (and tweeted by President Trump), there was no movement on DACA in the omnibus. The infamous Gateway project. The infrastructure project, a tunnel between New Jersey and New York City, was likely thrown under the bus as part of an ongoing feud between Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-NY) and President Trump since it didn't appear in the bill. However, the infrastructure provisions in the bill do not prevent federal funds from being used for the Gateway project. So, silent win-silent win?

The infrastructure project, a tunnel between New Jersey and New York City, was likely thrown under the bus as part of an ongoing feud between Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-NY) and President Trump since it didn't appear in the bill. However, the infrastructure provisions in the bill do not prevent federal funds from being used for the Gateway project. So, silent win-silent win? Planned Parenthood. As predicted, riders to block funding for Planned Parenthood did not make it into the final bill.

As predicted, riders to block funding for Planned Parenthood did not make it into the final bill. Johnson Amendment. The Johnson Amendment remains untouched, meaning that efforts to dismantle the 1954 tax law which prevented charitable organizations from endorsing or opposing political candidates will likely continue in separate legislation.

The Johnson Amendment remains untouched, meaning that efforts to dismantle the 1954 tax law which prevented charitable organizations from endorsing or opposing political candidates will likely continue in separate legislation. Obamacare. Provisions to deregulate the insurance market to stem rising premiums were chatted up, but none were included.

Provisions to deregulate the insurance market to stem rising premiums were chatted up, but none were included. Sales Tax Initiative. Rep. Kristi Noem (R-SD) had hoped to preempt SCOTUS' take on Quill and online sales tax with her own proposal - but the initiative didn't make it into the final version.

Rep. Kristi Noem (R-SD) had hoped to preempt SCOTUS' take on Quill and online sales tax with her own proposal - but the initiative didn't make it into the final version. Portraits. And just in case you were worried, none of the funds in the bill can be used to pay for the painting of "a portrait of an officer or employee of the Federal government, including the President, the Vice President, a member of Congress..., the head of an executive branch agency... or the head of an office of the legislative branch."

What else affects taxpayers? There are efforts to control IRS behavior under the bill, including:

Requiring an employee training program focusing on, among other things, "dealing courteously with taxpayers."

Implementing policies and procedures to safeguard the confidentiality of taxpayer information and protect against identity theft.

Increasing facilities and staff to "provide sufficient and effective 1–800 help line service for taxpayers."

Barring spending on videos "unless the Service-Wide Video Editorial Board determines in advance that making the video is appropriate, taking into account the cost, topic, tone, and purpose of the video." (So long, IRS YouTube channel?)

Prohibiting the use of agency funds "to target citizens of the United States for exercising any right guaranteed under the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States" or "to target groups for regulatory scrutiny based on their ideological beliefs."

Banning the IRS from using funds to "to issue, revise, or finalize any regulation, revenue ruling, or other guidance not limited to a particular taxpayer relating to the standard which is used to determine whether an organization is operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare for purposes of section 501(c)(4)..." For more on 501(c)(4) organizations, see this post.

Altogether, there's a lot to take in. You can read the bill here. Spoiler alert: It downloads as 2,232 "budget-busting" pages, as tweeted by Sen. Rand Paul (R-KY). That works out to $582 million per page. I did the math for you: You're welcome.