Megyn Kelly's Move To NBC Will Likely Make Her The World's Highest-Paid Female News Anchor
Megyn Kelly, one of Fox News' biggest stars, is heading for rival NBC News when her contract is up later this year, according to a spokesperson for NBC News. She will host a daytime news and talk show, anchor a Sunday night news show and work on special programming; in return, it's likely that NBC is making her the highest-paid female news anchor on television.

In the announcement, Andrew Lack, the chairman of the NBCUniversal News Group, said that Kelly is "an exceptional journalist and news anchor, who has had an extraordinary career."

Kelly--who has been at Fox for 12 years and will host the final edition of her prime-time show, The Kelly File, on Friday--was offered more than $20 million a year to stay from parent company 21st Century Fox. While NBC and other networks had said they could not match the amount offered by Fox, it is likely the network came close and at least offered more than Kelly's current salary of $15 million per year, per Forbes' reporting. NBC has not replied to a request for comment about the financial details of the contract.

Robin Roberts, a host of ABC's Good Morning America, is currently the highest-paid female news anchor, Forbes estimates, with a salary of $18 million a year (still less than Matt Lauer's $25 million for hosting Today and Bill O'Reilly's $18.5 million for The O'Reilly Factor).

However much NBC spends, it will likely be worth it -- Kelly is one of the top draws of cable news. On Fox News, the cable news leader since its inception 15 years ago, Kelly is the second-most watched host behind O'Reilly with an average of 2.7 million viewers. (Kelly and NBC both argue she is the number one news program on cable news, calling O'Reilly's show an opinion program.)

Kelly tends to be attractive to younger and female audiences, who view her as a subtle and insightful counterpoint to Fox's stereotypical dogmatic conservatism. This portrayal of Kelly was confirmed last year when she engaged Donald Trump during the Republican primary, causing him to publicly attack her, including retweeting a tweet calling her a "bimbo," despite Fox News' then-CEO and chairman Roger Ailes supporting the candidate.

Kelly has made clear that a switch in networks would not be entirely about money. In her book, Settle for More, which was released in November, she discusses wanting to spend as much time as possible with her children, as well as move beyond political commentary and cable news. The new role at NBC seems to provide this flexibility in both schedule and content.

Kelly's departure will only add to Fox New's tumultuous year. While the network remained on top in ratings throughout the election cycle, it saw CNN and MSNBC gain ground, particularly with younger viewers.

Additionally, the network was hit with multiple law suits and allegations regarding sexual harassment at the hands of its former CEO and founding chairman Ailes, who has denied all charges. This led to his ousting and left the network without its strong leader who was often credited with its success. Kelly was one of the women who claimed Ailes harassed her, and it was following her allegation that he finally left.

“We thank Megyn Kelly for her 12 years of contributions to FOX News. We hope she enjoys tremendous success in her career and wish her and her family all the best," Rupert Murdoch, the executive chairman of 21st Century Fox, said in a statement.

Kelly's departure will undoubtedly shake the news media landscape and possibly be the straw that broke Fox News' triumphant back.