Don't Worry, You'll Still Be Able To Buy Avocados If Trump Shuts The Border With Mexico
Crates of avocados at a market in Mexico City, (AP Photo/Nick Wagner) ASSOCIATED PRESS

There's nothing like the prospect of an avocado shortage to spark fear in the hearts of toast lovers everywhere.

And, if President Donald Trump follows through with his threat to close the border with Mexico, it could affect supplies from there, as one importer predicts.

Speaking to Reuters, Steve Barnard, president and chief executive of Mission Produce, the largest distributor and grower of avocados in the world, said Americans would run out of avocados in three weeks if imports from Mexico were stopped.

Last week, Trump said here was a “very good likelihood” he would close the border if Mexico did not stop migrants from reaching the United States.

The U.S. imports about $137 billion in food through the border with Mexico, and that includes about 90 percent of the imported avocados purchased by American consumers.

But, that doesn't mean you won't be able to find the green fruit at your grocery store or street vendor.

Along with Mexico, U.S. consumers also get avocados from California, Peru and Florida.

The 2019 crop of California-grown avocados has just begun to appear in stores. But, one problem this year is that a heat wave in 2018 damaged the California avocado crop.

California is expected to produce about half the number of avocados for sale this year as it did in 2018.

The estimate for the 2018-2019 California avocado crop is 175 million pounds, according to the California Avocado Commission.

California-grown avocados are sold mainly in California and western states. According to the commission, their availability will ramp up through June, which is the peak month for California avocados.

There could be more California grown avocados available later in the summer, because the fruits are grown in northern California, where they ripen later.

The commission has a store locator on its website, with results available by state. in case you'd like to track down California avocados. You also can see data on the size of the California crop here.

Meanwhile, you may have noticed ample supplies of Mexican-grown avocados in your local stores, with lower-than-usual prices.

That full supply right now follows a shortage that took place in the wake of a strike last fall by Mexican avocado pickers.

During January, the latest month for which data was available, the price of conventional Hass avocados hovered around $1, while organic avocados averaged about $1.50 each, according to the Hass Avocado Board.

So, enjoy while you can, and make plans for later this spring in case the Mexican supply is turned off.