Coke And Cannabis: The Big Guys Are Muscling Into This New Market
Coca-Cola is the latest major corporation to make a move into the cannabis industry. Expect more in the coming years.

Coca-Cola has its eye on the cannabis market. BNN Bloomberg reported this week that the American soft drink giant is in talks with Canadian company Aurora Cannabis to produce drinks enhanced with cannabidiol, or CBD — a chemical in marijuana leaves that doesn’t create a high but shows promise for therapeutic and medicinal applications, including pain and stress relief. While declining to confirm the specifics, a Coke spokesman acknowledged the company was broadly interested in the booming cannabis space: “We are closely watching the growth of non-psychoactive CBD as an ingredient in functional wellness beverages around the world.”

A partnership with Aurora, which has announced its own interest in infused beverages, would represent a “groundbreaking move that would signal a significant foray into the marijuana sector by one of the world’s most iconic consumer brands,” according to BNN Bloomberg.

Coca-Cola is responding to two incentives. One is the declining consumption of soda, which has led the iconic Georgia-based company to diversify into juice, coffee and tea. The other is the green wave it sees coming over the horizon, as cannabis gains greater respectability and — just as important — becomes legal in more and more places.

Coca-Cola’s move is just the latest sign that the big players are starting to feel more comfortable investing in cannabis. For most of the life of this nascent industry, large corporations have sat on the sidelines because of cannabis’ murky legal status. While cannabis in some form is legal in two-thirds of the states, at the federal level it’s still considered a Schedule 1 drug, the same as heroin.

That disconnect has meant that banks basically can’t work with cannabis companies unless they’re willing to file millions of suspicious activity reports, and without the banks on board, public companies have stayed away.

But that’s starting to change.

If Coke does jump into the marijuana space, it wouldn’t be the first beverage purveyor to do so. Drinks giant Constellation Brands Inc. (maker of Corona beer and Svedka vodka) recently acquired a minority stake in Canopy Growth, a Canadian medical marijuana company. And this past summer, Heineken-owned Lagunitas Brewing Co. unveiled a THC-infused sparkling water for sale at California dispensaries. Even the Wine & Spirits Wholesalers of America has announced support for the federal legalization of cannabis in the U.S.

It’s worth noting that for right now, all of these deals are taking place in Canada where cannabis is legal. That’s made Canada a staging ground for corporations that will be ready to muscle into the U.S. market in a big way if and when cannabis becomes widely legal here. It’s a challenge small U.S.-based entrepreneurs need to be preparing for now.

As more big companies move into the cannabis game, it will bring increased legitimacy to the industry and help the entrepreneurs who built the cannabis market. But eventually, those smaller companies risk being overrun by corporate giants.