Trade War Or Not, Beijing Will Continue Buying U.S. Treasuries -- It Has No Choice
China doesn’t seem to fear a trade war with the U.S. And it has plenty of means at its disposal to fight the war, including the scaling back of buying U.S. Treasuries, or even worse, sell-off of U.S. Treasuries. After all, it is the largest holder of U.S. Treasuries, totaling $1.17 trillion as of January 2018.

But China will never use this weapon – because it has very good reasons to keep buying U.S. Treasuries. Specifically, because of its trade surplus with America.

That surplus totaled $385 billion in 2016, according to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.

This means that China has excess U.S. dollars that end up in the hands of Chinese exporters. But as these exporters must pay their bills in local currency, they take the U.S. dollars to the local banks and convert back to Yuan. Eventually, these dollars end up with Bank of China (BOC), which provides the yuan to the local banks.

In turn, BOC has two choices. One of them is to keep these dollars as reserves and earn nothing. The other choice is to use this money to buy U.S. Treasuries and earn an interest, which can amount to billions of dollars.

But there’s another, bigger benefit, associated with the second choice. Converting yuan into dollars helps keep the yuan artificially low against the dollar, and Chinese exports to the U.S. artificially high.

That’s something China badly needs, as it continues to rely heavily on exports to maintain high growth and employment rates.

Still, it is worth examining what would happen if China did stop buying U.S. Treasuries -- or even worse, began selling them?

Two things. First, U.S. long-term rates would spike, at least temporarily, crushing world financial markets, and especially those of emerging markets. This is because a spike would reverse the dollar carry trade—the capital flows from the U.S. where interest rates are low to those of emerging markets where interest rates are high, including China.

Second, the yuan would appreciate against the dollar, hurting China’s exports, economic growth, and employment.

Meanwhile, America’s allies like Japan and Saudi Arabia could step in and buy up the U.S. Treasuries China is selling. So would the Federal Reserve, which can print dollars.

So it appears that scaling back on purchasing U.S. Treasuries -- or even selling them off -- isn’t an effective policy to get even with the U.S. in case of a trade war.

And it may backfire badly against Beijing.

Financial markets seem to know this very well. That’s why they have been focusing on other factors (e.g., the rising of short-term rates) rather on the prospect of a trade war between America and China—the 10-year Treasury yield has moved lower rather than higher recently.