U.S. Health Outcomes Compared to Other Countries Are Misleading
Shutterstock

Well, here we go again. More new studies that indict the U.S. healthcare system directly and, by inference, America’s physicians have been published.

A new report in JAMA published in March comparing U.S. statistics with those of the highest income countries (United Kingdom, Canada, Germany, Australia, Japan, Sweden, France, the Netherlands, Switzerland and Denmark) indicates that the American healthcare system fares quite poorly. Surprise!

The primary author is Irene Papanicolas, affiliated with the Department of Health Policy, London School of Economics and Political Science. She and co-authors, Liana R. Woski, MSc. And Ashich K. Jha, MD, MPH (affiliated with the Department of Health Policy and Management at Harvard), deserve credit for compiling the numbers in such a comprehensive report. Throughout, the point is made frequently that the U.S. spends far more per capita on healthcare when compared to other countries, but has less in healthcare outcomes to show for it. These conclusions are not so different from other studies previously published. However, there are valid reasons for these differences, and we feel compelled to address them.

For one thing, even our system’s captious critics admit that it is far easier to manage health outcomes in smaller and more homogeneous countries. The U.S., with a population of 323 million, is far larger than any of the other countries mentioned in the sample. In fact, the mean population for all of them is a mere 69 million. Recent research, including an insightful book by Dr. Buz Cooper, all suggest that poverty and other social determinants have a significant impact on our health and healthcare costs. Unfortunately, the U.S. poverty rate is higher than the other countries at 12.7 percent of the population.

In an accompanying JAMA article also published in March 2018, Ezekiel J. Emanuel, MD, observes that “administrative costs contribute significantly to the cost difference between the U.S. and others used in the comparison.” This is a point on which Papanicolas et al resoundingly agree. Emanuel also mentions that a major driver of cost differences is high-margin, high volume procedures. For example, he points to knee replacements where the U.S. performs nearly twice as many per capita as in the Netherlands.

Tim had a knee replacement himself in May and enjoys far greater mobility. He also has a tennis friend in Connecticut who in the past year had both knees replaced and is back to playing tennis three times a week. His age: 90! We suspect that it would be very difficult, if not impossible, for a 90-year-old to receive two knee replacements in any of the other countries and in a very timely fashion. However, much of America prides itself on physical fitness and quality of life at every age. The price of this is certainly reflected in our higher healthcare costs.

Papanicolas et al also call attention to the fact that the U.S. performed the second highest number of MRI scans per capita (behind Japan) and the most CT scans. We don’t find that unusual, given the current medical liability environment that exists in the U.S. The medico-legal Sword of Damocles hangs precariously over every physician for every procedure.