Under Scott Walker, Wisconsin Has Prospered--Keep That In Mind For 2016
Before Governor Scott Walker took office in January of 2011, Wisconsin was seeing high unemployment, stagnating incomes and a high tax burden. Fast-forward four years: The state enjoys strong growth in employment and improvements in living standards through higher after-tax incomes. Thanks to a fiscal policy of reducing tax and regulatory burdens while balancing the budget, Wisconsin now outperforms many of its neighbors.

(Disclosure: Mr. Williams has been serving as an informal adviser to Gov. Walker's presidential campaign.)

But this economic performance has not always been recognized. For example, on his recent trip to the state President Barack Obama contrasted Wisconsin with Minnesota, which has seen increases in taxes, government spending and the minimum wage. The president, echoing earlier press reports, cited Minnesota’s lower unemployment rate and higher median income as signs that these “middle class economics” policies were working. But to see the effect of policies, we need to look at changes since they were implemented.

Comparing Wisconsin to the rest of the country

Minnesota had a lower unemployment rate and higher income than Wisconsin at the start of 2011. But since then, the unemployment rate has fallen more in Wisconsin and per capita output growth in Wisconsin has outpaced Minnesota each year. Since 2012 real per capita disposable personal income—a broad measure of average after-tax income—has fallen in Minnesota. In Wisconsin, due to reductions in state taxes, real after-tax incomes have increased twice as fast as the nation as a whole.

The labor market in Wisconsin tightened substantially under Gov. Walker, with the unemployment rate falling from 8.1% in December 2010 to 4.6% in May 2015. In addition, labor force participation has been roughly stable over the past few years around 68%. By contrast, participation nationwide has fallen to under 63%, levels not seen since the late 1970s. Some of this decline has been demographic, but an important component has been discouraged unemployed workers leaving the labor force.

A useful statistic including these workers is the employment-population ratio, measuring the fraction of the population that is working. In May, it stood at 59.4% nationally and 64.8% in Wisconsin, the 10th highest in any state.

While Wisconsin has seen strong employment growth, some press reports focus on a different measure: job growth on nonfarm business payrolls. By that metric Wisconsin lags the national average—but not without explanation. The recession was not as severe in the state, so slower job growth should be expected in the recovery. In addition, shifts out of farm and self-employment nationally have increased nonfarm job growth but not net employment. But most importantly, (working age) population growth in Wisconsin has been half that of the nation as a whole.

With slower growth in labor supply, it is difficult to create jobs at a faster rate. For these reasons, measures of household employment give a more accurate picture of the state of the labor market. Similarly, per capita measures of income and output, capturing improvements in living standards for an average worker, are better indicators than aggregate measures of overall size.

Also on Forbes:

Walker's tenure has seen incomes increase and deficits shrink

Under Gov. Walker, per capita output and income in Wisconsin have grown more rapidly than in the nation as a whole, bringing improvement in household living standards. Households in Wisconsin are also keeping more of their income due to reductions in state taxes. In the 2013-14 and 2014-15 fiscal years, state income taxes were cut by a total of $747 million, and property taxes by an additional $536 million, with smaller reductions in other taxes.

While many states have struggled with deficits and credit downgrades, the tax reductions in Wisconsin have been more than matched with spending reductions, bringing the budget into balance. In response to this sound fiscal management, Moody’s revised up its outlook for Wisconsin to positive, and increased its bond rating last November. Moody’s cited the improvement in the state’s budget, an improved liquidity position, well-funded pensions and limited liabilities for other retirement benefits.

The recently passed budget continues this strategy: limiting spending while further reducing property taxes.

Wisconsin is embracing pro-growth policies--not increased regulation like the federal government

Nationwide, the recovery has been marked by slow economic growth. Productivity growth has remained low, even turning negative in the first quarter of this year. One of the main factors has been a slowdown in business investment.

At the same time, there has been a vast expansion in federal regulation, with new business regulation under Obamacare, financial regulation under Dodd-Frank and recent expansions of environmental and labor regulation. All of this has increased business costs and created a climate of uncertainty, further hampering investment.

By contrast, Wisconsin has seen the adoption of a number of pro-growth policies, which have improved the business climate. Most well-known are the labor market reforms to collective bargaining and the recent right-to-work legislation. But there has also been a substantial streamlining of regulation, and in addition to the cuts in personal taxes, there have been reductions in business taxes and investment incentives.

While the reforms are recent and ongoing, they are having an effect. There have been marked improvements in the state’s business rankings by Chief Executive Magazine, Area Development Magazine and the Manpower Group. In addition, the annual rate of new business filings in the state was 21% higher in 2014 than 2010 and Ernst and Young ranked Wisconsin 10th for 2014 in announced jobs for mobile capital investments.

But there is only so much that changes at the state level can do. Policies similar to Gov. Walker’s fiscally responsible reforms at the federal level could help accelerate the slow economic recovery we’ve all experienced since 2009.