Entrepreneur Running For Congress: 'Health Care Should Be A Moral Right'
Today, we conclude our interview with Dean Phillips, the Minneapolis entrepreneur who helped introduce Belvedere vodka and Talenti gelato to America. In May, he announced that he is running for Congress in suburban Minneapolis — a seat that has been in Republican hands since the 1960s, although the district has voted for Democrat presidential candidates since 2008. We spoke at length about health care, and sharing much of that discussion seems worthwhile because Phillips has not only had a hand in running three businesses since the Affordable Care Act became law in 2010, but he also served on the board of one of Minnesota's largest health systems, Allina, from 2005 to 2011. He served as the nonprofit's chairman beginning 2009. The conversation has been condensed and edited.

Robb Mandelbaum: There seem to be a lot of businesspeople, the constituency that you claim, hostile to the Affordable Care Act. What would you tell them about it?

Dean Phillips: I would be the first to argue that the ACA was imperfect by just about any measure. But the answer in my estimation is not the AHCA [the American Health Care Act, the Republican bill to repeal and replace the ACA that passed the House in May]. I think that's a step backwards. Health care consumes about 18 percent of our economy right now. Americans are the first to point out sometimes you've got to pay more to get more, but in this case we pay oftentimes double and get the same or in most cases even less. Our quality and outcomes as a nation are mid-pack.

I do believe like education, health care should be a moral right. And I believe there's a way to do so using the resources that are currently consumed by the system. There's not an example of which I'm aware where competition to improve quality and didn't reduce price. And just as we provide a public option of education with those good options for private, parochial and charters for others, I believe in the possibility of creating a similar system of health care that affords public options at a baseline level of quality of care, and certainly affords private care for those who have the resources.

Robb Mandelbaum: You've had a hand in running three businesses since 2010, when the Affordable Care Act became law — has it affected any of your businesses one way or the other?

Dean Phillips: At our bigger enterprises, we've always provided care, so it didn't affect people directly. They were going to get it regardless. But at Allina Health, our uncompensated care had been growing rapidly, and after the ACA it dropped considerably because a lot more people had coverage, and they weren't using the emergency room for the general health needs — and that is a significant reduction in burden for health systems large and small. And anecdotally, a number of people who I know personally who did not have health insurance before the ACA were covered. It is in this country's best interest to have more people covered rather than fewer. And I do believe that that should be a consensus, and if we could start there and use sound principles from both parties, it is entirely possible to find innovative solutions.