Meet Your New NRA President-A Man Still Fighting The Civil War From The Losing Side
If you’re happy with the way NRA executive vice-president Wayne LaPierre perceives the world around him, you’re going to be absolutely over the moon with the new top dog at the organization which comprises one of the most powerful lobbying forces in America.

Meet Jim Porter, the Alabama lawyer newly installed as the President of the National Rifle Association and the man outgoing organization president, David Keene, referred to as a “perfect match” for the job.

Thanks to a speech Mr. Porter delivered to the New York Rife and Pistol Association’s 2012 annual dinner—an event that served as the perfect occasion for Porter to tell his audience that President Obama is a “fake president” while Attorney General Eric Holder is “rabidly un-American”—getting a sense of where Porter would like to take the NRA during his regime turns out to be a fairly simple exercise.

Mr. Porter additionally used the 2012 speech to alert the audience to his belief that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was seeking to “kill the Second Amendment at the United Nations” in reference to the US supporting a proposed measure placed before the UN that would regulate global trade in conventional arms. Note that this proposal that had the support of every member nation with the exception of North Korea, Iran and Syria.

Apparently, siding with the enemies of the United States is not a disqualifying event when seeking the presidency of the National Rifle Association if doing so provides an opportunity to disrespect the nation’s top leaders.

But there might be a reason that Jim Porter may not be much of a fan of the American government—one that becomes somewhat apparent as you delve deeper into his 2012 speech.

Check out this portion of his address—

“The NRA was started, 1871, right here in New York state. It was started by some Yankee generals who didn’t like the way my southern boys had the ability to shoot in what we call the “War of Northern Aggression.” Now, y’all might call it the Civil War, but we call it the War of Northern Aggression down south (emphasis added.) But that was the very reason that they started the National Rifle Association—it was to teach and train the civilian in the use of the standard military firearm. And I am one who still feels very strongly that that is one of our most greatest charges that we can have today, is to train the civilian in the use of the standard military firearm, so that when they have to fight for their country they’re ready to do it. Also, when they’re ready to fight tyranny, they’re ready to do it. Also, when they’re ready to fight tyranny, they have the wherewithal and the weapons to do it.”

Setting aside the fact that one might hope that the leader of so powerful a national organization would display a modicum of public respect for the nation’s top elected official— along with the leaders of the Justice and State Departments—what he reveals in the speech is really quite illuminating.

For starters, we learn that the man now heading up what is arguably the most effective lobby in America holds a grudge against the USA for putting him on what he perceives to be the wrong side of the Civil War outcome.

Porter additionally reveals that—so far as he is concerned—the NRA’s purpose should be to train us all in the use of military weapons for wars both home and abroad. Apparently, Mr. Porter wants to be ready the next time he feels the need to support his state’s decision to secede from the Union.

Considering that today’s military training program is all about the use of automatic weapons, not to mention grenade launchers and other weaponry that would seem a bit out of place in civilian use, it is perplexing that David Keene—the outgoing NRA president who recently told an audience at Harvard that fully automatic weapons should be illegal for civilian use—viewed Porter as the perfect match for taking over his post.

But then, I can still remember when Wayne LaPierre supported universal background checks. These days, things change quickly over at the National Rifle Association.

Here is the video of Porter’s 2012 speech. You have to see it to believe it.

Sadly, things would appear to be getting even crazier at this organization that is no longer your father's voice for those with an interest in gun rights.

Contact Rick at thepolicypage@gmail.com and follow me on Twitter and Facebook.