Obama to pursue Colombia, Panama trade deals
President Obama's top trade negotiator says the administration won't stop with South Korea when it comes to free trade agreements.

Next up: deals with Colombia and Panama, begun under the Bush administration but held up for years because of disputes over labor rights (Colombia) and tax haven (Panama) concerns.

U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk told the House Ways and Means Committee Wednesday that the administration will pursue those trade agreements this year -- but will not sacrifice concerns over labor and human rights. In Colombia, labor leaders have been subjected to violence.

The two agreements have been sought by business leaders as well as Republicans in Congress as a way to open up more markets for U.S. products. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce has accused Obama of slow-walking the Colombia and Panama deals.

On Monday, Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell said it's up to Obama to bring Democrats along:

It won't be enough for Republicans and it shouldn't be enough for the business community to allow the administration's trade agenda to start and end with South Korea. We should be passing all pending trade agreements and inking new ones on a bipartisan basis -- even when it requires the president bringing his own party along. We welcome the president's support for the South Korea Free Trade Agreement, which has earned strong bipartisan support. But by failing to show the same commitment in passing these two other free trade agreements, the president is missing out on an important opportunity to do something good for the economy and for jobs.

Kirk's testimony gives trade enthusiasts hope:

The president intends to submit the U.S.-Korea trade agreement to Congress in the next few weeks and looks forward to working with you to secure its approval this spring.

We will not stop there. With the same engagement and cooperation, we will work to address outstanding concerns relating to the Panama and Colombia trade agreements. If we are successful, we will move those forward as well. I can tell you today that the president has directed me to immediately intensify engagement with Colombia and Panama with the objective of resolving the outstanding issues as soon as possible this year and bringing those agreements to Congress for consideration immediately thereafter. But let me clear: There remain serious issues to be resolved before the Colombia and Panama agreements can be submitted for congressional consideration. Some of these issues go to core U.S. values and interests, such as the protection of labor rights. Any timetable will be contingent on the successful resolution of these issues. ... We will not be left behind as others open markets and take our market share. But the president has made one thing abundantly clear: we will not sign agreements for agreements' sake. They must be enforceable and of the highest standard, in the interests of our workers, farmers, and businesses.

His testimony was greeted favorably by Democratic Reps. Sander Levin of Michigan and Jim McDermott of Washington.

"Let's not fool ourselves: We can't move forward on the trade agenda by going backward," McDermott said. "The only way forward is by addressing – no longer ignoring – legitimate issues and concerns where we find them. And there are very legitimate concerns about the effect that trade, and trade deficits, can have on middle-class Americans."