Will The Trump Administration Spur US Oil & Gas Development?
By Anna Mikulska and Michael Maher

Whether you believe that the recent U.S. oil and natural gas boom happened because or in spite of former President Barack Obama’s policies, one thing cannot be disputed: it happened. The question is whether President Donald Trump, whose campaign promised a pro-fossil agenda, will actually provide a boost to U.S. oil and gas production above the policies of the Obama administration.

Over the last eight years, U.S. oil production grew more than 85 percent. At the end of 2015, it was the highest it had been since 1972, reaching 9.4 million barrels per day (MBD) (not including 3.3 MBD of natural gas liquids [NGLs]). Shale and tight oil accounted for 4.9 MBD in 2015, compared to 0.82 MBD in 2010. The Energy Information Administration (EIA) projects that this source will continue to make up the majority of U.S. oil production increase into 2040. The total natural gas production also increased drastically, as the volume of shale gas produced in the United States shot from 2.1 billion cubic feet (BCF) in 2008 to 15.2 BCF in 2015.

This unprecedented growth happened in an environment in which a distinctive mix of policy measures was implemented by the Obama administration. Some of those measures have been arguably the most pro-oil and gas policies of the last several decades, such as putting an end to the ban on oil exports (initially opposed by the Obama administration) and providing a process for approval of LNG export terminals. Moreover, despite heavy environmental protection rhetoric, thousands of acres of public land were auctioned for oil and gas drilling, as the administration shifted to online auctions for O&G drilling on federal properties and 119 million acres of offshore drilling leases opened up in the Gulf of Mexico. The Obama administration also allowed drilling in the Arctic Ocean and did little to limit offshore oil and gas activity after the Deepwater Horizon disaster. Lastly, the Obama administration did not adopt drilling rules that pre-empted the traditional oil and gas regulatory role of the states on non-federal lands.

Interestingly, the Clean Power Plan (CPP) championed by the Obama administration and the environmental lobby would actually have been advantageous for natural gas producers by forcing sizable coal power capacity into early retirement over the coming decade or so. Even without the CPP, other EPA air pollution regulatory initiatives, probably less susceptible to removal by the Trump Administration, will require increased capital and operating expenditures at coal power plants and will encourage the faster retirement of old coal-fired plants near the end of their economic life. That, too, would be a boost for natural gas use in the power sector.

On the other hand, environmentalists were also able to claim a win when the Obama administration blocked the sale of new permits for O&G drilling in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas and did not allow leasing on Cook Inlet off of the Alaskan coast. Obama also introduced rules against methane leakage and proposed drilling regulations for shale development on federal lands, and a 2012 Environmental Protection Agency rule required shale companies to use “green completion” equipment. Vetoing the Keystone XL pipeline and stopping development of the Dakota pipeline (though with the intention of rerouting a small portion and not prohibiting the entire line) have also been seen as anti-oil and gas.

Whether there would be more growth under an “oil and gas-friendly” president (beyond what market forces and technological innovation would bring forward) is difficult to say, as with all counterfactual speculations. But when we look closely at the Obama years, we see international supply and demand as the main factor that spurred the growth in shale, save only for the technological advancement needed to start the hydraulic fracturing revolution.

On the supply side, Obama’s decision to sign off on ending the oil export ban and his support for liquefied natural gas (LNG) exports were and will continue to be a boost to U.S. shale development, as these policies opened the U.S. oil and gas industry to global consumers. At the same time, the most limiting factor to the industry’s growth post-2015 has not been policy but price. At over $100/bbl, oil prices were supportive of strong growth, and domestic policies did do little to stunt that growth. The slump in oil prices over the last several years also reflects international geopolitics and economics and not U.S. energy policy.

Enter President Trump and his campaign promises to the oil and gas industry into the equation. Will they materialize into a significant boost in the development of U.S. shale resources over Obama’s policies?

President Trump proposes domestic-level actions that would increase the domestic market supply of U.S. oil and gas, including cutting restrictive environmental regulations and scrapping the CPP, encouraging pipeline development, eliminating rules on methane releases from oil and gas operations and rescinding BLM’s proposed drilling rules on federal lands, and increasing the leasing of federal lands, for example. However, these will have only marginal impacts on the oil and gas sector. Ending BLM rules will still leave in place state regulations and states may themselves regulate methane releases (e.g., Colorado). Also, given that private lands with vast amounts of shale resources are often situated closer to refining and export facilities than federal acreage, increased leasing of federal lands is unlikely to have a significant impact on US supplies over the next four to eight years.

At the same time, while easing the regulatory burden, these actions are not significant enough to stimulate the necessary oil and gas demand for U.S. supply to grow much more than under the rules that Trump inherited. They either have no influence on the demand that is needed to generate supply or actually work directly against such demand. For example, eliminating the CPP will probably lead to a slower retirement of coal-fired power plants and, in effect, slower natural gas demand growth in the U.S.

The biggest problem with these declarations is their inward-looking, U.S.-centric focus. This is not enough. With the real demand growth concentrated in the developing world and away from the U.S. and other member countries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the marginal barrel of U.S. oil and refined products will have to feed into the world market. The same holds for American natural gas, as the globalization of the natural gas market via LNG is becoming reality.

Meanwhile, on the international demand side, the Trump administration’s decisions may do more harm than good for the interests of U.S. oil and gas producers who are seeking to sell their products globally. This includes the president’s take on trade. A “war” over a border wall combined with a possible border tax on Mexican imports may become an issue for U.S. oil and gas producers considering that in 2016, the U.S. energy export value to Mexico was more than twice the value of energy imports from Mexico. US natural gas pipeline exports to Mexico grew by 2.7 BCF/D from 2008 to 2016.

While in theory, changes in relative exchange rates under a corporate tax would keep incentives for US exports and imports to the US unchanged, other nations may still view the border-tax adjustments as protectionary and retaliate against US exports with border taxes. The U.S. LNG industry could find its competitiveness in Asia harmed if countries such as China retaliate against the rumored U.S. import or border adjustment taxes. On the oil side of the equation, similar retaliations may take place on the part of countries that are currently seen as possible consumers of the U.S. sweet light crude and/or U.S. refined product exports.

In general, to the extent that U.S. trade policies move away from WTO rules and other countries follow suit, there could be a negative impact of such policies on global economic growth – the main driver for growth in global oil and gas demand.

Additionally, dropping out of the global climate agreement could lead to import fees on U.S. energy exports, a measure that was recently proposed by Nicolas Sarkozy, the former president of France and until very recently a candidate to retake that office. It is not difficult to imagine other countries heeding the suggestion.

U.S. trade and foreign policy can also affect the supply side of the oil and gas equation, as lower levels of international supplies generally benefit the U.S. oil and gas industry by pushing prices higher and making more markets available.

During the Obama years, for example, turmoil in the Middle East removed supplies from Iran, Algeria, Syria, and Libya and provided price support for the shale revolution. Later in his administration, sanctions on Russia slowed down future supply growth there. Conversely, the removal of international sanctions previously imposed on Iran provided for immediate—and probably future—growth in Iran’s production.

Thus, Trump’s decisions on whether to continue Obama’s sanction policies related to Russia and Iran will have an impact on global supply. If President Trump rescinds U.S. sanctions on Russia, it will most likely increase foreign investment in Russian oil and natural gas, thereby putting downward pressure on global oil and gas prices. On the other hand, reimposing international sanctions on Iran would have an opposite effect (however, only if—and it is a big if—other countries join in the reimposition).

Overall, although President Trump took office expressing strong support for the development of U.S. oil and gas supplies, his domestic energy policy measures geared toward energizing the oil and natural gas industry are likely to have a limited effect. Meanwhile, President Trump’s trade and foreign policies, though in a less obvious manner, are likely to be more influential and effective in fostering or stifling the industry’s growth by influencing the global supply and the demand for U.S. oil and natural gas. Thus, his anti-trade rhetoric and unorthodox foreign policy positions could mean that Trump’s administration will have more downsides than upsides for the U.S. oil and gas industry.

Anna Mikulska is a nonresident fellow for the Center for Energy Studies at Rice University’s Baker Institute for Public Policy.

Michael Maher is a senior program advisor for the Center for Energy Studies at Rice University’s Baker Institute for Public Policy.