The EPI's Terribly Strange Calculation About Trade And The Effect On Jobs
The Economic Policy Institute has long been known as being off to the left of centre, also for being very much pro-union and pro-labour. All of which is fine, one can choose where to be on the political spectrum as you like. However, they do seem to get a little odd when it comes to the issue of trade. In fact, they're well out of line with the standard economic analysis of the effect of trade upon employment. Everyone will agree that trade changes the jobs that are done in both economies. That's actually rather the point of the process in fact. However, the usual contention is that trade doesn't change the number of jobs in an economy. That's determined by the fiscal and monetary policy mix.

EPI however stoutly insists that the trade deficit reduces the number of jobs in the US. As in this piece of reporting:

Robert E. Scott, a senior economist at the left-leaning Economic Policy Institute, estimates that NAFTA is responsible for the net loss of roughly 700,000 American jobs to Mexico, while China’s admittance to the W.T.O. cost the United States more than three million jobs. Roughly three-quarters of those losses were in the more heavily unionized manufacturing sector, contributing to the steep decline in private sector union membership, which went from 15.7 percent in 1993 to a nadir of 6.6 percent in 2014, the lowest figure in a century.

This is a very slightly different and more recent paper from Scott at the EPI, looking at the effect the TPP will have on jobs. But it uses, indeed explicitly states it does, the same underlying model to estimate jobs losses from trade. And we get this description of their model:

As shown in Table 1, the U.S. goods trade deficit with TPP member countries reached $177.9 billion in 2015. Using a simple macroeconomic model developed by Bivens (2014), we estimate the effects of this trade deficit on U.S. GDP and employment, including respending effects. (The approach is also based, in part, on the models developed in Scott 2014b.) The macroeconomic model estimates the amount of labor (i.e., number of jobs) required to produce a given volume of exports and the labor displaced when a given volume of imports is substituted for domestic output. Within that model, we use an input-output (IO) model to determine the distribution of jobs supported by exports and the jobs eliminated by imports in the U.S. economy. (See the appendix methodology section below for further details on the model structure and data sources used in this study). By providing estimates of the direct and indirect labor requirements of producing output in a given domestic industry, the model tells us each industry’s share of the overall jobs lost.

So they work out how many jobs it takes to make a certain amount of stuff, look at the amount of stuff making up the trade deficit and multiply one by the other. Seems fair enough really: but it's not actually a measure of jobs lost. That's a measure of jobs changed for a reason we'll come to in a moment. We should though point out a small lacuna in this: they are talking about the goods trade deficit only. And we really shouldn't be doing that at all. We should be looking at the goods and services trade balance. And as the US runs large services trade surpluses we should offset this. And that offset is, from a quick eyeballing, some one third of the goods deficit. So even if their logic were correct here they'd be overstating matters.

However, what's being left out here is that the balance of payments does balance. As Mark Perry has shown us:

And this is why the general economic contention is that trade doesn't change the number of jobs. Because all of those dollars that go out to buy cars in China then come back into the US through the capital account. Where they boost aggregate demand again. For example, another EPI contention (again, in this paper) is that China (and others) currency manipulates by buying up foreign currency denominated bonds. Like, say, US Treasuries. Which might even be true: but note what the other effect of that is. The US government now has those dollars spent on cars in China and goes off and spends those dollars from its bond sales on, say, nice union contracts to build roads and things in the US. We can, if we really want to, run a partial analysis of the jobs "lost to trade". But we then need to go on to note that these are actually the jobs changed by trade, not lost to it, because that capital account means that all the money comes back again.

And yes, it is all the money comes back. Because the balance of payments really does balance, by definition. Or, as the standard analysis has it, trade changes the type of job done where but not the number of jobs done where.