Snap's Evan Spiegel Is Right Though, Snapchat Is An App For Rich People, Not India
The CEO of the recently floated Snapchat, Evan Spiegel, is in hot water over his being a little too eager to tell the economic truth about the company. He's said that the app itself is something for rich people, not poor people or places like Spain or India. That might well be undiplomatic--and it's not really true of Spain either--but the economics of the company are such that it is indeed something for rich people. Or, if you prefer, he would very much prefer that rich people, not poor, used it. This is all very much tied up with the economics of dual sided markets, part of what won Jean Tirole his Nobel a couple of years back.

The crucial thing to understand here is what is being sold. Yes, sure, Speigel and his team would love to sell you on the use of their app. But that's not where the revenue comes from, that's from selling the fact that you use the app to advertisers. And quite clearly advertisers would prefer to be advertising to rich people who have money to spend on the things they're advertising. This is why a page ad in Vogue costs more than a similar one in the Clacton Advertiser.

So, this might be undiplomatic but it is also true:

Snapchat is busy fire-fighting, ever since the Variety report came out which quotes CEO Evan Spiegel as saying (back in 2015) the app was only for rich people and not for poor countries like India or Spain.

The report itself is here with the full quote:

At a meeting to discuss Snapchat’s user growth in 2015, Anthony Pompliano says he expressed concern that the app was not taking off overseas. Pompliano, who had just been hired away from Facebook, contends that he presented methods to address the issue, but that Evan Spiegel, the company’s CEO, abruptly cut him off. “This app is only for rich people,” Spiegel said, according to Pompliano. “I don’t want to expand into poor countries like India and Spain.”

The source of all of this is this lawsuit and we can apply any level of belief to the idea that it was actually said that we like.

At which point consider the economics of the matter. Jean Tirole's Nobel is here, a paper explaining matters here and Marginal Revolution, as so often, has a very clear description of the basics:

An important example for the internet age is that Google is a platform of search users and advertisers. An key difficulty in these markets is that the price charged to one side of the market influences the demand on the other side of the market. The price a newspaper charges to readers, for example, influences the number of readers but that in turn influences the price that the advertisers, the other side of the market, are willing to pay to advertise in the newspaper. It further often happens that one side of the market is harder to “get” than the other and so the profit-maximizing prices on the two sides of the market are very different. One side of the market may even be “subsidized.” The price that newspapers charge readers, for example, is often much less than the cost of the newspaper.

We could deploy that rather cynical line that's been used about Facebook here, if you're being offered a service for free then it's you that is being sold.

Less cynically, the essence of Tirole's insight is that in these sorts of markets there are two things being sold. There's the whatever it is going to the readers or users and there's the attention of the readers or users to advertisers. When reduced to this economic essence there's no difference between Google's search engine, Snapchat's pictures, Facebooks's connections or, indeed, the standard freebie newspaper model. The product is whatever it is, but the economic model is that it's just something which engages peoples' attention. Once that attention has been gained then it is that attention which is then sold to the advertisers. That's where the actual revenue comes from so that is the thing being sold for cash. Whatever it is that is being offered to gain the attention is just that, the means to the end of being able to sell the attention itself.

At which point obviously you'd prefer to be gaining the attention of lots of rich people, or rich world people even, because advertisers will pay more for that attention of those who have the money to buy their products. This is obviously more so if you've got to run an expensive campaign to attract users in whatever markets you decide to approach. You would want to concentrate efforts on where there is the most return, quite obviously.

Spiegel's therefore exactly right about the market for Snapchat, it is for rich people because that's the attention that his advertisers want to buy. It's just a little undiplomatic to flat out say so about India.