Obama team delays Christmas tree fee
The Obama administration is delaying and re-evaluating the imposition of a fee on Christmas tree growers that conservative critics have attacked as a "Christmas tree tax."

"I can tell you unequivocally that the Obama administration is not taxing Christmas trees," spokesman Matt Lehrich said. "What's being talked about here is an industry group deciding to impose fees on itself to fund a promotional campaign, similar to how the dairy producers have created the "Got Milk?" campaign."

"That said," he added, the U.S. Agriculture Department "is going to delay implementation and revisit this action."

The flap began when the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank in Washington, posted a blog on Obama's alleged "Christmas Tree Tax," a 15-cent charge on all fresh trees that author David Addington said would be passed on to holiday consumers.

"The economy is barely growing and nine percent of the American people have no jobs," writes Addington, a former top aide to Vice President Dick Cheney who is with the Heritage Foundation. "Is a new tax on Christmas trees the best President Obama can do?"

Christmas tree growers would pay the fee and say the money is to help their industry with a promotional campaign similar to the ones for milk, beef and cotton producers.

"As demographics and buying habits have changed, we have watched the market for real trees shrink drastically, requiring us to spend much more time and money on promotion," said Don Cameron, past president of the California Christmas Tree Association, McClatchy reports.

Addington writes:

To pay for the new Federal Christmas tree image improvement and marketing program, the Department of Agriculture imposed a 15-cent fee on all sales of fresh Christmas trees by sellers of more than 500 trees per year (7 CFR 1214.52). And, of course, the Christmas tree sellers are free to pass along the 15-cent Federal fee to consumers who buy their Christmas trees. Acting Administrator Shipman had the temerity to say the 15-cent mandatory Christmas tree fee "is not a tax nor does it yield revenue for the Federal government" (76 CFR 69102). The Federal government mandates that the Christmas tree sellers pay the 15-cents per tree, whether they want to or not. The Federal government directs that the revenue generated by the 15-cent fee goes to the Board appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture to carry out the Christmas tree program established by the Secretary of Agriculture. Mr. President, that's a new 15-cent tax to pay for a Federal program to improve the image and marketing of Christmas trees. Nobody is saying President Obama doesn't have authority to impose his new Christmas Tree Tax -- his Administration cites the Commodity Promotion, Research and Information Act of 1996. Just because the Obama Administration has the legal power to impose its Christmas Tree Tax doesn't mean it should do so.

McClatchy reports on the proposed Christmas tree promotion program: