Florida's job growth brisk, but largely at low wages
Candidates for governor see workforce landscape differently

TALLAHASSEE — Florida unemployment is nearing an all-time low and Gov. Rick Scott says the state is “on a roll” with 1.5 million jobs created since he took office.

But that didn’t stop Angela Edwards-Luckett from coming to the Capitol recently as part of a protest by labor groups and others critical of the lack of good-paying jobs in the state.

“It’s a struggle to survive out there,” said Edwards-Luckett, 51, of Clearwater, whose biggest source of income is a $10,000-a-year part-time instructor’s job at St. Petersburg College.

Edwards-Luckett, who teaches world religion, said she picks up more money doing ministerial work. But in Pinellas County, she said, many jobs pay only $8.50 or $9.50 an hour.

“If the jobs are there, they really don’t pay what you need, or what you’d call a living wage,” she said.

Almost a decade since the Great Recession ended, Florida’s economic recovery remains uneven, data shows. Scott can point to an abundance of new jobs — although research shows almost half are considered low-wage, paying $10 or less an hour.

Close to half of Florida’s 67 counties still have not returned to the employment levels they had before the recession, which began in 2007 and officially ceased in June 2009.

Now, Florida’s economy is the backbeat to one of the state’s most important elections in years. A two-term governor, Scott is campaigning for U.S. Senate, trying to unseat three-term incumbent Democrat Bill Nelson in what is shaping up as one of the nation’s highest profile contests.

Scott’s singular focus as governor has been on jobs — and dragging Florida from the depths of the recession toward its current 3.8 percent unemployment rate, a level most economists consider full employment. Florida's lowest rate ever was 3.1 percent, reached in March 2006.

For the governor, his work first triaging, then expanding the Florida economy is his “mission accomplished” moment and has emerged as the central item on his resume as a Senate candidate.

But the state’s economic revival can be viewed in vastly different ways, according to both experts and everyday Floridians.

Three million in poverty

While jobs seem plentiful and growing, almost three million Floridians live in poverty — earning less than $24,300 for a family of four. Poverty numbers peaked in 2012, but still have not fallen to pre-recession levels.

The number of struggling households is increasing as living costs outstrip what most jobs pay, data shows.

The state’s economy will shape almost every race on the ballot this election year — specially the campaign to succeed Scott, where Democratic and Republican candidates divide over the scope of the state’s rebound from a jobless rate that hovered around 11 percent when the governor took office.

“Now we have job creation that is the envy of the nation,” said Agriculture Commissioner Adam Putnam, who is battling U.S. Rep. Ron DeSantis, a Palm Coast congressman, for the Republican nomination for governor in the Aug. 28 primary.

Among the five major Democrats running for governor, most point out that Florida’s recovery has been uneven.

Not everyone is doing well, said former Miami Beach Mayor Philip Levine.

“I think the governor likes to think that having a great economy is a state of Walmarts, McDonalds and Applebees, and everybody makes $8.25-an-hour,” Levine said. “My vision is a little different.”

“I kind of look at Massachusetts as more of a model, and that’s a state of General Electric, Lockheed, Apple, Amazon and eBay and great companies come to Florida and pay high-paying positions so these folks in our state don’t have to work two and three jobs,” he said.

The other Democratic candidates, former U.S. Rep. Gwen Graham of Tallahassee, Palm Beach billionaire investor Jeff Greene, Orlando businessman Chris King and Tallahassee Mayor Andrew Gillum also are making Florida’s economic divide a big part of their campaigns.

Florida’s wages typically are below the U.S. average. The latest figures available show that the state’s wages in 2016 were 87 percent that of the national average — a level that grew only slightly in the previous two years.

Palm Beach County had the state’s highest annual salaries, an average $51,862, while rural Calhoun County had the worst, at $29,059, state and federal labor statistics show.

But even as overall job numbers climbed by 1.5 million, some counties missed out.

Indeed, 30 of Florida’s 67 counties last year had job levels below that of 2007, when unemployment began to soar. That includes Gainesville metro area, where a workforce that numbered 137,160 in 2007 remains 4 percent lower — at 131,830 — as of May 2017, according federal statistics.

Many counties trailing in the jobs recovery are rural. But they also include Edwards-Luckett’s home Pinellas County, Manatee County, Brevard County on the Space Coast, tourism-heavy Okaloosa County on the Panhandle, and Putnam, Bradford and Union counties near Jacksonville.

Leon County, where the state capital is located, also trails the jobs levels of a decade ago, partly stemming from Scott’s continued effort to shrink the size of state government, an effort begun 20 years ago, under Republican Gov. Jeb Bush.

The capital’s economy affects neighboring counties where jobs are even scarcer. Economists say the state’s robust job numbers are clustered in urban areas — Orlando, Tampa, Jacksonville and Miami, and their nearby suburbs.

“It just seems that here in Gadsden County, we’re overlooked,” said Shinita Mercer, 37, of Quincy, who formerly commuted to Tallahassee to work for the state’s Department of Children & Families, a $27,400-a-year job she said she lost last year.

“We’re not a tourist town. So that’s out. And when you have to drive a half-hour to Tallahassee, you’ve got to count in that cost, then childcare, it adds up,” added Mercer.

In a shifting economy, when some jobs disappear, what work is available can fall short.

Allison Lollie, 40, of Monticello, lost her printer’s job of 18 years when her company went out of business. Finding another job hasn’t been easy.

“You can look and there are pages and pages of jobs online. But not many pay what I need,” Lollie said.

How the governor sees it

Scott says that to gauge Florida’s current economy, analysts should look at a more recent starting point — when he was sworn in as governor.

“What people forget — because of how well we are doing now — is how bad we were doing eight years ago,” Scott said recently.

In the years leading up to Scott’s election, Florida lost 832,000 jobs, home prices dropped 42 percent, state debt climbed, and almost half the state’s homes were underwater, with mortgages topping market value.

Scott said he came into office with a simple goal: “It was that I’m going to make sure we have the best economic environment for business in the world. There’s nothing we can do if we don’t have a good job market.”

Scott worked toward that goal with help from a Republican-controlled Legislature that reduced business taxes, regulations, unemployment coverage and growth management laws.

“He’s delivered on all three points of his agenda: jobs, jobs and jobs,” said Bill Herrle, executive director of the National Federation of Independent Business-Florida, whose national political committee recently endorsed Scott over Nelson.

But analysis by Florida International University of the state’s job creation efforts raises questions about the quality of these new positions.

Comparing the state’s pre-recession labor statistics with those of 2016, FIU found that 44.5 percent of new jobs were considered low-wage, with hourly pay of $10 or less.

The analysis showed that the percentage of Floridians in low-wage jobs had actually climbed since the recession — to where it now represents one-in-five people in the workforce.

Jennifer Johnson, 30, supports herself and her three children on the $8.25-an-hour minimum wage she earns at an Orlando Burger King.

“There are jobs out there,” Johnson said. “But the problem is they don’t pay.”

Herrle, though, said that Scott has set a tone which fueled confidence among companies in the state. A national survey of members by NFIB found that small business optimism in June was at its second highest rate in 45 years — levels which he said are reflected in Florida.

Companies are ready to expand, reduce debt and raise salaries, he said. And any reservations about the extent of the state’s recovery stem mainly from what Herrle called a hangover effect from Florida’s economic swoon.

“We had eight-to-10 years of pent-up desires among Americans,” he said. “We’re finally getting to the point again where... they’re replacing that old refrigerator, they’re replacing that old car. That feeling is starting to move through the market.”

Melode Smelko, CEO of Altrua Global Services in Tallahassee, said that her company has taken off since the recession. She credits policy changes advanced by Scott for providing the spark.

Scott repeatedly pushed the Legislature to eliminate the state’s sales tax on manufacturing equipment purchases. And when they did, two years ago, it allowed companies like Smelko’s to expand and add good-paying jobs, she said.

“We invest a lot in equipment,” said Smelko, whose 54-employee company has a national contract printing marketing and advertising products for McDonald’s.

The company’s lowest pay is $13-an-hour she said.

“We’ve probably doubled our production capacity and our number of employees over the past 10 years. And not having to pay the sales tax has helped — and that was a Gov. Scott idea,” Smelko said.

Larry Kates, who with his wife owns Progressive Power Products in Jacksonville, said he’s seen his business soar the past few years — a sharp rebound from the struggles he faced during the depths of the recession.

Kates’ company, which installs and repairs transmissions for trucks and other heavy equipment, said the state’s approach to business has helped him grow.

“I think to retain good employees, you’ve got to pay them,” said Kates, who declined to offer specifics about his salaries, but said they are well above the state’s minimum. “Without them, I’m not in business.”

A grimmer picture

But the state United Way’s research on working Floridians paints a grimmer picture.

In findings released last year, it said that two-thirds of jobs in Florida pay less than $20-an-hour, with an overwhelming number of those drawing less than $15 hourly.

Household living costs have climbed, causing more challenges.

For a family of four to reach what United Way analysts call an average survival budget, they needed $53,856 annually, with an hourly wage nearing $27-an-hour.

The median household income in Alachua County is below state and national numbers for all major demographic groups. Black families fare the worst, with a median household income of $26,600.

“In the measures that really matter to families, which is how much money do you have in your pocket relative to pre-recession levels, many are still hurting. They haven’t bounced back yet,” said Ali Bustamante, an economist at Loyola University-New Orleans who has studied working-class Florida.

The United Way study cited Florida’s aging population, with many seniors not having income to support themselves. Minority households also do worse than the rest of the state’s residents.

Going forward, low-wage jobs are projected to grow faster than high-paying work over the next decade, with technology also changing the workplace — adding some jobs, but eliminating others.

According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, job projections for Florida from 2015 to 2023 show that 82 percent of new jobs will pay less than $15 per hour.

While Scott runs as a job creator, most analysts say state leaders can only do so much to ignite a state’s economy.

They can influence important policies. But some economists say Scott’s choice of who to favor has further polarized the state.

“Governors in their policies can say, ‘what can we do for workers?’” Bustamante said. “Expand Medicaid coverage, pay higher-per-hour wages and promote efforts to lift workers and their families. Gov. Scott hasn’t done that.”

But Jerry Parrish, economist for the Florida Chamber of Commerce, said Scott “made Florida a place where people are comfortable investing private capital. They know that government is not going to get in their way.”

Amy Baker, coordinator of the Legislature’s Office of Economic and Demographic Research, said it’s clear that since the recession, the state has been steadily increasing its jobs numbers.

But she conceded that — powered, in part, by rising tourism — the type of jobs being added haven’t changed much. They remain mostly lower-paid.

“During the recession, any jobs were important; it didn’t really matter what they were,” Baker said. “But a lot of the growth is coming in tourist-related jobs, and these are among the lowest paid.”

That’s not a good sign for Florida’s future, said Edwards-Luckett, the college instructor who joined the protest just down the hall from Scott’s office.

“This election should be about helping people advance,” she said. “The jobs have come back in Florida, but not the good jobs.

“That’s what we need now.”