George P. Bush
George Prescott Bush is a native Texan, born in Houston on April 24, 1976. He was first elected Texas Land Commissioner on November 4, 2014 and was overwhelmingly re-elected on November 6, 2018. He received the second highest vote total of any candidate running statewide.

As the 28th Texas Land Commissioner, Bush works to safeguard our Texas coastline as well as ensure Texas veterans receive the benefits they’ve earned. He hosted 100 roundtables, forums and events in 2016 to highlight issues within the Texas veteran community. Since September of 2017, Commissioner Bush and the General Land Office (GLO) have led the state’s housing-related recovery efforts following Hurricane Harvey, helping more than 60,000 victims of Hurricane Harvey rebuild their homes and their lives. In addition, he protected private property rights by joining a lawsuit along with Red River ranchers and farmers against the Obama BLM which was successfully settled in November of 2017. He also oversees investments that earn billions of dollars for public education while managing state lands to produce the oil and gas that is helping make America energy-independent. Commissioner Bush is also working to save The Alamo and preserve the Shrine of Texas Liberty for generations to come.

Commissioner Bush has dedicated his life to public service — working as a public-school teacher after graduating from Rice University, serving in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan as an officer in the U.S. Naval Reserve, and now as the 28th Land Commissioner of the Texas General Land Office, the only state agency that makes more money than it spends.

Prior to running for office, Commissioner Bush was a successful businessman. He joined Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP after earning his Juris Doctorate from The University of Texas School of Law. He subsequently co-founded Pennybacker Capital LLC, a real estate private equity firm, in 2007, and St. Augustine Partners LLC, a Fort Worth-based investment firm focused on oil and gas transactions and consulting for private businesses. He was awarded The University of Texas’ Latino Leadership Award in 2015, the Outstanding Young Alumnus Award from The University of Texas School of Law in 2016, and the Outstanding Young Texas Ex Award in 2016.

Commissioner Bush is also committed to helping fellow Texans in his private life. He co-chaired a $30 million capital campaign for Big Brothers Big Sisters in North Texas and served as the co-chairman of the Dallas/Fort Worth Celebration of Reading. He was the Tarrant County chairman for Uplift Education — a highly successful Dallas-based public charter network focused on closing the achievement gap in inner city public schools. He also served on the Board of Trustees for the Bob Bullock Texas State History Museum in Austin.

Commissioner Bush is the grandson of President George H.W. Bush, the son of former Florida Governor Jeb Bush and the nephew of President George W. Bush. He lives in Austin with his wife, Amanda, and their two sons.