Previous Assessments

First National Climate Asssessment

The First National Climate Assessment, entitled Climate Change Impacts on the United States: The Potential Consequences of Climate Variability and Change, was published in 2000 and was a major landmark in the ongoing effort to understand what climate change meant for America. This assessment began a national process of research, analysis, and dialogue about the coming changes in climate, their impacts, and what Americans can do to adapt to an uncertain and continuously changing climate.

Second National Climate Assessment

The Second National Climate Assessment, entitled Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States, was published in 2009 and summarized the science of climate change and its impacts on America, now and in the future. It identified key climatic vulnerabilities of particular regions and sectors, in the context of other changes in the Nation’s environment, resources, and economy. It also identified potential measures to adapt to climate variability and change. Finally, the Second National Climate Assessment identified the highest priority uncertainties about which further study is needed to understand climate impacts, vulnerabilities, and America's ability to adapt.

Interim Assessments

From 2002 to 2009, USGCRP was known as the U.S. Climate Change Science Program (CCSP). CCSP created a series of 21 Synthesis and Assessment Products (SAPs) that integrated research on key climate science issues and aimed to support informed discussion by decision makers (such as resource managers and policymakers), stakeholders, and the general public.

This assessment analyzed the effects of global change on natural and human environments, agriculture, water resources, social systems, energy production and use, transportation, and human health. It analyzed existing trends in global change, both natural and human-induced, and projected major trends for the future. Like the SAPs and other assessment products, it was intended to support informed discussion by decision makers, stakeholders, and the public. In 2008, the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) and CCSP released the Scientific Assessment of the Effects of Global Change on the United States, which placed special emphasis on climate change.

Third National Climate Assessment

The Third National Climate Assessment, Climate Change Impacts in the United States, was published in 2014 and summarizes the impacts of climate change on the United States, now and in the future. A team of more than 300 experts guided by a 60-member Federal Advisory Committee produced the report, which was extensively reviewed by the public and experts, including federal agencies and a panel of the National Academy of Sciences.​