Fundraiser for Braden Pollock by Support Women : Help Stand Up to Donald Trump
SUMMARY: Jill put herself out there, facing off with Donald Trump. Let’s show her some love.

Jill’s Story:

Despite her initial reluctance and great fear, Jill Harth courageously decided to share her allegations of being sexually harassed and assaulted by Republican Presidential Nominee, Donald Trump. She was the first woman to do so, on July 18, 2016. For three long months, she was the only one out there, facing social media hate and losing business. She’s been vindicated by the “ hot mic ” tape released on October 7, 2016, in which Trump brags about kissing women and grabbing their genitals.Let’s help Jill get back on her feet!-----------------------------------------------------------------------Since her 1997 sexual harassment lawsuit , Jill has maintained that Trump groped her, without her consent, on three different occasions when she was trying to do a business deal with him. In one incident, she says that he pushed her into the children’s room at his Florida Mar-a-Lago estate. Trump then pinned Ms. Harth against the wall. He fondled her, tried to get up her dress, and forcibly kissed her.Trump settled Jill’s case three weeks after she filed it. He then invited Jill and her husband to a party and suggested they all “bury the hatchet.” Jill was more than willing to turn the page and move on with her life. “I’m a Christian, and I forgave him,” she says. “And he didn’t do anything inappropriate to me after that. So I moved on.”Years passed, and Jill says that she and Trump had a cordial relationship. Jill got divorced and found a new career as a freelance make-up artist with her own make-up and skin care line . Jill passionately pursued her dream of creating affordable hypoallergenic, gluten-free, paraben-free, and cruelty-free products that would help women feel radiant and confident. She moved to a new city. Donald Trump was the furthest thing from her mind.In 2015, Trump's presidential campaign invited scrutiny into his past, which is littered with accusations that he behaved badly with women. At first, Jill refused all the reporters’ requests to talk about her experiences with him, believing that they had indeed “buried the hatchet.” But when Trump reacted to a New York Times exposé on Trump’s mistreatment of women – including Jill – by claiming the women were all liars, and when Ivanka Trump said “my dad is not a groper,” Jill reached her breaking point. Jill did a few interviews and shared her story. “I am not a liar,” Jill declared.Jill’s decision to come forward and relive her experience was not easy. Jill knew that his supporters would try to discredit her. She knew her face and story would be on TV, news articles, and other media channels. Trump is a powerful, rich man, who has millions of angry supporters.Speaking out took an economic toll on Jill. Clients cancelled, saying they did not want to be associated with her “controversial” story. Bookings dried up. Trump threatens to sue everyone who crosses him. Jill retained Lisa Bloom and The Bloom Firm to represent her.Jill now faces hard economic times. The GoFundMe proceeds will go towards paying Jill’s bills, shoring up her business, and paying legal fees. The funds will go to Jill's attorneys at The Bloom Firm, who will disburse the funds.We ask for your support of Jill. Let’s show her there are more good people than bad, who want to help her.