Congresswoman Corrine Brown Works to Overturn Governor Scottís High Speed Rail Funding Decision
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: February 17th, 2011

CONTACT: David Simon (202) 225-0123 David.Simon@mail.house.gov

Congresswoman Corrine Brown Works to Overturn Governor Scott’s High Speed Rail Funding Decision





(Washington, DC) Congresswoman Brown made the following statement:

“Along with my colleagues in the Florida delegation and Senator Bill Nelson, I am working day and night to keep high speed rail alive in the state of Florida. Following our meeting today with U.S. Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood, our state has been granted an extra week to come up with a viable plan, before the $2.4 billion in federal money for high-speed rail funding directed to Florida will be granted to other states.

As was clearly demonstrated in the bipartisan letter sent by 26 Florida state senators to Governor Scott, high speed rail in Florida has support across all spectrums in the state. Key stakeholders throughout the state of Florida, from the private sector to local city and county councils, to the state legislature, to Chambers of Commerce in cities statewide, have been working for years to make high speed rail a reality, and we will not let the baseless objections by the Governor stop this train.

Certainly, to offset Florida’s unemployment rate, which is stuck at 12%, investment in our state’s infrastructure system is essential. The reasoning is simple: investment in transportation and infrastructure creates jobs, and, according to the Department of Transportation, for every $1 billion invested in infrastructure projects, over 42,000 well paying jobs are created.

And according to Florida DOT and the Florida High Speed Rail Association, the construction of what was projected to be merely the first high speed rail line, from Tampa-Orlando, was estimated to produce nearly 75,000 construction jobs, as well as numerous positions to operate and maintain the trains once the system was in place.

FACT CHECK:

Governor Scott FALSELY claims that if the private operators walked away, the state would be liable, NOT true (the repayment would be pro-rated based on a 20 year contract and the state would not have to pay back the $2.5 billion);

A new ridership study done by Federal DOT showed a 15% increase in ridership. The Governor claimed that the ridership numbers were over-optimistic, yet in reality, the study, which was paid for by Federal DOT at the behest of the state, showed a 15% increase since the last ridership study was conducted;

The Federal DOT helped write the Request for Qualification that protected the state from future financial risks/operational cost over-runs, etc… so that the state of Florida would NOT be put at any financial risk;

There is a 12% unemployment rate in the state of Florida, yet the Governor’s plan to kill high speed rail will dissolve 70,000 well paying construction jobs before the project even had a chance to get off the ground. According to the Florida High Speed Rail Association:

Building the Tampa-Orlando HSR line is projected to create 23,000 job-years of direct construction jobs and more than 48,000 job-years of work through both direct and spin-off employment during the four-year construction period. The peak employment period will be between the Fall of 2012 and 2014, when close to 10,000 workers are expected to be directly employed in building the system. FDOT further estimates the system will employ approximately 600 people once operation starts and another 500 indirectly on an on-going basis.