Cory’s Record

Cory has a record that reflects his desire to rein in out-of-control spending and build consensus on issues where he can find common ground with his colleagues. Whether it is promoting agriculture or reforming telecommunications policy, Cory’s record is one of forging solutions to our nation’s greatest problems.

As a national leader on energy policy, Cory has championed a bipartisan effort on liquefied natural gas (LNG) exports that recently passed the House Energy and Commerce Committee. He also introduced two major pieces of legislation that passed the House with bipartisan support and would increase domestic production while creating thousands of jobs here at home. In addition to his work with traditional resources, Cory has promoted legislation to streamline the permitting process for renewable technologies on federal lands and supports a paid-for extension of the wind production tax credit (PTC). He also co-wrote the legislation that established Colorado’s Clean Energy Development Authority while serving in the Colorado General Assembly.

Cory is a leading voice on energy efficiency and co-founded a bipartisan caucus dedicated to promoting efficiency initiatives that are good for the environment and the taxpayer. More than fifty cosponsors from both sides of the aisle have signed on to Cory’s energy efficiency legislation and the Energy and Commerce Committee recently passed the bill unanimously.

Throughout his time in Congress, Cory has voiced his strong opposition to Obamacare and the premium increases, thousands of pages in new regulations, and burdensome mandates it creates. Cory chose to reject federal health benefits when first elected to Congress, and his family was among the 335,000 Coloradans who received health care cancellation notices as a result of Obamacare. He supports legislation that repeals this misguided law and replaces it with a solution that allows the purchase of insurance across state lines, bolsters state high-risk pools to provide for those with pre-existing conditions, and enacts badly needed tort reform to reduce medical costs, among other ideas.

Cory is dedicated to fiscal responsibility and government reform. He introduced legislation that requires Congress to review programs targeted by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) as wasteful and duplicative. In an effort to make Congress work, he voted in favor of a bill that requires lawmakers to pass a budget or face having their pay withheld. He has also been a consistent voice for improving transparency through simplifying complicated government regulations and improving permit processes.

Cory believes that the next generation must be prepared to lead. He has supported efforts to entrust parents and educators with improving curriculum in their communities. Cory has also introduced legislation that helps students save more for college in a time of rising tuition costs. With two young children of his own, Cory knows that a quality education is invaluable to helping our youth meet the challenges of the future.