MEMO: Debate Ticket Allocation
TO: Members of the RNC FROM: Sean Cairncross, COO RE: Debate Ticket Allocation DATE: February 16, 2016

Over the last two days, there have been various accusations, questions, and media attention related to both tickets and the audience at Republican National Committee-sanctioned debates. This brief memorandum is meant to introduce facts into this discussion.



Two primary accusations have been made regarding debate audiences.



First , the RNC has been accused of “stacking” the debate audiences with our donors. This is incorrect.



For example, in South Carolina the approximately 1,600 debate tickets were allocated as follows:

642 to campaigns;

Approximately 300 to the RNC/elected officials/in-state grassroots activists (of these, only 10 to RNC donors); and

The remainder to the South Carolina Republican Party and CBS News.

With respect to the RNC’s tickets in the last three debates, held in Iowa, New Hampshire, and South Carolina, RNC donors constituted approximately:

.5% of the Iowa debate audience (7 tickets out of approximately 1,200);

1.6% of the New Hampshire debate audience (16 tickets out of approximately 1,000); and

.6% of the South Carolina debate audience (10 tickets out of approximately 1,600).

Second , St. Anselm students have been accused of selling their tickets to donors and lobbyists. This too is incorrect.



Every ticket to RNC-sanctioned debates is matched on a name identification basis to its holder. Individuals who receive tickets are entered into an electronic database before they arrive, and are required to produce a government-issued photo ID matching the name in the database and on their ticket before being allowed entry into a debate.



Notably, this system assists in security at the debates and is supported by the United States Secret Service – which is currently protecting two candidates participating in the debates: Dr. Carson and Mr. Trump.



Questions have been raised as to why the crowd at the South Carolina debate was so actively engaged in expressing their reactions to what was happening on the debate stage. One possible, even perhaps probable, reason is that – at their request – campaigns received a higher allocation of tickets in South Carolina than they had previously. Each campaign received 107 tickets, and thus campaign partisans constituted 40% of the South Carolina debate crowd (each campaign expressed satisfaction with their ticket number ahead of the South Carolina debate).



Naturally, two things happen when the percentage of individuals supporting only one candidate increases in the crowd: (1) the level of support for each candidate increases by the number of tickets that campaign is allocated; and (2) the level of opposition for each candidate increases by the number of tickets allocated to every other campaign. For example, in South Carolina, each campaign had 107 of its partisans in the crowd, and faced 535 partisans from opposing campaigns. Additionally, campaigns often organize their ticket holders, select their attendees carefully, and ask them to be vocal supporters. In South Carolina, it may have been the case that some campaigns executed this more thoroughly than others – or some may have chosen not to do so at all.



Of course, there is a wide variety of potential reasons behind crowd reaction: the upcoming South Carolina primary is very important; issue differences between the candidates are becoming more sharply drawn; and agreement/disagreement with statements made by the candidates on stage. It’s difficult to say with any certainty.



The RNC is proud to play an active role for our candidates in the debate process in 2016. Over 200 million Americans have tuned into watch Republican debates, and they have served a vital role in our nominating process to date. Debates are meant to show voters where candidates stand, and to allow candidates to distinguish themselves from one another. South Carolina, as with every other debate, was a demonstration of exactly that.

2016 HQ

Debates