Miley Cyrus Did NOT Say Donald Trump Supporters “Are Hurting My Career,” Despite Report
Truth rating: 0

By Andrew Shuster |

Miley Cyrus never said President Donald Trump’s supporters are hurting her music career, despite a bogus report posted on a fake news website. Gossip Cop can set the record straight.

According to the blog Just News USA, the singer expressed dissatisfaction with the status of her career in a recent interview and blamed Trump supporters for damaging her popularity. The untrustworthy outlet claims Billboard magazine asked Cyrus why she’s “not one of the top-selling artists anymore,” to which she allegedly answered, “I’m sure that [Trump supporters] have something to do with this. The amount of hate that I receive is unbelievable. If this continues I’m gonna leave the US and go to Australia or wherever. I swear. At least while Trump is here. He’s not my President.”

Cyrus, however, never made such comments. The fake news site concocted the quote out of thin air. But in an attempt to dupe readers into believing the quote is legitimate, the outlet also sprinkled in some real quotes from the singer’s May 2017 Billboard cover story. Unfortunately for Just News USA, the scheme has backfired. Cyrus actually noted in her Billboard interview that she respects political opinions that differ from her own. The singer explained, “I like the way I think right now. But don’t Trump supporters like the way they think? So I’ve also got to be open with the way I approach people with my opinions. That’s the only way to make real change. And it’s not because I want to sell records!”

Regardless of how the pop star may feel about the president, she simply never accused his supporters of hurting her album sales, nor did she express discontent with her career in the first place. This phony article was seemingly designed to stir the pot and make people believe that a liberal celebrity attacked all U.S. citizens who voted for Trump. In reality, the singer explained that she stays open-minded when it comes to the president’s supporters.