Jennifer Aniston Launching HSN Clothing Collection?
EXCLUSIVE

Truth rating: 0

By Shari Weiss |

Is Jennifer Aniston launching a clothing collection with HSN? A new report claims she’s teaming up with Sheryl Crow, who already has a line with the Home Shopping Network. But Gossip Cop has exclusively learned Aniston isn’t involved in any partnership.

The new issue of OK! is announcing, “Sheryl & Jen’s Home Shopping Hookup.” In the article, the tabloid claims the singer is “steering her pal toward the Home Shopping Network.” A so-called “insider” is quoted as saying of Crow, “She’s shocked at how much fun it is and how much money she is making relative to the time and effort she put into her last album. Now she wants Jen to team up with her on a collection they’ll design and sell together!”

According to the gossip magazine’s supposed source, Aniston is on board with the idea because she’s been “looking for more opportunities outside of acting.” Cautions the snitch, “The big leap would be hawking the collection on-air, but Sheryl makes that look easy, and Jen would essentially be a guest star.” The alleged tipster further contends to the outlet, “Jen is thrilled that Sheryl suggested it. She can dip her toe into a lifestyle brand and see if that’s something she wants to pursue. It’s kind of a no-brainer for her. She has a built-in fan base that’ll love her stuff.”

The publication notes this purported project is still in the “planning stages,” which could be why there are no specifics given about what type of apparel Aniston and Crow would design or when the clothing might debut. More likely, though, the real reason this article is so general and vague is because there’s no such collection in the works. No one with whom Gossip Cop spoke, including Aniston’s rep, could confirm any plans to do a line for HSN. In fact, we’re told that the star’s agents and manager have not had any discussions about this alleged career move.

And there’s further reason to doubt the legitimacy of this supposed scoop: OK! has a beyond horrible track record when it comes to reporting on Aniston. The tabloid has spent years publishing untrue pregnancy reports about the actress, including a cover story two months ago that falsely claimed Aniston was expecting a “miracle baby at 48.” The magazine that doesn’t care to be accurate on such important topics is not going to be the outlet that breaks real news about the star’s career.