Tax Reform Profile: Rep. Greg Gianforte (R-MT)
We promised more jobs, fairer taxes, and bigger paychecks — and we’re delivering.

While the Democrats threaten to take it all away if given the opportunity, we’ve been sitting down with families and workers from all walks of life who are seeing bonuses, pay increases, and lower electric bills thanks to the Tax Cuts & Jobs Act.

One great example of this is Rep. Greg Gianforte, a freshman who represents the entire state of Montana. Rep. Gianforte did a statewide Tax Cuts & Jobs Tour in March and April, meeting with everyone from farmers to women-owned businesses. A typical middle-income family of four in Montana will see a tax cut of $2,281 because of tax reform. More on that at FairandSimple.gop.

“Throughout the tour, I heard loud and clear from Montanans that the tax cuts passed in December are helping them,” Gianforte said in a recap of his tour. “Because of the tax cuts, hardworking Montanans are keeping more of what they earn, and our small businesses are growing, hiring more people, and increasing wages.”

In all, the Gentleman from Montana held nine events in six cities, earned television coverage in five of his state’s cities, did 11 radio hits, and two live, in-studio television interviews. WOW!

Here’s a recap of Rep. Gianforte’s Tax Cuts & Jobs Tour:

Roundtable with women small business owners in Bozeman:

“The entrepreneurs expressed an optimistic outlook for the future of their businesses, and anticipated increasing wages and benefits for their employees. One entrepreneur, who co-owns a cabinetry and design business with her husband, said the new tax policies were a big part of their decision to launch two new businesses this year.”

Boeing facility in Helena:

“Employees told Gianforte they were seeing larger paychecks as a result of the tax cuts. Boeing’s Helena facility is installing new manufacturing equipment and will add 20 new employees this year. Boeing welcomed the tax cuts with $300 million in employee-related and charitable investments, including $100 million in workforce development and $100 million in facilities improvements for employees.”

Meeting with Billings Flying Service in Billings:

“Citing reforms to the tax code that allow businesses to immediately write off the full cost of new equipment, the company is investing in updated equipment. The tax cuts have also facilitated new research and development for enhanced firefighting equipment. Over lunch, employees of Billings Flying Service told Gianforte they have seen their take-home pay increase because of the tax cuts.”

KFC in Great Falls:

“Gianforte talked with the owner, managers, and employees at a KFC on Central Avenue in Great Falls. The proprietor, who owns 10 other KFC locations throughout Montana, says he gave all employees pay raises, increased starting wages for new employees, and is planning renovations in many of his locations. He attributes the pay increases and investments to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.”

Visit with Big Sky Wholesale Seeds in Shelby:

“Gianforte visited Big Sky Wholesale Seeds, a seed production company in Shelby. Gianforte met with owners of the business to discuss the impact of tax reform as well as federal regulations. Gianforte also talked with employees who have seen their paychecks grow because of the tax cuts.”

CLICK HERE for a full recap