Kevin Bacon Did NOT Say “We Are Blessed To Have Donald Trump As President,” Despite Report
Truth rating: 0

By Andrew Shuster |

Kevin Bacon never said America is “blessed to have Donald Trump as our president,” despite a bogus article filled with fabricated quotes. The manufactured report comes from a website known for peddling fake news. Gossip Cop can set the record straight.

According to the unreliable blog Worldwide Politics, the actor went on a pro-Trump rant during an appearance on the ABC News show, “This Week With George Stephanopoulos.” The site quotes Bacon as having stated, “I honestly think that we are blessed to have [Trump] as President. He is the only one who can take care of all this mess. The president is smart and powerful. I think he attacks anyone he perceives or believes is attacking him or the country.”

The untrustworthy outlet further quotes the actor as saying, “[Trump] should be given the Medal of Freedom for talking his mind in such a bold, honest, and straightforward manner. The reality is that people need to start fighting for this country together with him instead of criticizing and wasting their time on stupid things.” Bacon allegedly added, “He has no speechwriters, no editing, no nothing. You just have to like the guy. Trump is not a politician. He does not need your money, and he will speak his mind, God damn it, whether you like it or not.”

However, the actor never made any of these comments, all of which were completely manufactured by the blog. For starters, Bacon only appeared on “This Week” once in 2007, and he never discussed Trump during the interview. Also, bogus blogs like Worldwide Politics have a habit of pretending that a particular celebrity is an unflinching supporter of the divisive president.

Gossip Cop recently busted the site Daily News For Americans for falsely claiming Julia Roberts called Trump “the best president in U.S. history.” We’ve debunked similarly phony reports about Brad Pitt, Jennifer Aniston and other A-listers praising the president. This latest article concerning Bacon’s supposed pro-Trump diatribe is equally fake.

Update: Shortly after we debunked the story, Bacon thanked Gossip Cop on Twitter for setting the record straight. The actor wrote, “Wow. Thanks for clearing this up. And just to be clear to those of you read or believed this original blog. There’s nothing about this presidents policy’s that I agree with. And nothing about his character that I admire.”