Governor Cuomo Announces Gap, Inc. Opens Fishkill Distribution Center in "Pop-Up" Facility
"From day one, New York stood with Gap Inc. and worked tirelessly with state and local leaders to ensure more than 1,200 workers remained employed at the Fishkill distribution facility," Governor Cuomo said. "That’s what New Yorkers do – we work together, we grow together and we succeed together, and I commend the Mid-Hudson Valley communities for supporting each other through this hardship. We are honored to have Gap reopen, rebuild and remain in this state and look forward to the company's success this holiday season and in the coming years."



"We are proud to have been a part of the Fishkill community for the last 16 years," said Jim Young, Vice President and Regional General Manager of Distribution Operations for Gap Inc.’s Global Supply Chain Team. "As we look ahead to rebuilding better and stronger than before, this grant will help accelerate our recovery efforts. We appreciate the incredible support from Governor Cuomo, the Empire State Development Corporation, and local leaders, and we look forward to our continued partnership. On behalf of our employees here in Fishkill and the customers we serve, thank you."

On August 30, the morning after the fire, Empire State Development and the State Department of Labor began working with Gap Inc. to assess damage, determine immediate needs, and ensure all workers remained employed at the Fishkill facility. During this time, Gap Inc. has continued to provide all employees full wages and benefits and not one employee was let go as a result of the fire. In addition, of the more than 1,200 employees affected by the fire, approximately 400 returned to work just one week after the devastating event.



In the days and weeks that followed, the State worked with Gap officials to determine next steps for the company, its employees and the Fishkill community. After weighing relocation options, Gap Inc. decided to remain in New York State, building a temporary “pop up” facility with $2.65 million in state funding. The facility, which opened on October 10, allowed the remaining 900 employees to return to work and additional seasonal employees to be hired in time for the holiday shopping season.