Governor Cuomo Announces Genesee Brewery Expansion to Create 128 Jobs in Rochester
“Companies like North American Breweries are growing New York’s thriving beverage industry,” said Empire State Development President, CEO & Commissioner Howard Zemsky. “Thanks to the Governor’s commitment we are seeing beverage producers take their businesses to the next level, grow their workforces and fuel economic opportunities statewide.”



“Over the past six years, North American Breweries has invested $70 million in Genesee, creating 250 new jobs in the beer industry. Genesee has been a big part of the brewing renaissance in Rochester,” said North American Breweries CEO Kris Sirchio. “As the oldest brewery in New York State, Genesee has a great opportunity to help Rochester become a premier destination for beer and brewing. With all the great breweries in Western New York, there is no better time than now to create an Eco-Brewery District that will attract hundreds of thousands of visitors each year while generating new jobs and investment in the Northeast district of Rochester. “



Assemblyman Joseph Morelle said, “This investment in the Genesee Brewery will grow an important cornerstone of our community and ensure that our craft beverage industry continues to thrive right here in Rochester. I thank Governor Cuomo for signing this important piece of legislation today and for his commitment to building a brighter future for the Finger Lakes region. This is the perfect example of what we can achieve when the state and private sector work together and I look forward to seeing our progress develop in the years to come.”



Senator Joe Robach said, “From agriculture to photonics, the Rochester region is home to lucrative industries that form the backbone of our economy and today we are making an important investment that will continue building on our assets. The investment in Genesee Brewery will generate new opportunities for our region by creating jobs, attracting private investment and solidifying Rochester’s role as an important craft beverage producer. I am proud to work with Governor Cuomo to continue generating opportunities for our region’s businesses and our workforce and I thank him for signing this legislation today.”



“North American Breweries’ continued dedication to Rochester and the High Falls District is evident with today’s Eco-Brewery expansion announcement,” said Finger Lakes Regional Economic Development Council Co-Chairs, Monroe Community College President Anne Kress and Wegmans Food Markets CEO Danny Wegman. “Another exciting component of today’s announcement is that NAB, one of our City’s oldest employers, has become the first private company to commit to hiring people impacted by poverty since Governor Cuomo created the Rochester Anti-Poverty Task Force last year. Using URI funding to incentivize these kind of job commitments is essential to creating the “Pathways to Prosperity” at the heart of the poverty reduction goal in the Finger Lakes Forward URI strategic plan.”



Rochester Mayor Lovely Warren said, “We are placing Rochester on a path toward success by investing in our assets to help businesses grow, to create more jobs, safer and more vibrant neighborhoods and better educational opportunities. In doing so we’ve had a great partner in Governor Cuomo. Today’s investment in the Genesee Brewery is a manifestation of the Governor’s commitment to helping industries in our community and upstate New York thrive. The Rochester region is home to some of the leading producers of beer, wine and spirits, and this landmark legislation will help create more opportunities for these businesses and allow them to create more jobs and build on the growth we’ve seen in recent years.”