Governor Cuomo Announces Feldmeier Equipment Breaks Ground on New Manufacturing Facility in Herkimer County and Creates 80 Jobs
Governor Andrew M. Cuomo today announced that Feldmeier Equipment, Inc., an industry leader in the fabrication of stainless steel storage and processing equipment, has broken ground in Little Falls, Herkimer County, marking the start of construction on a significant expansion of the companys operations. Feldmeiers plans include building a new 50,000 square foot manufacturing facility as well as upgrading machinery and equipment at their Syracuse headquarters and existing Little Falls facility together these projects will allow the company to be more competitive and help them maintain a strong presence in the Northeast. The expansion will result in the creation of 80 new jobs and the retention of nearly 300 existing jobs in New York State.

This expansion of Feldmeier Equipment, Inc. is yet another testament to the rise of Upstate New York as a destination for growth in the private sector, Governor Cuomo said. The creation of this new facility and added investment in the companys existing local operations not only support the creation and retention of nearly 400 jobs, but it also furthers the commitment that this family-run company has made to New York State and our other industries such as breweries and yogurt producers. I am pleased to welcome the next chapter of the Feldmeier familys business right here in the Mohawk Valley.

The family-owned operation began in 1952 when its founder, Robert H. Feldmeier, developed the worlds first Triple Tube Heat Exchanger. Since then, a long list of innovative and patented ideas led Feldmeier to emerge as an industry leader for stainless steel processing equipment. Today, the company is recognized as a global leader within the pharmaceutical, biotech, cosmetic, food, and dairy industries with five state-of-the-art facilities located throughout the U.S. The Feldmeier family has remained active in the management of the company for over 60 years and has never once laid off an employee. Robert Feldmeier moved the first shovel-load of dirt today to kick off this latest expansion.

Robert H. Feldmeier, Sr., Founder of Feldmeier Equipment, Inc. said, Growing up in Little Falls, I have always considered it home. My father worked in this town, my business career started here. It is an important part of Feldmeiers history and future. We want to see it grow and prosper.

Robert H. Feldmeier, Jr., President of Feldmeier Equipment, Inc. said, We are excited to be staying and expanding here in Little Falls and are very appreciative of the State and local officials who worked hard to keep us here to continue our long tradition of manufacturing in the Mohawk Valley. As family run business, we have a long history in Upstate New York and are committed to keeping it that way. Today we break ground and soon well be up and running, manufacturing the products that have brought jobs and economic growth to our communities for the last 60 years.

The $8 million project consists of constructing and equipping a new 50,000-square-foot manufacturing facility in the Riverside Industrial Parkway, as well as additional investment in machinery and equipment at Feldmeiers existing facilities in Little Falls and Syracuse. ESD is supporting the expansion and upgrades with a total investment of $750,000 through the combination of a capital grant ($200,000) and Excelsior Jobs Program tax credits ($550,000). Both incentives are performance-based and tied to project completion and job creation commitments. ESDs assistance was necessary in order to keep the expansion in New York State as the company also has manufacturing facilities in Alabama, Iowa and Nevada. The Herkimer County location specifically was competing with sites in both Iowa and Nevada for this expansion; 190 existing jobs in New York were at risk if this project located at either out of state site.

Empire State Development President, CEO & Commissioner Kenneth Adams said, This is a great day for the City of Little Falls and the Mohawk Valley as this home-grown industry leader is staying true to their roots by expanding and creating vital new jobs here in upstate New York. Feldmeier Equipments decision to build a new manufacturing facility provides further proof that Governor Cuomos efforts to improve the business climate are paying off. Congratulations to Robert Feldmeier and the entire Feldmeier family on todays milestone, and I am looking forward to seeing the new facility up and running, and creating jobs, in Little Falls.

Additionally, the expansion project supports key strategies in the Mohawk Valley Regional Economic Development Councils Strategic Plan, including enhancing regional concentrations in materials processing and supporting the agriculture and food processing concentration in the Mohawk Valley. As a manufacturer of stainless steel storage and processing equipment, Feldmeiers expansion supports the food and beverage industries including New York companies such as Chobani, FAGE, Matt Brewing and Brooklyn Brewery.

Senator James Seward said, Feldmeier Equipments ability to succeed and grow has a direct impact on the success of our regional economy and the future well-being for hundreds of families. This expansion will help preserve and build upon our rich Mohawk Valley manufacturing tradition. I applaud Empire State Development and Commissioner Kenneth Adams for recognizing the importance of this business expansion and advancing this partnership.

Mayor of Little Falls Robert J. Peters, Sr. said, We are delighted that Feldmeier has decided not only stay but expand here in Little Falls. This project will help drive our citys economy forward and attract more economic development and industry to the business park. The creation and retention of jobs will support our tax base, which is vital to keep our city growing. I thank the Feldmeier family for partnering with the City of Little Falls and New York State as they continue to do what they do best manufacture products and employ New Yorkers.

Jim Bono, Chairman, Herkimer County Legislature said, Its great to see this local, industry leading company, which has been a cornerstone in the community, expand and bring much-needed new jobs to the area. We are very excited as we worked closely with the company and State to help accommodate their needs, and it has been a great partnership. On behalf of Herkimer County, congratulations to the Feldmeier family for breaking ground today on a key piece of Little Falls future.

Mark Feane, Executive Director, Herkimer County IDA said, First and foremost, I would like to congratulate Feldmeier on their decision to expand here in Herkimer County and the City of Little Falls. This is more good news for the Mohawk Valley and Upstate New York. We extend our thanks to Empire State Development and the State for their help in bringing this project to fruition. We are fortunate the Feldmeier family chose to expand here as there were other sites and states under consideration, but the new jobs are coming here to Herkimer.