Gov. Wolf Discusses Benefits of Medicaid Expansion, ACA
Governor Wolf Discusses Benefits of Medicaid Expansion and ACA in Response to Request from Majority Leader McCarthy

December 20, 2016

Harrisburg, PA – Today, Governor Wolf responded to Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy’s request for input regarding the health care system in Pennsylvania. Governor Wolf outlined the importance of ensuring that Pennsylvanians continue to have access to affordable, quality health insurance and discussed how Medicaid expansion and the Affordable Care Act have benefitted the people of Pennsylvania. Governor Wolf also sent letters to the Pennsylvania delegation highlighting the specific benefit these programs have had in congressional districts.

“In Pennsylvania, an additional 670,000 Pennsylvanians received health insurance through Medicaid expansion,” said Governor Tom Wolf. “Medicaid expansion has also served as a critical resource for Pennsylvanians who are suffering from a substance use disorder as our commonwealth battles an unprecedented prescription drug and heroin public health crisis. Through Medicaid expansion, almost 63,000 newly eligible Medicaid enrollees were able to access drug and alcohol treatment that is critical to helping patients’ recovery.”

“Americans need real, meaningful health care coverage. They need options that are affordable, easy to understand, responsive to their needs, and available immediately – with no lapse in coverage. They need leadership and compassion and solutions – and together, we can provide them with all of those things. I look forward to future conversations. Thank you again for the opportunity to contribute to this incredibly important dialogue.”

Governor Wolf highlighted the following statistics:

After expanding Medicaid in February 2015, more than 670,000 Pennsylvanians have enrolled in HealthChoices , Pennsylvania’s mandatory managed care Medicaid program.

, Pennsylvania’s mandatory managed care Medicaid program. U.S. Census data shows that the commonwealth’s uninsured rate has dropped from 10.2 percent in 2010 to 6.4 percent in 2015.

from 10.2 percent in 2010 to 6.4 percent in 2015. In the first year of Pennsylvania’s Medicaid expansion, almost 63,000 newly eligible Medicaid enrollees accessed drug and alcohol treatment . This coverage is essential in battling the opioid and heroin public health crisis that took over 3,500 lives in Pennsylvania in 2015.

. This coverage is essential in battling the opioid and heroin public health crisis that took over 3,500 lives in Pennsylvania in 2015. In 2016, more than 439,000 Pennsylvanians had selected health coverage through the Marketplace. Seventy six percent of those Pennsylvanians received subsidies to make those plans more affordable and 60 percent of those enrollees could obtain coverage for $100 or less after tax credits.

To read the full letter, click here.

To view one of the letters Governor Wolf sent to the Pennsylvania delegation, click here.

Like Governor Tom Wolf on Facebook: Facebook.com/GovernorWolf