GovTrack.us tracks the United States Congress and helps Americans participate in their national legislature.

We publish the status of federal legislation, information about your representative and senators in Congress including voting records, and original research on legislation and congressional oversight & investigations.

Contact Us

What you can do on GovTrack

Use GovTrack to track bills for updates by getting alerts and understand the broader context of legislation through our statistical analyses. Read our original research on GovTrack Insider and in our congressional misconduct database.

You can read more about the data we have, including how you can get it. GovTrack was the first to create comprehensive open data about Congress, and we have successfully lobbied Congress to make more and better legislative information available to the public.

Who we are

GovTrack.us is a project of Civic Impulse, LLC, a completely independent entity which is wholly owned by its operator and receives no funding in any form from outside organizations. We have no financers, sponsors, investors, or partners, nor do we have any affiliation or relationship (financial or otherwise) with any political party, government agency, or any other outside group or persons.

We pay our operating costs through our advertising revenue (read our ad policy) and crowdfunding (support us on Patreon; see our 2015 project on Kickstarter).

We’re a small organization with four part-time staff members, who are:

Joshua Tauberer, president Joshua is the founder of GovTrack.us. He created GovTrack initially as a hobby in 2004. He is a software developer and entrepreneur that has also been a contractor to the United States Congress and the District of Columbia municipal government on improving the publication process of the law, and he is a member of the Open Government Advisory Group to the DC mayor. He holds a Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania. Jesse Rifkin, staff writer Jesse has been a staff writer for GovTrack Insider since 2016, focusing primarily on bill summaries. His writings on politics and other subjects have been published in The Washington Post, Politico Magazine, Los Angeles Times, USA Today, Daily Beast, HuffPost Politics, Hartford Courant, and Billboard. Jesse's favorite pieces he's written for GovTrack Insider are: Almost Unanimous, where we asked why these lone dissenters withheld their votes on bills, Will the Constitution ever be amended again?, where we asked the man behind the Twenty-Seventh Amendment, and What the first Congress of 1789 can teach the Congress of 2017. Ben Hammer, external relations associate Ben is our external relations associate. He has assisted managing site content and fundraising for three years, working to find new partnerships, projects, and data. Some of his latest work includes adding congressional scorecards to Member pages and statements from legislative stakeholders to bill pages. He has a B.A. in philosophy from Carnegie Mellon University. Outside of work Ben is working on a short graphic novel about sentient candles. Amy West, research & communications manager Amy has been the GovTrack research and communications manager since February 2017 when she realized she didn't want to retire quite so early after all. She edits GovTrack Insider articles, posts to GovTrack social media and developed the Congressional Misconduct Database. From 1999-2015, she was a librarian at the University of Minnesota Libraries specializing in government publications and government data.

Help us open government

Join the movement to make our government more open and effective. Here are some ideas: