Summary of H.R. 2642 (113th): Agriculture Reform, Food, and Jobs Act of 2013
Section1112 -

Directs the Secretary of Agriculture (USDA) (the Secretary in this bill unless otherwise indicated) to notify farm owners regarding their opportunity to elect to:

retain base acres, including generic base acres; or reallocate any base acres other than generic base acres for covered commodities, as in effect on September 30, 2013, among covered commodities planted on the farm during the 2009-2012 crop years. Deems a non-electing farm owner to have elected to retain base acres, including generic acres.

Applies such election, or deemed election, to all covered commodities on a farm.

Sets forth the reallocation formula. Directs the Secretary to provide for a farm's base acreage adjustment for covered commodities if: (1) a conservation reserve contract expires or is voluntarily terminated, (2) cropland is released from conservation reserve contract coverage, or (3) the producer has eligible oilseed acreage.

Requires a farm owner, for the crop year in which a base acres adjustment is first made, to elect to receive either price loss coverage (PLC) or agriculture risk coverage (ARC) for the acreage added to the farm, or a prorated payment under the conservation reserve contract.

Requires the Secretary to reduce the base acres for one or more covered commodities on a farm if the sum of the base acres and certain other conservation and oilseed acreage exceeds the farm's actual cropland acreage. Exempts double-cropped acreage from such requirement. Permits the farm owner to select the base acres to be reduced.

Authorizes a farm owner to reduce the base acres for any covered commodity, whose reduction shall be permanent.

Directs the Secretary to reduce a farm's base acres for land that has been subdivided and developed for multiple residential units or other nonfarming uses if the size of the tracts and the density of the subdivision is such that the land is unlikely to return to the previous agricultural use, unless it: (1) remains devoted to commercial agricultural production, or (2) is likely to be returned to the previous agricultural use.