Alan Grayson’s 2014 Report Card from GovTrack.us
Keep in mind that there are many important aspects of being a legislator besides what can be measured, such as constituent services and performing oversight of the executive branch, which aren’t reflected here.

A higher or lower number below doesn’t necessarily make this legislator any better or worse, or more or less effective, than other Members of Congress. We present these statistics for you to understand the quantitative aspects of Grayson’s legislative career and make your own judgements based on what activities you think are important.

These special statistics cover Grayson’s record during the 113 th Congress (Jan 3, 2013-Jan 2, 2015) and compare him to other representatives also serving at the end of the session. Last updated on Jan 12, 2015. Although Rep. Suzan DelBene [D-WA1], Rep. Thomas Massie [R-KY4], Rep. Donald Payne [D-NJ10], and Sen. Brian Schatz [D-HI] served in the 112th Congress, they took office within the last two months of the 112th Congress and here are grouped with other freshmen for the 113th Congress.

Grayson held a leadership position on 0 committees and 0 subcommittees, as either a chair (majority party) or ranking member (minority party), at the end of the session. View Grayson’s Profile »

1 of Grayson’s bills and resolutions in the 113th Congress had a cosponsor who was a chair or ranking member of a committee that the bill was referred to. Getting support from committee leaders on relevant committees is a crucial step in moving legislation forward.

Grayson cosponsored 261 bills and resolutions introduced by other Members of Congress. Cosponsorship shows a willingness to work with others to advance policy goals. View Cosponsored Bills »

A bill or joint resolution is considered enacted if it or an exactly identical bill to it is enacted as law. We only consider bills that the legislator was the primary sponsor of. While a legislator may lay claim to authoring other bills that became law, such as through incorporation into larger bills, these cases are difficult for us to track quantitatively.

Grayson introduced 0 bills that became law in the 113th Congress. Keep in mind that it takes a law to repeal a law. Very few bills ever become law.

The Speaker of the House is not included in this statistic because according to current House rules , the Speaker of the House is not required to vote in “ordinary legislative proceedings, and the delegates from the five island territories and the District of Columbia are also not included because they were not elligible to vote in any roll call votes.

Most bills and resolutions languish in committee without any action. Grayson introduced 2 bills in the 113th Congress that got past committee and to the floor for consideration.

The House and Senate often work on the same issue simultaneously by introducing companion bills in each chamber. 0 of Grayson’s bills and resolutions had a companion bill in the Senate. Working with a sponsor in the other chamber makes a bill more likely to be passed by both the House and Senate.

GovTrack looked at whether Grayson supported any of 12 government transparency, accountability, and effectiveness bills in the House that we identified in this session. We gave Grayson 0 points, based on one point for cosponsoring and three points for sponsoring any of these bills.

Only Democratic and Republican Members of Congress who cosponsored more than 10 bills and resolutions are included in this statistic.

In this era of partisanship, it is encouraging to see Members of Congress working across the aisle. Of the 261 bills that Grayson cosponsored, 31% were introduced by a legislator who was not a Democrat. View Cosponsored Bills »

Grayson’s bills and resolutions had 35 cosponsors in the 113th Congress. Securing cosponsors is an important part of getting support for a bill, although having more cosponsors does not always mean a bill will get a vote. View Bills »

For more, see our methodology . Note that because on this page only legislative activity in the 113th Congress is considered, the leadership score here may differ from Grayson’s score elsewhere on GovTrack.

Our unique leadership analysis looks at who is cosponsoring whose bills. A higher score shows a greater ability to get cosponsors on bills.

Only Members of Congress who sponsored more than 10 bills and resolutions are included in this statistic.

Grayson tends to gather cosponsors only on one side of the aisle. 1% of Grayson’s 96 bills and resolutions had both a Democratic cosponsor and a Republican cosponsor in the 113th Congress.

Additional Notes

The Speaker’s Votes: Missed votes are not computed for the Speaker of the House. According to current House rules, the Speaker of the House is not required to vote in “ordinary legislative proceedings.” In practice this means the Speaker of the House rarely votes but is not considered absent.

Leadership/Ideology: The leadership and ideology scores are not displayed for Members of Congress who introduced fewer than 10 bills, or, for ideology, for Members of Congress that have a low leadership score, as there is usually not enough data in these cases to compute reliable leadership and ideology statistics.

Missing Bills: We exclude bills from some statistics where the sponsor’s original intent is not in the final bill because the bill’s text was replaced in whole with unrelated provisions (i.e. it became a vehicle for passage of unrelated provisions).

Ranking Members (RkMembs): The chair of a committee is always selected from the political party that holds the most seats in the chamber, called the “majority party”. The “ranking member” (sometimes “RkMembs”) is the title given to the senior-most member of the committee not in the majority party.

Freshmen/Sophomores: Freshmen and sophomores are Members of Congress whose first term (in the same chamber at the end of the 113th Congress) was the 113th Congress (freshmen) or 112th (sophomores). Members of Congress who took office within the last few months of a Congress are considered freshmen in the next Congress as well.