Alan Grayson Report Card 2013
For more, see our methodology . Note that because on this page only legislative activity in 2013 is considered, the leadership score here may differ from Grayson’s score elsewhere on GovTrack.

Our unique leadership analysis looks at who is cosponsoring whose bills. A higher score shows a greater ability to get cosponsors on bills.

The Speaker of the House is not included in this statistic (see the notes at the very bottom of the page for why), and the delegates from the five island territories and the District of Columbia are also not included because they were not elligible to vote in any roll call votes.

Most bills and resolutions languish in committee without any action. Grayson introduced 0 bills and resolutions in 2013 that got a committee vote sending it to the floor for further consideration.

0 of Grayson’s bills and resolutions in 2013 had a cosponsor who was a chair or ranking member of a committee that the bill was referred to. Getting support from committee leaders on relevant committees is a crucial step in moving legislation forward.

Grayson held a leadership position on 0 committees and 0 subcommittees, as either a chair (majority party) or ranking member (minority party), at the end of the session. For comparison to other Members of Congress, we assigned a score giving five points for each full committee leadership position and one point for each subcommittee leadership position. View Grayson’s Profile »

Companion bills are those that are identified as “identical” by Congress’s Congressional Research Service.

The House and Senate often work on the same issue simultaneously by introducing companion bills in each chamber. 0 of Grayson’s bills and resolutions had a companion bill in the Senate. Working with a sponsor in the other chamber makes a bill more likely to be passed by both the House and Senate.

We only count enacted bills that the legislator was the primary sponsor of. While a legislator may lay claim to authoring other bills that became law, such as through companion bills or incorporation into larger bills, these cases are difficult for us to track quantitatively.

Grayson introduced 0 bills that became law in 2013. Keep in mind that it takes a law to repeal a law. Very few bills ever become law. View Enacted Bills »

GovTrack looked at whether Grayson supported any of 12 government transparency bills in the House that we identified in this session. We gave Grayson 0 points, based on one point for cosponsoring and three points for sponsoring any of these bills.

Notes

The statistics on this page were last updated on Dec 1, 2014. On Dec. 1, 2014, the statistics were updated to remove Sen. Schatz from the list of Senate sophomores. Schatz only served for several days in the preceding Congress.

Legislative Year: “2013” refers to the legislative year that began on Jan 3, 2013 and ended on Dec 26, 2013. We only compare each legislator to other Members of Congress serving in the same chamber on Dec 26, 2013.

Ranking Members (RkMembs): The chair of a committee is always selected from the political party that holds the most seats in the chamber, called the “majority party”. The “ranking member” (sometimes “RkMembs”) is the title given to the senior-most member of the committee not in the majority party.

Safe vs Competitive: Safe and competitive House seats are as listed in the Cook Political Report as of December 18, 2013.

Freshmen/Sophomores: Freshmen and sophomores refer to Members of Congress that did not serve in the previous Congress or that served no earlier than the previous Congress, respectively, and in the same chamber as they were at the end of 2013.

Joint Resolutions: When counting laws, we also include joint resolutions that are enacted.

Speaker’s Votes: Missed votes are not computed for the Speaker of the House. According to current House rules, the Speaker of the House is not required to vote in “ordinary legislative proceedings.” In practice this means the Speaker of the House rarely votes but is not considered absent.

Bipartisan Bills: When computing statistics for Writing Bipartisan Bills, we included only Members of Congress who sponsored more than 10 bills. Similarly for Joining Bipartisan Bills, we included Members of Congress who cosponsored more than 10 bills.

Leadership/Ideology: The leadership and ideology scores are not displayed for Members of Congress who introduced fewer than 10 bills, or, for ideology, for Members of Congress that have a low leadership score, as there is usually not enough data in these cases to compute reliable leadership and ideology statistics.

Transparency Bills: We identified 20 bills (12 House bills and 8 Senate bills) that improve access to government records and are on subjects that we believe are non-partisan.