Leonard Lance’s 2017 Report Card from GovTrack.us
Ranked most conservative compared to New Jersey Delegation Our unique ideology analysis assigns a score to Members of Congress according to their legislative behavior by how similar the pattern of bills and resolutions they cosponsor are to other Members of Congress. For more, see our methodology. Note that because on this page only legislative activity in 2017 is considered, the ideology score here may differ from Lance’s score elsewhere on GovTrack. Compare to all New Jersey Delegation (92nd percentile); House Republicans (14th percentile); All Representatives (52nd percentile).

Ranked the 2nd top leader compared to New Jersey Delegation Our unique leadership analysis looks at who is cosponsoring whose bills. A higher score shows a greater ability to get cosponsors on bills. For more, see our methodology. Note that because on this page only legislative activity in 2017 is considered, the leadership score here may differ from Lance’s score elsewhere on GovTrack. Compare to all New Jersey Delegation (83rd percentile); House Republicans (57th percentile); All Representatives (66th percentile).

Introduced the 3rd most bills compared to New Jersey Delegation Lance introduced 16 bills and resolutions in 2017. View Bills » Compare to all New Jersey Delegation (75th percentile); House Republicans (73rd percentile); All Representatives (72nd percentile).

Got their bills out of committee the 3rd least often compared to New Jersey Delegation (tied with 1 other) Most bills and resolutions languish in committee without any action. Lance introduced 1 bill in 2017 that got past committee and to the floor for consideration. Those bills were: H.R. 2815: To designate the facility of ... Compare to all New Jersey Delegation (17th percentile); House Republicans (13th percentile); All Representatives (29th percentile).

Held the 4th fewest committee positions compared to New Jersey Delegation (tied with 4 others) Lance held a leadership position on 0 committees and 1 subcommittee, as either a chair (majority party) or ranking member (minority party), at the end of the session. For comparison to other Members of Congress, we assigned a score giving five points for each full committee leadership position and one point for each subcommittee leadership position. View Lance’s Profile » Compare to all New Jersey Delegation (25th percentile); House Republicans (37th percentile); All Representatives (39th percentile).

Joined bipartisan bills the 12th most often compared to House Republicans In this era of partisanship, it is encouraging to see Members of Congress working across the aisle. Of the 182 bills that Lance cosponsored, 30% were introduced by a legislator who was not a Republican. View Cosponsored Bills » Compare to all New Jersey Delegation (50th percentile); House Republicans (95th percentile); All Representatives (79th percentile). Only Democratic and Republican Members of Congress who cosponsored more than 10 bills and resolutions are included in this statistic.

Was 31st most present in votes compared to All Representatives (tied with 30 others) Lance missed 0.3% of votes (2 of 710 votes) in 2017. View Lance’s Profile » Compare to all New Jersey Delegation (17th percentile); All Representatives (7th percentile). The Speaker of the House is not included in this statistic because according to current House rules, the Speaker of the House is not required to vote in “ordinary legislative proceedings, and the delegates from the five island territories and the District of Columbia are also not included because they were not elligible to vote in any roll call votes.

Cosponsored the 55th most bills compared to House Republicans (tied with 1 other) Lance cosponsored 182 bills and resolutions introduced by other Members of Congress. Cosponsorship shows a willingness to work with others to advance policy goals. View Cosponsored Bills » Compare to all New Jersey Delegation (42nd percentile); House Republicans (77th percentile); All Representatives (49th percentile).

Got bipartisan cosponsors on the 52nd most bills compared to All Representatives (tied with 13 others) In this era of partisanship, it is important to see Members of Congress working across the aisle. 9 of Lance’s 16 bills and resolutions had both a Democratic cosponsor and a Republican cosponsor in 2017. Compare to all New Jersey Delegation (83rd percentile); House Republicans (82nd percentile); All Representatives (85th percentile).

Cosponsors Lance’s bills and resolutions had 181 cosponsors in 2017. Securing cosponsors is an important part of getting support for a bill, although having more cosponsors does not always mean a bill will get a vote. View Bills » Compare to all New Jersey Delegation (58th percentile); House Republicans (66th percentile); All Representatives (60th percentile).