Heidi Heitkamp’s 2017 Report Card from GovTrack.us
Ranked 4th most conservative compared to Senate Democrats Our unique ideology analysis assigns a score to Members of Congress according to their legislative behavior by how similar the pattern of bills and resolutions they cosponsor are to other Members of Congress. For more, see our methodology. Note that because on this page only legislative activity in 2017 is considered, the ideology score here may differ from Heitkamp’s score elsewhere on GovTrack. Compare to all Senate Democrats (91st percentile); All Senators (45th percentile).

Joined bipartisan bills the 6th most often compared to All Senators In this era of partisanship, it is encouraging to see Members of Congress working across the aisle. Of the 143 bills that Heitkamp cosponsored, 51% were introduced by a legislator who was not a Democrat. View Cosponsored Bills » Compare to all Senate Democrats (91st percentile); All Senators (94th percentile). Only Democratic and Republican Members of Congress who cosponsored more than 10 bills and resolutions are included in this statistic.

Cosponsored the 8th fewest bills compared to Senate Democrats Heitkamp cosponsored 143 bills and resolutions introduced by other Members of Congress. Cosponsorship shows a willingness to work with others to advance policy goals. View Cosponsored Bills » Compare to all Senate Democrats (15th percentile); All Senators (42nd percentile).

Was 24th most present in votes compared to All Senators (tied with 18 others) Heitkamp missed 0.3% of votes (1 of 325 votes) in 2017. View Heitkamp’s Profile » Compare to all All Senators (23rd percentile).

Bills Introduced Heitkamp introduced 24 bills and resolutions in 2017. View Bills » Compare to all Senate Democrats (30th percentile); All Senators (42nd percentile).

Government Transparency GovTrack looked at whether Heitkamp supported any of 8 government transparency, accountability, and effectiveness bills in the Senate that we identified in this session. We gave Heitkamp 0 points, based on one point for cosponsoring and three points for sponsoring any of these bills. Compare to all Senate Democrats (0th percentile); All Senators (0th percentile).

Powerful Cosponsors 1 of Heitkamp’s bills and resolutions in 2017 had a cosponsor who was a chair or ranking member of a committee that the bill was referred to. Getting support from committee leaders on relevant committees is a crucial step in moving legislation forward. Those bills were: S.Res. 203: A resolution designating the month ... Compare to all Senate Democrats (2nd percentile); All Senators (8th percentile).

Writing Bipartisan Bills In this era of partisanship, it is important to see Members of Congress working across the aisle. 12 of Heitkamp’s 24 bills and resolutions had both a Democratic cosponsor and a Republican cosponsor in 2017. Compare to all Senate Democrats (63rd percentile); All Senators (70th percentile).

Leadership Score Our unique leadership analysis looks at who is cosponsoring whose bills. A higher score shows a greater ability to get cosponsors on bills. For more, see our methodology. Note that because on this page only legislative activity in 2017 is considered, the leadership score here may differ from Heitkamp’s score elsewhere on GovTrack. Compare to all Senate Democrats (54th percentile); All Senators (53rd percentile).

Cosponsors Heitkamp’s bills and resolutions had 168 cosponsors in 2017. Securing cosponsors is an important part of getting support for a bill, although having more cosponsors does not always mean a bill will get a vote. View Bills » Compare to all Senate Democrats (48th percentile); All Senators (62nd percentile).

Laws Enacted Heitkamp introduced 0 bills that became law, including via incorporation into other measures, in 2017. Keep in mind that it takes a law to repeal a law. Very few bills ever become law. Compare to all Senate Democrats (0th percentile); All Senators (0th percentile). The legislator must be the primary sponsor of the bill or joint resolution that was enacted or the primary sponsor of a bill or joint resolution for which at least about one third of its text was incorporated into another bill or joint resolution that was enacted as law, as determined by an automated analysis. While a legislator may lay claim to authoring other bills that became law, these cases are difficult for us to track quantitatively. We also exclude bills where the sponsor’s original intent is not in the final bill.