- MEXICO CITY POLICY: EFFECTS OF RESTRICTIONS ON INTERNATIONAL FAMILY PLANNING FUNDING
[Senate Hearing 107-165] [From the U.S. Government Printing Office] S. Hrg. 107-165 MEXICO CITY POLICY: EFFECTS OF RESTRICTIONS ON INTERNATIONAL FAMILY PLANNING FUNDING ======================================================================= HEARING BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS UNITED STATES SENATE ONE HUNDRED SEVENTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION __________ JULY 19, 2001 __________ Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Relations Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.access.gpo.gov/congress/ senate _______ U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 75-604 WASHINGTON : 2002 ____________________________________________________________________________ For Sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office Internet: bookstore.gpr.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; (202) 512�091800 Fax: (202) 512�092250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402�090001 COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS JOSEPH R. BIDEN, Jr., Delaware, Chairman PAUL S. SARBANES, Maryland JESSE HELMS, North Carolina CHRISTOPHER J. DODD, Connecticut RICHARD G. LUGAR, Indiana JOHN F. KERRY, Massachusetts CHUCK HAGEL, Nebraska RUSSELL D. FEINGOLD, Wisconsin GORDON H. SMITH, Oregon PAUL D. WELLSTONE, Minnesota BILL FRIST, Tennessee BARBARA BOXER, California LINCOLN D. CHAFEE, Rhode Island ROBERT G. TORRICELLI, New Jersey GEORGE ALLEN, Virginia BILL NELSON, Florida SAM BROWNBACK, Kansas JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER IV, West MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming Virginia Edwin K. Hall, Staff Director Patricia A. McNerney, Republican Staff Director (ii) C O N T E N T S ---------- Page Aguirre, Dr. Maria Sophia, associate professor, Department of Economics and Business, Catholic University of America, Washington, DC................................................. 41 Prepared statement........................................... 45 Bista, Dr. Nirmal K., director general, Family Planning Association of Nepal, Kathmandu, Nepal......................... 36 Prepared statement........................................... 39 Boxer, Hon. Barbara, U.S. Senator from California, submissions for the record: ``Women in Prison in Nepal for Abortion''.................... 56 Sec. 2151b. Population Planning and Health Programs.......... 59 Cleaver, Kathy, director of Planning and Information for the Secretariat for Pro-Life Activities, U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops, Washington, DC............................... 56 Prepared statement........................................... 58 Eberstadt, Dr. Nicholas N., scholar, American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC...................................... 33 Galdos, Susana Silva, president, Movimiento Maneula Ramos, Lima, Peru........................................................... 28 Prepared statement........................................... 31 Hutchinson, Hon. Tim, U.S. Senator fron Arkansas................. 5 Kreczko, Alan J., Acting Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration, Department of State; accompanied by: Barbara Turner, Acting Assistant Administrator for Global Programs, USAID, Washington, DC..................... 13 Prepared statement........................................... 15 Lowey, Hon. Nita, U.S. Representative from New York.............. 10 Neier, Aryeh, president, Open Society Institute, New York, NY.... 60 Prepared statement........................................... 61 Pellegrom, Dr. Daniel E., president, Pathfinder International, Watertown, MA.................................................. 51 Prepared statement........................................... 53 Reid, Hon. Harry, U.S. Senator from Nevada....................... 3 Smith, Hon. Chris, U.S. Representative from New Jersey........... 6 Snowe, Hon. Olympia J., U.S. Senator from Maine, prepared statement...................................................... 9 (iii) MEXICO CITY POLICY: EFFECTS OF RESTRICTIONS ON INTERNATIONAL FAMILY PLANNING FUNDING ---------- THURSDAY, JULY 19, 2001 U.S. Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations, Washington, DC. The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m. in room SD-419, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Barbara Boxer, presiding. Present: Senators Boxer, Feingold, Chafee, and Allen. Senator Boxer. This meeting of the Foreign Relations Committee will come to order. And as we await the arrival of the first panel, which consists of several Senators and Representative Nita Lowey and Representative Chris Smith, we want to welcome Senator Hutchinson. And what I want to do, Senator, is give a brief opening statement and then call on you, and perhaps by that time we will be joined by our other colleagues. I want to welcome you all to this important hearing. Today the Senate Foreign Relations Committee meets to discuss the effects of the Mexico City Policy on international family planning. I want to thank Chairman Biden for supporting this hearing and for allowing me to chair it. Mexico City Policy is known as the global gag rule. It restricts foreign, non-governmental organizations that receive USAID family planning funds in three ways, and I'm going to identify the three ways that these restrictions play out. First, these non-governmental foreign organizations may not use their own money to provide legal abortion services. Second, they may not use their own money to advocate for changing the abortion laws in their own country. And third, they may not use their own money to provide full and accurate medical information about legal abortion services to their patients. As a result, many foreign, non-governmental organizations are being forced to either limit their services or simply to close their doors to women across the world, and we will hear witnesses who will so testify. I believe, and I know, that this will cause women and families increased misery and death. Among the witnesses who will testify before the committee this morning are the presidents of two foreign, non-governmental organizations who provide family planning services abroad. Ms. Susana Silva Galdos heads a non-governmental organization in Peru that is trying to work under the limitations imposed by the gag rule. Dr. Nirmal Bista works for a non-governmental organization in Nepal that has refused USAID funding because of the harsh restrictions of the gag rule. In fact, Ms. Galdos, our first witness from these foreign, non-governmental organizations, had to seek a temporary restraining order in Federal court yesterday in order to be allowed to testify before Congress on informing us of the abortion laws in Peru. It's almost unimaginable that a witness that a United States Senator asked to come here actually had to go to court to get a restraining order in order to speak in this, the freest and greatest country in the world. We were fortunate yesterday in that court case. The Bush administration conceded on this issue, so we're fortunate to have Ms. Galdos' uncensored testimony before the committee today. Why does the United States provide international family planning assistance? Because by providing family planning, counseling and care, by working to increase child survival rates, by improving maternal health and preventing the spread of HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases, we help save lives. As a result of USAID funds, more than 50 million couples in the developing world use family planning. In the last 30 years the percentage of couples using family planning has risen fivefold. Fewer than 10 percent of the couples used contraception in the 1960's. More than 50 percent of the couples use contraception today. So 50 percent of the couples are planning their families. But the need for family planning assistance continues because the other side of it is that 50 percent of the couples in the developing world still do not use contraception. As a result, approximately 78,000 women throughout the world die each year as a result of unsafe abortions, and at least one- fourth of all unsafe abortions in the world are to girls aged 15 to 19. The problem is growing. By the year 2015 contraceptive needs in developing countries will grow by more than 40 percent. Make no mistake, the Mexico City gag rule is restricting family planning, not abortions. International family planning assistance prevents abortions by helping women avoid unwanted pregnancies, and it saves the lives of thousands of poor women in developing countries who would otherwise die from unsafe abortions. For example, the recent increased availability of modern family planning methods has already resulted in a 33 percent drop in the abortion rate in Russia and a 60 percent reduction in Hungary. Family planning can significantly improve the health of these girls and young women by teaching them to postpone childbearing until the healthiest times in their lives, which would in turn prevent abortions. That is why I have introduced bipartisan legislation with Senators Snowe, Chafee, Collins, and 26 other co-sponsors to overturn the global gag rule. This legislation that we have introduced aims to overturn the Draconian restrictions on international family planning programs put into place by President Bush on January 22, one of his very first acts as President of these United States. Our bill will allow these organizations to continue to provide legal family planning services without needlessly restricting their funds. Our bill does nothing to change the fact that no U.S. funds can be used for abortion services. Let me repeat that. Since 1973 no U.S. funds may be used for abortion services. What our bill does is lift the restrictions on foreign organizations that would be unconstitutional here in the United States, and that's why the Bush administration was quick to just give in to us on our lawsuit. We would never gag people here. We couldn't do it. But they are doing it in foreign countries. I believe firmly that family planning organizations should not be prevented from using their own privately raised funds to provide legal abortion services, including counseling and referral, and these groups should not be forced to relinquish their right of free speech in order to receive U.S. funding, so I am very anxious to hear from all of our witnesses. I want to get an update on the other Senators. What do we know about the Congresswoman? They are on their way. There is one. We have our assistant majority leader. I am going to call on Senator Reid first because of his duties on the floor, and then right to you, Senator Hutchinson. Senator Reid, I just made my opening remarks. I know your time with us this morning is limited. I made the point that we believe that family planning saves women's lives, and I would be happy to hear from you. STATEMENT OF HON. HARRY REID, U.S. SENATOR FROM NEVADA Senator Reid. I appreciate very much Senator Hutchinson accommodating me. The Senate is in recess now, and I have to go back and finish the bill I am managing. I really appreciate the opportunity to testify here today. Senator Boxer. Could you speak a little louder into the microphone, Senator. Senator Reid. I appreciate the opportunity to speak here today. About 2 years ago I took a trip. One of the places that I went was Nepal, an unusual and beautiful country. Eighty-four percent of the people in Nepal have no electricity, but also, in addition to that, Nepal has one of the highest maternal mortality rates in the whole world. Over 1,000 women out of every 100,000 women in Nepal die from pregnancy related complications compared to our country of about six or seven of every 100,000 women. The Mexico City Policy, in my opinion, threatens efforts aimed at reducing mortality rates and improving access to basic health care in Nepal and all over the world. Nepal is only an example. Our support of international family plan programs literally means, in my opinion, the difference between the life or death of women in developing countries. At least one woman dies every minute of every day from causes related to pregnancy and childbirth. One woman dies every minute of every day from causes related to pregnancy and childbirth. This means, Madam Chair, that almost 600,000 women die every year from causes related to pregnancy. Family planning efforts prevent unintended pregnancies and save the lives of thousands of women each year. In addition to reducing maternal and infant mortality rates, family planning helps prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. The World Health Organization reports that about 6 million individuals, the majority of whom live in developing nations, become infected with HIV and that has gone up almost every year. At present in Africa we have 6,000 people dying every day from HIV-related diseases, every day, no weekends off, no vacations, every day. And that number is going up and will double, it's believed, within a dozen years. President Bush's rationale for imposing the gag rules is that he wants to decrease the number of abortions abroad. The last time the Mexico City Policy was in effect there was no reduction in the number of abortions. It only reduced access to quality health care services, increased unintended pregnancies, and actually increased the number of abortions. Research shows that the only way to reduce the need for abortion is to improve the family planning effort to decrease the number of unintended pregnancies. Access to contraception reduces the probability of having an abortion by 85 percent. Madam Chair, let me be clear, I do not support the use of one single taxpayer dollar to inform or promote abortion overseas. The law explicitly prohibits such activities for almost 30 years, since 1973. Instead, the legislation written by Senator Boxer, S. 367, supports family planning efforts that will reduce unintended pregnancies and reduce the need for abortions. Not only does the Mexico City Policy run counter to our country's commitment to women's health, it restricts foreign organizations in a way that would be unconstitutional in our own country. The Mexico City Policy violates a fundamental tenet of our democracy, freedom of speech. Exporting a policy that's unconstitutional at home is, in my opinion, the ultimate act of hypocrisy. Surely this is not the message we want to send to struggling democracies, which are looking to the United States as an example and for guidance. The bipartisan Global Democracy Promotion Act, S. 367, written by Senator Boxer, would ensure that United States foreign policy is consistent with American values, including free speech and medical ethics. I support this legislation, and I commend the Senator from California, Senator Boxer, for her efforts to protect and defend the rights of women around the world. Senator Boxer. Thank you, Senator. Your testimony is most welcome. I am extremely honored that you support the bill, and I want to also announce that Senator Daschle is as well a sponsor, as is Senator Chafee. Welcome, and I would be happy to hear from you at this time. Senator Chafee. Thank you, Senator Boxer. I am just listening to Senator Reid talk about what is constitutional in this country, and the hypocrisy of it is a main point. Senator Boxer. Thank you so very much. I want to welcome my former colleague in the House, Representative Chris Smith. Senator Hutchinson, we will turn to you. You and the Honorable Chris Smith will have differing views from ours, and we welcome you here to bring those views out. STATEMENT OF HON. TIM HUTCHINSON, U.S. SENATOR FROM ARKANSAS Senator Hutchinson. Thank you, Madam Chair, and members of the committee. I want to thank you for inviting me to testify on what truly is an important topic. President Bush's decision to re-implement the Mexico City Policy ensures that our legacy to the world does not include systematic violence against innocent, unborn children. It ensures that our citizens' tax dollars are used to enhance the lives of those in the developing world, not destroy them. In 1973 Senator Helms sponsored legislative language that prohibited U.S. monetary aid from being used to pay for abortions or involuntary sterilizations overseas. The intent of that legislation is clear. American taxpayers should not be compelled to fund overseas abortions. It sends a message to the world that the United States does not stand for the despair and hopelessness of attacking the most vulnerable group in the human race, the unborn. The Mexico City Policy builds on that goal by prohibiting aid to organizations that were involved in abortion activities. President Reagan took this step to prevent foreign, non- governmental organizations from playing accounting games that result in the use of American tax dollars to pay for abortions, so, while we can pretend that allowing these organizations, these NGOs, to perform abortions with their own money and use American taxpayers' dollars for family planning, that we all know is a fiscal fiction, that these funds are fungible, and that the intent of the Helms legislation back in 1973 was not to compel American taxpayers to subsidize something that they believe is morally wrong. And that is what is happening if you do not have the Mexico City Policy in place. Every American tax dollar that went to an abortion provider freed up another dollar to pay for more abortions. That's wrong. And I am very pleased that President Bush has reinstated this prohibition. As this committee hears testimony on this issue, I just want to make a few points clear from my perspective. This policy does not affect the amount of United States aid going to international family planning by one cent. For fiscal year 2002 President Bush is seeking over $400 million for population assistance, which is comparable to previous years. In fact, the policy will barely change the number of NGOs that receive the money. When the Mexico City language was re-instituted in fiscal year 2000, 448 groups accepted the policy. Only nine groups refused the policy. So family planning is not affected and to raise the specter of not having U.S. aid for family planning is, I believe, a red herring. Frankly, those NGOs that refused to abide by a simple and fair Mexico City language are precisely the kind of extremist organizations that the United States should not be associated with. As I said, 448 groups accepted the policy. Only nine groups refused the policy. Those groups that refused the policy truly have a radical abortion agenda, and our foreign aid money should not be to assist them. There are approximately 100 countries in the world--Madam Chairman, approximately 100 countries in the world still have strong pro-life laws. In the past, U.S. grantees like International Planned Parenthood Federation have actively lobbied some of those governments for anti-life legislation. The Mexico City Policy guarantees that our tax dollars will not be used to promote an agenda antithetical to millions of Americans. I had an opportunity to meet with a number of NGOs and individuals that have had firsthand experience with international development. I've been told about the need for more food, about the need for more medical supplies, about the need for safe drinking water, but not once have I heard about the need for more abortions. The Mexico City Policy will not affect the amount of funding that goes to HIV and AIDS at all. That totally remains the same, untouched. Madam Chairman, millions of Americans believe that abortion is fundamentally wrong and that it is the taking of a human life. Madam Chairman, you and I may disagree on that. In fact, our society is and will continue to be deeply divided over this issue. But one point in which there has been broad agreement in the past has been that Americans who believe it is wrong should not be forced by our government to subsidize a practice that is fundamentally against their deepest-held religious views. Pro-choice people often make the argument to me, as a pro- lifer, ``It's fine for you to be pro-life, but don't impose your pro-life views on me in law.'' And, yet, that is precisely what the pro-choice individual is doing in opposing the Mexico City Policy. They are forcing me and millions who share my deep convictions on the sanctity of human life to violate our own beliefs and convictions by subsidizing that practice with my tax dollars in a foreign country. No American should be compelled to participate in an event which they believe is so wrong. So, Madam Chairman, I, with deepest respect for you, must oppose your legislation, and I thank you for the opportunity to express my viewpoint. Senator Boxer. Senator, I really do appreciate your very straightforward testimony. We know that we come from different places on this in this sense, I believe this policy causes abortion; you think it prevents it. That's where we have a disagreement. I think that this policy is completely against what you want to do, which is to reduce abortion. That's why we have an agreement over it. Family planning, having groups walk away from it because of this is counterproductive to what we both want, fewer abortions. We will have this agreement, I am sure, in another venue. Senator Hutchinson. May I be excused? Senator Boxer. Of course, you may. You have my deepest thanks for your testimony. And, Representative Smith, we will turn to you. STATEMENT OF HON. CHRIS SMITH, U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM NEW JERSEY Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman, and I deeply appreciate the opportunity to testify today. I know some things will be said at this hearing about the Mexico City Policy, which prohibits U.S. subsidies of foreign abortionists and abortion lobbyists. I also recognize that we have a strong difference on this policy, as you just expressed again, and I know Mr. Chafee as well disagrees. Nevertheless, I hope the committee will consider my argument, that a strong, effective U.S. international family planning program should welcome the opportunity to put a wall of separation between that family planning program and the contentious issue of abortion. Madam Chairwoman, the overriding justification for the Mexico City Policy is the protection and the safeguarding of human life. Simply put, abortion is violence against children and in no way can abortion be construed as humane and compassionate. Abortion methods include dismembering innocent children with razor blade tip suction devices, some with the power of 20 or 30 times a household vacuum cleaner, or injections of chemical poisons designed to kill the child. Salt poisoning abortion entails injecting high concentrated salt water into the baby's amniotic sac. The baby breathes in the salty water and is burned alive, internally and externally. It takes about 2 hours to kill the child in this way. In recent years most Americans have been shocked to discover yet another hideous method to destroy an unborn child, partial birth abortion. Performed in the second and third trimester, the abortionist delivers the entire body except for the child's head. He then stabs the back of the child's head with a pair of scissors. The abortionist then sucks out the brains of that child and kills him or her. If that isn't violence against children, I don't know what is. Abortion treats pregnancy as a sexually transmitted disease, a tumor, a wart, a piece of junk to be destroyed. And, yet, if you ever watched an unborn child's image on an ultrasound screen, you can't help but be awed by the miracle of human life, by the preciousness of the child's being, and moved to pity by the helplessness and the vulnerability of that child. This is a human rights issue, Madam Chairwoman. To see an unborn child turning and twisting, kicking, and sucking his or her thumb while still in utero--and my wife and I have four children, three of those we saw with an ultrasound. And even though I've worked in the pro-life movement for many years, I was amazed and awed to see the intricate detail of their bodies very, very early in pregnancy. Senator Boxer. I saw my grandsons. Mr. Smith. So you know. Senator Boxer. It's great. Mr. Smith. But it does shatter the myth, I would respectfully submit, that this is mere tissue or ``products of conception.'' Madam Chairwoman, while the Mexico City Policy is pro-life it is not, and I repeat, it is not anti-family planning. It does not cut by one penny the $425 million the United States spends every year promoting family planning overseas. And years of experience have shown that we can run a good, solid, family planning project without retaining abortionists or abortion lobbyists to administer that for us. During the 9 years the policy was originally in force, only two organizations refused to agree to the pro-life safeguards. We had hundreds of organizations left to choose from. Over 350 family planning organizations agreed to abide by the Mexico City Policy. In fact, U.S. family planning appropriations increased dramatically during this time, in part because pro- life Americans no longer felt an obligation to limit such spending in order to avoid subsidizing the international abortion industry. Some opponents of the Mexico City Policy like to call it a gag rule. They say it violates free speech, the right to free speech, although the Federal courts have upheld the policy as consistent with the first amendment. The restrictions on abortion promotion that it imposes are narrow and reasonable. In fact, they are absolutely necessary to ensure that the organizations function effectively as highly visible partners and representatives of the United States. The organizations that work with the United States overseas are our surrogates. They are an extension of U.S. policy. They are our ambassadors. Their promotion of abortion in these countries on issues closely related to the U.S. programs they administer as well as their activities, such as the actual performance of abortions, are inevitably going to be associated with the United States. So these activities are highly relevant to whether they can effectively administer our programs. Specifically, among the most important stated purposes of U.S. family planning programs overseas is to reduce the number of abortions. The United States has no obligation to administer these programs through agents whose other activities suggest otherwise, that they do not really agree with this goal. We would not hire the Tobacco Institute to run an anti-smoking campaign, not even if the organization carried out its pro- tobacco activities with its own money. There's just too strong a conflict of interest, too high a probability of sending a mixed and confusing message to the people we are trying to reach. Similarly, it makes no sense to hire abortionists or abortion lobbyists to run programs that purport to reduce abortions. Money is fungible. When we give money to an organization, we unavoidably enrich and empower all those activities. U.S. support also enhances the domestic and the international prestige of the organization by giving it an official U.S. seal of approval. And, remember, the people we are trying to reach are not likely to have seen their organization's books. They don't know which activities are funded and from which spigot. So when the very same organizations offer U.S. family planning assistance with one hand and the killing of an unborn child by way of abortion with the other, the message is that the United States, its representatives and partners, are perfectly comfortable with abortion as a method of family planning. Finally, perhaps the most outrageous claim that has been made by opponents of the Mexico City Policy is that it will somehow interfere with efforts to address the HIV/AIDS epidemic. This claim is simply false. For one thing, the United States currently spends over a half a billion dollars per year on fighting AIDS, plus many millions that go to WHO and UNDP and many other NGOs and international organizations. This money, plus the new money promised by the Bush administration, and the significant increase today in the Hyde- Lantos Global Access to HIV/AIDS Prevention and Treatment bill, which I am a very strong supporter of and actually offered a strengthening amendment in the area of hospice care, was recently approved by the House International Relations Committee. And I think that does demonstrate our real, tangible commitment to the victims of AIDS. To sum up, Madam Chairwoman, the Mexico City Policy is a reasonable exercise of the President's power to set terms and conditions on U.S. foreign aid projects. With or without the policy, the same amount of money will be available for family planning programs and the same number of people can be provided with these services. The only difference is whether our service providers will be abortionists or not abortionists. You may disagree, as I know you do so vigorously, with the Mexico City Policy because it is pro-life, but it is simply unfair and I would respectfully submit it is inaccurate to call it anti-family planning. Again, I thank you for this opportunity to be here. Senator Boxer. Thank you, Congressman, and I hope you will look at our position that we believe the imposition of this, in fact, leads to thousands and thousands of unsafe abortions. But, we respect our differences. Congresswoman Lowey, you are free to leave if you have to. If you would like to stay and hear your friend, you are welcome to do that. Ms. Lowey. Thank you. I keep hoping I'm going to convince my good friends in Congress. Senator Boxer. Well, we thank you for all your efforts on behalf of this. I also want to ask unanimous consent at this time that I place into the record a statement by Senator Olympia Snowe, who is the key Republican, along with Senator Chafee, on this particular piece of legislation. [The prepared statement of Senator Snowe follows:] Prepared Statement of Hon. Olympia J. Snowe, U.S. Senator from Maine Madam Chairman, thank you for providing me with the opportunity to offer testimony to the committee today on international family planning. I appreciate the committee taking the time to address this important matter. This has, as you know, long been a concern of mine and an issue that I have continued to advocate for during my tenure in both the House and here in the Senate. There is no question that U.S. population assistance is of critical importance, as the primary deliverer of health education, health care and pre-natal care to millions of women in developing countries. According to USAID, studies in several countries have shown that for every dollar invested in family planning programs, governments save as much as $16 in reduced expenditures in health, education, and social services. It is not only an investment for the health of women, and their children, but for whole nations. There is also no question that U.S. population assistance in developing countries has been successful. The average family size in countries that have received U.S. population assistance has decreased from six children to four. AID assistance has increased the use of contraceptives in developing countries from 10 percent of married couples in the 1970s, to 50-60 percent today. I would also like to make it clear for the record that the issue before us today is not abortion, because current law already prohibits the use of any U.S. funds for abortion-related activities. That law, by the way, is the Helms Amendment of 1973, which I support as an important guarantee that our international family planning programs stay apart from domestic debates on the issue of abortion. The real issue before us today is often referred to as the ``Mexico City Policy'' because it was at the 1984 U.N. Population Conference in Mexico City that the Reagan Administration adopted this policy. Under the Mexico City Policy, the Reagan Administration withheld international family planning funds from all groups that had the slightest involvement in legal abortion-related services even though they were paid for with their own private funds. This was done despite the fact that similar restrictions were not placed on funding programs run by foreign governments that related to legal abortions. It is also often referred to as the international ``gag rule'' because it prevents organizations from even providing abortion counseling or referral services. The matter before us is in part about leadership. The United States has traditionally been the leader in international family planning assistance. This has been the case ever since this issue rose to international prominence with the 1974 U.N. Population Conference in Bucharest. At that time, a great number of the world's developing countries perceived family planning as a Western effort to reduce the power and influence of Third World countries. However, in the years since, the need and importance of family planning has been recognized and embraced by most developing nations. If, as a country, we believe in volunteerism in family planning-- and we do--then we should maintain our leadership. Because of our leading role in international family planning, we have unrivaled influence in setting standards for family planning programs. A great number of other donors and recipient countries adopt our models in their own efforts. According to the Center for Reproductive Law and Policy, the Mexico City Policy will penalize 59 countries whose non-governmental organizations--NGOs--receive family planning assistance funds from the U.S. NGOs will be prohibited not only from providing abortion-related services, but also counseling and referrals regarding abortions. And, the final piece of the Mexico City Policy, bars NGOs from even lobbying for abortion rights or on abortion related issues. That's the policy, let's consider the real effect on people. According to the Alan Guttmacher Institute, about four in every ten pregnancies worldwide are unplanned, and 40 percent of unintended pregnancies end in abortion. Knowing this, the net effect of the Mexico City Policy on these 59 nations is to limit or eliminate critical family planning work that has a very real impact on the quality of life. Moreover, the absence of family planning is likely to increase the instance of the one thing that the advocates of the Mexico City Policy are most opposed to--abortion. Family planning is also about health care. Too often, women in developing nations do not have access to the contraceptive or family planning services they need because contraceptives are expensive, supplies are erratic, services are difficult or impossible to obtain, or the quality of care is poor. In a March report by the Population Action Institute it was estimated that about 515,000 women die each year in pregnancy and childbirth, or almost one death every minute, and millions more women become ill or disabled. In addition, an estimated 78,000 women die every year from illegal and unsafe abortion and thousands more are injured. How many more women would die if access to these services were even more limited? The bottom line is, the Mexico City Policy is bad public policy. It not only limits discussion, counseling, and referrals for abortion, but it also limits the ability of organizations, in at least 59 nations, to carry out needed family planning work. We must remember that family planning is about--just that--planning one's family. By spacing births at least two years apart, family planning can prevent an average of one in four infant deaths in developing countries. Family planning provides access to needed contraceptives and gives women worldwide the ability to properly space out their pregnancies so that they can have healthier babies, which will lead to healthier children and healthier nations. Again, I appreciate the opportunity to offer my comments today. I look forward to working with you, Madam Chairman, and the other members of the committee who believe, like I do, that the Mexico City Policy should be lifted for once and for all. Thank you. Senator Boxer. Congresswoman Lowey. STATEMENT OF HON. NITA LOWEY, U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM NEW YORK Ms. Lowey. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, Senator Chafee. I want to thank you and members of the committee for holding this hearing and for inviting me to testify on the effects of the global gag rule on the United States' support of international family planning. Senator Boxer, you have shown such extraordinary leadership and I am very pleased that we have the opportunity to examine this issue today. We are familiar with the global gag rule, and I know that we will hear from many experts during the hearing. I would like to focus today on just a few critical points. First of all, the most common misconception about the global gag rule is that it stops U.S. funds from going to perform abortions overseas. As you know, spending U.S. money on abortions overseas has been illegal since 1973 and spending U.S. money to conduct abortion-related lobbying is prohibited as well. When the President announced in January that he would reinstate this policy because, ``taxpayer funds should not be used to pay for abortions or advocate or actively promote abortions,'' we just respectfully disagree with him. These prohibitions are already well entrenched in U.S. law. I have other concerns as well. The policy ignores the laws of other sovereign countries. Under the global gag rule, an overseas NGO must promise not to use any money from any source to perform abortions regardless of the abortion laws in the NGO's home country. The options for counseling and referral are also severely limited. A health care provider may only discuss abortion as an available option or refer women for services elsewhere under the following unlikely scenario: A woman enters the clinic, announces that she is pregnant, declares that she has already decided to terminate the pregnancy, and specifically requests a referral. And in a further example of the sheer folly of the policy, an NGO will remain eligible for United States funding even if it uses non- U.S. funds to advocate for tighter restrictions on abortions. Only pro-choice speech is prohibited. That's what's so interesting about this. The global gag rule undermines U.S. support, in my judgment, for basic human rights around the world, and it weakens our efforts to promote democracy abroad. Because U.S.- based groups and their personnel are protected by the first amendment, they are not subject to these restrictions, so the practical effect is this: U.S.-based organizations using Americans to provide family planning services abroad are not restricted in what they can say or do with private funds, but indigenous NGOs working alongside them are. American organizations can come to Capitol Hill to advocate for a repeal of the global gag rule, but foreign NGOs risk losing their U.S. funds if they follow suit. The global gag rule says in no uncertain terms that only Americans should be entitled to the basic protections our Constitution provides. I believe this is a dangerous double standard. The global gag rule is clearly not about crafting rational foreign policy. If it were evaluated under this lens, the gag rule would be defeated soundly at every turn. There is no evidence that the global gag rule will decrease the number of abortions. It may, in fact, in my judgment, have the opposite effect. By forcing NGOs to choose between providing lifesaving health services and receiving U.S. funds we will decrease the resources certain groups have to provide contraceptives, counseling and advocacy services that reduce the incidence of abortion. Since the Mexico City Policy was initially reinstated last year I've been working with my colleagues to repeal it. I first introduced the Global Democracy Promotion Act during the last Congress, and I was honored to reintroduce the bill with Senator Boxer this year. I call the Global Democracy Promotion Act the ``golden rule'' bill. It will keep an overseas group from being denied U.S. funding solely on the basis of services it provides with non-U.S. funds as long as those services are legal in the United States and legal in the country where the group operates. And it would prohibit overseas NGOs from being subject to advocacy and lobbying restriction which cannot be applied to U.S.-based NGOs. It essentially says that we should treat people in other countries the way we ourselves would like to be treated. It's a principle we all learned as children and we should not forget it now. The votes in the House to repeal this misguided policy are bipartisan and very close, and I believe we will ultimately prevail. I hope this hearing and our combined efforts will convince people that the global gag rule is bad policy. It undermines U.S. efforts to promote democracy in the developing world. It thwarts USAID's global health initiatives. It sullies our country's global reputation, and it does nothing to reduce the incidence of abortion worldwide. Let me just say to Senator Boxer and Senator Chafee, and to my good friend, Congressman Smith, many of us have traveled to other parts of the world, and I know you, as a leader in human rights, have done so. I remember a trip to Egypt very recently where I visited a maternal-child clinic, and the nurse was telling me of stories where a woman was brought in bleeding to death because of a botched abortion, but they couldn't do anything. Because this has such a chilling effect, they were afraid to refer this woman to help save her life, to take care of her, because of the chilling effect. I also remember, when we talk of rights and protecting women and families, a recent trip to Cambodia. Only 40 percent of the people in that country currently receive family planning assistance, contraceptive assistance. Seventy percent want it. And when we look at these families and children who desperately need these services, I think it is the right thing for us to do to encourage family planning as much as we can, and it would be irresponsible for us to cause any kind of chilling effect. So let me close by again restating the golden rule. Let's not do unto others what we wouldn't impose on ourselves, and let's make sure that we do all we can to preserve human life around the world and protect these families, protect these children, provide these services. I'm very proud of the work that the United States is doing in providing family planning services and assisting these families in planning their lives. And I thank you again for your important leadership, Madam Chairwoman. Senator Boxer. Thank you very much. Thank you both. We'll call our second panel. Mr. Smith. Madam Chairwoman, may I respond? Senator Boxer. We're not going to have a response back and forth. I'm so sorry. The tradition of the committee is that our witnesses speak and we don't question Members of Congress, because we take your testimony for what it is worth, and it's worth a lot to us and we thank you for it. We will move on to the second panel. Mr. Alan Kreczko is Acting Assistant Secretary of the Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration, Department of State. He is a representative of the Bush administration. He will speak in favor of their policy. He is accompanied by Barbara Turner, Acting Assistant Administrator for Global Programs, USAID. We welcome you, and we're going to ask that you try to limit your opening statements to--how much time do you think you need? Mr. Kreczko. Ten minutes, Madam Chairman. Senator Boxer. If you could try to keep it to 10 minutes, because we need to move ahead. Thank you. Please proceed. STATEMENT OF ALAN J. KRECZKO, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU OF POPULATION, REFUGEES AND MIGRATION, DEPARTMENT OF STATE; ACCOMPANIED BY: BARBARA TURNER, ACTING ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR FOR GLOBAL PROGRAMS, USAID, WASHINGTON, DC Mr. Kreczko. Thank you, Madam Chairman and members of the committee. I am pleased to be here today to represent the administration in discussing the Mexico City Policy and to reaffirm the administration's commitment to international family planning. Throughout the more than 30-year history the U.S. International Family Planning Program has had strong support from the American public as well as the Congress. This program is recognized worldwide as one of the most successful components of our foreign assistance. We remain the largest donor in the world with programs in more than 58 countries. More than 50 million couples in the developing world use voluntary family planning services as a result of programs supported by U.S. tax dollars. These programs enable couples to choose the number and spacing of births, promote enhancement of maternal and child health, reduce the incidence of abortion, and enable parents to better provide for their children. And we know that voluntary family planning saves lives by reducing up to a quarter of the 515,000 annual pregnancy-related deaths around the world. President Bush has reaffirmed the United States' commitment to a strong international family planning program. On January 22 the White House indicated that the President was committed to maintaining the $425 million funding level provided for in fiscal year 2001 appropriations, noting that this support recognizes our country's long history of providing international health care services including voluntary family planning for couples around the world who want to make free and responsible decisions about the number and spacing of their children and also noting that providing quality family planning services is one of the best ways to prevent abortion. The administration's commitment to international family planning is further reflected in the President's fiscal year 2002 budget request, which includes $425 million for USAID's population program with an additional $25 million for the U.N. population fund, UNFPA. One standard applied in making decisions about how limited U.S. international family planning assistance funds are allocated to potential foreign grantees or sub-grantees is whether their family planning programs are consistent with the values and principles the President decides to promote as part of his broader foreign policy. Congress recognized this when it stipulated that fiscal year 2001 population assistance funds would not be available for expenditure until February 15, 2001. The accompanying conference report noted that this restriction was designed to allow the new President to decide what terms and conditions to impose on such assistance. The programs of foreign NGOs that provide or actively promote abortion are not consistent with the family planning values President Bush wants to promote as part of his foreign policy agenda. Consequently, President Bush restored the Mexico City Policy. While USAID's population assistance program had been prohibited since 1973 from supporting abortion-related activities, the Mexico City Policy ensures that USAID's family planning assistance only goes to foreign organizations that do not perform or actively promote abortion with a clearly stated exception for post-abortion care. This policy had previously been in place from 1984 until 1993, during the Reagan and first Bush Presidencies, but was rescinded by President Clinton. The Department of State and USAID worked closely together in issuing the implemented clauses for the Mexico City Policy. They are nearly identical with the previous clauses. While few organizations have decided not to comply with these clauses, we expect more than 450 foreign, non-governmental organizations will ultimately elect to accept assistance subject to the clauses as they did when the policy was in place under Presidents Reagan and Bush and will therefore continue to receive USAID funding. USAID will do its very best to assure that any gaps in services created by organizations that are now under Mexico City Policy ineligible for USAID population assistance will be filled by other eligible organizations. Let me briefly express concerns raised regarding the limitations on abortion advocacy by NGOs operating abroad. In order to avoid any misperception of U.S. Government endorsement of what a government's foreign organization's message may be on abortion, foreign NGOs that engage in advocacy on abortion are prohibited under the Mexico City Policy from receiving USAID family planning assistance. Foreign NGOs that choose not to comply with the policy can, of course, seek funding from other donor governments, the private sector, or from their own governments. While family planning assistance has broad support in the United States, abortion is an issue on which Americans sincerely and deeply disagree. The Mexico City Policy seeks to clearly separate the U.S. Government's support of family planning assistance from abortion-related activities. I would also like to note that USAID's family planning program operates under a variety of restrictions. Its own monitoring and independent audits from the inspector general and GAO have routinely found their programs in compliance with these restrictions. In closing, Madam Chair, let me reiterate this administration's strong commitment to international family planning. As I said earlier, we are the largest bilateral provider of voluntary family planning and related health services. The President's fiscal year 2002 budget supports our position as the leading donor. With this committee's support and that of the entire Congress, we expect that to remain the case in the years to come. That concludes my remarks. As USAID is the responsible implementing agency for the Mexico City Policy, I have asked Barbara Turner, who is the Acting Assistant Administrator for Global Programs, USAID, to join me in answering any questions you may have. Thank you. [The prepared statement of Mr. Kreczko follows:] Prepared Statement of Alan J. Kreczko Madam Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to represent the Administration in discussing the Mexico City Policy and to reaffirm the Administration's commitment to international family planning. Throughout its more than 30-year history, the U.S. international family planning program has had strong support from the American public as well as Congress. This program is recognized worldwide as one of the most successful components of our foreign assistance. We remain the largest bilateral donor in the world, with programs in more than 58 countries. More than 50 million couples in the developing world use voluntary family planning services as a result of programs supported by U.S. tax dollars. These programs enable couples to choose the number and spacing of births, enhance maternal and child health, reduce the incidence of abortion, and enable parents to better provide for their children. And we know that voluntary family planning saves lives by reducing up to a quarter of the 515,000 annual pregnancy-related deaths around the world. President Bush has reaffirmed the U.S. commitment to a strong international family planning program. On January 22, the White House indicated that the President was committed to maintaining the $425 million funding level provided for in the FY 2001 appropriation, noting that this support recognizes our country's long history of providing international health care services, including voluntary family planning to couples around the world who want to make free and responsible decisions about the number and spacing of their children, and also noting that providing quality family planning services is one of the best ways to prevent abortion. The Administration's commitment to international family planning is further reflected in the President's FY 2002 budget request of $425 million for USAID's population program, with an additional $25 million for the UN Population Fund (UNFPA). One standard applied in making decisions about how limited U.S. international family planning assistance funds are allocated to potential foreign grantees or subgrantees is whether their family planning programs are consistent with the values and principles a President decides to promote as part of his broader foreign policy. Congress recognized this when it stipulated that FY 2001 population assistance funds would not be available for expenditure until February 15, 2001. The accompanying conference report noted that this restriction was designed to allow the new President to decide what terms and conditions to impose on such assistance. The programs of foreign NGOs that provide or actively promote abortion are not consistent with the family planning values President Bush wants to promote as part of his foreign policy agenda. Consequently, President Bush restored the ``Mexico City Policy.'' While USAID's population assistance program has been prohibited since 1973 from supporting abortion-related activities, the Mexico City Policy ensures that USAID's family planning assistance only goes to foreign organizations that do not perform or actively promote abortion, with the clearly stated exception of post-abortion care. This policy had previously been in place from 1984-1993 during the Reagan and first Bush presidencies, but was rescinded by President Clinton. The Department of State and USAID worked closely together in issuing the implementing clauses for the Mexico City Policy. They are nearly identical with the previous clauses. While a few organizations have decided not to comply with these clauses, we expect more than 450 foreign non-governmental organizations (NGOs) will ultimately elect to accept assistance subject to the clauses, as they did when the policy was in place under President's Reagan and Bush, and will, therefore, continue to receive USAID funding. USAID will do its very best to assure that any gaps in services created by organizations that are now, under the Mexico City Policy, ineligible for USAID population assistance will be filled by other, eligible organizations. Let me address briefly concerns raised regarding the limitations on abortion advocacy by NGOs operating abroad. In order to avoid any misperception of U.S. government endorsement for what a foreign organization's message may be on abortion, foreign NGOs that engage in advocacy on abortion are prohibited under the Mexico City Policy from receiving USAID family planning assistance. Foreign NGOs that choose not to comply with the policy can of course seek funding from other donor governments, the private sector, or from their own governments. While family planning assistance has broad support in the United States, abortion is an issue on which Americans sincerely and deeply disagree. The Mexico City Policy seeks to clearly separate U.S. government support for family planning assistance from abortion-related activities. I would also like to note that USAID's family planning program operates under a variety of restrictions. Its own monitoring and independent audits from their Inspector General and GAO have routinely found their programs in compliance with these restrictions. In closing, let me reiterate this Administration's strong commitment to international family planning. As I said earlier, we are the largest bilateral provider of voluntary family planning and related health services. The President's FY 2002 budget supports our position as the leading donor. With this Committee's support--and that of the entire Congress--we expect that to remain the case in the years to come. That concludes my remarks. As USAID is the responsible implementing agency for the Mexico City Policy, I have asked Barbara Turner, USAID Acting Assistant Administrator for Global Programs to join me in answering any questions you may have. Senator Boxer. Thank you very much. I note the presence of two members of the committee and am honored that they took time out of their schedules to be here. Before I ask any questions and open it up for questions, I would ask Senator Feingold if he would like to make an opening statement. Senator Feingold. I would, and I want to thank the Chair, Senator Boxer, for chairing this very important hearing, and I want to thank the witnesses. I have consistently opposed the so-called Mexico City restrictions on U.S. assistance to these programs, which are also know as the gag rule restrictions. Current U.S. law already prohibits U.S. funds from being used to promote abortion-related activities overseas. The gag rule restrictions traditionally prohibit U.S. funds from going to any organization abroad that uses its own funds for the purposes of providing abortion services or counseling, or even speaking out about abortion laws in their own country. I find it difficult to believe that these restrictions really prevent abortions. More likely, I think they actually increase their likelihood by cutting off funds to reputable family planning organizations, which happen also to use their own money for abortion-related activities. All over the world these gag rule restrictions also bring U.S. Government into what should be private consultation between a woman and her health care provider, effectively somehow setting the parameters of these discussions from here in Washington. I think this is really beyond presumptuous. I believe that this policy actually directly conflicts with our national values. Gag rule restrictions basically demand the recipients of U.S. family planning to surrender their rights to free speech if they wish to receive U.S. family planning assistance, a policy that runs counter to cherished American principles. I strongly support voluntary international family planning programs which help to educate women about contraception, prenatal care, birth spacing, the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases and other important lifesaving issues. And I am greatly concerned that this misguided policy will undermine these programs and hinder global progress toward better maternal/child health. I look forward, of course, to reading over the witnesses' testimony. And, again, I just want to thank the Chair for her tremendous leadership on this issue. Thank you. Senator Boxer. Thank you so very much, and I appreciate your support. Senator Allen. Senator Allen. Thank you, Madam Chairman. It's good to be with you again. You have convened a hearing on issues, actually two issues, that understandably stir emotions---- Senator Boxer. Actually, this was Senator Biden's---- Senator Allen. So, Senator Biden pulled this off? Senator Boxer. This is actually a full committee hearing that he has given me the honor of chairing. Senator Allen. He ought to be here to handle this, but it's---- Senator Boxer. He trusts me. Senator Allen. I think it's much more enjoyable to have you doing this, in essence, and for you to have this hearing on these very controversial issues, and those are the issues, really, of foreign aid and the issue of abortion, which are issues that clearly stir emotions and controversy in our country. I've read and listened to Mr. Kreczko's statement. Regardless of pronouncing his name incorrectly, I think it's a very articulate statement, but I also think it's a statement of the administration that shows a very reasonable, principled statement of policy, which I support. I would go on to say to the chairman on the issue of abortion I have a position of what I call one of reasonable moderation, and it's one which uses scientific ways of looking at when there is a quality of life or development of life, when there is a compelling state interest to protect the unborn child, fetus, product, whichever term one would want to use. But I've always taken the strong stand against taxpayer funding of elective abortions unless they are in the case of rape or incest or the physical health of the woman, the mother, being in danger. And if you look at the details of this so- called Mexico City Policy, it actually fits in as far as the taxpayer funding issue: Abortions may be performed if the life of the mother would be in danger if her fetus were carried to term, or following rape or incest. And so funds can be used in that way. Health care facilities may treat injuries or illnesses caused by legal or illegal abortions, post-abortion care. As I understand it, that is covered by such funding. Passive responses by family planning counselors to questions about abortion from pregnant women who have already decided to have a legal abortion are not considered acts of promoting or advocating abortion, and referrals for abortion as a result of rape, incest, or where a mother's life would be in danger or support of post-abortion care are permitted. So this is generally my view of the way it ought to be, as everyone has their own views, have very strongly held views on this issue. But as far as I'm concerned, it's pretty close to my general view of taxpayer funding. I might have a different status or view as far as what goes on in the United States versus foreign aid, because, after all, this is the taxpayers' money that will be going to support foreign groups that support abortion, fund abortions, or encourage or advocate abortions. And I think we all want to help women. I support family planning. I support funding by the United States of programs that help women decide how many children they may want to have, or spacing of their children. Our Government, which means the taxpayers of the United States, spend over $400 million a year for family planning programs, and I just don't think we need to use this money to give it to groups that perform abortions or advocate abortions. The so-called Mexico City rule has been in effect in the past, and the international family planning groups have not run out of business. They've survived all those years just fine during the Reagan and first Bush administration. And there will always be funds from other countries. They can support it. There are private organizations. There are individuals that want to support these groups. So I don't see why the taxpayers ought to be compelled to do so. The reason I say the private groups can fund it is that it is the right of an individual to fund whatever they want, to fund as they see fit. The question here is what is the proper use of U.S. taxpayers' money. So, in summary, Madam Chairman, I pretty much agree with the statements made here on behalf of the Bush administration, and I would hope that policy stands because it's consistent with my views and principles, and I consider my stand to be one of a status of reasonable moderation on the issue of abortion. So thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank you all for bravely coming before this committee. Senator Boxer. Thank you, Senator. This is a good start. This is common ground. Let me say, Senator, how much I respect your being here this morning. So I guess where I disagree with you is you think this is a very controversial hearing and controversial subject. I think family planning is not. I also want to point out that you said a couple of things that I just want you to look at, because I know you are a very serious legislator, and that is you said very strongly that you don't believe public funding should be used for abortion, and that has been the law since 1973. When I got to the Congress in 1983, that had been the law for 10 years. So the fact that it is written without the gag rule, U.S. funds may not be used. And what this gag rule says is, if they spend their own money on abortion, they cannot receive Federal funds. So I just urge you to look at that. You also said you support abortion in the case where the physical health of the mother is impaired. This gag rule makes no exception for the physical health of the mother. It does for life of the mother, not physical health. So I'd love to see that section added. We're with you on it if you would like to do that, because that might be an area we could work on together. Senator Allen. May I---- Senator Boxer. Please, please. We're taking a little time out here. Maybe we can reach some---- Senator Allen. The concern I would have for the chairman is that, if you give money to these organizations, these foreign organizations---- Senator Boxer. Yes, nongovernmental. Senator Allen. All right, non-governmental organizations that perform abortions, obviously you can switch money around. It could supplant other funds. They'll say, ``Oh, yes, we are not using it for this,'' so they use the money for one way or the other. So money is fungible. That's a concern I have there. Senator Boxer. I would say in this country we do give tax dollars to organizations that use their own funds. They have to give very strict---- Senator Allen. Such as Planned Parenthood? Senator Boxer. Well, several. Senator Allen. Correct. Senator Boxer. And we do have very strict laws. So this is a different set of rules for non-governmental entities abroad in developing countries. That's why we think, many of us, that this is just so unfair. Senator Allen. Let me ask you this. This so-called gag rule, which was an issue in the first Bush administration, which applied to the United States, that issue--maybe the Bush administration is going to bring it back, but as I understood during the Clinton administration, that's been settled and the policy as far as Federal funding for organizations on planning, while it doesn't fund abortions as far as abortion counseling, the gag rule, as I remembered it from 10 years ago, was one that even prohibited---- Senator Boxer. That's correct. Senator Allen [continuing]. Discussion of abortion. Senator Boxer. And that's what this does, the Mexico City Policy. We had that, but it's unconstitutional and we can't have it here, so that's why we don't have it in this country but we have it in developing countries. Senator Allen. Just so you know, when I was for a short time a Member of Congress, my stand was opposed to that so- called gag rule. I thought it went too far in prohibiting, and got some nice blasting letters and faxes from folks on it, but nevertheless that was the position I took during the campaign. This, though, is overseas. Senator Boxer. Yes. Senator Allen. These are foreign operations. Senator Boxer. And you're going to meet some of these good folks who are going to testify today. Senator Allen. It's important and the whole issue of foreign aid and how much foreign aid we ought to have is another issue, and what we should be funding and what sort of certainty is there that it won't be used--and especially if an organization does perform abortions. But I'm glad that the gag rule issue as far as domestic, here in this country, is settled. Who knows? Maybe it will come back again. Senator Boxer. I don't think so. Senator Allen. Good. I hope it doesn't. Senator Boxer. We have a good Constitution. Senator Allen. Well, I didn't know it was a constitutional---- Senator Boxer. Well, free speech is the basis of our---- Senator Allen. Yes, but you don't have the right to have our taxpayers pay for your speech. I just thought it was a bad medical policy to not allow medical professionals to even discuss the option of abortion. I didn't think they should---- Senator Boxer. Senator? Senator Allen. Just let me say one thing. Senator Boxer. Yes. Senator Allen. The reason I used the words ``physical health'' as far as exceptions, which are in this policy, for rape and incest and---- Senator Boxer. Life of the mother. Senator Allen. You used life of the mother. The reason I used the words ``physical health,'' is simply an adjective to make sure that we are thinking of physical health as opposed to---- Senator Boxer. Mental health. Senator Allen. Because some people can use that as a way-- without the proper adjectives it's too big of a loophole. Senator Boxer. I agree. Senator Allen. Maybe I should use the word ``life,'' but I'm just always--there could be a situation detrimental to a woman's physical health. Senator Boxer. Yes. Senator Allen. An impairment disabling---- Senator Boxer. Exactly, and that's a very big issues surrounding the whole debate. Thank you, Senator. We did this little, mini debate, because I think it's helpful to see different views, but the point, I hope, Senator Allen, you will keep in mind, and if you do I have some confidence, maybe, that you will rethink your position on this, that this global gag rule is the same thing as that domestic gag rule we had, same thing. Doctors, or nurses, in foreign countries cannot tell a patient their options. It has to be a passive question. But no one can come in and say, ``What are my choices? What can I do? I'm in trouble here.'' Doctors may not speak if they receive Federal funds. So I think this is crucial. Well, Mr. Kreczko, I'm sure you were thrilled that you didn't get on the hook for a couple of these questions, so I'm going to return to you. And I would like to go to the 5-minute rule for us as well. So let me say, I was stunned when George Bush did this, frankly, 2 days after he was elected, and I have his statement here. He said, ``It is my conviction that taxpayer funds should not be used to pay for abortions or advocate or actively promote abortion, either here or abroad.'' So I just want to make sure you know, and I know you know this, but just for the record, do you not agree that since 1973, taxpayer funds have not been able to be used to provide abortion, to promote abortion, in this country or abroad? Mr. Kreczko. Senator, you are correct. Since 1973 U.S. taxpayer funds cannot go directly to support abortion activities. Senator Boxer. You agree with that? Mr. Kreczko. Yes. Senator Boxer. So I just might say for the record then, and I don't ask you to comment at all, that in my opinion this statement is incorrect, because he said, ``The Mexico City Policy must be restored because taxpayer funds should not be used to pay for abortions.'' That's why so many of us were stunned. He didn't say ``fungible'' or any of these things that others have said. So I think that this statement is incorrect on its face, and I would put it in the record and make the point that the Bush administration has now stated that. It is an accurate statement that since 1973 taxpayer funds have not been able to be used for abortion or promote abortion here or abroad. Mr. Kreczko, you pointed out some of the exceptions, and Senator Allen also did, of this global gag rule I call it. Others call it the Mexico City Policy. But we agree that the life of the mother, rape, incest--and I believe you said you didn't say medical emergency. What is the exact---- Mr. Kreczko. Care for the consequence of abortion. Senator Boxer. Right. So that in your opinion if a woman walked into one of these USAID clinics that was living under the global gag rule and she was bleeding from a botched abortion or an incomplete abortion, and they helped her get through the rest of this operation, they would not lose their funding? Mr. Kreczko. Correct. The President made that explicitly clear when he enacted the Mexico City Policy. Senator Boxer. Well, let me---- Ms. Lowey. I would just like to comment that under the original Mexico City Policy in the 1980's and 1990's, that was not correct. President Bush changed that in the new policy. It's the one thing he specifically asked that we adjust because we felt that was something groups had brought to us as a concern. Senator Boxer. OK, well, I would recommend that you might consider discussing this with Secretary Powell or people from the State Department or USAID. I think we really need to clarify that because Congresswoman Lowey says that the groups are fearful of the chilling effect of this policy where when a woman comes in in that circumstance they are afraid or fearful, or even if she asks a passive question. I want to ask you, do we have this gag rule in any other USAID activity? Mr. Kreczko. I don't know the answer to that. Ms. Lowey. Not to my knowledge. Senator Boxer. We don't. And it seems to be amazing that we have a gag rule--on no other USAID program, but we have this gag rule on family planning. I think that says volumes. If we're so worried about it--I mean, theoretically, if somebody goes in to get treatment because they're afraid that they have AIDS, let's say, the people there in those non-governmental organizations aren't gagged from talking about abortion or anything else. So I'm saying this not to give you an idea to now go out and gag those people, but I'm saying the fact that a gag rule applies strictly to family planning is very hostile. It is very hostile to women. It's very hostile to the notion of freedom of speech when it comes to a woman's reproductive rights. Mr. Kreczko. Senator Boxer, can I comment on this? Senator Boxer. Yes, go ahead. Mr. Kreczko. I actually think that the narrowness of the Mexico City Policy demonstrates exactly the opposite. The Mexico City Policy only applies to the family planning money. It does not apply to any other source of U.S. Government funding, so clearly the intent is not simply to go out and target any foreign NGO because of its advocacy. If so, it would apply no matter what the source of funding. Instead, it applies to family planning because of the President's desire to draw a clear line of separation between family planning and abortion. Now you mentioned in your comments that family planning is not controversial. There is a strong consensus in the United States that we ought to be doing family planning, but there is not a consensus on the abortion issue in the United States, and we actually can encourage and promote and secure support for family planning by keeping a clear separation between family planning and abortion. And that's what the Mexico City Policy does. We choose our partners for the implementation of family planning on the basis of what their views are. Senator Boxer. Well, that's a good try, but we don't do that at home. We don't do these things to our family planning people at home. We don't gag them. We permit doctors to tell them their options. We don't stop them from being able to advocate. Do you know that we have a witness on the next panel that had to go to court because she was fearful of speaking out here and the Bush administration showed up in court and very wisely said, ``Oh, we won't contest this. We'll let her talk.'' Thank you. Thank you, for allowing someone to speak. I would say to you that, because this is just attached to family planning organizations and no one else, it is hostile to family planning. It is hostile to those groups. I hope you can stay and hear those groups and what it is like for them because they are so fearful. They see 78,000 women dying of illegal, botched abortions. They believe that your policy, which you are defending here today, is going to lead and is leading to more illegal abortions. So I respect your view. I think you made a good try to show how friendly this administration is to family planning, but you are putting a gag on groups outside of America. You can't do it here. The administration would love to do it here, but it can't, because we're protected here by our Constitution. And I think that is a shameful situation, but I appreciate--I have a sense that in your heart you don't see it this way. And so, good, I'm glad, you sleep at night much better. But I see it a completely different way. Senator Chafee. Senator Chafee. Thank you, Senator Boxer. I think you are making the key point here, and that's the hypocritical aspect of this law. Senator Boxer's bill, S. 367, declares that ``ineligibility to termination for certain assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961: Foreign NGOs shall not be ineligible for assistance solely based on the health and medical services, including counseling and referral services, provided by them with non-U.S. Government funds if such services do not violate the laws of the country in which they are being provided and would not violate U.S. Federal law if provided in the United States.'' These are the key points here. How can the administration not support S. 367 under those circumstances? Mr. Kreczko. If I can try to respond to that, Senator. The issue is what organizations we want to choose as our partners. There's no obligation to fund everyone regardless of their views, and I think that would be uncontested if there were a group that was arguing that abortion ought to be coerced or that abortion ought to be used in order to choose the sex of the child that was going to be delivered. We have no obligation to fund any organization because of the views that it advances. You have to bear in mind that we are associated with the groups that we fund. We do not fund anonymously. In fact, we go out of our way overseas to take credit for the family planning services that we provide. So when we provide financial support to a foreign, non-governmental organization, organization x, we go out of our way to make it clear and visible and public that the U.S. Government is supporting that organization's activities. Now we don't want to create any confusion about what this administration's view is on appropriate family planning, and therefore we do not fund those groups which support abortion activities. So I think that is the explanation. And again, as I say, the intent is to keep a clear line between family planning, which everyone supports, and abortion, which is divisive. Senator Chafee. I just add that we have to be careful about blurring the line between the 1973 law, as has been pointed out, and how that exists and the laws that--what is constitutional here in the United States and how can we have different standards for foreign countries. Mr. Kreczko. Senator, I understand the difference between the 1973 law. The 1973 law only applies to what happens directly with our funding. But it is a fact that we perpetuate intentionally that when we fund an organization, that organization becomes associated with us overseas, and it is known that we fund them. Senator Chafee. Thank you, sir. Senator Boxer. Senator Allen. Senator Allen. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I do think that the issue is which hearings on appropriation policies, so to speak, as to which foreign organizations the taxpayers of this country ought to fund. We make all sorts of decisions on appropriations and have conditions on appropriations. To me, this seems very reasonable. Again, you know, this was not anything that was all that hard, prior to the Clinton administration--they came in after 2 days in office and they changed the rules that were in the first Bush administration, so Presidents use their Executive powers quite quickly, and that's within the prerogatives in changing it. But I do think it's important to note a new aspect of this law, and I assume this was along and blurred from this hearing, that if someone has complications from an abortion, some physical problems, whatever the problems may be, that these organizations are perfectly--that there is no prohibition and, in fact, probably what needs to be done in this is one thing that I think everyone can agree on out of this hearing that could be very beneficial if there is a chilling effect somehow on this Mexico City problem. But those who do have medical problems after an abortion, not performed, obviously, in that particular facility, but they want to go to the other organization, that that certainly would be allowed. And probably you need to work with whatever these non- governmental organizations are, and there may be some of these non-governmental organizations that may not have applied previously for these funds that do perform that very important service that need to know that. Because I think it's a good change. I think it should have been there before. It just never arose or came to my attention, nor was I here to worry about such matters when one is worrying simply about the Commonwealth of Virginia. The chairman had some questions about your heart there, Mr. Kreczko, and I'm going to allow my final time for you to--the chairman is very persuasive, as you can see, and she's very, very sharp and smart. Is there anything that you would want to add? I can tell that you want to respond, but the time has expired so I'll give you whatever moments I have left on my time. Mr. Kreczko. Thank you, Senator. I would like to make two comments. No. 1, the actual White House statement that indicated the restoration of Mexico City Policy included in it a statement about being able to provide care for people who went through botched abortions, so attaching visibility to that is something that we have tried to do to remove any questions that might have existed under the former policy on that. The other point that I welcome an opportunity to make is this question about impact on family planning, because there is a consensus around the room that we all support family planning. The fact is that we are given by Congress $425 million for a family planning program, and we will program that $425 million with or without Mexico City Policy. We can and will program effectively the $425 million of funding we are provided, so there is not going to be a significant adverse impact on family planning programs as has been argued. Thank you, Senator. Senator Allen. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Senator Boxer. Thank you so much. Maybe there is room for us to work on a way together to the Bush administration asking them to send out a clarification of their rule, because we did get testimony from Nita Lowey that--I don't know if you were here at that point. Senator Allen. I was not. Senator Boxer. That in Egypt a woman desperately seeking help after a botched abortion came into one of these organizations that was a very good organization, and they were afraid to treat her because it had that chilling effect. Senator Allen. Let's do that. Senator Boxer. I would love to. And so that's a place that we could work together on and hopefully get your support on that, and that we could work together on something would be very good. Mr. Kreczko. I can say that it's there in the amended policy guidelines that were issued after the Mexico City Policy was restored by the President, so it is there. Senator Allen. It seems like a notification needs to--at least in Egypt, and who knows where else in the world, that needs to be clarified. Not everyone reads all these missives. Most people do, but not everyone all over the world. Senator Boxer. That's true. People in Nepal may not read the Federal Register. This is true. So if we want to get something out there, it seems to me we might send a letter-- and, Senator Allen, maybe or maybe not we could hope to agree on something. Let me thank you. I would want to say, however, sort of the irony of this in my mind, not in yours and not in Senator Allen's, but I think in Senator Chafee's and mine, I think I would speak for the both of us in saying this, as we seek to make the best of the circumstance by clarification of what we have in place, it seems to me, it is a separation where, because we have these different rules for the international organizations who are doing this, we have this chilling effect and we certainly know they cannot let people know what their rights are unless it's the answer to a passive question. They cannot. We all admit that. That's what this global gag rule is. A doctor can't say to you, if he sees you, what he or she might not want to be fearful of doing, but they can't do that or they will lose their funds. So what we have set up then is perhaps some of the base organizations that you fund, that we all fund as Americans. We're picking out the best. You're absolutely right, the best of the best family planning organizations are getting our funding. And they are the very same ones that are gagged. They are the very same ones that cannot use their own funds to provide safe abortions. Now a woman doesn't go there. She goes to some back alley. Then she comes bleeding into one of the organizations we fund, and, with your magnanimous exception, if she arrives bleeding on the floor, they have the help for her. Well, good for you. I'm glad you have that exception, but how much better it would be if that woman could go to that fine organization and not to the back alley. That's why many of us are upset about this. I respect that we see it differently. Believe me, I do respect that difference. And I think we have to be real honest about what this is about. From my perspective, it is about family planning and avoiding abortion. It's what I believe. But sometimes life doesn't go exactly right and a woman is forced into a terrible circumstance and she makes this difficult personal choice with herself, her doctor, her family, and her God. Now in this country it's a legal choice. In other countries it's a legal choice. But because of this gag rule she can't get all the options. She can't choose what's best, really, for her. I think this is backward. I don't feel good that the only time she could get the help from these good organizations that you fund, and we agree with you that we should fund, she can only get it in a desperate type of situation and we can't do it in this country. So that's why we have so many people who consider themselves anti-choice, if you will, or pro-life, whatever way they phrase it, on our bill as co-sponsors. We have Harry Reid as one of our leading supporters. He testified here today, Senator Allen. He has got a pro-life record. We don't agree on the issue of choice, but we agree on this one. In any event, I think you get my point, and I thank you both very, very much for coming. And I hope we can find common ground on some of these issues that Senator Allen and I have discussed. And we dismiss you and we hope you have a good day. Thank you very much. Senator Allen. Madam Chairman, may I--I don't know protocol. If it's out of order, fine. Senator Boxer. Anything you want. What do you need? Senator Allen. You're wonderful. I think we can agree---- Senator Boxer. I knew he wouldn't give me the last word. Senator Allen. No, you'll always get the last word. And I was listening very closely to everything you were saying, and I think we should work together in making sure that these foreign operations, foreign, non-governmental organizations know the change. I think it's very, very important. None of us, none of us want back--well, I'm going to speak only for myself. I don't want people having back alley abortions or unsafe abortions. And you're saying, oh, gosh, if the United States--here's the import of all of this, is if the United States, out of $427 million--when you start allocating that around the world, that really doesn't come out to very much money. I'm not advocating any big increases. Senator Boxer. Well, we almost had a---- Senator Allen. No, national defense, education and basic scientific research, take care of those. Senator Boxer. Well, wait a minute. Are we getting our campaign platform in here? Senator Allen. No. Senator Boxer. I'm just kidding. Senator Allen. But the point is I don't want anyone-- advocating anyone having a back alley abortion or an unsafe abortion. This amount of money, even if it was going to these organizations, would not necessarily prevent that. There is a responsibility, by the way, for those who care about this, if they so desire, to fund the organizations so that they can provide safe abortions. But beyond all that, what about the countries in which these people reside? You know, it's nice if there's no governments around or in those countries they can advocate better hospitals, better medical care and so forth. So the question is not whether or not, gosh, if we change this, if we delineate or delete this Mexico City Policy that all of a sudden health care and safe abortions will occur. That's really not--I don't think it's going to make much of a difference whatsoever as a practical matter, because not everyone is going to be able to go to these very few facilities that $400 million would cover around the whole world. So I do think there is an obligation and the primary responsibility on the part of the governments of those countries to make sure there is good quality health care. This is just the United States and our charitable way of trying to help out with family planning, which we understand is important as a world issue, and a hunger issue, and a quality of life issue. Senator Boxer. Well, Senator, I agree with you that the countries have to do more. Sadly, in the developing world we have countries that are just so poor and they just don't have the funding. They barely can feed their own people. We're talking about the developing world. We're not talking about--we don't help France with this. You know, we're helping the roughest and the toughest, and the most undeveloped nations. But we would certainly hope that they would, with whatever resources they could, deliver this health care. But the reason that you're needed and the reason we do these programs is we do try to stretch our dollars. And I personally would like to see us do a little more, because I think when we really get into the analysis--you talk about a priority of defense, which we all share, you're going to have to do a lot less of that if people are fed and people have good health care. So I think helping with these kinds of programs abroad does help us. And I'm sure that if we were to have the Secretary of Health he would agree that helping these people does help bring people to our side. It does help bring democracy. So in any event, I greatly appreciate the panel and my colleagues in Congress. If you'd like to stay you are welcome to stay. I think what is extremely interesting is that we do have a person here who felt she had to go to court to get the gag rule lifted. And I hope from what happened--this is a news release from this morning, ``U.S. Government Backs Away From Gag Rule Limitation on Abortion Right Advocacy.'' It's a headline, New York. ``Today the Bush administration, faced with the embarrassing possibility that its abortion gag would censor the testimony of a witness before Congress, backed away from the global rules limitation on abortion rights advocacy. As a result, Susana Silva Galdos, a Peruvian reproductive rights advocate, is free to speak before a hearing at the U.S. Senate on Thursday about the gag rules limitations on abortion in her formative nation without jeopardizing her organization's funding.'' Mr. Kreczko. If I can comment on that, Senator. Senator Boxer. Yes. Mr. Kreczko. I want to comment on the characterization that the Bush administration was forced to back away. The Bush administration never believed that the Mexico City Policy would interfere with an individual's ability to testify before Congress. We made that clear to the judge and the judge agreed with that and, therefore, no restraining order was issued. Senator Boxer. I understand. Mr. Kreczko. So the suggestion that the Mexico City Policy would preclude an individual from testifying before Congress is inaccurate and the individual was informed of that so that there wouldn't be any question about that. Senator Boxer. And I'll finish, ``although free to testify before the Senate on one occasion, Ms. Galdos remains censored by the gag rule's restrictions against discussing abortion law or in any other circumstance on any other day.'' This means she was censored from speaking before Peru's legislature, the U.N. or to members of the press. Now I'm embarrassed about this. I mean, I am. Anyway, we're going to call on our next panel, and we thank you very, very much. May I ask that both panels, because of the time situation, come up together, and I would ask our wonderful staff to accommodate that. We want to put our ``now free to speak'' witness Susana Silva Galdos and Dr. Nirmal Bista right in the center if we can. They came a very long way to be here today. We would like to have the other panel as well. Dr. Pellegrom, Dr. Eberstadt, Mr. Neier, Ms. Cleaver, Professor Aguirre. We welcome all of you. I'm going to ask Ms. Galdos, since you had to go through a lot to get to speak here today, you are ungagged and you are here in the U.S. Senate, and you may take that gag off, and we hope that you will speak to us about the impact of the Mexico City rule on your ability to deliver care to people in Peru. And we would ask that--we're going to keep the 5-minute light on, and, if each of you needs to have another minute or two, we'll do that, but we can't go much over that or we'll run into votes and other things. So, Ms. Galdos, we welcome you. STATEMENT OF SUSANA SILVA GALDOS, PRESIDENT, MOVIMIENTO MANUELA RAMOS, LIMA, PERU Ms. Galdos. Senator Boxer and members of the committee, good morning. Senator Boxer. Ma'am, move the mike closer and please speak a little louder. Now that you are ungagged we all want to hear you. Ms. Galdos. Thank you very much for inviting me. Thank you for this opportunity to testify before the committee today. I am here today in the United States to testify about the impact of the global gag rule. I come from Peru, a developing country with the second highest maternal mortality rate in South America. I belong to Movimiento Manuela Ramos, a Peruvian non- governmental organization with more than 20 years of experience in focusing for women's rights and well-being. We are partners with USAID on two projects, one of which is the Reproductive Health in the Community Project known as ReproSalud. This project is our passion because it is a big project to reach the poorest women in my country in the area of family planning and other essential health services. I would like to discuss two things. First, I would like to discuss about unsafe abortion and, second, I would like to discuss the impact that the gag rule has on free speech and democracy. This first issue is one that I have not been allowed to speak about under the global gag rule. Yesterday, your government gave me some assurances in court that I could speak freely about it, but only in this hearing. And because a judge has affirmed this understanding, I feel comfortable speaking out, but as soon as this hearing is over, I cannot speak on this issue. I will return to my country tomorrow; I will again be silenced. But now, at least for today, I can speak freely here in the United States, not my country. I cannot speak in my own country about my own problems because they are off limit. I have worked on reproductive rights issues for many years, which has included advocacy to decriminalize abortion, because in my institution we believe that it is important to work on an issue that has a big impact on women's reproductive lives. Research shows that unsafe abortion is one of the most widespread causes of death of low-income women around the world. Recently, United Nations conferences have recognized that unsafe abortion is one of the most significant public health problems. Abortion is illegal in Peru. It is considered a crime against life, the body, and health, with the exception of therapeutic abortion to save the pregnant woman's life or to protect her from serious and permanent harm. History has taught us that throughout the world desperate women will seek abortion regardless of its legal status. It is estimated that each year 60 percent of pregnancies in Peru are unwanted and 30 percent of all the pregnancies end in abortion despite Peru's existing law. Senator Boxer. Could you repeat that again. Ms. Galdos. Yes. It is estimated that each year 60 percent of pregnancies, more than 50, more than a half are unwanted pregnancies and 30 percent---- Senator Boxer. Do you ban contraceptives? Ms. Galdos. Well, I think we should--I've told you about the contraceptive. Senator Boxer. Just go ahead. Just do your thing and then-- -- Ms. Galdos. Thirty percent of all the pregnancies end in abortion despite Peru's existing law Peru is no different. Because abortion is a crime in Peru, most women unfortunately undergo clandestine abortions, performed in unsafe conditions. I don't want to make you a picture like one of the persons did about the waste, what terrible waste. It is really sad to see a woman in that condition after an unsafe abortion. While the clandestine nature of such procedures makes it difficult to know the prevalence of dangerous abortions, it is estimated that 69 percent of poor rural women who undergo abortions suffer from complications, as do 44 percent of women living in poor urban areas. Unsafe abortion has serious consequences. It is estimated that every year 65,000 Peruvian women are harmed to the point of needing hospitalization due to complications of unsafe abortion. The Ministry of Health reports that in 1997 15 percent of all obstetrical and gynecological admissions were due to abortion complications. And adding to the problem, most of those women do not receive adequate health care once admitted. Tragically, unsafe abortion is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality among low-income Peruvian women. Simply put, women are dying. In my country, unsafe abortion causes 22 percent of maternal deaths in Peru. It's a high risk there. Peru has the second highest rate of maternal mortality in South America. Unintended pregnancy and unsafe abortion has a dramatic impact on the lives of adolescents in Peru as well. Three- quarters of sexually active young women in Peru are not using a modern contraceptive method, and one-half are using no contraception at all. In fact, 13.4 percent of adolescents between the ages of 15 and 19 are mothers or are pregnant for the first time. Poverty compounds the problem. The number of births is greater among the young women in this age group who live in areas with higher levels of poverty. I am saddened to report that a recent survey indicates that 90 percent of pregnant adolescent patients between the ages of 12 and 16 in the Lima Maternity Hospital were pregnant as a result of sexual abuse. These statistics indicate that desperate young women are too often forced to make difficult choices in a country where abortion is illegal. As a result, one-third of those who are hospitalized for abortion complications are young women between the ages of 15 and 24 years old. Manuela Ramos would like to contribute to efforts to decriminalize abortion. Abortion is a difficult issue in Peru, but we need to work gradually to legalize abortion and make it safe and available to all Peruvian women, rich and poor, rural or urban. Now it is safe for the rich only. If you have money, you don't have risks. Senator Boxer. You have another 2 minutes. Ms. Galdos. Thank you. Our first step would be to decriminalize in cases of rape and incest. In the face of these serious problems such as sexual abuse, dangerous abortion practices, and alarming rates of maternal mortality, how can the United States tell us that we must be silent? This brings me to my second concern that I would like to discuss. The gag rule is against very important values: freedom and democracy. The gag rule has taken away my freedom to speak about an important issue in my country, a serious issue that is about the life and death of women in Peru. A freedom that I had to ask a judge to give me back, temporarily, so that I could speak to you today. In particular, this policy gags the very individuals who, like me, are directly affected by this policy. It is as though the global gag rule has a built-in ban on speaking out against it. I have traveled to the United States on two previous occasions to share my views on the global gag rule. I was invited to participate in meetings with USAID and State Department officials. I was asked to speak at a congressional briefing, and I was invited to share my views at two press conferences. At each of these events I have been gagged from discussing abortion, even when U.S. officials asked me questions directly. Until today, I have been unable to stand here in your country--where you so value free speech--and discuss openly the impact of unsafe abortion on the lives of