Fire-Threat Maps and Fire-Safety Regulations Proceedings
CPUC Fire Safety Rulemaking Background

In October 2007, devastating wildfires driven by strong Santa Ana winds burned hundreds of square miles in Southern California. Several of the worst wildfires were reportedly ignited by overhead utility power lines and aerial communication facilities in close proximity to power lines. In response to these wildfires, the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) initiated Rulemaking (R.) 08-11-005 to consider and adopt regulations to protect the public from potential fire hazards associated with overhead powerline facilities and nearby aerial communication facilities.

Beginning in 2009, the CPUC issued several decisions in R.08-11-005 that together adopted dozens of new fire-safety regulations. Most of the adopted fire-safety regulations consisted of new or revised rules in General Order (GO) 95. Several of the adopted fire-safety regulations apply only to areas, referred to as "high fire-threat areas," where there is an elevated risk for power line fires igniting and spreading rapidly. These high fire-threat areas are designated by several maps that were adopted on an interim basis. Each of the interim maps covers a different part of the State and uses its own methodology for identifying high fire-threat areas, presenting consistency and potential enforcement issues. To address these issues, the CPUC also commenced the development of a single statewide fire-threat map to designate areas where (1) there is an elevated risk for destructive power line fires, and (2) where stricter fire-safety regulations should apply.

In May 2015, the CPUC closed R.08-11-005 and initiated successor rulemaking R.15-05-006 to complete the outstanding tasks in R.08-11-005. The general scope of R.15-05-006 was to address the following matters carried over from the scope of R.08-11-005: (1) develop and adopt a statewide fire-threat map that delineates the boundaries of a new High Fire-Threat District (HFTD) where the previously adopted regulations will apply, (2) determine the need for additional fire-safety regulations in the HFTD, and (3) revise GO 95 to include a definition and maps of the HFTD, as well as any new fire-safety regulations. The scope and schedule for R.15-05-006 was divided into two parallel tracks. One track focused on the development and adoption of a statewide fire-threat map. The second track focused on the identification, evaluation, and adoption of fire-safety regulations in the HFTD.

On December 21, 2017, the CPUC issued Decision (D.) 17-12-024 adopting regulations to enhance fire-safety in the HFTD, effectively completing the second track of R.15-05-006 described above. On January 19, 2018 the CPUC adopted, via Safety and Enforcement Division's (SED) disposition of a Tier 1 Advice Letter, the final CPUC Fire-Threat Map. The adopted CPUC Fire-Threat Map, together with the map of Tier 1 High Hazard Zones (HHZs) on the U.S. Forest Service (USFS)- California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection's (CAL FIRE) joint map of tree mortality HHZs, comprise the HFTD Map where stricter fire-safety regulations apply. See more information under Fire Safety Regulations below.

Fire-Threat Maps & the High Fire-Threat District (HFTD)

Map Dissemination

In accordance with the requirements of D.17-01-009, SED makes available the following map products that collectively constitute the High Fire-Threat District (HFTD), which will direct future utility and communication infrastructure provider fire-safety activity in California:

In addition to the mandated map products required for posting in D.17-01-009 and provided above, SED has collaborated with CAL FIRE and the IRT to provide the following supplemental map products:

The HFTD Map provides a singular map depicting all parts of the HFTD from both map sources (i.e. CPUC Fire-Threat Map and Tree Mortality HHZ Map).