- IMPROVING PREDICTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY IN DEA AND FDA REGULATION
[House Hearing, 113 Congress] [From the U.S. Government Publishing Office] IMPROVING PREDICTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY IN DEA AND FDA REGULATION ======================================================================= HEARING BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION __________ APRIL 7, 2014 __________ Serial No. 113-137 [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce energycommerce.house.gov ______ U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 90-872 PDF WASHINGTON : 2015 ----------------------------------------------------------------------- For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC 20402-0001 COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE FRED UPTON, Michigan Chairman RALPH M. HALL, Texas HENRY A. WAXMAN, California JOE BARTON, Texas Ranking Member Chairman Emeritus JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania ANNA G. ESHOO, California GREG WALDEN, Oregon ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York LEE TERRY, Nebraska GENE GREEN, Texas MIKE ROGERS, Michigan DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania LOIS CAPPS, California MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois Vice Chairman JIM MATHESON, Utah PHIL GINGREY, Georgia G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana JOHN BARROW, Georgia ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio DORIS O. MATSUI, California CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin GREGG HARPER, Mississippi Islands LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey KATHY CASTOR, Florida BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky JERRY McNERNEY, California PETE OLSON, Texas BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia PETER WELCH, Vermont CORY GARDNER, Colorado BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico MIKE POMPEO, Kansas PAUL TONKO, New York ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida BILL JOHNSON, Ohio BILLY LONG, Missouri RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina _____ Subcommittee on Health JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania Chairman MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey Vice Chairman Ranking Member ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York MIKE ROGERS, Michigan LOIS CAPPS, California TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee JIM MATHESON, Utah PHIL GINGREY, Georgia GENE GREEN, Texas CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey JOHN BARROW, Georgia BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky Islands H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia KATHY CASTOR, Florida GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex JOE BARTON, Texas officio) FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio) (ii) C O N T E N T S ---------- Page Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................ 1 Prepared statement........................................... 44 Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the State of New Jersey, opening statement......................... 45 Hon. John D. Dingell, a Representative in Congress from the State of Michigan, opening statement................................. 47 Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of Michigan, opening statement.................................... 47 Prepared statement........................................... 48 Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the State of Tennessee, opening statement.......................... 48 Prepared statement........................................... 66 Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement.................... 67 Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the State of Texas, opening statement.............................. 67 Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State of California, opening statement............................... 68 Witnesses Janet Woodcock, Director, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and Human Services............................................. 69 Prepared statement........................................... 72 Answers to submitted questions............................... 184 Joseph T. Rannazzisi, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office of Diversion Control, Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice..................................................... 80 Prepared statement........................................... 82 Answers to submitted questions............................... 194 Nathan B. Fountain, Chair, Professional Advisory Board, Epilepsy Foundation of America.......................................... 122 Prepared statement........................................... 126 John M. Gray, President and Chief Executive Officer, Healthcare Distribution Management Association............................ 134 Prepared statement........................................... 136 D. Linden Barber, Partner and Director, DEA Compliance and Litigation Practice, Quarles & Brady, LLP...................... 141 Prepared statement........................................... 143 Answers to submitted questions............................... 212 Wendy K.D. Selig, President and Chief Executive Officer, Melanoma Research Alliance.............................................. 155 Prepared statement........................................... 157 Scott Faber, Senior Vice President for Government Affairs, Environmental Working Group.................................... 163 Prepared statement........................................... 165 Submitted Material H.R. 4069, the Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act of 2013, submitted by Mr. Pitts................ 2 H.R. 4250, the Sunscreen Innovation Act, submitted by Mr. Pitts.. 15 H.R. 4299, the Improving Regulatory Transparency for New Medical Therapies Act, submitted by Mr. Pitts.......................... 41 Letter of April 7, 2014, from Gina F. Adams, Corporate Vice President, Government Affairs, FedEx Corporation, to Mr. Upton, et al., submitted by Mrs. Blackburn............................ 50 Statement of April 7, 2014, by the National Association of Chain Drug Stores, submitted by Mrs. Blackburn....................... 51 Letter of April 7, 2014, from Alliance to Prevent the Abuse of Medicines to Hon. Tom Marino and Mrs. Blackburn, submitted by Mrs. Blackburn................................................. 64 Letter of April 4, 2014, from Brett M. Coldiron, President, American Academy of Dermatology Association to Mr. Pitts and Mr. Pallone, submitted by Mr. Whitfield........................ 108 Letter of April 7, 2014, from Bill Piper, Director, Office of National Affairs, Drug Policy Alliance, to Mr. Pitts and Mr. Pallone, submitted by Mr. Pallone.............................. 120 Statement of April 7, 2014, by the Global Healthy Living Foundation, submitted by Mr. Pitts............................. 182 IMPROVING PREDICTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY IN DEA AND FDA REGULATION ---------- MONDAY, APRIL 7, 2014 House of Representatives, Subcommittee on Health, Committee on Energy and Commerce, Washington, DC. The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:00 p.m., in room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Pitts (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding. Members present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Whitfield, Shimkus, Murphy, Blackburn, Lance, Griffith, Bilirakis, Ellmers, Upton (ex officio), Pallone, Dingell, Green, Barrow, and Waxman (ex officio). Staff present: Clay Alspach, Chief Counsel, Health; Gary Andres, Staff Director; Noelle Clemente, Press Secretary; Paul Edattel, Professional Staff Member, Health; Sydne Harwick, Legislative Clerk; Robert Horne, Professional Staff Member, Health; Carly McWilliams, Professional Staff Member, Health; Heidi Stirrup, Policy Coordinator, Health; John Stone, Counsel, Health; Ziky Ababiya, Democratic Staff Assistant; Eric Flamm, Democratic FDA Detailee; Elizabeth Letter, Democratic Press Secretary; Karen Lightfoot, Democratic Communications Director and Senior Policy Advisor; and Karen Nelson, Democratic Deputy Staff Director, Health. Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The Chair will recognize himself for an opening statement. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA Today's legislative hearing focuses on three bills designed to improve the predictability and transparency in Drug Enforcement Administration and Food and Drug Administration regulation. H.R. 4069, the Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act, introduced by Representatives Marino and Blackburn, will facilitate greater collaboration between industry stakeholders and regulators in an effort to combat our Nation's prescription drug abuse epidemic. [The information follows:] [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] Mr. Pitts. H.R. 4250, the Sunscreen Innovation Act, introduced by Representatives Whitfield and Dingell, seeks to expedite the FDA's approval process for active ingredients in sunscreens that have long been approved for use in places like Europe, Canada, and other countries to ensure that U.S. consumers have access to the safest, most effective sunscreens available. [The information follows:] [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] Mr. Pitts. And H.R. 4299, the Improving Regulatory Transparency for New Medical Therapies Act, which Ranking Member Pallone and I introduced. Mr. Pallone and I introduced H.R. 4299, which seeks to improve the transparency and consistency of DEA's scheduling of new FDA-approved drugs under the Controlled Substances Act, CSA, and its registration process for manufacturing controlled substances for use in clinical trials. Ultimately, this will allow new and innovative treatments to get to patients who desperately need them faster. It now takes on average well over a billion dollars and 14 years from the time a drug is discovered to the time of approval. [The information follows:] [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] Mr. Pitts. This committee has taken steps to provide more transparency and consistency in the drug approval process through the Prescription Drug User Fee Program and a commitment to review goals imbedded in the PDUFA agreements. However, drugs that contain substances that have not been previously marketed in the United States and that have abuse potential must also be scheduled under the CSA by the DEA before they can begin marketing their product. But under the CSA, there is no deadline for the DEA to make a scheduling decision, and the delays in DEA decisions have increased nearly fivefold since the year 2000. This lack of predictability in the timing of DEA's scheduling decisions leads to unnecessary uncertainty in the drug development process and needless delays in patients' access to new therapies. H.R. 4299 simply requires the DEA to issue an interim final rule 45 days after it receives FDA's scheduling recommendation for a new drug, allowing patients access to new therapies 45 days after FDA approval. DEA would retain its authority to subsequently transfer the drug between schedules under the Section 201 of the CSA. This bill also establishes a timeline for DEA to grant approval of manufacturers' applications to register controlled substances not yet approved by FDA to be used in clinical trials, allowing companies to properly plan clinical trial schedules for prospective new therapies. This provision will get products to the market faster because innovators will be able to get clinical trials under way in a timely and predictable way, which is critical to drug developers and patients alike. H.R. 4299 requires that if the DEA has not made a final decision on whether to approve a registration application for products in the investigational new drug, IND, phase within 180 days of submission of the application, then the DEA shall provide notice to the applicant on the outstanding issues that must be resolved in order to reach a final decision and an estimated date on which a final decision on the registration application will be made. Such a solution does not force the DEA to make a particular decision but will provide transparency to the process so companies can better plan when regulatory decisions will be made. I would like to thank all of our witnesses for being here today. I look forward to having a constructive discussion on these legislative proposals. These bills touch on very important issues for this committee, and they offer and excellent starting point for finding solutions. [The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:] Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts Today's legislative hearing focuses on three bills designed to improve the predictability and transparency in Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulation: H.R. 4069, the Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act, introduced by Reps. Marino and Blackburn, will facilitate greater collaboration between industry stakeholders and regulators in an effort to combat our Nation's prescription drug abuse epidemic; H.R. 4250, the Sunscreen Innovation Act, introduced by Reps. Whitfield and Dingell, seeks to expedite the FDA's approval process for active ingredients in sunscreens that have long been approved for use in places like Europe, Canada, and other countries to ensure that U.S. consumers have access to the safest, most effective sunscreens available; and H.R. 4299, the Improving Regulatory Transparency for New Medical Therapies Act, which Ranking Member Pallone and I introduced. Mr. Pallone and I introduced H.R. 4299 seeks to improve the transparency and consistency of DEA's scheduling of new FDA- approved drugs under the Controlled Substances Act (CSA), and its registration process for manufacturing controlled substances for use in clinical trials. Ultimately, this will allow new and innovative treatments to get to patients who desperately need them faster. It now takes, on average, well over a billion dollars and 14 years from the time a drug is discovered to the time of approval. This committee has taken steps to provide more transparency and consistency in the drug approval process through the Prescription Drug User Fee program and a commitment to review goals embedded in the PDUFA agreements. However, drugs that contain substances that have not been previously marketed in the United States and that have abuse potential must also be scheduled under the CSA by the DEA before they can begin marketing their product. But, under the CSA, there is no deadline for the DEA to make a scheduling decision, and the delays in DEA decisions have increased nearly five-fold since 2000. This lack of predictability in the timing of DEA scheduling decisions leads to unnecessary uncertainty in the drug development process and needless delays in patients' access to new therapies. H.R. 4299 simply requires DEA to issue an Interim Final Rule 45 days after it receives FDA's scheduling recommendation for a new drug, allowing patients access to new therapies 45 days after FDA approval. The DEA would retain its authority to subsequently transfer the drug between schedules under the Section 201 of the CSA. This bill also establishes a timeline for DEA to grant approval of manufacturers' applications to register controlled substances, not yet approved by FDA, to be used in clinical trials, allowing companies to properly plan clinical trial schedules for prospective new therapies. This provision will get products to the market faster because innovators will be able to get clinical trials underway in a timely and predictable way; which is critical to drug developers and patients alike. H.R. 4299 requires that if the DEA has not made a final decision on whether to approve a registration application for products in the investigational new drug (IND) phase within 180 days of submission of the application, then the DEA shall provide notice to the applicant on the outstanding issues that must be resolved in order to reach a final decision, and, an estimated date on which a final decision on the registration application will be made. Such a solution does not force the DEA to make a particular decision but will provide transparency to the process so companies can better plan when regulatory decisions will be made. I would like to thank all of our witnesses for being here today, and I look forward to having a constructive discussion on these legislative proposals. These bills touch on very important issues for this committee and they offer an excellent starting point for finding solutions. Thank you. Mr. Pitts. I yield back the balance of my time and, at this point, recognize the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, 5 minutes for an opening statement. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Pitts. Today's important hearing will examine a number of bills that aim to provide predictability and transparency for medicines and other products. This committee has an important balancing act it must play. As prescription drug abuse threatens the safety and health of too many people in this country, we must find ways to combat this growing public health epidemic. At the same time as we examine different policies to address this issue, we must also ensure patient access to necessary medications. We all agree that the Food and Drug Administration, the FDA, and the Drug Enforcement Agency, the DEA, have critical missions. FDA ensures that innovative medicines and other products are safe and effective, while the DEA safeguards our communities from illegal and diverted drugs. Once the FDA approves a drug, the DEA's role is to utilize the scheduling process under the Controlled Substances Act, which helps them to keep the medicine in the hands of those who need them and away from criminals and abusers who aim to break the law or, in some unfortunate cases, abuse these drugs. While both agencies typically work independently, it is important that their authorities and actions work in a complimentary way. There is no question that DEA has an important role in combatting drug abuse, but there must be some recognition by DEA of the legitimate therapies that improve the public health. One of the bills under consideration today is one that I am proud to sponsor with Chairman Pitts. H.R. 4299, the Improving Regulatory Transparency For New Medical Therapies Act, aims to improve the DEA's scheduling process for new FDA approved drugs under the Controlled Substances Act and the registration process for the use of controlled substances in clinical trials. In recent years, this committee has worked successfully to improve review of new medications. Without weakening FDA oversight, we have given manufacturers and patient groups a more predictable process allowing patients to get timely access to the latest innovation therapies available. But unfortunately, when a medicine has abuse potential, the DEA's authorities under the Controlled Substances Act are hindering this progress. Specifically the draft bill would require DEA to make a final determination 45 days after receiving FDA's scheduling recommendation for a new drug. Additionally, it would generate more transparency in the application process for clinical trials by requiring the DEA make a final determination within 180 days or provide the applicant with details about what outstanding issues remain unresolved. I hope we can better understand today what is happening at the DEA and find ways to address it. In addition today, we will examine H.R. 4069, the Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act, introduced by Representatives Blackburn and Marino. The bill aims to improve and better coordinate enforcement efforts within the drug supply chain regarding prescription drug diversion and abuse. It also aims to curtail unnecessary supply chain disruptions that may be affecting patient access to needed medications. And lastly, we will hear from our witnesses about H.R. 4250, the Sunscreen Innovation Act, introduced by Representatives Whitfield and Dingell. Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the U.S., and one in five Americans will develop skin cancer in their lifetime. Research has shown that sunscreen helps reduce the risk of skin cancer and is essential to protecting the public. However, to date, the FDA has not approved a new sunscreen ingredient in nearly two decades. This is a real issue that needs to be addressed, and I am hopeful we can all work together to establish a process that promotes the timely review of sunscreen ingredients while ensuring consumer safety and product efficacy. So I want to thank all of our witnesses here today. Dr. Woodcock, I don't know, is this the second time in 2 weeks? And I look forward to your comments. I would like to yield the remainder of my time to Mr. Dingell, who is the lead sponsor, Democratic sponsor, of H.R. 4205. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN D. DINGELL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman, and I thank you and commend you for this hearing. I am particularly grateful to the gentleman from New Jersey for his courtesy to me. I ask unanimous consent that my remarks be extended in the record. And I would like to address H.R. 4250 and particularly with my concerns as they might exist with regard to Food and Drug. There is no reason why a piece of legislation like this is necessary after 10 years, and why it is that the Congress of the United States has not received the counsel of Food and Drug, that they have had need of legislation of this kind to address a serious problem like skin cancer. This is a great shame indeed. It is the kind of thing that causes distress on the part of the public, puts the public at risk, and puts them at risk of a particularly deadly form of cancer, which is one of the most frequently achieved levels of cancer and kinds of cancer in our society. Food and Drug did not come up here to talk to us about it. We think that this is legislation, which was crafted somewhat with and somewhat without the assistance of the Food and Drug Administration, but it would have been so much better had Food and Drug come up here with the legislation earlier on. I want to thank you for holding this hearing, Mr. Chairman. And I want to particularly thank my good friend Mr. Whitfield for his leadership and responsibility in this matter. I hope that we are going to have supportive testimony from Food and Drug and that the Food and Drug Administration will not let this kind of thing happen again. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Upton, for an opening statement. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today the subcommittee will hear testimony on what I think will be three bipartisan bills that address important problems facing the Nation. First, Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member Pallone are collaborating on H.R. 4299, the Improving Regulatory Transparency for New Medical Therapies Act. Their bill would provide more certainty among the Drug Enforcement Administration's review of scheduling decisions for new drug products. Second, Vice Chair of the Committee Marsha Blackburn is working with Representative Marino on H.R. 4069, the Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act. This bill establishes a collaborative and coordinated approach to the prescription drug abuse crisis that certainly is plaguing our local communities across the country. And finally, we are going to be discussing H.R. 4250, which is cosponsored by Ed Whitfield and Mr. Dingell. Everyone does seem to agree that the current system for approving sunscreen ingredients is broken. It is long overdue that we find a solution to the current backlog of sunscreen ingredients pending at the FDA, and this bill does it. I want to commend my colleagues for working together to develop these legislative solutions. We have had a strong record of bipartisan success this Congress in our work to improve public health, and these bills further that effort. [The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:] Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton Today the subcommittee will hear testimony on three bills that address important problems facing our country. First, Chairman Pitts and Ranking Member Pallone are collaborating on H.R. 4299, the ``Improving Regulatory Transparency for New Medical Therapies Act.'' Their bill would provide more certainty around the Drug Enforcement Administration's review of scheduling decisions for new drug products. Second, Marsha Blackburn, vice chair of the committee, is working with Representative Marino on H.R. 4069, the ``Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act.'' The bill would help establish a collaborative and coordinated approach to the prescription drug abuse crisis that is plaguing our local communities across the country. Finally, today we will discuss H.R. 4250, which is co- sponsored by Ed Whitfield and John Dingell. Everyone seems to agree that the current system for approving sunscreen ingredients is broken. This bill would help provide a solution to the current backlog of sunscreen ingredients pending at the FDA. I want to commend my colleagues for working together to develop these legislative solutions. We look forward to working in a bipartisan manner to perfect them so we can move them swiftly through the legislative process. We have had a strong record of bipartisan success this Congress in our work to improve public health, and these bills further our efforts. Thank you for holding this hearing. Mr. Upton. And I yield the balance of my time to Ms. Blackburn. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE Mrs. Blackburn. I thank the chairman for yielding, and Mr. Pitts for the hearing. And, yes, I have worked with Congressman Marino; 4069 is a piece of legislation that we have put some effort into to come up with the Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act. And there is a necessity to clarify a couple of definitions and provide some certainty and some consistency. We will talk more about that. And Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit my full statement to the record. Mr. Pitts. Without objection. Mrs. Blackburn. And also three letters of support for our legislation, one from FedEx, another National Association of Chain Drug stores, and then also the Alliance to Prevent Abuse of Medications. Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered. [The information follows:] [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] Mrs. Blackburn. And I appreciate that so much. Congressman Marino and I are working to clarify the two phrases, ``consistent with public health and safety,'' and how that corresponds to substantial relationship to preventing diversion and abuse of controlled substances, and further define ``imminent danger'' by providing clarification and harmonizing the CSA with other statutes using the imminent danger standard, such as the Federal Mines Safety and Health Act. And these definitions do matter. We all realize that. We are also interested in moving forward with the prescription drug abuse working group, which would give Government, public policy, and industry the ability to collaborate and provide recommendations to Congress on initiatives to reduce prescription drug diversion and abuse. This is an issue that has grown to epidemic proportions in our country, and we had about 27,000 unintentional drug overdose deaths which occurred in the U.S. during 2007 and a number that has increased fivefold since 1990. [The prepared statement of Mrs. Blackburn follows:] Prepared statement of Hon. Marsha Blackburn Prescription drug abuse is an epidemic that is killing tens of thousands of Americans each year. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), approximately 27,000 unintentional drug overdose deaths occurred in the United States during 2007--a number that has increased five-fold since 1990. This is a problem that's greatly in need of a solution. However, simply acknowledging the epidemic of prescription drug abuse isn't enough. There needs to be a clear distinction between the legitimate pharmaceutical supply chain that directly serves patients and the criminals who are diverting and selling illegal drugs. Supply chain stakeholders need further guidance on how to collaborate more effectively with law enforcement. Stated simply, their obligation to prevent diversion is only achievable if the DEA and other regulators will work with them to get it done. I believe these stakeholders--physicians, pharmacies, and distributors who want to do the right thing--stand ready to work with law enforcement in combating prescription drug abuse. That's why I worked with my colleague Congressman Tom Marino in crafting, H.R. 4069, the Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act of 2014. Our legislation clarifies two definitions within the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) which is essential to providing a clear path forward for enforcement agencies. We specify that the phrase ``consistent with the public health and safety'' corresponds to a ``substantial relationship to .preventing diversion and abuse of controlled substances.'' We also further define ``imminent danger'' by providing clarification and harmonizing the CSA with other statutes using the ``imminent danger'' standard such as the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act. Why do definitions matter? Because Congress--this subcommittee--has a responsibility to make sure the law is crystal clear for both DEA and legitimate businesses who want to understand what the rules are so they can do the right thing. Our job is to make sure they're on the same page. We also expect industry to step up and do more to minimize the risk of diversion. To protect the integrity of the distribution system, we require criminal background checks and drug testing for employees of distributors who have access to controlled substances. I should note that we are continuing to work with the interested parties to make sure that provision is narrowly crafted to achieve the right policy objective. Lastly, we establish a Prescription Drug Abuse Working Group which will give Government, public policy and industry the ability to collaborate and provide recommendations to Congress on initiatives to reduce prescription drug diversion and abuse. I've said many times since I took the lead on this issue over 2 years ago that on this one, the tragic prescription drug abuse epidemic in America, we are all in this together. And that's where Congressman Marino and I are coming from with this bill. A bill which already has the support of three former United States Attorneys now in Congress, including Mr. Marino. I thank Chairman Pitts for holding this hearing this afternoon, and I look forward to working with my colleagues and our witnesses today on bringing an effective solution to this growing epidemic. I yield back. Mrs. Blackburn. At this time, I yield the balance of my time to Mr. Whitfield. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. FDA has not expanded its approval list of sunscreen ingredients since 1999, even though many innovative products have been used safely for years abroad. In fact, there are eight pending applications, all of which have been used in other parts of the world. Some of them have been under the process of being scrutinized for 12 years. That is why we have introduced the Sunscreen Innovation Act, Mr. Dingell and others, and we look forward to working with FDA because we need to pass legislation to make sure that this process is speeded up in some way, and I yield the balance of the time to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Burgess. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS Mr. Burgess. I thank the gentleman for yielding the time. Glad to have both the FDA and the DEA here today. Time is short. Let me confine my observations to the Drug Enforcement Administration. I am hearing that manufacturers and distributors are having a difficult time working with your agency. They say the relationship is not collaborative. It is one where intimidation and lack of communication is all too common. I am willing to work with anyone to close loopholes to target bad actors and even propose policies that might raise the ire of those in my party, but I will not sit by while patients cannot access lawfully prescribed medication. No doctor, no wholesaler, no pharmacist, should live in fear that in their attempt to alleviate human suffering, they are likely to be put out of business. I understand your mission, but I want to know that you have a strong voice for patients, for providers, and I want you to know the effect that you have. It is necessary to enter conversations on everything from the scheduling of certain drugs to prescribing drug abuse with an interactive perspective. No one should stand down in the face of bullying, aggressive and narrow-minded tactics. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will now yield back the balance of my time. Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I will now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes of opening statement. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, for holding this hearing today. Today's hearing focuses on three bills, all addressing important issues. Mr. Marino and Mrs. Blackburn's bill, H.R. 4069, makes changes to the Controlled Substances Act that will help drug distributors and others work with the DEA to keep controlled substance prescription drugs out of the hands of drug abusers. It also will help them avoid inappropriately limiting legitimate access to these same drugs by patients who need them. Achieving that balance is a difficult challenge. I will be interested to learn DEA's views on the bill. Mr. Pitts and Mr. Pallone's bill, H.R. 4299, would speed up DEA decisions on scheduling new FDA approved drugs containing controlled substances so they could get to patients more quickly. It also would speed up the DEA registration process, allowing the manufacture and distribution of controlled substances for use only in clinical trials. It is aiming to address a problem faced by those with epilepsy and other patients, the delay in getting a new FDA approved controlled substance medication to patients in need. I think their bill could make a significant contribution to solving this problem, and I applaud them for introducing it. DEA's mission and focus is combatting drug abuse. I applaud its work in that area. At the same time, we need to find a way for new FDA-approved controlled substance medicines to get to patients who need them more quickly, and I hope DEA shares that goal and will work with the committee to achieve it. Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Dingell's bill, H.R. 4250, aims to speed up FDA's regulatory decisions on sunscreens that have been marketed in other countries for at least 5 years. Sunscreens are an important tool in lowering the risk of skin cancer. Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the United States, and its incidence continues to grow. Melanoma, the deadliest kind, kills over 9,000 Americans a year. One way to prevent skin cancer is to minimize exposure to UV rays. I have had a long interest in this issue. I have been working with Chairman Upton to protect teenagers from the dangers of sun lamps. Getting better sunscreens to market and increasing sunscreen use is another critical element in the fight against skin cancer. We need a regulatory system that enables safe and effective sunscreens to make it to the market in a reasonable amount of time. Under our current system, sunscreen applications have been languishing for 5 to 10 years. I don't think anyone could call that a reasonable amount of time. Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Dingell, working with the PASS Coalition, have made a good faith effort to come up with a bill that would help FDA reach decisions in a timely fashion on such sunscreen applications. I strongly support those efforts. However, I do have concerns with a number of elements of the bill, most notably the bill effectively cedes FDA's jurisdiction to an advisory committee. If the advisory committee recommends approval, the approval goes into effect, unless FDA rejects it within 45 days, and even then, the burden is on FDA to justify its decision not to accept the recommendation. I think this would be a bad precedent. I applaud the bill's sponsors and the PASS Coalition for working on this issue and developing a bill for us to consider. That alone is a step forward. I share the goal of having an FDA review process that enables safe and effective sunscreens to get to market as quickly as possible. I recognize that the current system does not achieve that goal. I hope FDA will commit to work with the committee and with the coalition and other stakeholders to reach that goal. I look forward to the hearing today and, while I may not be here all of the time, to reviewing the testimony from our witnesses. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would be happy to yield my time if anybody seeks it. If not, I yield it back. Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes the opening statements. All members' written opening statements will be submitted for the record. We have two panels before us today. On our first panel we have Dr. Janet Woodcock, Director, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Thank you again for coming to the subcommittee. And Mr. Joseph Rannazzisi, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office of Diversion Control, Drug Enforcement Administration. Your written testimony will be made part of the record. You will be each given 5 minutes to summarize. Thank you for coming today. And Dr. Woodcock, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your opening statement. STATEMENTS OF JANET WOODCOCK, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR DRUG EVALUATION AND RESEARCH, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES; AND JOSEPH T. RANNAZZISI, DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF DIVERSION CONTROL, DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE STATEMENT OF JANET WOODCOCK Ms. Woodcock. Thank you and good afternoon. I am Janet Woodcock, Director of the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research at FDA, and thank you for the opportunity to discuss important issues concerning sunscreen products. Now, as you know, manufacturers must have an approved new drug or abbreviated new drug application before they can market a drug in the United States, unless they have a drug that complies with an over-the-counter monograph. The monograph is a regulation that describes the conditions OTC drugs must meet. This allows these monograph products to be offered in many different configurations to the public without filing different applications. And this has been a very successful program. There are over 100,000 products out there, OTC products out there, it is estimated, that are monograph products. And most sunscreens are marketed in the U.S. under the sunscreen monograph. Now, the FDA must conclude that an ingredient is generally recognized as safe and effective for the condition of use if it is going to be put into a monograph. But the real world conditions of use and what is scientifically considered safe and effective can change over time. And by over time, I mean over decades of time. And in the 1970s, when examination of sunscreens began in the OTC drug review, they were used primarily on a seasonal basis to prevent sunburn. That is what sunscreens were thought to be for back in the day. And the Sunscreen Advisory Panel thought people would be exposed to these sunscreen active ingredients in modest amounts and for short intermittent time periods. And also the ingredients weren't thought to get below the skin, so systemic exposure to these drugs was not a concern. This was before we had all the transdermal skin products that we have now--for hypertension and so forth--that are delivered through the skin. The advisory panel safety evaluation focused on ensuring that sunscreen products caused minimal skin irritation and sensitivity and then, on their efficacy, just that they prevented sunburn. Today people are urged to apply sunscreen in generous amounts and to reapply it frequently and to use it year round, resulting in exposure to the products that is massively greater than what was contemplated originally in the monograph. In addition, sunscreens are applied all over babies and children repeatedly as well to prevent them from the deleterious effects of the sun. There is increasing evidence, though, that some sunscreen ingredients are absorbed through the skin, and that leads to systemic exposures that are chronic, that have not previously been understood or anticipated. This shift in sunscreen use, together with advances in scientific understanding and our own safety evaluation methods have raised questions about what is needed to assure sunscreen safety. FDA has undertaken major actions on important sunscreen issues in the last several years. We have not been inactive. In 2011, we published a regulation that updated efficacy testing and sunscreen labels. This put on what people are used to now the broad spectrum claim that we urge people to use to protect against various types of UV, and also it put information in the label about preventing skin cancer and about decreasing skin aging, so important information about the use of these sunscreens. We also issued a proposed rule with a maximum SPF value of 50 plus for all sunscreen monograph products, and we put an advance notice of proposed rulemaking about additional information on the safety and effectiveness of various dosage forms, like sprays, that raise new concerns about flammability, for example, and inhalation. We have also been evaluating these Time and Extent Applications to add eight new ingredients to the sunscreen monograph. This process, established in 2002, provides a potential pathway for newer active ingredients. We recently sent sponsors letters on two of these applications, giving them feedback and noting that their record is insufficient to establish that they are safe for OTC sunscreen use. We will be holding a public meeting later this year to further clarify our thinking about safety testing for all OTC sunscreen products. And given the expansion of sunscreen use and scientific advances since the OTC evaluation began, our evaluation must include potential endocrine or other effects from systemic absorption. Now this process has taken too long. I agree with that, and we really recognize the entire OTC monograph process is outdated, and about 2 weeks ago, we had a public hearing to discuss ways we might be able to modernize the process. In closing, the OTC monograph process that had historically been so successful is no longer really serving the needs of consumers, industry or the FDA. We have embarked on consideration of how to revise it to work in the current environment, and the problem with sunscreens is really a microcosm of the larger issues we have with the OTC monograph process. Thank you. [The prepared statement of Ms. Woodcock follows:] [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. I now recognize Mr. Rannazzisi for 5 minutes for an opening statement. STATEMENT OF JOSEPH T. RANNAZZISI Mr. Rannazzisi. Thank you, sir. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone, distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of Administrator Michele Leonhart and the men and women of the Drug Enforcement Agency, thank you for the opportunity to discuss today the drug scheduling process and the registration and verification suspension process. First, the DEA was not given the opportunity to comment when legislation that was pending before the subcommittee was drafted. The Department and the administration has not taken a position on the legislation. Therefore, I must emphasize that I am unable to discuss with you the specific details of the legislation. The Controlled Substances Act provides the DEA with the authority to administratively control substances with abuse potential. As fully explored in my written testimony, generally, the complexity and length of time to complete the scheduling process depends on many variables. There are two important points I will emphasize. With respect to newly approved medicines, the DEA initiates the scheduling process when it receives a recommendation from HHS. The DEA might receive the recommendation before or after the approval for marketing. One recent example I will share involves two similar medications that are indicated for epilepsy. The DEA completed the scheduling process in about the same time, 10 and 11 months from the time we received the recommendation. However, in one instance, we received the recommendation 5 months before the drug was marketed--was approved for marketing. In the other instance, we received it 4 months after it was approved for marketing. The result was that one drug was controlled 6 months after market approval, and the other drug was controlled 14 months after market approval. The experience here is that the sooner DEA receives the recommendation to control, the closer to market approval a drug can be scheduled. The next point also concerns timing. Patent holders of recently approved medicines have paid fees to expedite their products through the market approval process, but that is not the process when it comes to scheduling. Like most Federal law enforcement agencies, DEA must prioritize resources to meet the threats and to accomplish the mission. Any perceived delays to control newly approved drugs in the past 3 years must be viewed as part of a bigger picture. In the 13 years from 1997 to 2010, the DEA controlled nine new pharmaceutical drugs and temporarily controlled four substances to avoid an imminent hazard to public safety, but in the last 3 years, DEA has controlled four new pharmaceutical drugs and 28 different synthetic drugs to avoid imminent hazard to public safety. To be sure, the additional responsibility to control 28 different synthetic drugs had an effect on the time to control new pharmaceuticals. In 2010, designer drugs exploded in the retail market, resulting in serious injury and death across America. Faced with the responsibility to get these drugs off the retail shelves, the DEA had no choice but to control these substances as quickly as possible. The DEA acted to stop the imminent hazard these drugs caused, which in turn required significant resources. Another use of DEA's administrative authorities to stop an imminent threat is the authority to immediately suspend a DEA registration. As a law enforcement agency with a regulatory function, the DEA has the authority to revoke a registration and also immediately suspend a registration that poses an imminent danger. In addition to revocation and immediate suspension, there are other nonpunitive actions available to DEA, including a letter of admonition or an informal hearing. From 2007 to 2013, the DEA issued approximately 5,500 letters of admonition and held approximately 118 informal hearings. This fiscal year to date, DEA issued less than 20 orders to show cause and immediate suspensions combined. When the DEA issues a show cause order, the registrant is afforded the opportunity to present his case at a formal hearing in front of a neutral fact finder before any action may be taken. An immediate suspension is authorized during the pendency of the show cause proceeding and is effective immediately. Immediate suspensions are by law reserved for those entities that are an imminent danger to public health and safety. The DEA's administrative enforcement authorities are important tools in DEA's arsenal to ensure compliance, deter and prevent diversion, and ensure that every registration is within the public interest. Without these administrative tools, civil and criminal sanctions would increase, and it would be tremendously more difficult to protect the public health and safety from the diversion of pharmaceutically controlled substances. In closing, I would like to comment on other testimony that the subcommittee will hear today. Some of the witnesses may assume to advocate on behalf of DEA, representing that they believe new legislation will help DEA. I encourage you to look beyond the self-interested statements of witnesses who are here to lobby you to protect their paying clients, present and future, from administrative sanction. The DEA has a responsibility to maintain the closed system of distribution established by the Controlled Substances Act. As such, the DEA's sole interest is protecting the public from harm. That is what the administrative and regulatory process is for. That is what we do best: Keeping industry in compliance and protecting the public health and safety. I appreciate the invitation to appear today and look forward to your questions. Thank you. [The prepared statement of Mr. Rannazzisi follows:] [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. We will now go to questioning. I will recognize myself for 5 minutes for that purpose. Dr. Woodcock, with respect to scheduling of controlled substances, would you elaborate on what types of data FDA uses in conducting its analysis for a new molecular entity prior to sending the agency's recommendation to DEA, and what is the purpose of this evaluation? Do the scientists at FDA do everything they can to make this evaluation as comprehensive and accurate as possible? Ms. Woodcock. Certainly. Well, the FDA and our partner, we work with NIDA, are trying to predict, based on what data we have, how abusable, how attractive, a drug may be once it is out on the market for abuse and addiction. We use everything from the structural knowledge of the drug to animal studies, and there are animal studies that can look at whether the animals find the drug attractive, to actual human studies, likability studies, where we ask experienced humans what they think of the effects of the drug, and that is very illuminating. We put all that information together plus epidemiology on similar and related substances, and basically, we do what is called an eight factor analysis, and we put all those factors together into an analysis. Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Mr. Rannazzisi, what is the average time it takes DEA to schedule a new molecular entity after your agency receives FDA's recommendation? Mr. Rannazzisi. I don't know what the average time is, but it is very product specific. It depends on when we receive the recommendation. See, in some products, we receive the recommendation way before approval, so we could go ahead and start our eight factor because, like my colleague, we have to do an eight factor as well, and three of the factors are based on DEA findings. Mr. Pitts. And why does it sometimes take over a year to make this determination? Mr. Rannazzisi. Depending on when we receive the recommendation, generally there could be problems. When we get the recommendation, we have to send it back to FDA for a clarification. There might have been something that FDA missed that we want them to look at. Remember, when we take the final scheduling action, and we publish it, there may be a hearing and DEA, not FDA, but DEA has to justify the schedule that the product is being put in. We have to provide the evidence that the drug is properly scheduled. So if the scheduling action is questioned and a hearing is requested, DEA is the one that goes into court and justifies the scheduling. We bring FDA in to provide testimony, but in the end, it is our scheduling action based on 811. Mr. Pitts. In your opinion, are there instances where the agency has taken too long to schedule a new molecular entity after FDA approval? Mr. Rannazzisi. No. In fact, there was a statement I think somebody made with a fivefold increase since 1999. I have no idea where that number came from because you have to look at when we received the actual recommendation. It is not when the drug is scheduled. We have to go back because, like I said, sometimes we get the recommendation well after the approval has been done, 3 to 4 months, so that is when we start. We cannot start the process until we receive the eight factor from HHS. Mr. Pitts. Section 201-B of the Control Substances Act, it states that DEA is bound by the medical and scientific recommendations of the FDA. Is that correct? Mr. Rannazzisi. That is correct. Mr. Pitts. And FDA's recommendations are made after a thorough analysis of the potential for abuse and misuse of the drug products, right? Mr. Rannazzisi. That is correct. Mr. Pitts. Now, after a drug product is scheduled and available for marketing, it can be rescheduled. Would you explain how DEA participates in that process and how often has DEA initiated these rescheduling discussions? Mr. Rannazzisi. Rescheduling action, most recently we have one pending with hydrocodone. We did a scheduling action on carisoprodol, which we had to go and justify in court. Carisoprodol is a muscle relaxant that was not scheduled. We requested a medical and scientific evaluation from HHS on two or three occasions. We finally got the justification necessary to reschedule it. It was challenged. We went into court. We justified based on evidence, and we prevailed. It just depends on the specific drug that we are dealing with at the time. Hydrocodone is pending. That is still a pending action. Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. My time is expired. I recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes of questions. Mr. Pallone. Dr. Woodcock, do you want to respond to what Mr. Rannazzisi said about, you know, when the clock stops, in other words-- I mean, when the clock starts, that even after you have approved the drug, it may be like another 4 months or so before its scheduled? He was talking about that. Ms. Woodcock. Well, there are multiple clocks involved here. We are working off the user fee clock that has been agreed to by Congress and so forth, and sometimes there may be additional information that we need for the eight factor that may come in at different times, and so that might prolong that particular determination. At the moment, that doesn't prevent us from approving the drug, so we go ahead and approve the drug, but we are still working on information that we may have received later in the cycle, which might mean a gap between the time the drug is approved, and that is information on safety and efficacy, and the drug, when we can make a recommendation for scheduling. Mr. Pallone. I am going to go back to Mr. Rannazzisi. I just want to get a little information on some other aspects of this scheduling process. I know Mr. Pitts has addressed this in some way, so I apologize if some of these questions are repetitive, but your responses are significant as we try to move this bill. What is the percentage of times in which DEA scheduled a new drug into a class different from which FDA recommended? Mr. Rannazzisi. I don't know of a time where we have not scheduled the drug outside of the recommendation. Mr. Pallone. OK. So there has never been any instance? Mr. Rannazzisi. Not that I can remember. Mr. Pallone. OK. Can you tell us how long it takes on average for DEA to issue a final scheduling decision starting from the time DEA receives a scheduling recommendation from the FDA? Mr. Rannazzisi. Again, I can't tell you on average because different drugs require different time periods. It just depends on the information that came back from the HHS on the eight factor analysis. It depends on when we received that information. It depends on if there needs clarification on any one of the eight factors. It is variable. It depends, especially on new molecular entity, because a new molecular entity, we have to do our research, which we try and do as soon as possible. But, again, it involves when we receive the recommendation. Mr. Dingell. Will you yield? Mr. Pallone. Sure. Mr. Dingell. Will you explain why you have to do your research and why you can't use FDA's research and why you can't get a memorandum of understanding as to how you are going to cooperate? Mr. Rannazzisi. Actually, we do have a memorandum of understanding pending. It is being reviewed by both agencies. Mr. Dingell. I am not hearing you say that today. Mr. Rannazzisi. Well, we have a memorandum of understanding pending, and we are working out the differences in the MOA, but I am pretty confident that we will have that in place very shortly. But in the meantime, again, our scientists are the ones who will be testifying in the hearing when it is challenged. Mr. Pallone. I am going to run out of time, so I just want to turn now to the process for registering manufacturers and distributors of controlled substances. What is the statutory deadline for making a decision on an application to become registered as a manufacturer or distributor of a controlled substance, or is there no deadline? Mr. Rannazzisi. I think it is within a reasonable time period. Mr. Pallone. Within a what you said? Mr. Rannazzisi. I think it is a reasonable time period. Once we receive all of the data, we do an investigation of the physical location. We grant the registration. As long as they have the proper, appropriate, State licensing. Mr. Pallone. How long does it usually take on average from application of registration? Mr. Rannazzisi. Again, it just depends on the entity we are registering. Mr. Pallone. Does the DEA look at any application to manufacture or distribute a controlled substance for a clinical trial any differently than an application to manufacture or distribute for commercial use? Because I would imagine that the quantities would be considerably smaller for clinical trials? Mr. Rannazzisi. On a clinical trial, a researcher for a clinical trial, they would send in their application with their research protocols. Once we receive the research protocols, we send the research protocols to FDA. FDA and NIDA review the research protocols. They make a determination that the protocols are consistent with good research. At that point in time, they are approved. They come back to us, and we send diversion investigators on site to review, to ensure that they have the appropriate storage container to lock whatever investigational drug that may be a controlled substance they are using, and we give them the application once they understand what paperwork's involved and security is in place. It is no different than anybody else really, except that the protocols must be approved by HHS. Mr. Pallone. My time is expired, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize the vice chairman of the full committee, Mrs. Blackburn, for 5 minutes for questioning. Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you so very much, and I appreciate that both of you are here and have just a couple of questions. I want us to be able to move on so we can get to the second panel. Continuing along kind of with the line that Mr. Pallone was going, I think that when we look at the DEA and look at what is happening with prescription drugs, you know, you can look at-- the laws are very clear when it comes to the illegal drug trade. You know that distribution of heroin or the methamphetamines, you know it is illegal. That type clarity is very helpful in enforcing the law, but when we are talking about the pharmaceutical products, what constitutes legal prescribing and dispensing is not quite as clear. So let me just ask you if you can list for us what you are doing, articulate what the efforts are that the DEA is engaged in to promulgate some clear standards for the prescribers, for the pharmacies, for the distributors. What is your step by step? You say you have got an MOA. You say that is pending, so give me your tick list. Mr. Rannazzisi. Well, let's talk about the prescribers first. I believe that the courts have settled what a prescriber must do. He must issue a prescription, a controlled substance prescription for a legitimate medical purpose in the usual course of professional practice. That was given to us by U.S. v. Moore 1975, and that hasn't changed. It is very obvious. When we go out and talk to physicians groups, we tell them that is their standard. They know that is the standard. If you looked back when we were doing the Internet pharmacy debacle, when doctors weren't seeing patients--they were just writing prescriptions without seeing the patient and having a pharmacy over the Internet fill them--that was not for legitimate medical purpose, not in the usual course of professional practice. There was no established doctor-patient relationship. Now let's talk about the pharmacists. The pharmacists have a corresponding responsibility to ensure the prescription is valid. We go out and we teach the pharmacists, as does the National Associations of the Boards of Pharmacy and the particular pharmacy boards that the pharmacist sits in, that they have a corresponding responsibility to ensure that the prescription is valid, that it is issued for a legitimate medical purpose in the usual course of professional practice. Pharmacists understand that. There is transparency in the case law. There is transparency in how we do things. We have done prescription drug pharmacy diversion awareness conferences in, I think, 14 States. Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Well, a lot of that we know. We were looking for a little bit of that new information, and I guess it is kind of a Monday attitude sort of day, so let me move on. Mr. Rannazzisi. I would like to finish my answer. I guess not. Mrs. Blackburn. What are you doing to help well-intentioned registrants to determine who they can do business with? Mr. Rannazzisi. I am sorry? We don't dictate who the registrant does business with. Mrs. Blackburn. OK. I thought maybe you were doing a little bit to help---- Mr. Rannazzisi. Well, we are, if I can proceed with the wholesalers and distributors, besides having one-on-one contact with the wholesalers and distributors in the distributor initiative, telling them what to look for and what red flags to look for, our yearly conference with the distributors as a whole to talk to them about what red flags, what we are seeing trend-wise and what they need to look for, besides the onsite investigations that we do, the cyclical investigations, to determination compliance and to assist them in complying, besides the fact that they call in and request assistance---- Mrs. Blackburn. Let me move on, then, if it is laborious. Mr. Rannazzisi. It is not laborious. You asked me to tick off what I do: 16,651 people in 2010 died of opiate overdose, OK, opiate-associated overdose. This is not a game. We are not playing a game. Mrs. Blackburn. Nobody is saying it is a game, sir. We are just trying to craft some legislation. Mr. Rannazzisi. Especially in Tennessee. There is 340---- Mrs. Blackburn. Your written statement indicates that the DEA has initiated less than 20 administrative cases in the last 6 months. What is behind the significant decline in case initiation, and are you satisfied with the number of cases being initiated? Mr. Rannazzisi. Well, we are initiating cases, for sure. Our case numbers have not gone down. Mrs. Blackburn. I think the case numbers have gone down. OK. If DEA has only initiated 20 administrative cases in the last 6 months, what is DEA doing to help registrants identify the prescribers and pharmacies that they should refuse to do business with? Mr. Rannazzisi. Ma'am, that is a due process issue. We can't direct a wholesaler or distributor or a pharmacy not to sell to a particular person. They are afforded due process like every other person. So if I told them, ``Don't sell to this pharmacy, don't sell to this doctor,'' then they wouldn't be afforded due process. Mrs. Blackburn. My time has expired. I yield back. Mr. Pitts. The Chair recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes of questions. Mr. Waxman. Thank you. Dr. Woodcock, I think we can all agree that the current process has not been working. Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Dingell have a bill that attempts to fix the problem. Of course, it is rather strange because we have got three different bills under discussion, and I am taking a leap from the last one. While I have concerns about elements of their bill, I share their frustration with the current FDA process and their desire to fix it. Will you commit to work with the committee, with the PASS Coalition, and other stakeholders, to come up with a process under which new, safe and effective sunscreens can get to market quickly? Ms. Woodcock. Yes. Mr. Waxman. I would like to better understand the current process and how we can help improve it. The central element in H.R. 4250 seems to be giving an FDA advisory committee the ability to make approval decisions, albeit providing FDA with some authority to reject that decision. I have serious concerns about such a model. Can you tell us if there are precedents at FDA for using an advisory committee in this way, what are FDA's views of such an approval, and it does at least appear to have the virtue of speeding up the process? Ms. Woodcock. Well, I believe possibly in the device realm in the past, there were some areas where the panel recommendations were more binding. However, this is not true for pharmaceuticals. The process problems with the OTC monograph go well beyond sunscreens and related or pertain to the entire monograph process, which has to be done by regulations. The Time and Extent Applications is what we are talking about here for sunscreens, were put in place by us actually in the early 2000s to try to bring more products that seemed to be most appropriate for monographs into the monograph system. However, what happened is that got caught up into the prolonged and torturous history of the sunscreen monograph and all the other monographs that we have to get out under the OTC system. So, personally, the administration does not have a position on this bill, but I would say that, you know, it is making steps forward, and we need to change some things if we are going to make an efficient process that can respond both to safety problems and get more products into the monograph. Mr. Waxman. What do you think of the idea of an advisory committee making that decision instead of you? Ms. Woodcock. Well, I think that will be very difficult because it is a voluminous amount of data, and one of the problems that we have had in general is having time to go through all these data, find out what is missing, figure out what the gaps are, communicate with the sponsors. It is not a typical type of thing that an AC would do. Mr. Waxman. And do you think if there were such a process, the committee members, I don't know how they would be chosen in particular, how would it affect conflict of interest issues? Ms. Woodcock. Well, like any other advisory committee, we have to do an extensive screening for conflict of interest, and a committee considering this wide range of issues would have to have a very broad representation, all of whom would have to be relatively free of conflict of interest. Mr. Waxman. The bill sets outs mandatory time frames for decisions both by the advisory committee and the FDA and even time frames for applicants to submit new information. I understand the sponsors' interest in moving things along quickly. However, the time frame seems somewhat more ambitious or optimistic than is reasonable. The advisory committee would have 180 days to make its recommendations after receiving an application. Considering that there are eight outstanding applications, that could be a lot of work to expect the committee to accomplish. It also gives FDA 45 days to agree or disagree with the committee recommendation. Again, that seems rather ambitious, even if the committee were to be making only one recommendation for consideration within that time frame. What are FDA's views on those time frames? What times frames would FDA consider reasonable? Ms. Woodcock. Well, I understand the impetus behind the desire for short time frames, however, I feel it may be self- defeating. If it is not possible to identify all the problems and get to a considered opinion in that time frame, then it would be likely to turn something down rather than turn it loose on the public. Mr. Waxman. And what do you think about the shifting of the burden? It appears the advisory committee decision is presumed to be right, unless FDA can prove it is wrong. That seems like an inappropriate shifting of the burden of proof. Seems like a decision could be reversed simply because the FDA reviewer didn't adequately write down the basis for the decision. What is the FDA's view of the appeals process? Ms. Woodcock. Well, I think this does put a tremendous burden on the FDA. And probably inappropriate--as written currently, difficult or undoable burden on the advisory committees as well. So I am not sure this process would end up with the desired outcome, which is clarity, public standards, knowing what needs to be done, and the most efficient process for getting it done. Mr. Waxman. I thank you for your answers and especially your willingness to work with us. I think that is going to be very important. Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman, now recognize the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Dr. Burgess, 5 minutes for questions. Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Woodcock, always good to have you back before the committee. And in fact, let me ask you a question, it is a little bit off topic today. Can you provide the committee with the status of the FDA's guidance on biosimilar naming? Ms. Woodcock. It is still under consideration, it has not been be issued. Mr. Burgess. But when is that guidance likely to become final? Ms. Woodcock. I do not know. However, I realize that it is urgent. We certainly hope that that program will get up and running this year. Mr. Burgess. Sure. Is there anyone advising, outside of the--anybody in the administration outside of the FDA itself? Is there anyone in the administration who is playing a role in this, giving you suggestions or recommendations with respect to the guidance? Ms. Woodcock. Well, the administration has not come to a conclusion on this topic. Mr. Burgess. Who in the administration? Ms. Woodcock. I would have to get back to you on that question. Mr. Burgess. I really would like for you to do that. And please expect some follow-up on that, because it looks to me as if the administration may be the impediment. You all are taking the fall for it. But it is far too long, and we actually need that. Mr. Rannazzisi, you mentioned the memorandum of agreement. And you and Dr. Woodcock, I think, both acknowledge there is a memorandum of agreement that is pending; is that correct? Mr. Rannazzisi. Yes, sir. Mr. Burgess. You know, I don't know that I was aware of the memorandum of agreement. Is that something, can you make the text of the memorandum available to the subcommittee? Mr. Rannazzisi. I don't believe we can. Well, you would have to request that from the Department of Justice because it is actually between the Department of Justice and HHS. Mr. Burgess. Mr. Chairman, I would, then, suggest that the subcommittee do request that from the Department of Justice. What is your time line? What is your expectation of when this will be accomplished? Mr. Rannazzisi. There are several components to this MOA, and I think there are just some things regarding proprietary information that needs to be passed, and I think that is what they were working on. The time limit, we hope to have it soon because it will make the process more efficient in scheduling once we get it in place. Mr. Burgess. Let me ask you the same question I asked Dr. Woodcock. Is there anyone in the administration that is affecting the timeline of this thing adversely? Mr. Rannazzisi. I don't believe so, no. It is---- Mr. Burgess. But you won't share it with us so we couldn't possibly know that, could we? Since you won't share it with us, I am going to let my imagination run wild. It seems as if we have got someone in the administration that is holding this up, and you won't allow us to see the memorandum. I would suggest, Mr. Chairman, that that memorandum of agreement be made available to the committee, and allow us to participate before you just visit this upon everyone who is involved in this process. Mr. Rannazzisi. Well, the problem is, sir, the memorandum of agreement is not finalized. If I gave you a memorandum of agreement right now, it is not a final agreement. Mr. Burgess. Share the draft with us. Mr. Rannazzisi. I am going to share something that is not finalized. Really? Mr. Burgess. Sure. We could help you. We could inform you. We could direct you. Sometimes the legislative and the administrative branches have worked together historically; Mr. Waxman, Mr. Dingell may be able to give you such a time that that happened, but this administration has not worked well with the legislative branch. Here would be an excellent opportunity to start. Let me just ask you a question. Because it keeps coming up. We are going to hear from people on the supply side in the second panel. But, what are you doing to draw the line between prosecuting those who overprescribe and not differentiating between those individuals who are legitimately trying to help? And bearing in mind the people they are trying to help is a pretty vulnerable population? Mr. Rannazzisi. Well, it depends. Again, every case is fact specific. The U.S. Attorney makes a judgment call on how we proceed on the cases based on the evidence that is presented to him or her. The fact is, is the cases that we bring forward are generally pretty egregious. There is no doctor-patient relationship attached, these pain clinics that are operating in Texas, in Tennessee, and pretty much throughout the country now, there is no medical care for rogue pain clinics. They are operating as a facade to distribute controlled substances. In Florida---- Mr. Burgess. And yet they continue to operate. So, you know, look, we do have to get a balance here taking care of people---- Mr. Rannazzisi. Absolutely. Mr. Burgess [continuing]. Who really need the help that they are looking to receive. But sometimes it seems that all the DEA cares about is the number of enforcement actions and not real solutions to stop the abuse. Mr. Rannazzisi. That is not correct. Mr. Burgess. Provide to us data on how that--what you have done to stop the abuse without interfering with the legitimate practice, medicine, pharmacy, and distribution. Mr. Rannazzisi. If you would go on our Web site and look at the cases that are posted on our Web site, both on the cases against practitioners and also cases, the administrative cases against registrants, you will see that---- Mr. Burgess. Well, it would have been great had you been prepared to provide that for us. Mr. Chairman, let me ask that on this memorandum of agreement that we have been talking about, maybe at least the Department could provide us with the goals of what they are trying to achieve with this. Because, after all, we do have legislation pending before this committee that could be impacted as to what those goals are and how they would affect the practice of medicine pharmacy. I'll yield back my time. Mr. Rannazzisi. May I finish my answer? I was not---- Mr. Pitts. You may finish. Mr. Rannazzisi. The administration has a four-pillar strategy, we follow the four-pillar strategy. Education, treatment, enforcement. The three basic tenets that we provide. Now, education, we provide education throughout the supply chain. We make sure that the supply chain, the registrants understand what their obligations are under the act. We provide them with red flags. We provide all of the case law, all of the administrative actions are posted on our Web site. We can direct them to particular circumstances and cases that they are inquiring about. We go out and look at them face to face and explain to them. The distributors we talk to before enforcement action is taken on them and give them an opportunity. See, the fact is, we are not just enforcement, we are a regulatory organization. We go out to their--on-site and look at their facilities and determine if there is any exploitation within their site that could be cause of diversion, and I don't see where you think we are just an enforcement agency, because we do so much more than enforcement. Talk to the pharmacists that have been to our classes. Mr. Burgess. Mr. Chairman, I will reclaim my time. But the vice chair brought it up. The clarity and the consistency of these regulations at the level of the distribution are things that we hear about all the time. But let's go on with the hearing, and I will yield back. Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentlemen. Now recognize the ranking member emeritus of the full committee, Mr. Dingell, 5 minutes for questions. Mr. Dingell. Thank you for your courtesy. I am reminded today of when I was a very small boy and used to go to my granddad's farm out in Iowa. He had a bunch of chickens, and so to keep the chickens happy and keep them laying, when he would take the hens--rather, take the eggs out from under the hens, he would always put a porcelain doorknob in, and those damn chickens would sit on that porcelain doorknob until hell froze over. I am reminded very much, Dr. Woodcock, of those happy days in Iowa and the chickens that were sitting there very happily on the bloody doorknob. Now, we got 2 million Americans developed skin cancer each year. Sixty-one thousand developed melanoma last year, and 9,000 people died. How many of these do you have laying around down there at Food and Drug where you have an application on these? Just if you haven't got it, submit it for the record. And how long has each one of them been laying around there? And when will you have action taken on each of them? And how long is it going to take to reach action on each of them? And why have you not been able to reach action on any of them as of this particular time? Because I note, Doctor, that all of them have been approved and are being used in Europe and other places which have food and drug laws that are roughly equal to ours in terms of their safety. Ms. Woodcock. The sunscreens are marketed as cosmetics in Europe. Mr. Dingell. Well, you are still sitting on them like a hen on a plastic doorknob, and I just find myself thoroughly dissatisfied. So if you will please submit that for the record, I believe it will be most helpful. [The information apears at the conclusion of the hearing.] Mr. Dingell. Now, skin cancer is an epidemic in the United States. It is a pressing public health issue, is it not? Ms. Woodcock. Yes. Mr. Dingell. All right. One of the best ways that we could ensure that the American people have access to the most effective sunscreen ingredients is to see to it that we allow those which are--been proven to be safe by long use in Europe; isn't that so? So you are just sitting there looking at these things. Food and Drug is doing nothing about it. Very comfortable. You come up here and tell us how concerned we are that we are not doing anything. So now, Doctor, do you believe that the American people should have the access to the latest safe and effective sunscreens to prevent skin cancer and melanoma? Ms. Woodcock. Yes, I do. Mr. Dingell. Rest of Food and Drug agree with that? Ms. Woodcock. Yes. Mr. Dingell. Now, Doctor, is it correct that there are eight applications for new sunscreen ingredients that have not received final determination under the time and extent application process at FDA? Yes or no? Ms. Woodcock. Yes. Mr. Dingell. Do you believe that time and extent application process has ever worked as intended, yes or no? Ms. Woodcock. No. Mr. Dingell. Yes? Ms. Woodcock. No, I don't believe it has worked. Mr. Dingell. But you still got eight sitting around and Food and Drug sitting on them like a hen on an egg, right? Now, do you believe that we need to reform this? Ms. Woodcock. Yes. Mr. Dingell. And this is precisely why I have been joined by dear friend Mr. Whitfield to introduce the Sunscreen Innovation Act. The goal of this legislation is to ensure a predictable time frame for the review of new sunscreen ingredients while making sure FDA has the final say on all scientific and safety determinations. Now, Dr. Woodcock, I know there is a request for technical assistance on the Sunscreen Innovation Act that is still outstanding. Will you commit to working with me on this legislation with a goal of resolve the remaining differences by the end of this month? Ms. Woodcock. I will commit to working with you and with the Congress. Mr. Dingell. Well, and I would like to have the requested information that I have sought: How many applications you got sitting around down there? How long have they been there? What is holding up each and every one of them? And the other questions that I asked relative to the delay on them, if you please. Ms. Woodcock. Certainly. There are eight applications for sunscreens to TEA. We have responded to two of those. We hope to respond to the remainder soon. Mr. Dingell. But in Europe they are all approved; right? Ms. Woodcock. In Europe, they are marketed as sunscreens, I am not familiar, but I don't believe there is an application process, such as we are discussing here. Mr. Dingell. They are selling them, aren't they? Ms. Woodcock. Correct. Mr. Dingell. And people are using them, aren't they? Ms. Woodcock. Absolutely. Mr. Dingell. Do you have any evidence of them being unsafe or causing any danger or--there are two things that a pharmaceutical has got to be in this country, one, it has got to be safe, and the other, it has got to be effective. Do you have any evidence that any of these doesn't meet those two tests? Ms. Woodcock. Well, that is part of the point of the TEA process, to have people submit to us what the evidence is about the safety in marketing. Mr. Dingell. You know the affectionate respect I have for you. But you also know that you are make a bad case today. You just can't defend the fact that these things have been sitting around for 8 to 12 years. I yield back the balance of my time. Thank you. Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman. Now recognize the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Whitfield, 5 minutes for questions. Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. Dr. Woodcock, you had indicated earlier that FDA had not taken a position on this legislation; is that correct? Ms. Woodcock. That is correct. Mr. Whitfield. And I think you said in your testimony and in response to Mr. Dingell's questions and others, you do agree that the TEA process is not working very well as it relates to sunscreens; correct? Ms. Woodcock. Generally, I believe the monograph process is no longer functioning the way it was intended, and the TEA process is simply a route to get into the monograph process. Mr. Whitfield. Do you consider the TEA process working? Ms. Woodcock. I think if it were coupled with a more functional monograph process, it could work, yes. Mr. Whitfield. Well, how difficult is it to get a more functional monograph process? Ms. Woodcock. Well, as I said, we had a public meeting 2 weeks ago, and we had few really substantive suggestions there, except we should work harder. Mr. Whitfield. Yes. Well, we all agree on that. But that is why, you know, at least we have a product here, a piece of legislation. Because there is genuine concern and everyone agrees that there is genuine concern. Ms. Woodcock. I share the concern. Mr. Whitfield. And when you have these eight applications, earliest of which was submitted in 2002, and you have only responded to two of them in 12 years, you know, something is not working. Ms. Woodcock. That is a problem. Mr. Whitfield. So Mr. Waxman, now, he pointed out that he was concerned about this advisory committee, and yet you have indicated in your testimony that in nonprescription drugs or in medical devices, you do have an advisory committee that makes recommendation, and, of course, we are talking about over-the- counter here, we are not even talking about prescription drugs, this is over the counter; and the medical devices, I mean, the artificial knee joints are placed in bodies, and that is recommended by advisory committee. So are you genuinely opposed to the advisory committee part of this legislation and the process that we have set out in this bill? Ms. Woodcock. I am not sure that the process you have set out will be functional. I mean, the problem with the current process is not functioning correctly, and I am worried that-- I think that there are some good steps here, and we can build on this. And perhaps get something that will really work for everyone. But, you know, if you press people too hard on matters of safety where you are exposing much of the population of the United States to something, you know, you need to give them the appropriate time and tools. Mr. Whitfield. Well, I think you know, I hope that you---- Mr. Dingell. Will the gentleman yield? Mr. Whitfield. I would be happy to yield. Mr. Dingell. Is 12 years too much pressing? Is 8 years too much pressing? I don't find it so. And I thank the gentleman for yielding. Mr. Whitfield. Well, I mean, I agree, I mean, I think we all agree this is ridiculous. Twelve years. Ms. Woodcock. We all agree. I am not defending the fact that it has taken that long. There are a variety of factors, but that is not appropriate and this process is not working. Mr. Whitfield. And these ingredients are being used elsewhere. But, the commitment that I am asking for from you and others at FDA is to work with us in a sincere way to improve this process for the health and welfare of the American people. Because we know that skin cancer is the most prevalent cancer out there. So you will make that commitment to me and we can work---- Ms. Woodcock. Yes, we would be delighted to work with you, although we would like to reform the whole process of the monographs. Because the sunscreens are just a microcosm, as I said, of a process of has encountered tremendous problems. Mr. Whitfield. Well we are focused on sunscreens because of the prevalence of skin cancer. And in concluding, I know my time hasn't quite expired yet, but I would like to submit for the record, Mr. Chairman, a letter of support from the American Academy of Dermatology Association. Mr. Pitts. Without objection. [The information follows:] [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] Mr. Whitfield. And with that, I would yield back the balance of my time. Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman. And I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for questions. Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you and both our Ranking Member Pallone for having this hearing, and our witnesses for taking the time. First, Dr. Woodcock, I learned just recently that the FDA advisory committee voted last week to recommend that the FDA approve two new antibiotics. These drugs were approved based on the GAIN Act that we passed, this committee passed last Congress, and I know they were in the development stage and before GAIN was enacted and their approval was welcome news. And of course we didn't get everything we wanted to out of the Senate, so we have a real bipartisan bill called Adapt that we are working with FDA on now. But I appreciate that. Mr. Rannazzisi, the FDA is vital to meeting the growing challenges our country faces, including reducing prescription drug abuse, one of our fastest growing public health threats. I commend the FDA for meeting the public safety threats head-on and appreciate it. Because I have seen those same clinics in my area, and frankly, we have a pretty aggressive U.S. Attorney sometimes that gets involved in them. So I am glad of that. However, the FDA, as it tackles its mandate in a number of fronts, it is critical that patients who desperately need these medicines have access without undue delay, particularly those with limited potential for abuse or addiction. In 2011, I sent a letter to FDA after learning it takes an average of 5 to 6 months for the DEA--I sent a letter to DEA--5 or 6 months for DEA to schedule a medicine, notwithstanding the drug's classification or potential for diversion. Since then, we have learned that the delays have not shortened and may actually have increased. I am concerned over the substantial and growing length of time between when the FDA approves a new molecular entity and provides a scheduling recommendation and when the DEA schedules the drug. According to testimony from Dr. Fountain of the Epilepsy Foundation and University of Virginia School of Medicine, the average time between FDA approval and the DEA's final scheduling increased from an average of 49.3 days in the 1990s to an average now of 237.6 days. These delays can result in lack of patient's access to potentially life-saving therapies. Also, a lack of transparency of the DEA scheduling process provides disincentives to companies developing these therapies. Mr. Rannazzisi, specifically what is the sequence of the internal actions at DEA from a receipt of recommendation by the FDA to the DEA's Federal Register publication? Mr. Rannazzisi. When we receive the recommendation, our pharmacists, our pharmacologists begin the process of drafting the eight factor. They look at all the information that has been presented by FDA, and then all the information that they have procured over the last however long when they know the drug is coming. That is a lot of scientific data. They look at all the abuse data, if there is any abuse data. Remember, there is transparency in the system. It is called the Administrative Procedures Act. The APA is our guidance on how we get drugs into the scheduling process. We provide a period of public comment after we do the notice. We have to look at every one of those comments. At that point in time, the public may request a hearing from an administrative law judge. So the process is very transparent. It just takes time because it is a science. The scientific method takes time, and our scientists, just like the FDA scientists, have to ensure that we have the justification to prevail in court. Mr. Green. Well, but it is still is the average increase from the late 1990s to today was from 49 days to 237 days. Mr. Rannazzisi. I don't know where that is coming from. Mr. Green. OK, we will get it to you. We will get the numbers there. Because if that is the issue, then somewhere along the way, whether you are not giving some kind of courtesy to what the FDA scientists did and, I expect--you know, I want FDA to do it. But I also know that they expect---- What is your opinion of the shortest time that might plausibly achieve to accomplish this process from start to finish? Is there an average time that the DEA aims for? Mr. Rannazzisi. I don't believe there is. Because it depends on--if it is a new molecular entity, that is going to take longer than an established drug that is in a different, you know, a combination of formulations. A drug that we know, a drug that we have done very significant research on. Mr. Green. Well, I know Congress and the FDA is taking steps to improve the transparency and consistency of the regulatory process for new drugs, to provide patients access for these new therapies in a timely manner. The lack of predictability, though, and timing of the DEA scheduling decisions, at least on certainty and drug development, and the process and some delays. Delays in patient access to new therapies should be addressed in a manner that doesn't threaten public health or weaken the DEA's ability to ensure public safety. But somewhere along the way, we need to make the system work faster than we are seeing. And I know I am out of time, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentleman. Now recognize the gentlelady from North Carolina, Mrs. Ellmers, 5 minutes for questions. Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Woodcock, and thank you to our panel for being here today. I do have questions about the sunscreen. I think that we have gone over that pretty well here in committee, and as a nurse prior to coming to Congress, obviously, this is an issue that we are all very concerned about, with skin cancer. And I guess what I would like to hear from you, is, please, can you just tell our committee that you are committed to improving upon this issue? I mean, obviously the time has been too long. Ms. Woodcock. It has been too long. As I said a number of months ago when I appeared before this committee, I think I am almost as frustrated as the manufacturers and some of you all about this issue. So I do commit to improving it. We have already taken steps to speed up this process and move it along. Mrs. Ellmers. OK. Moving along to some of the issues having to do with Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act of 2013. There again, a very important issue. This is one that I think many of us, you know, we understand the drug abuse issue, we understand the deaths that have occurred as a result, and we need to be proactive on this issue. One of the solutions that has been put forward that holds promise is the development of abuse-resistant prescription drug products. Such formulations make it harder for individuals to break down prescription drugs for abuse purposes. Obviously, that would be the actual drug itself. And I would just like to thank you for the work that you have been doing, and I do want a clarification. My understanding is that there is some progress being made right now, that the agency is contracting with some of the academic and research institutions, utilizing research grant funding through the Generic Drug User Fee Act, to study this evaluation of abuse-deterrent formulations. Is this correct? Ms. Woodcock. I can't comment on the funding. But the research is correct, yes. And we are trying to develop a framework so that as--we don't want to approve abuse-deterrent formulations that then disincentivize people from developing better ones. We have approved one, and it has some abuse-deterrent properties. However, we need to get much better than that. So what we need to do is kind of establish both the--you know, the carrot and the stick incentives, and we are doing research in our own laboratories as well as elsewhere. Mrs. Ellmers. Will the FDA in its guidance provide flexibility and encourage manufacturers to pursue alternative methods and approaches to develop meaningful abuse-deterrent technologies rather than a single development path such that the innovation and advancement in science are effective harness--I mean, are there incentives that are being put forward? Ms. Woodcock. Absolutely. That is part of the strategy, is to have multiple different abuse-deterrent mechanisms so that if one might be overcome--Mr. Rannazzisi and I were talking earlier that criminals are always sort of one step ahead of you. Mrs. Ellmers. Sure. Ms. Woodcock. So we need to keep encouraging that innovation. Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Dr. Woodcock. And, Mr. Rannazzisi, I think we have--there is a lot of discussion of clarity and process on how things are moving forward. You know, we are hearing repeatedly that registrants are very concerned about the lack of clarity. However, you have outlined that this is something that the DEA is working on. And you say that you, and I am going to quote you, that you give the opportunity for the registrants to come forward, that there is plenty of opportunity for them. Is there a process for appeal of a decision by the DEA? And can you describe that, if a registrant is found to have been revoked, their DEA ability to produce suspended or revoked? Mr. Rannazzisi. I believe they could take it to district court. Mrs. Ellmers. You believe or you---- Mr. Rannazzisi. They could take it to the district court. Mrs. Ellmers. OK, when we are talking about the hearing process, I know my colleague across the aisle, Mr. Green, was referring to some of the hearing procedures, and there seems to be a lot of discrepancy on timing of how long a hearing would take. Can you tell us what the average time is? I know my colleague had said that he had heard of a time frame, and there again, I don't know exactly the number. But you basically said you weren't sure where that number came from. Can you tell us? Mr. Rannazzisi. I don't believe that was for a hearing; I believe that was for--I think that was for scheduling. The timeframe it takes for scheduling action. Mrs. Ellmers. To schedule? Mr. Rannazzisi. Yes. Mrs. Ellmers. OK. Mr. Rannazzisi. For a hearing, again, it depends on if it is an immediate suspension order with an order to show cause or just a plain, ordinary---- Mrs. Ellmers. So to that point, how long would you say that it does take a hearing to be scheduled? And then I know my time is---- Mr. Rannazzisi. When we do an immediate suspension order with an order to show cause, the date of the hearing is on the order to show cause, and I believe if it is within 30 days. Mrs. Ellmers. OK. Within 30 days. Thank you so much. My time has expired. Mr. Pitts. Chair thanks the gentlelady. Now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis, for 5 minutes for questions. Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it very much. And again, thank you for your testimony. Thank the panel. Mr. Rannazzisi, numerous seniors in my district are complaining. They call my office on a regular basis because they can't get their pain medications, and the pharmacists have stated that DEA is placing arbitrary and vague quotas on wholesalers and pharmacies. I also hear that DEA is telling pharmacists not to fill prescriptions that raise red flags, but has given no guidance about these red flags. I want to give you an opportunity to respond. But considering DEA's mission to ensure an adequate, uninterrupted supply of controlled medications for patients' needs, what is DEA doing to address the impacts on patients that these confusing policies are causing? And I know we have touched on this earlier. But if you could elaborate, I would appreciate it. Mr. Rannazzisi. To start, actually, last year we were down in Florida, and we trained, I think, 1,400 pharmacists on what their role is as far as corresponding responsibility and how they review prescriptions. And we talked about the red flags, and we are trying to do that in every State. The fact is that we do not want patients to go without their medication, true pain patients that need their medication. We don't want that. But there is no quota---- Mr. Bilirakis.