- HEARING 4
[House Hearing, 114 Congress] [From the U.S. Government Publishing Office] HEARING 4 ======================================================================= HEARING 4 before the SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE EVENTS SURROUNDING THE 2012 TERRORIST ATTACK IN BENGHAZI HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION __________ HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, OCTOBER 22, 2015 __________ Printed for the use of the Select Committee on the Events Surrounding the 2012 Terrorist Attack in Benghazi [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] Available on the Internet: www.fdsys.gov _________ U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 98-884 PDF WASHINGTON : 2016 _________________________________________________________________________________ For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office, Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800 Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001 HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE on BENGHAZI TREY GOWDY, South Carolina, Chairman LYNN WESTMORELAND, Georgia ELIJAH CUMMINGS, Maryland JIM JORDAN, Ohio Ranking Minority Member PETER ROSKAM, Illinois ADAM SMITH, Washington MIKE POMPEO, Kansas ADAM SCHIFF, California MARTHA A. ROBY, Alabama LINDA SANCHEZ, California SUSAN BROOKS, Indiana TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois Professional Staff Phil Kiko, Staff Director Susanne Sachsman Grooms, Minority Staff Director (II) HEARING 4 ---------- THURSDAY, OCTOBER 22, 2015 House of Representatives, Select Committee on Benghazi, Washington, DC. The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Trey Gowdy [chairman of the committee] presiding. Present: Representatives Gowdy, Brooks, Jordan, Pompeo, Roby, Roskam, Westmoreland, Cummings, Smith, Schiff, Sanchez, and Duckworth. Staff Present: Philip G. Kiko, Staff Director and General Counsel; Chris Donesa, Deputy Staff Director; Dana Chipman, Chief Investigative Counsel; Sharon Jackson, Deputy Chief Counsel; Craig Missakian, Deputy Chief Counsel; Mark Grider, Deputy General Counsel; Mac Tolar, Senior Counsel; Carlton Davis, Investigator; Sara Barrineau, Investigator; Sheria Clarke, Counsel; Paige Oneto, Clerk; Kim Betz, Member Outreach Liaison; Paul Bell, Minority Press Secretary; Krista Boyd, Minority Senior Counsel; Linda Cohen, Minority Senior Professional Staff; Ronak Desai, Minority Counsel; Shannon Green, Minority Counsel; Susanne Sachsman Grooms, Minority Staff Director and General Counsel; Jennifer Werner, Minority Communications Director; Peter Kenny, Minority Senior Counsel; Erin O'Brien, Minority Detailee; Laura Rauch, Minority Senior Professional Staff; Dave Rapallo, Minority Senior Advisor to the Ranking Member; Daniel Rebnord, Minority Professional Staff; Mone Ross, Minority Staff Assistant; Heather Sawyer, Minority Chief Counsel; and Brent Woolfork, Minority Senior Professional Staff. Chairman Gowdy. Good morning. The committee will come to order, and the chair notes the presence of a quorum. Good morning. Welcome, Madam Secretary. Welcome to each of you. This is a public hearing of the Benghazi Select Committee. Just a couple of quick administrative matters before we start, Madam Secretary. There are predetermined breaks, but I want to make it absolutely clear, we can take a break for any reason or for no reason. If you or anyone would just simply alert me, then we will take a break, and it can be for any reason or for no reason. To our guests, we are happy to have you here. The witness deserves to hear the questions, and the members deserve to hear the answers. So proper decorum must be observed at all times. No reaction to questions or answers, no disruptions. Some committees take an incremental approach to decorum. I do not. This is your one and only notice. Madam Secretary, the ranking member and I will give opening statements, and then you will be recognized for your opening statement. And then, after that, the members will alternate from one side to the other. And because you have already been sworn, we will go straight to your opening. So I will now recognize myself and then recognize Mr. Cummings and then you, Madam Secretary. Chris Stevens, Sean Smith, Glen Doherty, and Tyrone Woods served this country with courage and with honor, and they were killed under circumstances most of us could never imagine. Terrorists pour through the front gate of an American facility, attacking people and property with machine guns, mortars, and fire. It is important that we remember how these four men died. It is equally important that we remember how these four men lived and why. They were more than four images on a television screen. They were husbands and fathers and sons and brothers and family and friends. They were Americans who believed in service and sacrifice. Many people speak wistfully of a better world but do little about it. These four went out and actually tried to make it better. And it cost them their lives. So we know what they gave us. What do we owe them? Justice for those that killed them. We owe their families our everlasting gratitude, respect. We owe them and each other the truth--the truth about why we were in Libya; the truth about what we were doing in Libya; the truth about the escalating violence in Libya before we were attacked and these four men were killed; the truth about requests for additional security; the truth about requests for additional personnel; the truth about requests for additional equipment; the truth about where and why our military was positioned as it was on the anniversary of 9/11; the truth about what was happening and being discussed in Washington while our people were under attack; the truth about what led to the attacks; and the truth about what our government told the American people after the attacks. Why were there so many requests for more security personnel and equipment, and why were those requests denied in Washington? Why did the State Department compound and facility not even come close to meeting proper security specifications? What policies were we pursuing in Libya that required a physical presence in spite of the escalating violence? Who in Washington was aware of the escalating violence? What precautions, if any, were taken on the anniversary of 9/11? What happened in Washington after the first attack, and what was our response to that attack? What did the military do or not do? What did our leaders in Washington do or not do, and when? Why was the American public given such divergent accounts of what caused these attacks? And why is it so hard to get information from the very government these four men represented, served, and sacrificed for? Even after an Accountability Review Board and a half-dozen congressional investigations, these and other questions still lingered. And these questions lingered because previous investigations were not thorough. These questions lingered because those previous investigations were narrow in scope and either incapable or unwilling to access the facts and evidence necessary to answer all relevant questions. So the House of Representatives--including some Democrats, I hasten to add--asked this committee to write the final, definitive accounting of what happened in Benghazi. This committee is the first committee to review more than 50,000 pages of documents because we insisted that they be produced. This committee is the first committee to demand access to more eyewitnesses because serious investigations talk to as many eyewitnesses as possible. This committee is the first committee to thoroughly and individually interview scores of other witnesses, many of them for the first time. This committee is the first committee to review thousands of pages of documents from top State Department personnel. This committee is the first committee to demand access to relevant documents from the CIA, the FBI, the Department of Defense, even the White House. This committee is the first committee to demand access to the emails to and from Ambassador Chris Stevens. How could an investigation possibly be considered serious without reviewing the emails of the person most knowledgeable about Libya? This committee is the first committee, the only committee, to uncover the fact that Secretary Clinton exclusively used personal email on her own personal server for official business and kept the public record, including emails about Benghazi and Libya, in her own custody and control for almost two years after she left office. You will hear a lot today about the Accountability Review Board. Secretary Clinton has mentioned it more than 70 times in her previous testimony before Congress. But when you hear about the ARB, you should also know the State Department leadership handpicked the members of the ARB. The ARB never interviewed Secretary Clinton. The ARB never reviewed her emails. And Secretary Clinton's top advisor was allowed to review and suggest changes to the ARB before the public ever saw it. There is no transcript of ARB interviews, so it's impossible to know whether all relevant questions were asked and answered. And because there's no transcript, it is also impossible to cite the ARB interviews with any particularity at all. That is not independent. That is not accountability. That is not a serious investigation. You will hear there were previous congressional investigations into Benghazi, and that is true. And it should make you wonder why those investigations failed to interview so many witnesses and access so many documents. If those previous congressional investigations were really serious and thorough, how did they miss Ambassador Stevens' emails? If those previous investigations were serious and thorough, how did they miss Secretary Clinton's emails? If those congressional investigations really were serious and thorough, why did they fail to interview dozens of key State Department witnesses, including agents on the ground who experienced the attacks firsthand? Just last month, three years after Benghazi, top aides finally returned documents to the State Department. A month ago, this committee received 1,500 new pages of Secretary Clinton's emails related to Libya and Benghazi, three years after the attacks. And a little over two weeks ago, this committee received nearly 1,400 pages of Ambassador Stevens' emails, three years after the attacks. It is impossible to conduct a serious, fact-centric investigation without access to the documents from the former Secretary of State, the Ambassador who knew more about Libya than anyone else, and testimony from witnesses who survived the attacks. Madam Secretary, I understand there are people, frankly, in both parties who have suggested that this investigation is about you. Let me assure you it is not, and let me assure you why it is not. This investigation is about four people who were killed representing our country on foreign soil. It is about what happened before, during, and after the attacks that killed them. It is about what this country owes to those who risk their lives to serve it. And it is about the fundamental obligation of government to tell the truth, always, to the people that it purports to represent. Madam Secretary, not a single member of this committee signed up to investigate you or your email. We signed up to investigate and, therefore, honor the lives of four people that we sent into a dangerous country to represent us and to do everything we can to prevent it from happening to others. Our committee has interviewed half a hundred witnesses. Not a single one of them has been named ``Clinton'' until today. You were the Secretary of State for this country at all relevant times, so of course the committee is going to want to talk to you. You are an important witness. You are one important witness among half a hundred important witnesses. And I do understand you wanted to come sooner than today, so let me be clear why that did not happen. You had an unusual email arrangement, which meant the State Department could not produce your emails to us. You made exclusive use of personal email and a personal server, and when you left the State Department, you kept the public record to yourself for almost two years. And it was you and your attorneys who decided what to return and what to delete. Those decisions were your decisions, not our decisions. It was only in March of this year we learned of this email arrangement. And since we learned of this email arrangement, we have interviewed dozens of witnesses, only one of whom was solely related to your email arrangement. And that was the shortest interview of all because that witness invoked his Fifth Amendment privilege against incrimination. Making sure the public record is complete is what serious investigations do, so it was important and remains important that this committee have access to all of Ambassador Stevens' emails, the emails of other senior leaders and witnesses, and it is important to gain access to all of your emails, Madam Secretary. Your emails are no less or no more important than the emails of anyone else. It just took us a little bit longer to get them, and it garnered a little more attention in the process. I want you to take note during this hearing how many times congressional Democrats call on this administration to make long-awaited documents available to us. They won't. Take note of how many witnesses congressional Democrats ask us to schedule for interview. They won't. We would be much closer to finding out what happened in writing the final, definitive report if Democrats on this committee had helped us, just a little bit, pursue the facts. But if the Democrats on this committee had their way, dozens of witnesses never would have been interviewed, your public record would still be private, thousands of documents never would have been accessed, and we wouldn't have the emails of our own ambassador. That may be smart politics, but it is a lousy way to run a serious investigation. There are certain characteristics that make our country unique in the annals of history. We are the greatest experiment in self-governance the world has ever known, and part of that self-governance comes self-scrutiny, even of the highest officials. Our country is strong enough to handle the truth, and our fellow citizens expect us to pursue the truth wherever the facts take us. So this committee is going to do what we pledged to do and what should have been done, frankly, a long time ago, which is interview all relevant witnesses, examine all relevant evidence, and access all relevant documents. And we are going to pursue the truth in a manner worthy of the memory of the four people who lost their lives and worthy of the respect of our fellow citizens. And we are going to write that final, definitive accounting of what happened in Benghazi. And we would like to do it with your help and the help of our Democrat colleagues, but make no mistake, we are going to do it nonetheless. Because understanding what happened in Benghazi goes to the heart of who we are as a country and the promises we make to those that we send into harm's way. They deserve the truth, they deserve the whole truth, they deserve nothing but the truth. The people we work for deserve the truth. The friends and family of the four who lost their lives deserve the truth. We are going to find the truth, because there is no statute of limitations on the truth. With that, I would recognize my friend from Maryland. [Prepared statement of Chairman Gowdy follows:] Mr. Cummings. The truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. The truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. Madam Secretary, I want to thank you very much for being here today to testify before Congress on this very important issue. This is your third time. This week, our chairman, Mr. Gowdy, was interviewed in a lengthy media profile. During his interview, he complained that he has ``an impossible job.'' That's what the chairman said, ``impossible job.'' He said it is impossible to conduct a serious, fact-centric investigation in such a ``political environment.'' I have great respect for the chairman, but on this score, he is absolutely wrong. In fact, it has been done by his own Republican colleagues in the House on this very issue, Benghazi. The Republican chairman of the House Intelligence Committee conducted an extensive, bipartisan, 2-year investigation and issued a detailed report. The Senate Intelligence Committee and the Senate Homeland Security Committee also conducted bipartisan investigations. Those bipartisan efforts respected and honored the memories of the four brave Americans who gave their lives in Benghazi: Ambassador Chris Stevens, Sean Smith, Tyrone Woods, and Glen Doherty. The problem is that the Republican caucus did not like the answers they got from those investigations. So they set up this select committee with no rules, no deadline, and an unlimited budget, and they set them loose, Madam Secretary, because you're running for President. Clearly, it is possible to conduct a serious, bipartisan investigation. What is impossible is for any reasonable person to continue denying that Republicans are squandering millions of taxpayer dollars on this abusive effort to derail Secretary Clinton's Presidential campaign. In the chairman's interview, he tried to defend against this criticism by attempting to cast himself as the victim, and he complained about attacks on the credibility of the select committee. His argument would be more compelling if Republicans weren't leading the charge. As we all know, Representative Kevin McCarthy, Speaker Boehner's second-in-command and the chairman's close friend, admitted that they established the select committee to drive down Secretary Clinton's poll numbers. Democrats didn't say that; the second-in-command in the House said that, a Republican. Republican Congressman Richard Hanna said the select committee was, ``designed''--``designed'' to go after Secretary Clinton. And one of the chairman's own handpicked investigators, a self-proclaimed conservative Republican, charged that he was fired in part for not going along with these plans to ``hyper- focus on Hillary Clinton.'' These stark admissions reflect exactly what we have seen inside the select committee for the past year. Let's just take a look at the facts. Since January, Republicans have canceled every single hearing on our schedule for the entire year except for this one, Secretary Clinton. They also canceled numerous interviews that they had planned with the Defense Department and the CIA officials. Instead of doing that, what they were going to do, Republicans zeroed in on Secretary Clinton, her speechwriters, her IT staffers, and her campaign officials. This is what the Republicans did, not the Democrats. When Speaker Boehner established this select committee, he justified it by arguing that it would ``cross jurisdictional lines.'' I assumed he meant we would focus on more than just Secretary of State. But, Madam Secretary, you're sitting there by yourself. The Secretary of Defense is not on your left. The Director of the CIA is not on your right. That is because Republicans abandoned their own plans to question those top officials. So, instead of being cross-jurisdictional, Republicans just crossed them off the list. Last weekend, the chairman told the Republican colleagues to shut up and stop talking about the select committee. What I want to know is this, and this is a key question: Why tell the Republicans to shut up when they are telling the truth, but not when they are attacking Secretary Clinton with reckless accusations that are demonstrably false? Why not tell them to shut up then? Carly Fiorina has said that Secretary Clinton has blood on her hands. Mike Huckabee accused her of ignoring the warning calls from dying Americans in Benghazi. Senator Rand Paul said Benghazi was a 3 a.m. phone call that she never picked up. And Senator Lindsey Graham tweeted, ``Where the hell were you on the night of the Benghazi attack?'' Everyone on this panel knows these accusations are baseless from our own investigation and all those before it. Yet Republican members of this select committee remain silent. On Monday, the Democrats issued a report showing that none of the 54 witnesses the committee interviewed substantiated these wild Republican claims. Secretary Clinton did not order the military to stand down, and she neither approved nor denied requests for additional security. I ask that our report be included in the official record for today's hearing, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Gowdy. Without objection. [The information follows:] [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] Mr. Cummings. What is so telling is that we issued virtually the same report a year ago--the same report. When we first joined the select committee, I asked my staff to put together a complete report and database setting forth the questions that have been asked about the attacks and all of the answers that were provided in the eight previous investigations. I ask that this report also be included in the record, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Gowdy. Without objection. [The information follows:] [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] Mr. Cummings. The problem is that, rather than accepting these facts, Republicans continue to spin new conspiracy theories that are just as outlandish and inaccurate. For example, the chairman recently tried to argue that Sidney Blumenthal was Secretary Clinton's primary advisor on Libya. And, this past Sunday, Representative Pompeo claimed on national television that Secretary Clinton relied on Sidney Blumenthal for most--for most--of her intelligence on Libya. Earlier this week, the Washington Post Fact Checker awarded this claim four Pinocchios, its worst rating. Here is the bottom line: The select committee has spent 17 months and $4.7 million of taxpayer money. We have held four hearings and conducted 54 interviews and depositions. Yes, we have received some new emails from Secretary Clinton, Ambassador Stevens, and others. And, yes, we have conducted some new interviews. But these documents and interviews do not show any nefarious activity. In fact, it is just the opposite. The new information we have obtained confirms and corroborates the core facts we already knew from eight previous investigations. They provide more detail, but they do not change the basic conclusions. It is time, and it is time now, for the Republicans to end this taxpayer-funded fishing expedition. We need to come together and shift from politics to policy. That is what the American people want: shifting from politics to policy. We need to finally make good on our promises to the families. And the families only asked us to do three things: one, do not make this a political football; two, find the facts; three, do everything in your power to make sure that this does not happen again. And so we need to start focusing on what we here in Congress can do to improve the safety and security of our diplomatic corps in the future. And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. [Prepared statement of Mr. Cummings follows:] Chairman Gowdy. The chair thanks the gentleman from Maryland. Madam Secretary, you are recognized for your opening statement. STATEMENT OF HILLARY CLINTON, FORMER SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE Mrs. Clinton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Cummings, members of this committee. The terrorist attacks at our diplomatic compound and later at the CIA post in Benghazi, Libya, on September 11, 2012, took the lives of four brave Americans: Ambassador Chris Stevens, Sean Smith, Glen Doherty, and Tyrone Woods. I'm here to honor the service of those four men, the courage of the Diplomatic Security agents and the CIA officers who risked their lives that night, and the work their colleagues do every single day all over the world. I knew and admired Chris Stevens. He was one of our nation's most accomplished diplomats. Chris' mother liked to say that he had sand in his shoes because he was always moving, always working, especially in the Middle East that he came to know so well. When the revolution broke out in Libya, we named Chris as our envoy to the opposition. There was no easy way to get him into Benghazi to begin gathering information and meeting those Libyans who were rising up against the murderous dictator Qadhafi, but he found a way to get himself there on a Greek cargo ship, just like a 19th-century American envoy. But his work was very much 21st-century, hard-nosed diplomacy. It is a testament to the relationships that he built in Libya that, on the day following the awareness of his death, tens of thousands of Libyans poured into the streets in Benghazi. They held signs reading, ``Thugs don't represent Benghazi or Islam''; ``Sorry, people of America. This is not the behavior of our Islam or our prophet''; ``Chris Stevens, a friend to all Libyans.'' Although I didn't have the privilege of meeting Sean Smith personally, he was a valued member of our State Department family. An Air Force veteran, he was an information management officer who had served in Pretoria, Baghdad, Montreal, and The Hague. Tyrone Woods and Glen Doherty worked for the CIA. They were killed by mortar fire at the CIA's outpost in Benghazi, a short distance from the diplomatic compound. They were both former Navy SEALs and trained paramedics with distinguished records of service, including in Iraq and Afghanistan. As Secretary of State, I had the honor to lead and the responsibility to support nearly 70,000 diplomats and development experts across the globe. Losing any one of them, as we did in Iraq, Afghanistan, Mexico, Haiti, and Libya, during my tenure was deeply painful for our entire State Department and USAID family and for me personally. I was the one who asked Chris to go to Libya as our envoy. I was the one who recommended him to be our Ambassador to the President. After the attacks, I stood next to President Obama as Marines carried his casket and those of the other three Americans off the plane at Andrews Air Force Base. I took responsibility. And, as part of that, before I left office, I launched reforms to better protect our people in the field and help reduce the chance of another tragedy happening in the future. What happened in Benghazi has been scrutinized by a nonpartisan, hard-hitting Accountability Review Board, seven prior congressional investigations, multiple news organizations, and, of course, our law enforcement and intelligence agencies. So today I would like to share three observations about how we can learn from this tragedy and move forward as a nation. First, America must lead in a dangerous world, and our diplomats must continue representing us in dangerous places. The State Department sends people to more than 270 posts in 170 countries around the world. Chris Stevens understood that diplomats must operate in many places where our soldiers do not, where there are no other boots on the ground and safety is far from guaranteed. In fact, he volunteered for just those assignments. He also understood we will never prevent every act of terrorism or achieve perfect security and that we inevitably must accept a level of risk to protect our country and advance our interests and values. And make no mistake, the risks are real. Terrorists have killed more than 65 American diplomatic personnel since the 1970s and more than 100 contractors and locally employed staff. Since 2001, there have been more than 100 attacks on U.S. diplomatic facilities around the world. But if you ask our most experienced ambassadors, they'll tell you they can't do their jobs for us from bunkers. It would compound the tragedy of Benghazi if Chris Stevens' death and the deaths of the other three Americans ended up undermining the work to which he and they devoted their lives. We have learned the hard way, when America is absent, especially from unstable places, there are consequences. Extremism takes root, aggressors seek to fill the vacuum, and security everywhere is threatened, including here at home. That's why Chris was in Benghazi. It's why he had served previously in Syria, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Jerusalem during the Second Intifada. Nobody knew the dangers of Libya better--a weak government, extremist groups, rampant instability. But Chris chose to go to Benghazi because he understood America had to be represented there at that pivotal time. He knew that eastern Libya was where the revolution had begun and that unrest there could derail the country's fragile transition to democracy, and if extremists gained a foothold, they would have the chance to destabilize the entire region, including Egypt and Tunisia. He also knew how urgent it was to ensure that the weapons Qadhafi had left strewn across the country, including shoulder- fired missiles that could knock an airplane out of the sky, did not fall into the wrong hands. The nearest Israeli airport is just a day's drive from the Libyan border. Above all, Chris understood that most people, in Libya or anywhere, reject the extremists' argument that violence can ever be a path to dignity or justice. That's what those thousands of Libyans were saying after they learned of his death. And he understood there was no substitute for going beyond the embassy walls and doing the hard work of building relationships. Retreat from the world is not an option. America cannot shrink from our responsibility to lead. That doesn't mean we should ever return to the go-it-alone foreign policy of the past, a foreign policy that puts boots on the ground as a first choice rather than a last resort. Quite the opposite. We need creative, confident leadership that harnesses all of America's strengths and values, leadership that integrates and balances the tools of diplomacy, development, and defense. And at the heart of that effort must be dedicated professionals, like Chris Stevens and his colleagues, who put their lives on the line for a country, our country, because they believed, as I do, that America is the greatest force for peace and progress the world has ever known. My second observation is this: we have a responsibility to provide our diplomats with the resources and support they need to do their jobs as safely and effectively as possible. After previous deadly attacks, leaders from both parties and both branches of government came together to determine what went wrong and how to fix it for the future. That's what happened during the Reagan administration when Hezbollah attacked our embassy and killed 63 people, including 17 Americans, and then, in a later attack, attacked our Marine barracks and killed so many more. Those two attacks in Beirut resulted in the deaths of 258 Americans. It's what happened during the Clinton administration when Al Qaeda bombed our embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, killing more than 200 people, wounding more than 2,000 people, and killing 12 Americans. And it's what happened during the Bush administration after 9/11. Part of America's strength is we learn, we adapt, and we get stronger. After the Benghazi attacks, I asked Ambassador Thomas Pickering, one of our most distinguished and longest-serving diplomats, along with Admiral Mike Mullen, the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff appointed by President George W. Bush, to lead an Accountability Review Board. This is an institution that the Congress set up after the terrible attacks in Beirut. There have been 18 previous Accountability Review Boards. Only two have ever made any of their findings public: the one following the attacks on our embassies in East Africa and the one following the attack on Benghazi. The Accountability Review Board did not pull a single punch. They found systemic problems and management deficiencies in two State Department bureaus. And the Review Board recommended 29 specific improvements. I pledged that by the time I left office every one would be on the way to implementation, and they were. More Marines were slated for deployment to high-threat embassies. Additional Diplomatic Security agents were being hired and trained. And Secretary Kerry has continued this work. But there is more to do, and no administration can do it alone. Congress has to be our partner, as it has been after previous tragedies. For example, the Accountability Review Board and subsequent investigations have recommended improved training for our officers before they deploy to the field, but efforts to establish a modern joint training center are being held up by Congress. The men and women who serve our country deserve better. Finally, there is one more observation I would like to share. I traveled to 112 countries as Secretary of State. Every time I did, I felt great pride and honor representing the country that I love. We need leadership at home to match our leadership abroad, leadership that puts national security ahead of politics and ideology. Our nation has a long history of bipartisan cooperation on foreign policy and national security. Not that we always agree--far from it--but we do come together when it counts. As Secretary of State, I worked with the Republican chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to pass a landmark nuclear arms control treaty with Russia. I worked with the Republican leader, Senator Mitch McConnell, to open up Burma, now Myanmar, to democratic change. I know it's possible to find common ground, because I have done it. We should debate on the basis of fact, not fear. We should resist denigrating the patriotism or loyalty of those with whom we disagree. So I'm here. Despite all the previous investigations and all the talk about partisan agendas, I'm here to honor those we lost and to do what I can to aid those who serve us still. My challenge to you, members of this committee, is the same challenge I put to myself: let's be worthy of the trust the American people have bestowed upon us. They expect us to lead, to learn the right lessons, to rise above partisanship, and to reach for statesmanship. That's what I tried to do every day as Secretary of State, and it's what I hope we will all strive for here today and into the future. Thank you. [Prepared statement of Mrs. Clinton follows:] [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] Chairman Gowdy. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I did not cut off your opening at all, nor would I think about doing so, because the subject matter is critically important, and you deserve to be heard. I would just simply note that--and I don't plan on cutting off any of your answers. Our members have questions that we believe are worthy of being answered, so I would just simply note that we do plan to ask all of the questions. And whatever precision and concision that you can give to the answers without giving short shrift to any of the answers would be much appreciated. And, with that, I would recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Roskam. Mr. Roskam. Good morning, Secretary Clinton. Jake Sullivan, your chief foreign policy advisor, wrote a ``tick tock on Libya'' memo on August 21, 2011. And this was the day before the rebels took Tripoli. He titles it, ``Secretary Clinton's leadership on Libya,'' in which he describes you as, ``a critical voice'' and, ``the public face of the U.S. effort in Libya and instrumental in tightening the noose around Qadhafi and his regime.'' But that didn't come easy, did it? Because you faced considerable opposition--and I can pause while you are reading your notes from your staff. Mrs. Clinton. No, that's fine. I'm listening. I can do more than one thing at a time, Congressman. Thanks. Mr. Roskam. Okay. That didn't come easy, did it, that leadership role and that public face and so forth that I just mentioned? Mrs. Clinton. No, Congressman. I know this is an issue that the committee has raised, and it really boils down to why were we in Libya, why did the United States join with our NATO and European allies, join with our Arab partners to protect the people of Libya against the murderous planning of Qadhafi, why did we take a role alongside our partners in doing so. There were a number of reasons for that. And I think it is important to remind the American people where we were at the time when the people of Libya, like people across the region, rose up demanding freedom and democracy, a chance to chart their own futures. And Qadhafi---- Mr. Roskam. I take your point---- Mrs. Clinton [continuing]. Qadhafi threatened them with genocide, with hunting them down like cockroaches. And we were then approached by, with great intensity, our closest allies in Europe, people who felt very strongly, the French and the British but others as well, that they could not stand idly by and permit that to happen so close to their shores, with the unintended consequences that they worried about, and they asked for the United States to help. We did not immediately say yes. We did an enormous amount of due diligence in meeting with not only our European and Arab partners but also with those who were heading up what was called the Transitional National Council. And we had experienced diplomats who were digging deep into what was happening in Libya and what the possibilities were before we agreed to provide very specific, limited help to the European and Arab efforts. We did not put one American soldier on the ground. We did not have one casualty. And, in fact, I think by many measures, the cooperation between NATO and Arab forces was quite remarkable and something that we want to learn more lessons from. Mr. Roskam. Secretary Clinton, you were meeting with opposition within the State Department, from very senior career diplomats in fact, and they were saying that it was going to produce a net negative for U.S. military intervention. For example, in a March 9, 2011, email discussing what has become known as the ``Libya options memo,'' Ambassador Stephen Mull, then the Executive Secretary at the State Department and one of the top career diplomats, said this: ``In the case of our diplomatic history, when we've provided material or tactical military support to people seeking to drive their leaders from power, no matter how just their cause, it's tended to produce net negatives for our interests over the long term in those countries.'' Now, we will come back to that in a minute. But you overruled those career diplomats. I mean, they report to you, and you are the chief diplomat of the United States. Go ahead and read the note if you need to. Mrs. Clinton. I have to--I have to---- Mr. Roskam. I'm not done with my question. I'm just giving you the courtesy of reading your notes. Mrs. Clinton. That's all right. Mr. Roskam. All right. They were pushing back, but you overcame those objections. But then you had another big obstacle, didn't you, and that was the White House itself? There were senior voices within the White House that were opposed to military action: Vice President Biden, Department of Defense, Secretary Gates, the National Security Council, and so forth. But you persuaded President Obama to intervene militarily. Isn't that right? Mrs. Clinton. Well, Congressman, I think it's important to point out there were many in the State Department who believed it was very much in America's interest and in furtherance of our values to protect the Libyan people, to join with our European allies and our Arab partners. The Ambassador who had to be withdrawn from Libya because of direct threats to his physical safety but who knew Libya very well, Ambassador Cretz, was a strong advocate for doing what we could to assist the Europeans and the Arabs. I think it's fair to say there were concerns and there were varying opinions about what to do, how to do it, and the like. At the end of the day, this was the President's decision, and all of us fed in our views. I did not favor it until I had done, as I said, the due diligence, speaking with not just people within our government and within the governments of all of the other nations who were urging us to assist them but also meeting in person with the gentleman who had assumed a lead role in the Transitional National Council. So it is, of course, fair to say this was a difficult decision. I wouldn't sit here and say otherwise. And there were varying points of view about it. But at the end of the day, in large measure because of the strong appeals from our European allies, the Arab League passing a resolution urging that the United States and NATO join with them, those were unprecedented requests, and we did decide in recommending to the President that there was a way to do it. The President, I think, very clearly had a limited instruction about how to proceed. And the first planes that flew were French planes. And I think what the United States provided was some of our unique capacity, but the bulk of the work militarily was done by Europeans and Arabs. Mr. Roskam. Well, I think you are underselling yourself. You got the State Department on board. You convinced the President. You overcame the objections of Vice President Biden and Secretary of Defense Gates, the National Security Council. And you had another obstacle then, and that was the United Nations. And you were able to persuade the Russians, of all things, to abstain. And had you not been successful in arguing that abstention, the Security Council Resolution 1973 wouldn't have passed because the Russians had a veto. So you overcame that obstacle, as well. Isn't that right? Mrs. Clinton. Well, Congressman, it is right that, after doing my due diligence and reviewing the various options and the potential consequences of pursuing each of them, I was in favor of the United States joining with our European allies and our Arab partners. And I also was in favor of obtaining U.N. Security Council support, because I thought that would provide greater legitimacy. In that, of course, our Ambassador to the U.N. was very uninfluential and successful in making the case to her colleagues. But this was at the behest of and the direction of the President once he was presented with the varying arguments. And, you know---- Mr. Roskam. And you presented the argument---- Mrs. Clinton [continuing]. Congressman, I have been in a number of Situation Room discussions. I remember very well the very intense conversation over whether or not to launch the Navy SEALs against the compound we thought in Abbottabad that might house bin Laden. There was a split in the advisors around the President. Eventually the President makes the decision. I supported doing what we could to support our European and Arab partners in their effort on a humanitarian basis, a strategic basis, to prevent Qadhafi from launching and carrying out mass massacres. Mr. Roskam. There was another obstacle that you overcame, and that was the Arabs themselves. Jake Sullivan sent you an email, and he said this: ``I think you should call. It will be a painful ten minutes, but you will be the one who delivered Arab support.'' And that's a Jake Sullivan email of March 17 to you asking you to call the Secretary General of the Arab League. So, to put this in totality, you were able to overcome opposition within the State Department, you were able to persuade the President, you were able to persuade the United Nations and the international community, you made the call to the Arabs and brought them home. You saw it, you drove it, you articulated it, and you persuaded people. Did I get that wrong? Mrs. Clinton. Well, Congressman, I was the Secretary of State. My job was to conduct the diplomacy. And the diplomacy consisted of a long series of meetings and phone calls, both here in our country and abroad, to take the measure of what people were saying and whether they meant it. We had heard sometimes before from countries saying, ``Well, the United States should go do this.'' And when we say, ``Well, what will you do in support of us?'', there was not much coming forth. This time, if they wanted us to support them in what they saw as an action vital to their respective national security interests, I wanted to be sure that they were going to bear the bulk of the load. And, in fact, they did. What the United States did, as I've said, was use our unique capacities. As I recall, if you want it in monetary terms, slightly over a billion dollars, or less than what we spend in Iraq in one day, is what the United States committed in support of our allies. You know, we ask our---- Mr. Roskam. Reclaiming my time---- Mrs. Clinton [continuing]. Allies to do a lot for us, Congressman---- Mr. Roskam. My time is expiring. Let me reclaim my time. Mrs. Clinton. They had asked for us to help them. Mr. Roskam. Let me reclaim my time because it's expiring. Actually, you summed it up best when you emailed your senior staff and you said of this interchange, you said, ``It's good to remind ourselves and the rest of the world that this couldn't have happened without us.'' And you were right, Secretary Clinton. Our Libya policy couldn't have happened without you because you were its chief architect. And I said we're going to go back to Admiral Mullen's warning about using military for regime change. And he said, ``Long term, things weren't going to turn out very well.'' And he was right. After your plan, things in Libya today are a disaster. I yield back. Mrs. Clinton. Well, we'll have more time, I'm sure, to talk about this, because that's not a view that I will ascribe to. Chairman Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Illinois and recognize the gentleman from Maryland. Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much. Madam Secretary, again, I want to thank you for being here. I want to start with the number one question that Republicans claim has not been answered in the eight previous investigations. Yesterday, the chairman wrote an op-ed, and he said this is his top unanswered question about Benghazi. And it is, ``why our people in Libya and Benghazi made so many requests for additional security personnel and equipment and why those requests were denied.'' I will give you a chance to answer that in a minute. Secretary Clinton, as you know, this exact question has been asked many times and answered many times. Let's start with the Accountability Review Board. Now, a moment ago, you talked about Admiral Mullen, but you also appointed another very distinguished gentleman, Ambassador Pickering. And, of course, Admiral Mullen served under Republican administrations. And Ambassador Pickering, who I have a phenomenal amount of respect for, served 40 years, as you know, as part of our diplomatic corps. He served under George H.W. Bush, and he also served as U.N. Ambassador under Reagan. Now, I am just wondering--let me go back to that question, why our people in Libya and Benghazi made so many requests? And then I want you to comment. There seems to be an implication that the ARB, the Accountability Review Board, was not independent. And I think the chairman said they were handpicked by you. Of course, that is done by law. But would you comment on those two things, please? Mrs. Clinton. Yes. I would be happy to. You know, as I said in my opening statement, I take responsibility for what happened in Benghazi. I felt a responsibility for all 70,000 people working at the State Department and USAID. I take that very seriously. As I said with respect to security requests in Benghazi back when I testified in January of 2013, those requests and issues related to security were rightly handled by the security professionals in the Department. I did not see them, I did not approve them, I did not deny them. Ambassador Pickering and Admiral Mullen make this case very clearly in their testimony before your committee and in their public comments. These issues would not ordinarily come before the Secretary of State, and they did not in this case. As Secretary, I was committed to taking aggressive measures to ensure our personnel and facilities were as safe as possible. And, certainly, when the nonpartisan, critical report from the Accountability Review Board came forward, I took it very seriously. And that's why I embraced all of their recommendations and created a new position within the Diplomatic Security Bureau specifically to evaluate high-risk posts. I think it's important also to mention, Congressman, that the Diplomatic Security professionals who were reviewing these requests, along with those who are serving in war zones and hotspots around the world, have great expertise and experience in keeping people safe. If you go on codels, they are the ones who plan your trip to keep you safe. They certainly did that for me. But, most importantly, that's what they do every day for everybody who serves our country as a diplomat or a development professional. And I was not going to second-guess them. I was not going to substitute my judgment, which is not based on experience that they have in keeping people safe, for theirs. And the changes that were recommended by the Accountability Review Board are ones that we thought made sense and began quickly to implement. Mr. Cummings. Now, the ARB, after conducting, Madam Secretary, more than 100 interviews, identified a specific employee at the State Department who denied these requests. It was Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Bureau of Diplomatic Security Charlene Lamb. And, again, she did come before the Oversight Committee. The ARB report was very critical of her. It was also critical of her two supervisors, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary and the Assistant Secretary for Diplomatic Security. The Oversight Committee found the same answer as the ARB. It found that this official denied these requests, and it found no evidence that you approved or denied them. The problem is that Republicans just keep asking the same question over and over again and pretend they don't know the answer. In 2013, the Republican chairmen of five House committees issued a report falsely accusing you personally of denying these requests in a cable over your signature. The next day--the next day--the chairman of the Oversight Committee, Darrell Issa, went on national television and accused you of the same thing. Can we play that clip, please? [Video shown.] Mr. Cummings. Do you remember that allegation, Madam Secretary? Mrs. Clinton. I do. Mr. Cummings. Well, when the Washington Post Fact Checker examined this claim, they gave it four Pinocchios. They called it a whopper. It turns out that the Republicans had a copy of that cable, but they didn't tell the American people that your so-called signature was just a stamp that appears on millions of cables from the State Department every single year. Is that right? Mrs. Clinton. That's correct. Mr. Cummings. Now, Madam Secretary, my goal has always been to gather facts and to defend the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. Last year, I asked our staff to compile an asked-and-answered database, and this particular issue was answered thoroughly. On Monday, we put out another report, and this issue was addressed yet again. But the Republicans want to keep this attack going, so they are now trying to argue that we have new emails that raise new questions. The truth is that we have reviewed these emails, and they don't contradict our previous conclusions; they confirm them. They corroborate them. We've reviewed emails from Ambassador Stevens, and they show that he asked Charlene Lamb for more security. Nothing we have obtained, not the new interviews or the new emails, changes the basic facts we have known for three years. Secretary Clinton, let me ask one final question, and please take as much time as you want to answer this. There's no evidence to support the Republican claims that you personally rejected security requests. So some have argued that since you knew the danger was increasing in Libya, you should have been in there making detailed decisions about whether there should be five, seven, or even nine security officers at any given post. Madam Secretary, I know you have answered this over again. You might want to just elaborate, and just--I'll give you--I have a minute and seven seconds. Mrs. Clinton. Well, thank you, Congressman. I think there has been some confusion, and I welcome the opportunity to try to clarify it to the best of my ability. With respect, as you rightly point out, the claims that were made about the cables, I think you have explained the fact, which is that it's the longstanding tradition of the State Department for cables from around the world to be sent to and sent from the State Department under the signature, over the signature of the Secretary of State. It's a stamp. It's just part of the tradition. There are millions of them, as you point out. They are sorted through and directed to the appropriate personnel. Very few of them ever come to my attention. None of them with respect to security regarding Benghazi did. Then the other point, which I thank you for raising so that perhaps I can speak to this one as well, there is, of course, information that we were obtaining about the increasingly dangerous environment in Libya, across the country but in particular in eastern Libya. And we were aware of that, and we were certainly taking that into account. There was no actionable intelligence on September 11 or even before that date about any kind of planned attack on our compound in Benghazi. And there were a lot of debates, apparently, that went on within the security professionals about what to provide because they did have to prioritize. The Accountability Review Board pointed that out. The State Department has historically and certainly before this terrible incident not had the amount of money that we thought would be necessary to do what was required to protect everyone, so of course there had to be priorities. And that was something that the security professionals dealt with. I think that both Admiral Mullen and Ambassador Pickering made it very clear that they thought that the high-threat posts should move to a higher level of scrutiny, and we had immediately moved to do that. Mr. Cummings. Thank you. Chairman Gowdy. I thank the gentleman. The chair would now recognize the gentlelady from Indiana, Mrs. Brooks. Mrs. Brooks. Good morning, Secretary Clinton. Mrs. Clinton. Morning. Mrs. Brooks. Thank you for being here today. And drawing on what you just said, that very few, but no requests for Benghazi came to your attention, I'd like to show you something. This pile represents the emails that you sent or received about Libya in 2011, from February through December of 2011. This pile represents the emails you sent or received from early 2012 until the day of the attack. There are 795 emails in this pile. We've counted them. There are 67 emails in this pile in 2012. And I'm troubled by what I see here, and so my questions relate to these piles. In this pile in 2011, I see daily updates, sometimes hourly updates, from your staff about Benghazi and Chris Stevens. When I look at this pile in 2012, I only see a handful of emails to you from your senior staff about Benghazi. And I have several questions for you about this disparity because we know from talking to your senior advisors that they knew--and many of them are here today seated behind you--they knew to send you important information, issues that were of importance to you. And I can only conclude by your own records that there was a lack of interest in Libya in 2012. So let's first focus, though, on this pile and what was happening in Libya in 2011. We have an Ambassador to Libya, Ambassador Cretz, but you've told us that--and you told us in your opening you hand-picked Chris Stevens to be your Special Representative in Benghazi, and you sent him there. And by your own emails--most provided last February, a few provided just a few weeks ago--they show that in March of 2011, so we're in March of 2011, you had Chris Stevens join you in Paris, where you were meeting with the leader of the Libyan revolution. And after Paris, that is when, as you talked about, Chris Stevens went into Benghazi, I believe on April 5 of 2011, on that Greek cargo ship. How long was he expected to stay? What were Chris Stevens' orders from you about Libya and about Benghazi specifically? Mrs. Clinton. Chris Stevens was asked to go to Benghazi to do reconnaissance to try to figure out who were the leaders of the insurgency who were based in Benghazi, what their goals were, what they understood would happen if they were successful. It was, as I said, the hard-nosed 21st century diplomacy that is rooted in the old-fashioned necessary work of building relationships and gathering information. Mrs. Brooks. How long was he anticipated to stay in Benghazi? Do you recall? Mrs. Clinton. There were--it was open ended. We were, in discussing it with him, unsure as to how productive it would be, whether it would be appropriate for him to stay for a long time or a short time. That was very much going to depend upon Chris' own assessment. We knew we were sending someone who understood the area, who understood the language, who understood a lot of the personalities because of the historical study that he used to love to do, and we were going to be guided by what he decided. Mrs. Brooks. I'd like to draw your attention to an email. It's an email found at tab 1. It's an Ops Center email that was forwarded to you from Huma Abedin on Sunday, March 27, that says at the bottom of the email: ``so the current game plan is for Mr. Stevens to move no later Wednesday from Malta to Benghazi.'' But the bottom of the email says the goal of this one-day trip is for him to lay the groundwork for a stay of up to 30 days. So just to refresh that recollection, I believe initially the goal was to go in for 30 days. Were you personally briefed on his security plan prior to him going into Libya, because---- Mrs. Clinton. Yes. Mrs. Brooks [continuing]. At that time, if I'm not mistaken--I'm sorry to interrupt--Qadhafi's forces were still battling the rebels. Correct? Mrs. Clinton. That--that--that's right. Mrs. Brooks. And so what were--were you personally briefed before you sent Mr. Stevens into Benghazi? Mrs. Clinton. I was personally told by the officials who were in the State Department who were immediately above Chris, who were making the plans for him to go in, that it was going to be expeditionary diplomacy. It was going to require him to make a lot of judgments on the ground about what he could accomplish and including where it would be safe for him to be and how long for him to stay. And I think the initial decision was, you know, up to 30 days and reassess, but it could have been ten days, it could have been 60 days, depending upon what he found and what he reported back to us. Mrs. Brooks. And possibly what was determined about the danger of Benghazi. Who were those officials, Secretary Clinton? Mrs. Clinton. Well, there were a number of officials who were working---- Mrs. Brooks. That were advising you on the security specifically. Mrs. Clinton. Well, with respect to the security, this was a particular concern of the Assistant Secretary for the bureau in which Chris worked, and---- Mrs. Brooks. And I'm sorry. What was that person's name? Mrs. Clinton. Assistant Secretary Jeff Feltman. Mrs. Brooks. Thank you. Mrs. Clinton. And it was also a concern of the Assistant Secretary for Diplomatic Security as well as other officials within the State Department. And I think it's fair to say, Congresswoman, this was, we all knew, a risky undertaking. And it was something that was, as I said in my opening statement, more reminiscent of the way diplomacy was practiced back in the 19th century because we didn't have the internet; we didn't have instantaneous communications. You would send diplomats and envoys into places and not hear from them for maybe months. This was obviously not of that kind, but it was not that different in degree from what we have done before. And it was a risky undertaking and one which Chris volunteered for and was anxious to undertake. Mrs. Brooks. And it was so risky, I'd like to pull up another email from the Ops Center that was forwarded to you from Ms. Abedin on Sunday, April 10. So he had been there about five days, and it indicates that the situation in Ajdabiya had worsened to the point where Stevens is considering departing from Benghazi. This is within five days of him going in. Were you aware of that concern within the first five days that he had gone in---- Mrs. Clinton. Yes. Mrs. Brooks [continuing]. And did anyone share that with you---- Mrs. Clinton. Yes. Mrs. Brooks [continuing]. And who did you share that with you? Mrs. Clinton. We were aware because we were really counting on Chris to guide us and give us the information from the ground. We had no other sources. You know, there was no American outpost. There was no, you know, American military presence. Eventually, other Americans representing different agencies were able to get into Benghazi and begin to do the same work, but they, of course, couldn't do that work overtly, which is why we wanted a diplomat who could be publicly meeting with people to try to get the best assessment. But it was always going to be a constant risk, and we knew that. Mrs. Brooks. And so let me go back to the risk in 2011 because there was a lot of communication, again, once again from your senior staff, from the State Department to you or from you in 2011. And, in fact, that is when Qadhafi fell. He fell in 2011. But then when we go to 2012, Libya, Benghazi, Chris Stevens, the staff there, they seem to fall off your radar in 2012, and the situation is getting much worse in 2012. It was getting much worse. And let me just share for you, in your records that we have reviewed, there is not one email to you or from you in 2012 when an explosive device went off at our compound in April. There's not a single email in your records about that explosive device. So my question is: this was a very important mission in 2011. You sent Chris Stevens there, but yet when our compound is attacked in 2012, what kind of culture was created in the State Department that your folks couldn't tell you in an email about a bomb in April of 2012? Mrs. Clinton. Well, Congresswoman, I did not conduct most of the business that I did on behalf of our country on email. I conducted it in meetings. I read massive amounts of memos, a great deal of classified information. I made a lot of secure phone calls. I was in and out of the White House all the time. There were a lot of things that happened that I was aware of and that I was reacting to. If you were to be in my office in the State Department, I didn't have a computer. I did not do the vast majority of my work on email. And I bet there's a lot of Sid Blumenthal's emails in there from 2011 too. Mrs. Brooks. Well, we'll go into that later. Mrs. Clinton. And so I think that there were--I don't want you to have a mistaken impression about what I did and how I did it. Most of my work was not done on emails with my closest aides, with the officials in the State Department, officials in the rest of the government, as well as the White House, and people around the world. Mrs. Brooks. And thank you for sharing that because I'm sure that it's not all done on emails, Madam Secretary, and there are meetings, and there are discussions. And so then when our compound took a second attack on June 6, when a bomb blew a wall through the compound then, no emails, no emails at all, but I am interested in knowing who were you meeting with, who were you huddling with, how were you informed about those things, because there is nothing in the emails that talks about two significant attacks on our compounds in 2012? Mrs. Clinton. I was meeting---- Mrs. Brooks. There is a lot of information in 2011 about issues in security posture and yet nothing in 2012. Mrs. Clinton. Well, I'd be happy to explain. Every morning when I arrived at the State Department, usually between 8:00 and 8:30, I had a personal one-on-one briefing from the representative of the Central Intelligence Agency, who shared with me the highest level of classified information that I was to be aware of on a daily basis. I then had a meeting with the top officials of the State Department every day that I was in town. That's where a lot of information, including threats and attacks on our facilities, was shared. I also had a weekly meeting every Monday with all of the officials, the Assistant Secretaries and others, so that I could be brought up-to-date on any issue that they were concerned about. During the day, I received hundreds of pages of memos, many of them classified, some of them so top secret that they were brought into my office in a locked briefcase that I had to read and immediately return to the courier. And I was constantly at the White House in the Situation Room meeting with the National Security Advisor and others. I would also be meeting with officials in the State Department, foreign officials and others. So there was a lot going on during every day. I did not email during the day, and--except on rare occasions when I was able to. But I didn't conduct the business that I did primarily on email. That is not how I gathered information, assessed information, asked the hard questions of the people that I worked with. Mrs. Brooks. It appears that leaving Benghazi, with respect to all of that danger, leaving Benghazi was not an option in 2012. And I yield back. Chairman Gowdy. The gentlelady---- Mrs. Clinton. Well, if I could just quickly respond. There was never a recommendation from any intelligence official in our government, from any official in the State Department, or from any other person with knowledge of our presence in Benghazi to shut down Benghazi, even after the two attacks that the compound suffered. And perhaps, you know, you would wonder why, but I can tell you that it was thought that the mission in Benghazi, in conjunction with the CIA mission, was vital to our national interests. Chairman Gowdy. The gentlelady from Indiana yields back. The chair will now briefly recognize Mr. Cummings and then Ms. Duckworth. Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I just want to clarify, when I was asking Secretary Clinton a question a moment ago, I mentioned an email that had gone from Ambassador Chris Stevens to Deputy Secretary Lamb. What I meant to say was a cable, and I just wanted to make sure the record was clear. Chairman Gowdy. The record will reflect that. Ms. Duckworth. Ms. Duckworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Clinton, I'm pleased that you finally have the opportunity to be here. Before I start my line of questioning, I just want to clarify with regard to the April, June 2012 incidents, I believe that the procedure that the State Department had for these types of incidents was to actually hold what are called Emergency Action Committee hearings on the ground immediately. And, in fact, there were at least five on the record for June alone on the ground in both Tripoli and Benghazi. And that is the correct procedure for handling such instances. Is that not correct? Mrs. Clinton. That's correct. Ms. Duckworth. Thank you. Secretary Clinton, my focus and my job on this committee is to make sure that we never put brave Americans, like Ambassador Stevens, Sean Smith, Tyrone Woods, and Glen Doherty, ever on the ground again anywhere in the world without the protection that they so rightly deserve. Having flown combat missions myself and in some dangerous places, I understand the dedication of our men and women who choose to serve this country overseas. I have a special affinity for the diplomatic corps because these are folks who go in without the benefit of weapons, without the benefit of military might, armed only with America's values, diplomatic words and a handshake to forward our Nation's interests globally. So I am absolutely determined to make sure that we safeguard, in the name of our heroic dead, our men and women in the diplomatic corps wherever they are around the world. So the bottom line for me--I'm a very mission-driven person. The bottom line for me is, with respect to examining what went wrong in Benghazi, clear: let's learn from those mistakes, and let's figure out what we need to do to fix them. I've only been in Congress not quite 3 years, almost 3 years. And in this time, I've actually served on two other committees in addition to this one that looked at the Benghazi attacks, both Armed Services and Oversight and Government Reform, so I've had a chance to really look at all of these documents. One of the things that I saw--and I'd like to discuss this with you--is that the Department of State and the Department of Defense at the time seem to have not had the most ideal cooperation when it came to threat or security analysis. I do know, however, that over the past decade, they've established a tradition of working together on the ground in dangerous regions that has increased over time. However, as a member of the Armed Services Committee, which also looked at the Benghazi attacks, I'm concerned that the interagency cooperation between State and DOD was not sufficient in the weeks and months leading up to the September 11, 2012, attacks. For example, the joint contingency planning and training exercises, if we had conducted any joint interagency planning and training exercises, this may have actually helped State and DOD to identify and fix existing vulnerabilities in the temporary mission facility in Benghazi. Moreover, regular communications between AFRICOM, which is the DOD command, and the Special Mission Benghazi could have facilitated the prepositioning of military assets in a region where there were very real questions over the host country's ability to protect our diplomatic personnel. Secretary Clinton, within the weeks of the terrorist attacks in Benghazi happening, following that, I understand you partnered with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to establish and deploy five Interagency Security Assessment Teams to assess our security posture and needs at at least the 19 high-threat posts in 13 different countries. In fact, Deputy Secretary Nides testified before the House Foreign Affairs Committee in December of 2012 that the State Department and DOD ISAT initiative created a roadmap for addressing emerging security challenges. Why did you partner with the Department of Defense to conduct such a high-priority review, and was it effective in addressing the shortfalls in Benghazi and applying it for other locations? Mrs. Clinton. Congressman, thank--Congresswoman, thank you very much, and thanks for your service and particularly your knowledge about these issues arising from your own military service and the service on the committees here in the House. It's very challenging to get military assets into countries that don't want them there. And, in fact, that has been a constant issue that we have worked between the State Department and the Department of Defense. The Libyans made it very clear from the very beginning they did not want any American military or any foreign military at all in their country. And what I concluded is that we needed to have these assessments because even if we couldn't post our own military in the country, we needed to have a faster reaction. Now, I certainly agree 100 percent with the findings of the Armed Services Committee here in the House and other investigations. Our military did everything they could. They turned over every rock. They tried to deploy as best they could to try to get to Benghazi. It was beyond the geographic range. They didn't have assets nearby because we don't have a lot of installations and military personnel that are in that immediate region. So following what happened in Benghazi, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, General Dempsey, and I agreed to send out mixed teams of our diplomatic security and their top security experts from the Defense Department to get a better idea of the 19 high-threat posts. And that's exactly what we did. And it gave us some guidance to try to have better planning ahead of time. I know Admiral Mullen testified that it would be beyond the scope of our military to be able to provide immediate reaction to 270 posts, but that's why we tried to narrow down. And, of course, we do get help from our military in war zones. The military has been incredibly supportive of our Embassy in Kabul and our Embassy in Baghdad, but we have a lot of hot spots now and very dangerous places that are not in military conflict areas where we have American military presence, so we wanted to figure out how we could get more quickly a fast reaction team to try to help prevent what happened in Benghazi. Ms. Duckworth. Thank you. So this ISAT process with the joint teams of DOD and State that goes out and initially looked at the 19 posts, that's great that they come out--back with a report. It's kind of like, you know, the seven reports for this, and now we have another committee. We can keep having committees to look into Benghazi, but we never act on them. It doesn't help our men and women on the ground, and that's what I'm focused on. So what I want to know is with these ISATs, so they came back with their recommendations to you. Have they been resourced? Are they institutionalized? What has been done with this process so that it's not a snapshot in time in reaction to the Benghazi attack? And I want to make sure that, you know, at the very least, we are continuing the cooperation, or at least there's some sort of institutionalization of the review process to make sure that if it's not those 19 posts, if the shift now is there's 20 posts or some other posts. What has been done to make sure it's institutionalized? Mrs. Clinton. Well, that was one of the changes that I instituted before I left, and I'm confident that Secretary Kerry and his counterpart, Secretary Carter, at the Defense Department, are continuing that because I think it was very useful. Certainly it was useful for our security professionals and our diplomats to be partnered in that way with the Defense Department. You know, historically the only presence at some of our facilities has been Marines. And as you know well, Marines were there not for the purpose of personnel protection; they were there to destroy classified material and equipment. And so part of the challenge that we have faced in some of these hot-spot, dangerous areas is, how will we get more of a presence? And after Benghazi, we were able to get Marines deployed to Tripoli. So this is a constant effort between the State Department and the Defense Department, but it's my strong belief that the ISAT process has been and should be institutionalized, and we just keep learning from it. Ms. Duckworth. I'd like to touch on the quadrennial reviews. Again, coming from Armed Services, even as a young platoon leader out in, you know, a platoon, we got and read the Defense Quadrennial Review, which is a review that happens on a periodic basis that gives the individual soldier an idea of what the Defense Department is trying to do. And I understand you initiated something similar---- Mrs. Clinton. Right. Ms. Duckworth [continuing]. In the State Department. And this goes to--there has been discussion already about the culture at the State Department, especially when it comes to security. I find that the Department of Defense Quadrennial Review is really good at instilling culture throughout the Department. Can you talk a little bit about how and why you decided to do the review for the State Department? Was it useful? Is it useful? Is it getting out there? Is it a waste of time, and we shouldn't be wasting money on it, and we should be doing something else? Mrs. Clinton. Well, I hope it's not the latter. I learned about the Quadrennial Defense Review serving on the Armed Services Committee in the Senate during my time there. I agree with you completely, Congresswoman. It's a very successful roadmap as to where we should be going, and I'm impressed that as a platoon leader, it was something that you took into account. So when I came to the State Department, there had never been anything like this done; there was no roadmap. And the State Department and USAID would come up and fight for the money that they could get out of Congress, no matter who was in charge of the Congress, every single year. It's 1 percent of the entire budget, and it was very difficult to explain effectively what it is we were trying to achieve, so I did institute the first ever Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review. And one of the key questions that we were addressing is, what is this balance between risk and reward when it comes to our diplomats and our development professionals? Because the first thing I heard when I got to the State Department was a litany of complaints from a lot of our most experienced diplomats that they were being hamstrung, that the security requirements were so intense that they were basically unable to do their jobs. And, of course, then from the security professionals, who were all part of this, what we call the QDDR, they were saying: We don't want you to go beyond the fence. We can't protect you in all of these dangerous circumstances. How you balance that--and it is a constant balancing of risk and reward in terms of what we hope our diplomats and development professionals can do. So it's been done twice now. Secretary Kerry in his tenure has done the second QDDR. And I hope it becomes as important and as much of a roadmap as the QDR has for our Defense Department and our military services. Ms. Duckworth. Thank you. I'm out of time, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Gowdy. I thank the gentlelady from Illinois. The chair would now recognize the gentlelady from Alabama, Mrs. Roby. Mrs. Roby. Good morning. Mrs. Clinton. Good morning. Mrs. Roby. Secretary Clinton, my colleagues have focused on your relationship with the Ambassador, Chris Stevens, and why you sent him into Benghazi in 2011 as part of your broader Libya initiative, but it's not so clear from everything that we've reviewed that you had a vision in Benghazi going forward into 2012 and beyond. It appears that there was confusion and uncertainty within your own Department about Libya. And, quite frankly, Secretary Clinton, it appears that you were a large cause of that uncertainty. And we've seen all the day-to-day updates and concern early in 2011. And I heard what you said to my colleague, Mrs. Brooks. And I'll get to that in a minute. But showing that Libya and, for that matter, Benghazi, belonged to you in 2011, it was yours, so to speak. And from your own records that we have, we saw a drop in your interest in Libya and Benghazi in 2012. Not only do the records show your drop in interest in Benghazi, it was even noticed by your own staff. I want to point this out to--I say this because I want to point you to an email in early February 2012 between two staffers at your Libya desk that says you didn't know whether we still even had a presence in Benghazi. Let's not use my words. Let's use theirs. This can be found at tab 31. The email says--and it's dated February 9, 2012. One writes to the other about an encounter that she had with you, quote: ``Also, the Secretary asked last week if we still have a presence in Benghazi. I think she would be upset to hear that yes, we do, but because we don't have enough security, they are on lockdown,'' end quote. And I say that this is very troubling to me because it raises several issues that I'd like to ask you about. I'm struck by the first part, ``The Secretary asked last week if we still have a presence in Benghazi.'' Now, you pointed out to Mrs. Brooks in her last line of questioning based upon the email stacks here that you engaged in a lot of conversations and briefings, so I'm assuming that this conversation with this member of your staff took place in one of those briefings, but then she sent this email asking about this. So how can this be that two of your staffers are emailing about whether or not you even knew that we had a presence in Benghazi in 2012, with all your interest in Libya in 2011, including your trip in October of 2011, and that months later, we come to find out that you didn't even know if we had a presence there? Mrs. Clinton. Well, I can't comment on what has been reported. Of course, I knew we had a presence in Benghazi. I knew that we were evaluating what that presence should be, how long it should continue, and I knew exactly what we were doing in Libya. And I think it's important since you--you have some very legitimate questions about what we were doing. You know, the United States played a major role in the first election that the Libyan people had in 51 years. It was a successful election by every count, and they voted for moderates. They voted for the kind of people they wanted to govern them. We had a very successful effort that the United States supported, getting rid of Qadhafi's remaining chemical weapons, which we led and supported the United Nations and others in being able to do. We were combating the proliferation of weapons. That's one of the reasons why there was a CIA presence in Benghazi because we were trying to figure out how to get those weapons out of the wrong hands and get them collected in a way and destroyed, and, in fact, we began reducing those heavy weapons stocks. We were, you know, working on providing transition assistance to the Libyans. I met with the Libyans. I telephoned with the Libyans. I saw the Libyans all during this period. And it was hard because a lot of them knew what they wanted, but they didn't know how to get from where they were to that goal. And we did an enormous amount of work. My two deputies, Tom Nides and Bill Burns, went to Libya. Other officials in the State Department went to Libya. So there was a constant continuing effort that I led to try to see what we could do to help. Now, one of the problems we faced is that the Libyans did not really feel that they could welcome a peacekeeping mission, they couldn't welcome foreign troops to their soil. That made it really difficult. And it---- Mrs. Roby. Secretary---- Mrs. Clinton [continuing]. Didn't have to be American troops. It could have been troops from anywhere in the world under a U.N. mandate that might have helped them begin to secure their country. Mrs. Roby. Secretary Clinton, if I may, I hear what you're saying, but this email says something very, very different. Mrs. Clinton. Well, I can't speak to that. I can just tell you what I was doing, and I---- Mrs. Roby. Sure. But these---- Mrs. Clinton [continuing]. Was doing a lot. Mrs. Roby. This was your staff, and I---- Mrs. Clinton. Well, who---- Mrs. Roby. How can they wonder---- Mrs. Clinton. What were the---- Mrs. Roby [continuing]. If they had this conversation with you, why they would make it up, but I wanted to move on. This email, you know, makes me wonder about the vision for Benghazi because they're asking if you--they're saying that you asked if we still had a presence, but if you--you know, we look at the second part of the email, ``and I think she would be upset to hear yes, we do''---- Mrs. Clinton. I---- Mrs. Roby. This---- Mrs. Clinton. You know, Congresswoman, I'm sorry. I have no--no recollection of or no knowledge of--of course. Mrs. Roby. Well, please turn to tab 31---- Mrs. Clinton. Well, I---- Mrs. Roby [continuing]. Because it's right there. Mrs. Clinton. I trust that you have read it, but I also tell you that we had a presence in Benghazi. We had members of the administration and Congress visiting Benghazi, so, of course, I knew we had a presence in Benghazi. I can't speak to what someone either heard or misheard, but I think what's important, and I understand the underlying point of your question, is, what were we doing about---- Mrs. Roby. Right. And I've heard---- Mrs. Clinton [continuing]. Libya after Qadhafi fell, and that's what I'm trying to explain to you about---- Mrs. Roby. Yes, ma'am. Mrs. Clinton [continuing]. What we were doing. Mrs. Roby. I want to get to the second part of the email that suggests that we were in lockdown, that you would have been upset to know yes. I've heard the first part of your answer. But that we were in lockdown, and you've said on numerous occasions, including in your opening statement on point number one, you know, America must lead and we must represent in dangerous places, ``They can't do their jobs for us in bunkers.'' And essentially what we know is that there weren't the required number of security on the ground in order for an individual to even move about the country to provide you with what you have reiterated on numerous occasions as being very important at that time, which is political reporting. Mrs. Clinton. Well, could you tell me who is--who are the names on this email that you're talking about? Mrs. Roby. Sure, I can. Turn to tab 31. You have a book in front of you. It is Alyce Abdalla and--I'm going to pronounce it wrong--Evyenia Sidereas? Is that correct? Mrs. Clinton. They were not on my staff. I'm not in any way, you know, contradicting what they think they heard or what they heard somebody say, but the people that I---- Mrs. Roby. Can you tell me who they were if they were not on your staff? Mrs. Clinton. They were not on my--they were--they--they were in the State Department along with thousands of other people. They were not part of the Secretary's staff. But I get what you're saying, Congresswoman, and I want to focus on this because I think it's a fair and important question. The facility in Benghazi was a temporary facility. There had been no decision made as to whether or not it would be permanent. It was not even a consulate. You know, our Embassy was in Tripoli. Obviously, much of the work that we were doing was going through the Embassy. There was a very vigorous discussion on the part of people who were responsible for making a recommendation about Benghazi as to what form of consulate, what form of facility it should be. Chris Stevens believed that it should be a formal consulate, but that was something that had to be worked out, and there had not yet been a decision at the time that the attack took place. So it was not a permanent facility, and, you know, there were a number of questions that people were asking about whether it could or should be. Mrs. Roby. I want to drill down on the security issue, but I also want to say it's frustrating for us here on this panel asking these questions to hear you in your opening statement talk about the responsibility you took for all 70,000-plus employees, yet I read you an email that is a conversation between two of those employees, and it seems as though you're just kind of brushing it off as---- Mrs. Clinton. No. I---- Mrs. Roby [continuing]. Not having any knowledge. Mrs. Clinton. I'm just saying I have no recollection of it, and it doesn't correspond with the facts of what we were doing on a regular basis. Mrs. Roby. Well, we talked for just a minute about the security. I've got a few seconds left. In 2011, during the revolution, then Envoy Stevens had ten agents with him on the ground in Benghazi. And then we know, in 2012, where the security situation had deteriorated even further, there were only three agents assigned to Benghazi. Again, can't even move anybody off of the facility to do the necessary political reporting. And my question is, you know, why did you not acknowledge, because of your interest in 2011, the importance of having those security officers there to do what was so important to you, which was the political reporting? Then in 2011, ten; and when the Ambassador was there, three; and he brought two of his own the night of the attack, which would meet the requisite five; but there was really only three there at any given time. So if you could address that again. I'm a little short on time. Mrs. Clinton. Well, he did have five with him on September 11, and he---- Mrs. Roby. Well, he brought two, right? He brought two---- Mrs. Clinton. Well---- Mrs. Roby [continuing]. With him. There were three there-- -- Mrs. Clinton. Right. But---- Mrs. Roby [continuing]. And there was supposed to be five there. Mrs. Clinton. But the point was they were personal security, so they were there to secure him. So, yes, he did bring two, and when he got there, he had five. Mrs. Roby. Can you address the discrepancy? Mrs. Clinton. The day before, on September 10, he went into Benghazi, he went to a luncheon with leading civic leaders, business leaders in Benghazi. So he felt very comfortable. It was his decision. Ambassadors do not have to seek permission from the State Department to travel around the country that they are assigned to. He decided to go to Benghazi. By taking two security officers with him and having three there, he had the requisite five that had been the subject of discussion between the Embassy and the State Department security professionals. I'm not going to in any way suggest that he or the Embassy got everything they requested. We know that they didn't, from the Accountability Review Board, from investigations that were done by the Congress. We know that there were a lot of discussions about what was needed, particularly in Benghazi, and that the day that he died, he had five security officers. A lot of security professionals who have reviewed this matter, even those who are critical that the State Department did not do enough, have said that the kind of attack that took place would have been very difficult to repel. That's what we have to learn from, Congresswoman. You know, there are many lessons going back to Beirut, going back to Tehran and the takeover of our embassy, and going all the way through these years. And sometimes we learn lessons and we actually act and we do the best we can, and there's a perfect terrible example of that with respect to what happened in Benghazi. Mrs. Roby. Certainly. My time has expired. And we'll certainly never know what would have--what the outcome would have been if there had been more agents that night. I yield back. Mrs. Clinton. Well, that's not what the professionals, that's not what the experts in security have concluded. If you read the Accountability Review Board---- Mrs. Roby. I have read it, Secretary Clinton, and it says that security was grossly inadequate. Mrs. Clinton. Well, it said that there were deficiencies within two bureaus in the State Department, which we have moved to correct, and it also pointed out that the Diplomatic Security officers who were there acted heroically. There was not one single question about what they did. And they were overrun, and it was unfortunate that the agreement we had with the CIA annex, and when those brave men showed up, that it was also not enough. Mrs. Roby. Certainly. And we'll discuss this more. I have to yield back. Chairman Gowdy. The gentlelady's time has expired. The chair will now recognize the gentleman from Washington. Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam Secretary, for being here. Just to clarify, you knew we had a presence? Mrs. Clinton. Of course, I knew. I knew, Congressman, of course. Mr. Smith. And then going back to an earlier question, you were also aware of those two attacks on our compounds, even though you didn't email about it? Mrs. Clinton. Yes, I was aware. Mr. Smith. And that, I think, you know, sort of points out, I mean, after 17 months and $4.7 million, as the ranking member pointed out in his opening statements, and then as we've seen today, this committee is simply not doing its job. And I don't really think it should have been formed in the first place, but what we've heard here is, well, first of all, an obsession with email. The idea that two fairly junior level staffers might not have gotten something wrong in what they heard or the information in an email might in fact not be accurate are certainly not things that should be news to anybody, but it is the obsession with the emails that takes us off of what should have been the task of this committee. I also find it interesting that Mrs. Roby's final comments were to quote the ARB report. Mrs. Clinton. Right. Mr. Smith. And, yes, the ARB report, I think, was very good. I think we absolutely had to have it. And I think it was appropriate for the committees and Congress to do the investigations that they did, but all of that begs the question as to why we've spent the $4.7 million that we have spent on this. And even in the chairman's opening remarks, it was primarily a defense of the committee's existence, not any new information, not here's what we in those 17 months and $4.7 million have figured out that is new and different. There's nothing. In fact, we've heard nothing, even in today's hearing, not a single solitary thing that hasn't already been discussed repeatedly. So we've learned absolutely nothing. And, yes, we've uncovered a trove of new information. In this age, there--I don't think there's ever an end to the emails. We could probably go on for another two years, and we'd find more. But the question is, have we found anything substantively that tells us something different about what happened in Benghazi? And the answer to that question is no. And, look, I didn't think this committee should have been formed in the first place, but if it was going to be formed, the least we could do would be to actually focus on the four brave Americans who were killed, why they were killed, and focus on Benghazi. And we have not. I mean, Mr. Roskam's questions I found to be the most interesting. Basically, I don't know, it was like he was running for President. He wanted to debate you on overall Libya policy as to why we got in there in the first place. And that's debatable, and I think you will argue that quite well. But that's not about the attack on Benghazi. That's not about what we could have done in Benghazi to better protect them. So, again, I think we've seen that this committee is focused on you. And I'm, you know, the ranking member of the Armed Services Committee. I don't see the Department of Defense here. I don't see the CIA here. There were many, many other agencies involved in this, and yet yours has been the one that they have obsessively focused on. And I, I think that's a shame for a whole lot of reasons, but for one thing, this committee, as it's been in the news the last several weeks, has been yet one more step in denigrating this institution. And I happen to think this institution needs more support, not less, so I wish we would stop doing that. And you mentioned Beirut, and that was the first thought that occurred to me when this happened, was a Democratic Congress at the time did a fair and quick investigation of what was an unspeakable tragedy, two separate suicide bombings 4 months apart. And there was clearly inadequate security, but the focus there was not on partisanship, not on embarrassing the Reagan administration, but on actually figuring out what happened and how we can better protect Americans. Now, I want to talk just--and ask questions about what I think is the central issue, and that is, how do we have that presence in the world that you described in what is an increasingly dangerous world? Because as I've traveled to Pakistan and Afghanistan and Yemen and other places, I am consistently amazed by the willingness of our diplomatic corps to put their lives at risk. And I wonder, how do you balance that very difficult decision because, frankly, what I've heard more often from that diplomatic corps is that they chafe at the restrictions. I mean, I remember vividly being in Peshawar, which is, you know--I mean, I don't like to ride from the airport to the Embassy, which was 10 minutes, and we were there for, I don't know, a few hours and then out. You know, the State Department personnel, they lived there and went out amongst the community. How do you try and strike that balance of, you know, being present and at the same time meeting the security obligations? And then, most importantly, who drives that decision because it seems to me in most instances, it is driven by the diplomatic corps there? If they take risks, it's because they have decided to do it. They're there. They know the security situation certainly better than the Secretary and better than most everybody else. But what is the proper way to strike that balance going forward to protect our personnel and still fulfill their mission? Mrs. Clinton. Congressman, I think that is the most important question, and I would certainly welcome congressional discussion and debate about this because it's what we tried to do, going back to Congresswoman Duckworth's question, what we tried to begin to do in the Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review, the first one that was ever done, because that's exactly what we were facing. You know, we have had diplomats and development professionals in war zones now for a number of years. We've had them in places that are incredibly unstable and dangerous because of ongoing conflicts. It is, I think, the bias of the diplomacy corps that they be there because that's what they signed up for, and they know that if America is not represented, then we leave a vacuum, and we lose our eyes and our ears about what people are thinking and doing. It is certainly the hardest part of the job in many of our agencies and departments today, and it was for me in the State Department. That's why I relied on the security professionals because by the time I got there in 2009, the Diplomatic Security professionals had been taking care of American diplomats in Iraq, in Afghanistan, in Pakistan, for years, and they had learned a lot of lessons, and they were forced to make tough decisions all the time. You mentioned Peshawar, one of clearly the high-threat posts that the United States maintains a presence in, but when you think that since 2001, we've had 100 of our facilities attacked. If we were to shut them all down, if we were to pull out from all of them, we would be blinding ourselves. So it's a constant balancing act: what are the risks, and what are the rewards for opening, maintaining, and/or closing a site? I don't know that there's any hard and fast rule that we can adopt. We just have to get better at making that assessment, Congressman. And your question really goes to the heart of it. When you were a Member of Congress in Peshawar, you were guarded by our Diplomatic Security professionals. They had to assess: Was it safe enough for a member of Congress to come? How do we get him from the airport to the Embassy? It won't surprise you to hear we've had attacks there, as in so many other places around the world. And that is a heavy responsibility. And the Diplomatic Security professionals get it right 999 times out of 1,000. And it's deeply distressing to them when anything goes wrong. We have lost non-Americans with some of these attacks on facilities. We've lost our locally employed staff. They never want to see any successful attack, so they have to be--they have to be right 100 percent of the time. The terrorists only have to be right once. And, you know, that's why this is really at the core of what I tried to do before even I got the Accountability Review Board, going back to the QDDR to come up with a better way of trying to make those assessments. Mr. Smith. Madam Secretary, if I may, just two final points. I mean, so the bottom line is Benghazi on 9/11/2012 was not the only dangerous place in the world where our security personnel were---- Mrs. Clinton. Right. Mr. Smith [continuing]. And where these difficult decisions had to be made. Mrs. Clinton. R