- THE EBOLA EPIDEMIC: THE KEYS TO SUCCESS FOR THE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSEa
[Senate Hearing 113-625] [From the U.S. Government Publishing Office] S. Hrg. 113-625 THE EBOLA EPIDEMIC: THE KEYS TO SUCCESS FOR THE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSEa ======================================================================= HEARING BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICAN AFFAIRS OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS UNITED STATES SENATE ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION __________ DECEMBER 10, 2014 __________ Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Relations Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/ ______ U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 94-193 PDF WASHINGTON : 2015 ----------------------------------------------------------------------- For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC 20402-0001 COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey, Chairman BARBARA BOXER, California BOB CORKER, Tennessee BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire MARCO RUBIO, Florida CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, Delaware RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois JEFF FLAKE, Arizona TOM UDALL, New Mexico JOHN McCAIN, Arizona CHRISTOPHER MURPHY, Connecticut JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming TIM KAINE, Virginia RAND PAUL, Kentucky EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts Daniel E. O'Brien, Staff Director Lester E. Munson III, Republican Staff Director ------------ SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICAN AFFAIRS CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, Delaware, Chairman RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois JEFF FLAKE, Arizona BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland JOHN McCAIN, Arizona JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming TOM UDALL, New Mexico RAND PAUL, Kentucky (ii) C O N T E N T S ---------- Page Alvarez, Javier, senior team lead, Strategic Response and Global Emergencies, Mercy Corps, Portland, OR......................... 31 Prepared statement........................................... 33 Coons, Hon. Christopher A., U.S. Senator from Delaware, opening statement...................................................... 1 Farmer, Paul, M.D., cofounder, Partners in Health, Boston, MA.... 12 Prepared statement........................................... 14 Flake, Hon. Jeff, U.S. Senator from Arizona, opening statement... 11 Gaye, Pape, president and CEO, IntraHealth International, Chapel Hill, NC....................................................... 25 Prepared statement........................................... 27 Peterson, E Anne, M.D., vice dean, Public Health Program, Ponce Health Sciences University, World Vision, Washington, DC....... 17 Prepared statement........................................... 19 Sirleaf, Her Excellency Ellen Johnson, President, Republic of Liberia, Monrovia.............................................. 2 Prepared statement........................................... 5 Additional Material Submitted for the Record Catholic Relief Services, prepared statement..................... 52 Menendez, Hon. Robert, U.S. Senator from New Jersey, prepared statement...................................................... 50 Save the Children, prepared statement............................ 51 (iii) THE EBOLA EPIDEMIC: THE KEYS TO SUCCESS FOR THE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE ---------- WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 10, 2014 U.S. Senate, Subcommittee on African Affairs, Committee on Foreign Relations, Washington, DC. The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:35 a.m., in room SD-419, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Christopher Coons (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding. Present: Senators Coons, Durbin, Shaheen, and Flake. Also Present: Senators Markey and Murphy. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, U.S. SENATOR FROM DELAWARE Senator Coons. Good morning. This meeting of the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on African Affairs will come to order. We are going to do things a little differently than usual today because of a rare honor for this subcommittee. Joining us from the Liberian capital of Monrovia today via video conference will be President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, who will share with us her observations on the Ebola outbreak and its impact on her country. President Sirleaf is an extraordinary individual who has already once pulled her country back from the brink of collapse following Liberia's long and destructive civil war. Her certainty of purpose, coupled with a vigorous commitment to reconciliation and economic recovery, make her the single best person to be leading Liberia through this very difficult time. President Sirleaf has shown extraordinary leadership for her country in this time of crisis and continues to be an example for all in public service. Winner of the Nobel Peace Prize and Africa's first elected female head of state, President Sirleaf is an individual of exemplary character, fortitude, and compassion for her people. I would also like to take a moment to recognize Mr. Jeremiah Sulunteh, the Republic of Liberia's Ambassador to the United States, who, like Madam President, has played a key role as a long-time servant to the Republic. It is an honor and a privilege to have you with us today. President Sirleaf has also volunteered to answer a few questions from members of the subcommittee following her remarks. It is a rare honor and an extraordinary opportunity to be joined by video conference by a sitting head of state, one for which my colleagues and I are grateful. Madam President. STATEMENT OF HER EXCELLENCY ELLEN JOHNSON SIRLEAF, PRESIDENT, REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA, MONROVIA President Sirleaf. Good morning. Thank you for inviting me to offer remarks at this hearing. I would like to start by extending warm and profound gratitude on behalf of the people and Government of Liberia to the American people, the U.S. Government, the many American institutions and faith-based organizations for the leadership your country has taken by joining us on the frontline of this battle to turn the tide against this unknown disease that has threatened our very way of life. My colleagues from Guinea and Sierra Leone, also victims of this disease, join me in these sentiments. Allow me to recognize also the extraordinary work of U.S. Ambassador Deborah Malac and the Embassy team. Chairman Coons and Ranking Member Flake, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks for the personal commitment demonstrated by you and other Members of Congress through your numerous phone calls and messages of support. We express appreciation to President Obama for the bold steps, including the work of Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control, and Rajiv Shah, the Administrator of USAID, in coming to our aid. It was the United States that awakened the world to the scope and magnitude of the Ebola disease's virulent spread in West Africa, that led to the extraordinary step to deploy the United States military to help Liberia. It was the leadership of the Obama administration, supported by Congress, that opened the space for the disease to stabilize in Liberia and encouraged the rest of the world to respond to this global crisis. It is a demonstration of leadership as important as the role to combat terrorism and other ills around the world. We applaud the construction of Ebola Treatment Units by the DOD and the establishment of the field hospital to treat health care personnel as a significant and timely response to our predicament. Today, our Armed Forces, which worked with the DOD, can boast of the capability to construct Treatment Units and other similar type of facilities. The Treatment Units send a powerful message to our people that Ebola is real, that it requires an overpowering response, and that the people of the United States stand by us. The units serve us well by ensuring that we can respond to continuing hotspots and possible recurrence. The fact that they are not full is a strong sign of their success and shows that by working together with overwhelming force, we have begun to push back on this unknown killer disease. Honorable Members of Congress, several of you may recall that on March 16, 2006, shortly after being elected President in Liberia's first post-conflict elections, I had the honor to address a joint meeting of the U.S. Congress and said that we will pay any price to lay the foundation for durable peace. In 2013, we celebrated the 10th year of peace that enabled us to achieve over 7 percent average annual economic growth, a 50- percent reduction in the infant mortality rate, 17 additional years in life expectancy, relief from a crippling external debt, and a restoration of economic and social infrastructure. Perhaps more importantly, we have established a free and democratic society, thus reversing the many decades of authoritarian rule. This year incredibly changed everything. Like the rest of the world, we knew nothing about this disease. It sprung on us at the worst of times. Our subregion had just begun to recover from years of instability and commenced the process of regional integration. The three most affected countries have embarked on a path of democratic governance. As natural resource-rich countries, we were in the process of attracting investors, creating the conditions to accelerate growth with development. This has all been unimaginably reversed. Today, we are fighting to keep people alive, facing a faceless but deadly enemy. As I speak to you, the Ebola virus has caused a serious disruption of Liberia's social, economic, and cultural fabric. It has destroyed many of our hard-fought development gains, wreaked havoc on our economy, exposed the weakness of our public health systems, interrupted our infrastructure development, closed schools, restrained travels, and shattered the lives of our people. The disease has subjected us to a stigma all over the world, creating a fear more destructive than Ebola itself. With the support of partners like you, we have made progress in containing the virus. Our 13 emergency treatment units, with a total of 840 beds, have only 136 patients. Our 70 burial teams have buried 23 persons per day across the country, compared to hundreds months ago. We have seen a drop from around 100 new cases per day at the peak of the epidemic to only 10 confirmed new cases per day over the past week. Our six active laboratories have tested 60 samples a day but, on average, only find 8 new Ebola cases per day. The 4,000 contact tracers, which involve community workers, are following some 7,000 persons. Doctors, nurses, and other health care workers, some 174 of the over 3,000 who have died, are no longer at risk because quality treatment facilities are available to them. We are happy to say that 1,312 persons, including 345 children, many of them orphans, have walked away free from the disease. Can I profoundly say I am excited about this progress? Yes, I am. But I also know that more has to be done, as we are now in the most critical stage of response. At 10 new cases a day, the crisis is now manageable, but experts tell us that traveling that last mile to zero new cases will be much more difficult because the disease has retreated and must now be chased down in every corner. To illustrate this, consider the challenge of contact tracing. For each of the patients in the United States, there were around 40 contacts that needed to be quarantined and monitored. The challenge in Liberia is greater, with thousands more contacts, often in villages which take hours to reach through densely forested terrain. This is one of the many reasons why your continued support and our joint collaboration is so important. Moreover, full eradication will not be secured until the whole region is freed from Ebola, until there is prevention against future possible outbreak, until we develop a medicine both preventive and curative to conquer this deadly disease. Yesterday, Liberia hosted a regional technical summit with Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Mali to share lessons and best practices. The summit drove home the point that Ebola is not a Liberian issue or a West African issue. It is a global issue that we must all continue to confront. This is why continuing your assistance to the combined effort with our neighbors remains a priority. This is why the United States has been right to tackle it at the front line, here in West Africa. This is why Dr. Margaret Chan, Director General of WHO, was right when she noted that this is the greatest peacetime challenge the United Nations and its agencies have ever faced. In Liberia and in Sierra Leone and in Guinea, we continue to live this challenge. As our response evolves, we ask that partners continue to support our efforts. This calls for strengthening community ownership and responsibility for awareness and immediate response action through the Community Care Centers that are being established with the support of USAID. Here are a few statistics in this regard. Liberia has 218 medical doctors and 5,234 nurses to serve a 4.3 million population at 405 public and 253 private health facilities. This means we have 1 doctor for 100,000 people, compared with 4 for 100,000 in Sierra Leone, 10 for 100,000 in Guinea, and 245 for 100,000 in the United States. As we speak, there are more Liberian doctors and medical professionals in the United States than at home. Most of them left during the war, and we were in the process of trying to get them back home with incentives that measure up to their qualifications. This disease has upset that effort. Clearly, we are far behind and can only sustain the progress and prevent a recurrence through better trained and better equipped health facilities, better diagnosis facilities for infectious diseases, better hospitals, better clinics. We have asked the 137 partners from some 26 countries who are with us in this fight to join us in this expanded effort. Above all, Liberia must get back on the path to growth. My government is preparing a comprehensive plan for Liberia's post-Ebola economic recovery, accelerating our work in infrastructure, above all Roads to Health, electricity, and WATSAN operations. A major push in the agricultural sector, where most Liberians are employed, will enable us to generate jobs and restore livelihoods. The private sector will play a crucial role. In this regard, we commend the private sector organized under the Ebola Private Sector Mobilization Group with the efficacy of ECOWAS and the African Union for their support in making people and resources available to fight the disease. Their efforts will be even more critical in the building of post-Ebola economies, requiring from us commitment to create conducive conditions for private capital to succeed. Liberia is extremely proud that we achieved the MCC Compact eligibility in 2012 by passing 10 out of the 20 indicators, including control of corruption. Liberia again passed eligibility in 2014 by passing 10 of the 20 indicators. Liberia has surpassed the MCC's Control of Corruption standard for seven straight years, one of the few developing countries to do so. An MCC grant would be a game changer for Liberia. It would facilitate our post-Ebola economic recovery and put our development momentum back on track, leading to substantial transformation of our economy. I want to conclude by expressing our gratitude to you, the U.S. Congress, for the friendship and assistance, without which we would not have made the progress to date. There remains a lot to do to ensure the resources are properly deployed by the many institutions to which it is directly allocated to ensure that there is full accountability to you and to all our partners, and to the Liberian people. Our resolve to meet the challenge that confronts us is strong and unrelenting. We will win this battle. Once again, I want to thank you and the American people for the opportunity to be with you in this meeting today. [The prepared statement of President Sirleaf follows:] Prepared Statement of Her Excellency Ellen Johnson Sirleaf Chairman Coons, Ranking Member Flake, distinguished Members of the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on African Affairs, Friends of Liberia, good morning. Thank you for inviting me to offer remarks at this hearing. I would like to start by extending warm greetings and profound gratitude of the people and Government of Liberia to the American people, the U.S. Government, the many American institutions, and faith- based organizations for the leadership your country has taken by joining us on the front line of this battle to turn the tide against this unknown disease that has threatened our very way of life. My colleagues from Guinea and Sierra Leone, also victims of this disease, join me in these sentiments. Allow me to recognize also the extraordinary work of U.S. Ambassador Deborah Malac and the Embassy team. Chairman Coons and Ranking Member Flake, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks for the personal commitment demonstrated by you and other Members of Congress through your numerous phone calls and messages of support. We want to express appreciation to President Obama for the bold steps, including the work of Tom Frieden, Director of the Centers for Disease Control, and Rajiv Shah, the Administrator of USAID in coming to our aid. It was the U.S. administration that awakened the world to the scope and magnitude of the Ebola disease's virulent spread in West Africa; that took the extraordinary step to deploy the U.S. military to help Liberia. It was the leadership of the Obama administration supported by Congress that opened the space for the disease to stabilize in Liberia and encouraged the rest of the world to respond to this global crisis. It is a demonstration of leadership as important as the role to combat terrorism and other ills around the world. We applaud the construction of Treatment Units by the DOD and the establishment of the field hospital to treat health care personnel as a significant and timely response to our predicament. Today, our Armed Forces which worked with the DOD can boast of the capability to construct treatment units and other similar type of facilities. The treatment units send a powerful message to our people that Ebola is real that it requires an overpowering response and that the people of the United States stand by us. The units serve us well by ensuring that we can respond to continuing hotspots and possible recurrence. The fact that they are not full is a strong sign of their success and shows that by working together with overwhelming force we have begun to push back on this killer disease. Honorable Members of Congress: Several of you may recall that on March 16, 2006, shortly after being elected President in Liberia's first post-conflict elections, I had the honor to address a joint meeting of the U.S. Congress and said that we would pay any price to lay the foundation for durable peace. In 2013, we celebrated the 10th year of peace that enabled us to achieve over 7 percent average economic growth, a 50-percent reduction in the infant mortality rate; 17 additional years in life expectancy, relief from a crippling external debt, and a restoration of economic and social infrastructure. Perhaps more importantly we have established a free and democratic society thus reversing the many decades of authoritarian rule. This year changed everything. As the rest of the world, we knew nothing about this disease. It sprung on us at the worst of times. Our subregion had just begun to recover from years of instability and commenced the process of regional integration. The three most affected countries had emerged from the days of instability and embarked on a path of democratic governance. As natural resource rich countries, we were in the process of attracting investors, creating the conditions to accelerate growth with development. This has all been reversed. Today, we are fighting to keep people alive, facing a faceless but deadly enemy. As I speak to you, the Ebola virus has caused a serious disruption of Liberia's social, economic, and cultural fabric. It has destroyed many of our hard fought development gains, wreaked havoc on our economy, exposed the weakness of our public health systems, interrupted our infrastructure development, closed schools, restrained travel, and shattered the lives of our people. The disease has subjected us to a stigma all over the world, creating a fear more destructive than Ebola itself. With the support of partners, we have made progress in containing the virus. Our 13 Emergency Treatment Units, with a total of 840 beds, has only 136 patients. Our 70 burial teams have buried 23 persons per day across the country compared to hundreds, months ago. We have seen a drop from around 100 new cases per day at the peak of the epidemic, to only 8 confirmed new cases per day over the past week. Our six active laboratories have tested 60 samples a day, but on average only find 8 new Ebola cases per day. The 4,000 contact tracers which increasingly involve community workers are following some 7,000 persons. Doctors, nurses, and other health care workers, some 174 of whom died, are no longer at risk because quality treatment facilities are available to them. We are happy to say that 1,312 persons including 345 children, many of them orphaned, have walked away free from the disease. Am I excited about this progress? Yes, I am! But I also know that much more has to be done for we are now in the most critical stage of response. At 10 new cases a day, the crisis is now manageable; but experts tell us that traveling that last mile to zero new cases will be much more difficult, because the disease has retreated and must now be chased down in every corner. To illustrate this, consider the challenge of contact tracing. For each of the patients in the U.S., there were around 40 contacts that needed to be quarantined and monitored. The challenge in Liberia is greater, with thousands more contacts, often in villages which take hours to reach through dense bush. This is one of the many reasons why continuing support your support and our joint work together is so important. Moreover, full eradication will not be secured until the whole region is freed from Ebola; until there is prevention against future possible outbreak and until we develop a medicine, both preventive and curative to conquer this deadly disease. This is why securing our borders remains a priority requiring additional resources, as well as providing assistance to our neighbors. On yesterday, Liberia hosted a regional Technical summit with Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Mali to share lessons and best practices. The summit drove home the point that Ebola is not a Liberian issue or a West African issue. It is a global issue that we all must continue to confront. This is why the U.S. has been right to tackle it at the front line, here in West Africa. This is why Dr. Margaret Chan, Director General of WHO, was right when she noted that this is greatest peacetime challenge the United Nations and its agencies have ever faced.'' In Liberia, and our Mano River Union neighbors of Sierra Leone and Guinea, we continue to live this challenge. As our response evolves we ask that partners continue to support our efforts. This calls for strengthening community ownership and responsibility for awareness and immediate response action, through the Community Care Centers that are being established with the support of USAID. Here are a few statistics in this regard. Liberia has 218 medical doctors and 5,234 nurses to serve 4.3 million population at 405 public and 253 private health facilities. This means we have 1 doctor for 100,000 people, compared with 4 per 100,000 in Sierra Leone, 10 per 100,000 in Guinea and 245 per 100,000 in the United States. As we speak, there are more Liberian doctors and medical professionals in the United States than at home. Most of them left during the war and we were in the process of trying to get them back home, with incentives that measure up to their qualifications. This disease has upset all of this effort. Clearly we are far behind and can only sustain the progress and prevent a recurrence through better training and better equipped health facilities. We have asked the 137 partners from some 26 countries who are with us in this fight to join us in this expanded effort. Above all, Liberia must get back on the path to growth. My government is preparing a comprehensive plan for Liberia's post-Ebola economic recovery, accelerating our work in infrastructure--above all Roads to Health, electricity and WATSAN operations. A major push in the agricultural sector, where most Liberians are employed, will enable us to generate jobs and restore livelihoods. The private sector will play a crucial role. In this regard, we commend the private sector organized under the Ebola Private Sector Mobilization Group (EPSMG), with the advocacy of ECOWAS and the African Union for their support in making people and resources available to fight the disease. Their efforts will be even more critical in the building of post-Ebola economies requiring from us commitment to create conducive conditions for private capital to succeed. Liberia is extremely proud that we achieved MCC compact eligibility in 2012 by passing 10 out of 20 indicators, including control of corruption. Liberia again passed eligibility in 2014 by passing 10 out of 20 indicators. Liberia has surpassed the MCC's control of corruption standard for 7 straight years, one of the few developing countries of the world to do so. An MCC grant would be a game changer for Liberia. It would facilitate our post-Ebola economic recovery and put our development momentum back on track leading to substantial transformation of our economy. I want to conclude by expressing our gratitude to you, the United States Congress, for the friendship and assistance, without which we would not have made the progress to date. There remains a lot to do--to ensure the resources are properly deployed by the many institutions to which it is directly allocated; to ensure that there is full accountability to you and all our partners and to the Liberian people. Our resolve to meet the challenge that confronts us is strong and unrelenting. We will win this battle. Once again, I want to thank you and the American people for the opportunity to address you today. Senator Coons. Thank you, Madam President. Thank you for your remarks with us today, and thank you for the opportunity for several of our members to ask a few questions. I might just begin with one question, and I think we might restrict ourselves to one question each, if we might. I want to make sure, Madam President, that we are providing the right resources both to meet the emergency that you so correctly point out is not over and we need to remain engaged on as an international community, the pressing and current emergency of Ebola. But I also am wondering if we are providing the right resources to rebuild your public health infrastructure and to overcome what you referenced, a stigma that is in some ways a fear of Ebola that is greater than Ebola itself in terms of long-term challenges for your economic recovery. Are we providing the right assistance, and are we helping you rebuild for the future in the right ways? President Sirleaf. The resources to contain the virus are for the moment adequate to do so, as the progress has shown. However, there is always the chance of reoccurrence, as the history has shown in other countries that have been affected by the disease. This is why we must now move from containment, from treatment to prevention, and to do that means we will need the resources to rebuild, to strengthen our health care facilities, our hospitals, our clinics, through training, through better equipment, through better facilities. That way we can ensure that there will not be a reoccurrence, or in the event of a recurrence we will have the means to control it and to prevent its spread, not only within our country but as it spreads across borders. And that is why today we are working with our partners to get them to join us in this transition to prevention, working with our own people, our Community Care Workers, taking full responsibility by being trained to handle basic health care, particularly in our rural areas. Senator Coons. Thank you, Madam President. Senator Flake. Senator Flake. Thank you, Madam President. Thank you for appearing here today. I wanted to thank you for what you have done to rally the international community to join the effort to, as you say, stop the epidemic in West Africa. We are pleased to hear the progress that Liberia is making, and our concern that similar progress has not been made in Sierra Leone. You mentioned that you have come together with leaders in other countries and public health officials. What are you doing to make sure that best practices are shared and that the progress that has been made in Liberia is replicated elsewhere? Can you give us some idea of what is going on there? President Sirleaf. The coordinator of the President's Advisory Ebola Committee is today on his way to start discussion that will put him in the position to become a general coordinator for the three countries, working with UNMEER, the U.N. coordinating agency that is based in Accra. At the meeting held yesterday, Liberia offered, and I had already obtained President Roman's agreement to that, to send some of those nurses and doctors that we have over to Sierra Leone, with the agreement, of course, to be able to join the Sierra Leone forces in trying to expand their own capacity to deal with the disease. We expect that we will be looking at the results of yesterday's meeting to see what else Liberia can do to be able to join Sierra Leone particularly because they seem to be right now the ones in most serious trouble. But we will do everything that we can, share every capacity that we have, every resource we have, to be able to work with them so that they can get the same progress. Because, like I say, until the other two countries are free, Liberia cannot be truly free. Senator Coons. Thank you, Madam President. Senator Durbin. Senator Durbin. Madam President, thank you. Let me tell you that your statement about the number of doctors and medical professionals in Liberia is sobering and evidences a dramatic need for more medical resources in your country. Our immigration bill that we considered 2 years ago would have allowed, for example, Liberians practicing medicine in the United States to go back to Liberia and West Africa and to help on an emergency basis without jeopardizing their immigration status in the United States, and I hope we can return and pass something of that nature very quickly next year. But my specific question to you is this. The United States and President Obama are making substantial investments in West Africa to address Ebola. Many, many other countries are joining in that effort. I applaud all of their efforts. What is being done in Liberia to make certain that the investments that are being made are part of a transition in Liberia to a stronger public health system? The investments in equipment, in laboratories, in training of health care workers? Is Liberia working with these nations to make sure that there is a long-term commitment to strengthening the public health system in your country? President Sirleaf. Congressman, first of all, I am so glad about the immigration law, and I wish it would be reintroduced and would pass to enable our Liberian doctors to come and work with us. I am so pleased that with the support of the Clinton initiative we had before Ebola worked on and finalized a 10- year health system improvement plan. That plan has in it the training of thousands of health care workers that would be placed throughout the country, in all areas. It also has the upgrading of facilities by better equipment, better facilities. So this is our plan. We are now discussing that plan with the partners who are here working with us on Ebola and engaging them to start the transition from working on Ebola to support for our health care system, because that is the most lasting way to contain Ebola and to contain similar diseases such as malaria, on which we have made substantial progress and which could be reversed if we do not have the infection control system through a better health care delivery system. Senator Durbin. Thank you. Senator Coons. Thank you, Madam President. Senator Shaheen. Senator Shaheen. Thank you very much, President Sirleaf, for your willingness to join us today and for your resolute leadership to address the Ebola crisis that has threatened not only Liberia but Guinea, Sierra Leone and other countries in Africa. As you know, one of the mandates of the U.N. mission for Ebola Emergency Response is to help work with the governments affected to reinforce the leadership of those countries, including Liberia, and I wonder if you could talk a little bit about how that part of the U.N. mission has been working and whether the cooperation is helpful, and are there other things that can be done to improve that cooperation. President Sirleaf. The support has been most helpful to us. The mission works with us as we plan our responses not only for Ebola but responses in all of our development initiatives. There could be more coordination because we do have many partners that join us in this, and what we are doing is trying to ensure that we set up the mechanism that will enable us to be able to continue to monitor the progress that is being made, to continue to revise plans and to upgrade them to meet extenuating circumstances. So at this stage we are very pleased with the support of the mission, and when it comes to the USAID mission, I have to say that I cannot start saying so much for the Administrator, Rajiv Shah, who has just worked with us through all of this in so much, and has worked with so many of the other missions in the other countries that enable us to coordinate that, not only on a national basis but on a regional basis. Senator Shaheen. Thank you. Senator Coons. Thank you, Senators. Madam President, thank you so much for your remarks to us today, thank you for your leadership, and thank you for the opportunity to continue to work in partnership as we invest in sustaining the recovery of your nation, lay the foundation for a strong public health system, and work tirelessly together to ensure that this outbreak of Ebola is brought to an end. Thank you very much. President Sirleaf. Chairman Coons, I thank you and all of you, the members of the subcommittee, for this opportunity, and thank you for the support that you continue to give to Liberia, not only in this fight but in our overall development effort. May I stay and listen to some of it? [Laughter.] Senator Coons. Absolutely, Madam President. You are the President. You can do what you want. [Laughter.] Technically, what we are doing from a parliamentary procedural perspective is that we are now going to conclude what was a meeting of the subcommittee, and I will now gavel in a formal hearing of the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on African Affairs, which is the final hearing of this subcommittee for the 113th Congress. And without objection, at the outset I would like to request the testimony from Save the Children and Catholic Relief Services be entered into the record. Additionally, I will request that a statement from the chairman of our full committee, Chairman Bob Menendez, be entered into the record. [Editor's note.--The articles mentioned above can be found in the ``Additional Material Submitted for the Record'' section at the end of this hearing.] Senator Coons. I would like to invite our four witnesses for our next panel to come forward while I make some brief opening remarks. We plan to focus today on the factors that made it so easy for the Ebola virus to spread in West Africa and so difficult for it to be contained. It is by learning how we got here that I think we will be better able to prevent flareups and future outbreaks of Ebola and other highly infectious deadly diseases and reduce the likelihood that American and international intervention will again be necessary. Ebola to date, in this outbreak in three countries in West Africa and several others, has claimed the lives of more than 6,000 men, women and children that we know of, and has infected nearly three times that many, mostly in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, and has claimed the lives of 330 health workers, who I was pleased to see earlier today were recognized by Time Magazine as person of the year. It is often the unsung, unheralded men and women who took to this challenge on the ground and from throughout the world who I think we should be lifting up and supporting in the weeks and months ahead. The international community, as we all know, was slow to respond to the outbreak and is still working to catch up, but the U.S. Government has already invested more than $780 million in the Ebola response effort, nearly twice the amount of the next largest donor, and I am grateful for the leadership actions of President Obama to ensure that members of our Armed Forces and the United States Uniform Public Health Service have been deployed and made available. My understanding is that as of this week, roughly 2,600 U.S. Armed Forces and public health personnel are deployed in West Africa. Our contributions are having a marked impact, as you heard from President Sirleaf. U.S. support for the establishment of Ebola treatment units and safe burial teams have contributed to a significant reduction in the rate of growth of the disease. However, our work is indeed far from done. Sierra Leone has seen a sharp rise in recent cases, and as cases continue to grow, Sierra Leone has surpassed Liberia, which previously for months had had the highest caseload. As we have heard from President Sirleaf, Liberia is still wrestling with this virus but is making very hopeful progress. Mali also recently saw its first Ebola cases in October and now has eight. Ebola is a volatile virus with the potential to flare up at a moment's notice, and we need to be able to react as quickly as possible to contain it. So I hope we will talk about how we work together with our partners to ensure that we are prepared for future outbreaks and that we build at the ground level the public health resources that we need. The U.S. Government was the first international governance institution to step in when the NGO community, which had been on the ground for months and truly led the response to Ebola, called for our response. It is because the United States stepped in, and at the scale we did, that progress has been made in combating this terrible disease. This is, as others have said, not just a matter of our national security, it is a matter of fundamental humanity. We cannot as a country go back to the sidelines and watch these already impoverished and unstable countries fall apart when we as a nation have the resources and the calling to help turn this crisis around. I am elated to have heard from Appropriations Committee leadership that $5.4 billion in emergency funding is included in the appropriations package that will be taken up and voted on this week by the Senate of the United States to contribute to the pace and scale and investment required to not just control this outbreak but to invest in preventing future outbreaks. The four witnesses who join us here today represent organizations that were fighting this Ebola outbreak far before headlines appeared here in the United States and have done heroic work for which all of us should be grateful. Before I turn this over to my friend and distinguished ranking member, I just wanted to note what a pleasure it has been for me to chair this subcommittee these last 4 years. I have had the honor of sharing this dais over many hearings with two wonderful ranking members, Senator Isakson of Georgia and Senator Flake of Arizona, who care deeply and passionately about Africa and with whom it has been a true joy to work. Senator Flake. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JEFF FLAKE, U.S. SENATOR FROM ARIZONA Senator Flake. Thank you, Senator Coons, and let me just return the sentiment. It is wonderful to work with a chairman who not only cares deeply about the continent but has so much experience and firsthand knowledge and a desire to learn more all the time, and it has truly been a pleasure working with you, and I look forward to a long-time partnership on these issues. I want to thank you for calling this hearing as well, and for your response on this issue early on and encouraging a more robust response from the United States. I think the response that we have seen is, in large measure, due to your efforts. So, thank you for that, and thanks for this hearing. I appreciate the witnesses being here and look forward to hearing what you have to say. As Senator Coons mentioned, there is a significant investment that has been made by the United States and the taxpayers, and we represent them. We want to make sure that the hard-earned funds that are being spent here are done so wisely. So that is why we are so anxious to hear from you on what we need to do, one, for the current crisis, and moving ahead what we need to do to make sure that we do not have flareups as well. So, thank you for being here, look forward to the testimony. Senator Coons. Thank you, Senator Flake. I would now like to turn it over to our witnesses to make opening statements, and I will offer a brief introduction of each of you in turn. First is Dr. Paul Farmer, one of the founders of Partners in Health. Dr. Farmer has been a revolutionary voice in public health globally and in working to build and sustain community- based health care institutions since the 1980s. He heads the Department of Global Health and Social Medicine at Harvard Medical School. Partners in Health had a footprint in West Africa prior to this outbreak, and Dr. Farmer has been on the front lines of soliciting international support for the Ebola response effort, and I am grateful for his passionate voice around the questions of equity and access to health care globally. Dr. Anne Peterson is the vice dean of the Public Health Program at Ponce Health Services University and is former director of Global Health for World Vision and former USAID Assistant Administrator for the Bureau of Global Health. Dr. Peterson recently returned from Liberia and Sierra Leone, where she was working through World Vision to identify gaps in response efforts and evaluating how stakeholders have been coordinating efforts on the ground. Mr. Pape Gaye is the president and CEO of IntraHealth International, which is focused on strengthening health systems by training health care workers in developing countries at the community level. A native of Senegal, Mr. Gaye has been a lifelong advocate of health systems strengthening in developing countries and now more than ever can speak to the needs in these crisis-stricken countries. And last but certainly not least, Javier Alvarez is the Liberia country director for Mercy Corps, with more than 15 years of experience at UNDP and UNICEF, and he is an expert on humanitarian emergency response and wrote Mercy Corps' most recent report on the economic impact of Ebola in Liberia. Thank you, all of you, for your service, for your time, for your advice, and we look forward to your input. Dr. Farmer. STATEMENT OF PAUL FARMER, M.D., COFOUNDER, PARTNERS IN HEALTH, BOSTON, MA Dr. Farmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Senators. And greetings, Madam President. It is wonderful to see you, and thank you for the warm welcome that you have showed our teams in Liberia, and the leadership that you have shown in responding. I am making just very brief and illustrative comments and will submit a more extensive written comment to the record, if that is acceptable to you, Senator. Senator Coons. Without objection. Dr. Farmer. I just wanted to--and I apologize for obliterating it. I do not know if there is an image that comes up. I would rather look at the President myself. But just as a reminder, the matter of zoonoses--that is, diseases that leap from animals to humans--is an important one. It will remain important. In the 1960s and 1970s and 1980s, some of these hemorrhagic fevers were first described, and remember HIV shortly thereafter, also a zoonosis which spread into a global pandemic. I believe this is what we are here to avert with a much more rapid, clinically rapid pathogen, Ebola. Now, one of the questions that I was asked to address was how did this disease spread quickly. Every time there is an epidemic, there are explanatory voids where lots of assertions are made, and we heard in this example a great deal about bush meat and other exotic modes of transmission. We should be very clear that the rapid spread of Ebola is not due to 15,000 episodes of bush meat eating frenzy but rather to person-to- person transmission in a setting of weak health care infrastructure. So the diagnosis, speaking as a physician, is that it is critical that we understand that. So, weak health systems are responsible for the spread. In interviewing survivors--these are three young people from Sierra Leone, but it is not a different story elsewhere in the region--there are very few mysteries. These are people who are looking after members of their families--their family members--while they are sick or after they have died. As in every culture in the world, we respect the dead, we bury the dead. That is actually in my faith tradition one of the corporeal works of mercy, if I get my Sunday school memory back, bury the dead. Of course, this is not something that can be easily wished away, that people stop revering those who have passed away and honoring them. So these are, as has been said, in a way, the heroes of the epidemic. Now, what I hope we will be able to focus on in the hearing is what usually does not happen with emergency responses. The last time I was in this room was shortly after the earthquake in Haiti, making these very same points, and yet President Sirleaf has made them more effectively. We need to address the human resources for health crises. We need to build local capacity, local systems, and local health care infrastructure. That is how we will avert the next disaster. This has gone under the unglamorous name of health systems strengthening. I think we need a consultant to help us think of something--you know, we all of us talk that language, but we need a little help from you. These are substantial resources you have requested, and we are thrilled to see that many of them will go into health systems strengthening that has a significant component focused on building local capacity in places that include Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea. I would like to just close by saying I personally am proud, as an American, of the CDC's role, the NIH, other American institutions that have stepped up. I think I am very grateful for my colleagues who are physicians and nurses from the states you represent and all across the country who have gone in to serve Partners in Health, who is proud to be part of this coalition. We will seek to promote health systems strengthening while we are looking for the new and sexier term and to open with our colleagues in the public health sector in Liberia and Sierra Leone--and we hope one day Guinea--many clinical units able to take care of people sick with Ebola. But also, as noted, and maybe I skipped over this, the largest number of Ebola victims will not have Ebola. They will have malaria, they will have obstructive labor, they will have minor injuries that, because there is no health care system, will fester and take their lives or maim them in other ways. So we are looking forward to responding over the course of the coming years and again are grateful to the President for being here with us today, but also for being such a welcoming host. Thank you. [The prepared statement in the form of slides of Dr. Farmer follows:] Senator Coons. Thank you, Dr. Farmer. For several members of the subcommittee who have joined us, the President of Liberia made remarks previously and has graciously agreed to stay and to hear from our witnesses. Dr. Anne Peterson. Dr. Peterson. STATEMENT OF E ANNE PETERSON, M.D., VICE DEAN, PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAM, PONCE HEALTH SCIENCES UNIVERSITY, WORLD VISION, WASHINGTON, DC Dr. Peterson. Thank you, Chairman Coons and Ranking Member Flake, and subcommittee members as well; and thank you for having this hearing and for inviting me to be here. I went to Liberia and Sierra Leone not so much to look at what was being done well--and I will say many things are being done very well in all of the countries, and especially in the United States response--but my terms of reference as I went with World Vision was to look at what are the gaps, what are the gaps between what the faith communities are doing or could be doing and how well are they working together with the U.S. Government. So I will try to focus my remarks on six areas where I think we could do a little better than we have. Three of them are in areas of ongoing effort, and the first is in the need for cross-cutting coordination. If you talk to anyone who is working on the ground, they will tell you there is a lot of coordination happening. There are meetings and meetings and pillar meetings and coordination meetings. But they are all focused in their more narrow vertical programming. We have seen this all along in health development. Vertical programs, vertical efforts can be very, very effective. But when you do that, you do not build an intact health system. So as I went and looked across the pillars, across government agencies and NGOs and faith-based organizations, as I looked at the difference between what was happening in Liberia and Sierra Leone, in fact there were a number of places where it was clear that if we had had a bigger view, a cross-cutting collaboration and coordination, we would have had economies of scale, we would have had reduced duplication, and some of the gaps in what needs to have been done would not have been missed. So my first call was outlined in the Institute of Medicine report that was published this summer, ``Investing in Global Health Systems: Sustaining Gains and Transforming Lives,'' that I was honored to cochair with Ambassador John Lang. We talked about this need to go from vertical focus to a broad health systems approach, and the same thing is happening right now in Ebola response, and we can do better than that. The next is to invest sustainably. Very rightly, investments that the U.S. Government and others are putting in are focused on stopping Ebola. Stopping Ebola is absolutely essential. But we are also setting it up in such a way that the ground is being cleared, the tents are being put up, the labs are set, the foreign doctors and health care workers are coming in, and when Ebola is done, my desperate fear is that the tents will be rolled up and the expats will go home, and what will be left will be the previous health system that is only more broken than before Ebola came. So as we are doing just what we should be doing in addressing Ebola, if we could focus on investing it so that it will make permanent improvements in the health systems; to be, in fact, training and building health worker capacity even as we deal with the Ebola epidemic itself. My third ``do it better'' comment is in the area of listening to communities. Communities are part of the health system. If, in fact, we do not hear their needs and address their needs, they do not respond to our behavior change messages. So we heard from President Sirleaf that people heard messages that this is a terrible disease, it is a fatal disease. Well, if that is so, then why would you send your child to disappear into an Ebola treatment unit and never come home? Instead, we should be looking at what can be done, celebrating survivors, knowing that people can protect themselves, protect their families. By going in sooner when they have Ebola, they can prevent transmission to their families. So I would ask that all of the communities and the collaboration that is going on, do not just talk to one another. Remember to go in and talk to the people of communities. Some of the best messages I heard were talking to mothers in the slum communities in Monrovia and Freetown, and I will tell you I am not surprised that in Freetown, in Sierra Leone, cases are going up. It is exactly what I expected as I looked at both the economic issues and the behavioral issues and Ebola approaching those slum dwellings. So there are now three game changers, and I am almost out of time. You probably have not heard about rapid diagnostic tests as a major game changer. I will tell you that if we could distinguish between who has Ebola and who does not have Ebola, you would change how many people are in the Ebola units, and you would be able to remove those from risk who do not have Ebola, the malarias that look like Ebola. You would change the ability of health care workers to go in and man the regular outpatient departments so we could begin to address the indirect impacts and profound health impacts of other diseases, and we would change what happens in burials. Maybe up to 70 percent of community transmission is now happening in funerals and burials. If people knew when someone died whether they truly were an Ebola patient or not, we would then have fewer Ebola burials. We would not be doing Ebola burials with destruction of homes for those who are not Ebola patients. So for me, the rapid diagnostic test is a profound game changer in almost every aspect, and it would stop a lot of transmission. The last and probably most important, if we are going to listen to communities and learn from them, we need to work with the faith-based sector. They are the link between our governments, our NGOs, and the communities. They know where the orphans are, they know where the people in need are, and they are an incredible vehicle. There are starting to be quite a number of things. World Vision is doing safe burials, but dignified and safe burials, meeting the cultural needs of the people. In closing, I will just say that I would suggest that we need to focus on listening better, building back better, partnering with the communities and the faith-based organizations; and I, like Dr. Farmer, am very pleased and very proud of the work that the U.S. Government has been doing in West Africa. Thank you. [The prepared statement of Dr. Peterson follows:] Prepared Statement of Dr. E Anne Peterson Chairman Coons, Ranking Member Flake, and subcommittee members, thank you for conducting this hearing on what remains a critical issue to Americans and to the people of West Africa. Thank you also for the honor of being able to speak with you about Ebola. I have spoken before this committee previously when I was Assistant Administrator for Global Health at USAID, but now hopefully will bring a civil society and on the ground perspective on what is and could be done to address Ebola in the affected countries. Recently, I spent most of a month first in Liberia and then in Sierra Leone as a consultant to World Vision. My terms of reference for that consultancy were very similar to the questions to be discussed in this hearing. I was to assess what was being done, what could be done better and what additional capacity was needed to meet the gaps. The focus of the assessment was on what the faith sector was contributing to the response. My broad terms of reference connected me with a variety of government agencies (U.S. Ambassador in Liberia, CDC, USAID, DFID, and both national Ministry of Heath representatives) as well as a myriad of NGO, FBOs, and individual faith leaders. We were able to see an incredible amount of what was happening in response to Ebola could spend time with people in communities in both the countries we visited. This gave us a big picture view of the response but also gave us access to the community perspective that highlighted strengths, weaknesses, gaps and growing needs that had not been addressed yet. I would like to focus my testimony on three areas of current work that I believe could be enhanced, three ``game changers'' and then some suggestions about how future USG investments might be prioritized to speed ending the Ebola crisis, mitigate the suffering of the countries most impacted and help rebuild the health system so that Ebola or other similar crises never take hold again at this level. Let me say first and strongly, that the emphasis on stopping Ebola is the correct focus and there is a great effort to achieve that end, but there is room to work smarter and to greater effect. The international aid community is fully aware of the need for coordination, correct messaging and need to build health care capacity but the workload and vertical pillar approach have limited the perspective and effectiveness in each of these areas. With some new perspectives the current work could be significantly more effective. Some of these needed changes were beginning to happen as I left Africa but clarity and encouragement to continue those improvements will maximize impact and the usefulness of the U.S. investments in Ebola. The three game changers would be (1) engagement and mobilization of the faith community; (2) availability of a rapid Ebola test; and (3) addressing now the massive indirect impacts of Ebola on the economy, society, and health of the impacted countries. Each of these ``game changers'' would significantly help reduce transmission of Ebola and mitigate the immediate and long term harm of the epidemic, beginning to reestablish a stable, functional system. achieving greater impact in our current efforts There are several ways that the current Ebola epidemic response could be improved to achieve greater impact, both in the immediate and the long term. First, there is a need for cross-cutting coordination. Coordination of effort is essential and a great deal of time and energy is appropriately being expended on coordination with national government and collaborating aid agencies. While the current coordination is essential the intensity of the response work and the narrow focus of work within each of the coordinating pillars leaves little time for collaborating across pillars, agencies or even learning lessons from nearby affected countries. Opportunities for synergy are lost, unnecessary duplication of effort is inevitable. These are predictably inefficiencies and like vertical programming of the past measureable and laudable progress might be happening in a certain ``pillar'' of the response, but the disconnected pillars do not build a coherent health system. The gaps between the vertical pillars are no one's responsibility and go unnoticed until they reach harmful levels. The recent Institute of Medicine (IOM) report that I was honored to cochair with Ambassador John Lange, ``Investing in Global Health Systems: Sustaining Gains, Transforming Lives,'' speaks about the limitation of the piecemeal approach to health and cites this Ebola outbreak as an example of what happens without a strong and intact health system. Our Ebola response is falling into a similar vertical, piecemeal set of actions. Invest sustainably. The U.S. is investing heavily in the Ebola response and doing good Ebola control response with the invested funds. It is probably necessary, at least for patient care, that there is a parallel Ebola system in addition to the regular health care infrastructure. We do want to separate Ebola patients from other patients to prevent transmission. We are clearing land, putting up tents, and manning Ebola units primarily with foreign medical personnel. While this is due in part to an existing lack of health care workforce exacerbated by the epidemic, it is not an approach that will help build national capacity, either in health facilities or workforce. When Ebola has been halted, the tents will be rolled up and removed, the foreign workers will return home. The other preventable health problems that have been ignored and neglected by a health system either shut down or diverted to Ebola will be of far larger proportions than before Ebola emerged. And unless we do our current work differently, the health system which has lost so much manpower will be weaker than before Ebola while forced to address greater and ongoing health challenges. It is possible, to address the urgent Ebola scale-up needs in a way that contributes to a stronger and sustainable health system. If we plan and invest only in the short-term control of Ebola, we will miss a great opportunity to strengthen national health systems to build their capacity to address the already prevalent preventable maternal and child deaths or to avert or respond to the next major health crisis. Listen to the communities. There are so many meetings and long conversations among all the Ebola response agencies that it isn't obvious initially that conversations are primarily between foreign aid workers and the government officials and rarely do we hear the voice of community members. Decisions and activities in the Ebola response have in some cases led to distrust and anger in communities, messages on the seriousness of Ebola have been scoffed at as unreal by some and taken fatalistically by others. In many instances, well intentioned scientifically based messages just haven't elicited the behavioral responses from the communities that were desired and transmission of Ebola therefore continues. The only way to develop effective behavior change programs and messages is to know and address the issues of the community from their perspective, addressing the fears and beliefs that have hindered the response effort. Listening before messaging is the key. Listening to the concerns of community members, the mothers with young children as well as leaders who might be at the decision tables will lead to a better understanding of what is needed to change behaviors and reduce Ebola transmission. game changer: engaging with the faith community If most Ebola transmission is happening in communities, as it is, and if we acknowledge it is hard for foreign aid agencies to link directly to communities, then an interface or intervening organization is needed. Far better than secular NGOs, faith-based NGOs or FBOs and church or Muslim associations are deeply embedded and knowledgeable about their communities and can link the voices and views of the communities to the Ebola response. The U.S. Government has long worked with faith-based organizations. Engaging with FBOs was critical in the war against AIDS and rose to some prominence in the implementation of PEPFAR. Longer ago than PEPFAR, local churches were instrumental in the small pox eradication efforts in the same West African settings now beset by Ebola. Yet, USG engagement with FBOs or mobilization of the faith networks has not been a core part of the Ebola response to date. A core focus of my work in Liberia and Sierra Leone was to conduct a qualitative assessment for World Vision of the roles of faith-based organizations (FBOs), churches and faith leaders in the Ebola response; what were they doing, what could they be doing and how could they be better integrated with the U.S. Government Ebola response. Granted, there are fewer FBOs who work in disaster humanitarian operations type settings, but there are some FBOs experienced, willing or active, such as Samaritan's Purse work in Liberia that responded early and at great cost in establishing Ebola treatment centers. Medical Teams International is providing training in infection control. Catholic Relief Services, CAFOD (another Catholic FBO), Catholic Medical Mission Board, MAP international, IMA World Health and World Vision all are participating in different places and ways. I'll use World Vision as just one example of what FBOs can contribute to the fight against Ebola. World Vision works primarily in Sierra Leone and has taken on unusual leadership roles in addressing Ebola, such as efforts to improve safe and dignified burials, training pastors and imams on Ebola prevention and stigma reduction, and addressing the indirect consequences of Ebola (including food insecurity, livelihoods, care of orphans and survivors, and educating children while they are out of school). The first and perhaps most urgent FBO coalition activity was taking on safe and dignified burials. The World Vision coalition in Sierra Leone, with Catholic and Muslims partners, has taken on managing, training, and paying burial teams in 12 of the14 districts. They are making sure the Ministry of Health burial teams are actually paid for their gruesome work, using their financial management expertise. As result of this effort, there are fewer burial team strikes and great progress has been made toward responding and conducting all burials within 24 hours. The added value of the FBO rather than secular coalition is that they have added a strong emphasis on how to convert safe but offensive burial practices (mass unmarked graves, no markers, no prayers or family attendance) into safe but dignified burials acceptable to the communities. As burials become ``dignified'' and faithful to spiritual traditions, families will no longer need to conduct the high risk transmission secret burials of Ebola deaths that are occurring now. But the issue isn't just what are international FBOs doing but what are the faith leaders and local churches doing and what part could they play in the Ebola response in their communities. In Liberia, there was more vigorous infection control but less visible coordination among the faith community. The reverse was true in Sierra Leone, where infection control practices were more lax but there was more action and greater coordination among the local faith community. The church, as has been true in past epidemics like AIDS, has been mixed in their response. There are many examples of churches being helpful and others that spread messages and practices contrary to helping control the spread of infection and discourage stigma. The situation is improving over time as the stark reality of Ebola hits congregations directly. Most churches have stopped the practice of greeting one another with handshakes or kisses or ``laying on of hands'' in prayer for the sick. Many, but not all, churches and mosques now have chlorine and hand-washing stations set up before people enter the church though sometimes the chlorine is missing and the water bucket is dry. A brave few churches were venturing out from their church buildings to conduct services right outside the doors of Ebola treatment units so patients can hear that others are praying for them. Others are beginning to note and address the needs of widows and orphans, or provide trauma counseling for devastated families. Support and reassurance from faith leaders is essential also in helping the transition to safe and dignified burials be acceptable to their communities. If faith leaders are engaged and informed they can even pave the way for acceptance of new tools, like an Ebola vaccine or rapid diagnostic test once they are available. The faith community has a clear command to meet the needs of their people, but as the epidemic has spread, the desire for reliable information has grown but many churches and mosques do not have reliable ways to learn about Ebola to correctly guide their congregations. Some have welcomed scientists from the CDC to their services to learn about Ebola. In addition to information from the government and CDC, there is a need to frame the science of Ebola response into the more familiar faith language of the Christians and Muslims. World Vision is leading another consortium, working with CRS and the Muslim organization Focus 1000, on the production of a toolkit on Ebola messaging to be disseminated through the leaders of each faith group. World Vision is combining the available scientific information on Ebola with the faith oriented tool kit into a reflective and action oriented training for a wide array of faith leaders, Muslim and Christian, through its Channels of Hope program which had previously been developed and used for training in HIV/AIDS. Through this tool, faith leaders can reduce negative messages and enhance positive ones, such as that reporting in to Ebola centers as soon as the disease is suspected protects their families from harm. Rather than preaching fear, faith leaders can affirm that God works through His people to meet the needs of the sick, widows, and orphans. Framing the stigma being experienced by families of victims and survivors in parallel to biblical example of reaching out and caring for lepers and outcasts can be particularly helpful in reducing stigma faced by survivors. Correct information, in the hands of faith leaders, harmonized and expressed in their faith language, can overcome widespread mistrust of the government and by extension the Ebola response. FBOs and faith leaders can encourage the people of Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea not only to respond more appropriately to Ebola but to be active agents to stop the spread of Ebola and mitigate the enormous personal, spiritual, and societal impacts of Ebola on their people. But the impact of Ebola and the opportunities for faith leaders and FBOs to mitigate the impact of Ebola goes far beyond stopping Ebola infections. Food insecurity is increasing as prices rise and farmers are not planting crops. Attention is also diverted from other health issues. Most deaths in Ebola-affected countries are not Ebola deaths. The even larger epidemic of deaths is from pneumonia, childbirth, malaria, and diarrhea due to the Ebola epidemic's impact on the health care system, lack of preventive services and broken societal and economic structures. Addressing these issues cannot wait for the end of the Ebola outbreak and the global health community, FBOs and faith leaders know how to prevent these deaths. It is the kind of work they are already called to do. They just need encouragement and resources to take on the daunting devastation of the impact of Ebola on these countries. game changer: rapid diagnostic test for ebola Ebola symptoms are similar initially to many other diseases. This nonspecificity of symptoms has profound impacts on health care worker risk and on patient care seeking behavior. I would argue that not being able to know promptly whether a patient (or body) has Ebola or not is a major driver of continued Ebola transmission and the cause of the collapse of almost all other health services, leading to unmeasured numbers of non-Ebola deaths indirectly caused by Ebola. A rapid diagnostic test would have a dramatic impact on both health care workers and patients Most of the recent health care worker infections have not occurred in Ebola treatment centers but in settings where they thought they were treating illnesses other than Ebola. A doctor was infected and died after delivering a baby. Forty-two health workers were infected by one Ebola patient, a friend who claimed initially only to have an ulcer. Twenty one of those health workers died. Each time a health care worker in a non-Ebola center is infected and diagnosed as an Ebola patient, all his or her health care worker colleagues become contacts, must be quarantined and often the care center closes until the 21-day quarantine is completed. Perhaps as much as two-thirds of the regular health system is closed and once closed, it is very hard for health care workers to return to take on again the risks of caring for patients who are not supposed to have Ebola but might. Patients, just like doctors, can't tell the initial Ebola symptoms apart from many other common diseases. Unless they have had significant exposure to a sick or dead Ebola patient, most of the symptoms will be due to malaria, diarrhea, typhoid fever, lassa fever or the number one child killer, pneumonia. These very common illnesses, have only become more common as the immunization programs, malaria prevention programs, outpatient treatment centers have closed in mass. Mothers, in poor slum areas have stated emphatically, that if they or their child was sick with a fever or a stomach ache or diarrhea they would not bring them in to a treatment center. They know these symptoms could be Ebola, but they believe sometimes rightly and sometimes with wishful thinking, that it is far more likely to not be Ebola than to be Ebola. They don't want to risk ``disappearing into an Ebola'' center never to return. When someone becomes sick they are rightly afraid to come in for care. If their symptoms could at all be like Ebola, as is true of many common illnesses, they know they will be held in Ebola observation until the test result is known 2-3 or more days later. They also know that staying in these holding centers with suspected Ebola cases puts them at high risk of being infected with Ebola while seeking care for another health problem. Very logically they stay home until it is clear they have Ebola. They would rather risk their child dying at home of malaria than risk getting Ebola and dying far away. But if in fact, the sick person has Ebola the delay in accessing care has impact on more than just that one individual. We have learned in this epidemic that Ebola is both more infectious as the disease progresses and that infectivity is dose dependent. The sicker and longer an Ebola patient stays in the home the greater the likelihood of transmission to family and friends. But if we had a rapid Ebola test at the triage of all non-Ebola centers and maybe even available for community health workers, all of these scenarios are changed. Health care workers could safely go back to work and families could safely bring their sick family members in for diagnosis and treatment. Communities, families, and patients would know only non-Ebola patients would be in the regular health centers and Ebola patients would be referred to now much less crowded Ebola centers. This would decrease transmission of Ebola in communities because families would be less likely to delay. It would decrease transmission within holding and quarantine centers. Patients could safely seek treatment for malaria and the increasing common diseases caused directly by the diversion of care to Ebola and halting of preventive and curative services other than Ebola. It would even reduce transmission in Ebola centers where uninfected suspect cases were previously being exposed to Ebola. Health care workers, both national and international volunteers, who are not ready to treat Ebola but do want to assist with the devastating health needs in the impacted countries could safely return to work. We could begin to rebuild the broken health system that allow the Ebola rampage to begin and continue unchecked. Community Ebola burials have been a source of anger and sometimes violence, especially if it turns out the death was not an Ebola death. A rapid test would contribute rebuilding of relationships with the community and to decreasing transmission since only the fewer and proven Ebola burials would need Ebola burials. If secret burials were thereby avoided, we would begin to get more accurate death reporting, surveillance, and referral. It would also help ensure when there is a non-Ebola death that homes and possessions aren't destroyed unnecessarily. A rapid diagnostic test would facilitate more rapid access to care for family contacts, less breaking of quarantine and fewer contacts lost to followup. All of these impacts will lead to better data on deaths, reduced burial transmission and better relationships with community members, which directly or indirectly enhances Ebola infection control. game changer: address the indirect impacts of ebola The massive indirect impacts of Ebola on the economy, education, social structures and health of the impacted countries are much greater and long-lasting than the impact of the Ebola epidemic itself. The plight of children demonstrates just a portion of this impact. WHO estimate of the number of orphans from October 29 for the three countries was 10,395 single orphans and 4,455 double orphans. These numbers corrected for underreporting (CDC uses 2.5 fold multiplier, which has been verified in an active surveillance activity in November) would make the estimated total orphans 25,986. Because of the previous civil war, there were many single parented homes in both Liberia and Sierra Leone. When Ebola hits these vulnerable homes, with perhaps greater adult vulnerability to Ebola than children, there are a disproportionate number of double orphans which is unprecedented even in Africa. In Sierra Leone, 42 percent of the orphans are double orphans and in some districts there were more double orphans (both parents dead) than single orphans. This was unheard of even in the height of the AIDS epidemic. Life is difficult in Sierra Leone and Liberia, even before Ebola. There are high child and maternal mortality rates and poverty in both countries, which was just beginning to improve after the civil war of a decade ago. Now, ALL children are impacted by Ebola. Most are out of school for the entire year, with some radio broadcast classes as their only educational input. About 50 percent of parents have been keeping their children home--all the time--no friends, no family gatherings, so they aren't exposed to Ebola. Most of the regular health care facilities are closed for any usual illnesses--malaria, diarrhea, pneumonia. Children (all children but even more so for orphans) are less well-nourished because of increasing poverty and food insecurity, they are also no longer receiving preventive services like Vitamin A or routine vaccinations. Therefore disease rates are escalating just as access to all health services, except Ebola services, are decreasing. Stigma is a debilitating reality for children, adult survivors, and families of Ebola victims even if they never had Ebola. People are afraid of the children as potential vectors of Ebola but also don't trust that the children won't bring Ebola into their home, even after a 21 day quarantine. Unlike other orphan situations in Africa, the extended family is very reluctant to take the children in. Even those who would, usually can't afford to take in extra children. The economy is so hard hit with so many businesses and schools closed that there is little income. Families in poor urban areas have gone from two meals a day to one meal a day for their own children and just can't feed anymore. In rural areas, between stigma and lack of crops, orphaned children are abandoned in large numbers. People are also afraid of survivors, especially since even when a survivor is no longer infectious they often have continued symptoms of migratory joint and muscle pain--which people misinterpret as still sick with Ebola. Survivors often move across the country to avoid anyone knowing they were sick with Ebola even if they are fully recovered. Often survivors also have no home to return to or family members have no home to stay in. When a sick person or body is picked up the house must be decontaminated, this may destroy much of the household belongings and the house itself is stigmatized as an Ebola house. It may in fact be infectious for a few days so care and decontamination is needed. But the process leads to further impoverishment and stigmatizing of those who have just been through the horrific experience of being sick with Ebola. The indirect impacts of Ebola need immediate and long term response. Without food and financial support food insecurity now, is likely to evolve into something closer to famine in a few months. WFP, UNICEF, and some NGOs, like World Vision, are beginning to partner with faith leaders and communities to identify hard hit communities, orphans and other vulnerable children (OVC) and survivors to begin to provide child protection, food, and safe places to live. These devastating impacts of Ebola warrant attention in their own right. These are illnesses and deaths we know well how to prevent. But ignoring them also impacts Ebola prevention efforts. Sick and malnourished children maybe more vulnerable to Ebola but certainly will add to the case load of an already overburdened health system. Every malaria case prevented is one less diagnostic dilemma that complicates isolation of suspected Ebola patients. When hunger, illness, or economic necessity compel someone to break quarantine more Ebola transmission is possible. When these other concerns loom so large and compromise life and health, Ebola precautions fall in relative importance and increased transmission becomes more likely. We cannot wait until the end of the Ebola outbreak massive indirect impacts of Ebola on West African society. Again, in Sierra Leone World Vision is ahead of the game in commissioning a rapid assessment of these indirect impacts of Ebola. They will use the information to help them reprogram their own funds but I believe this information will also provide desperately needed data for advocacy and prioritization of the global efforts. What could/should the USG do? Stop Ebola by enlisting the assistance of those who care even more than we do--the people of Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea. Work with trusted faith leaders to empower communities: listening to their concerns and potential solutions. Rebuild better not separate and temporary. The incredibly weak heath system, lack of surveillance systems, labs, inadequate workforce are the things that allowed the Ebola outbreak to reach such epic proportions. Instead of building a parallel system, in tents and manned by foreign health care workers, we should be ``building back better'' in ways that last; upgrading permanent facilities, building communications systems, training all cadres of health workers in infection control and disease treatment with a strong emphasis on preventive medicine, public health and community-based interventions and disease prevention. It would have been far easier to identify the first cases of Ebola if they were not lost among the many sick from diseases we know how to prevent. Don't wait. The indirect impacts of Ebola on the people of each of these countries are enormous. As poverty, malnutrition, lack of school and work and preventable diseases increase, Ebola control will fall lower on the population's priority list. If you can't feed your child, the ``far away'' risk of getting Ebola becomes much less important. Listen well, address their fears, give messages of hope, celebrate survivors, and empower parents, families and communities to protect themselves and assist in the response. Message at home. Stopping Ebola in Africa is the best protection for Americans and celebrate those willing to serve in Africa. Healthy people don't transmit Ebola. Health care workers are not a danger to Americans just because they have worked in West Africa. We need to encourage American volunteers who want to help to be able to go and to be able to return home without stigma, shunning and exclusion from normal American work and society. The inappropriate level of fear is hindering the flow of aid workers needed to stop this Ebola epidemic there and increasing the risk of spread here. conclusion I am very proud of my country for its extraordinary efforts to address Ebola. The investments by the U.S. to address the Ebola outbreak in West Africa are critical and are the best way to protect the American people. We have learned an immense amount in this current epidemic, that we couldn't have learned from previous smaller outbreaks. But we must continue to learn and to apply the lessons learned, to improving our medical and the nonmedical programs, addressing the urgent demands of stemming the spread of Ebola and addressing the urgent life needs of communities devastated by the presence of Ebola in their country We are doing well but we can do even better by investing in the right interventions, focusing on long-term sustainability and engaging the right stakeholders. We can stop the Ebola epidemic and leave behind a health system and developed infrastructure well-positioned to respond to future crises. Senator Coons. Thank you, Dr. Peterson. Mr. Gaye. STATEMENT OF PAPE GAYE, PRESIDENT AND CEO, INTRAHEALTH INTERNATIONAL, CHAPEL HILL, NC Mr. Gaye. Chairman Coons, Ranking Member Flake, and other distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of IntraHealth International, I thank you for inviting me to testify today on this issue of paramount importance to our friends in West Africa and to us here in the United States. I ask that my full written testimony be submitted for the record. Senator Coons. Without objection. Mr. Gaye. In my native Senegal, there is a Wolof proverb: ``Nit, nit ay garabam.'' It means ``the best medicine for a person is another person.'' I am fortunate to lead an organization, IntraHealth International, that for 35 years has been a firsthand witness to this proverb in action through our support to frontline health workers in 100 countries around the world, including all the Ebola-affected countries. Tragically, however, far too many people in the West Africa region I hold dear did not have access to that person, that health worker, who could have prevented Ebola from decimating their communities and threatening the well-being and security of their countries, their region, and the world. As this Ebola outbreak has already started to fade from the consciousness of some, one of the crucial underlying conditions that helped the virus spread remains the absence of a sustainable and resilient health workforce in the region. Let there be no misunderstanding: if health workforce does not get the high-level political attention it sorely needs, workforce deficiencies will continue to threaten global health security, and threaten the tremendous progress made in saving women and children's lives, fighting diseases like HIV/AIDS, and all the great work accomplished by USAID. As shared by President Sirleaf, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea all had fewer than three doctors, nurses, and midwives per 10,000 people, even before the Ebola epidemic began. But these countries are hardly alone. The World Health Organization last year estimated that 83 countries in the world are below the minimum threshold of health workers needed to provide essential services to everyone. Last year, at a major conference in Brazil, Guinea and Liberia were among 57 countries that made health workforce commitments. Guinea's commitment highlighted two rural provinces where frontline health workers were largely absent, and one of those regions is where ``Patient Zero'' of the Ebola epidemic was believed to be infected less than a month later. Let me be clear: because of the generosity of the American people and the know-how and innovations of implementing partners like IntraHealth, the United States Government has maintained global health leadership, and no one on this Earth will dispute that the mantle of that leadership rests and will continue to rest on the shoulders of the United States. For example, IntraHealth and UNICEF are currently working with the Liberian government on a tool called mHero to allow the Ministry of Health and health workers to instantly communicate critical information. The USAID-supported, open- source, online personnel management system, called iHRIS, will save low-income countries about $232 million, and data using the tool has already been used to drive additional domestic investment for health workers. In the next 5 years, iHRIS is expected to save the Liberian Government, the equivalent amount of money as the salaries of 317 Liberian nurses. That number of nurses could serve 634,000 Liberians. These innovations supported by American foreign assistance are critical to addressing some health workforce challenges, but certainly not all of them. The Frontline Health Workers Coalition, an alliance of 41 U.S.-based public and private organizations, with a Secretariat housed in our offices at IntraHealth, last month released recommendations for how the United States can lead on these issues. I have included them in an addendum to my testimony. In brief, there must be a more concerted effort to address the needs of local health workers in West Africa, such as ensuring timely delivery of hazard pay and personal protective equipment. This support to local health workers must be backed by an equally fervent political push for addressing the most critical health workforce gaps globally. A 2010 report estimated that by 2020, the United States needs to invest at least $5.5 billion in health workforce strengthening to achieve its global health goals. Investment must be guided by a cross- agency strategy that sends an unequivocal message that America is committed to this issue, and we expect others to respond in kind. I also believe all global health procurements should be required to show how they will help strengthen the health workforce and systems. I would like to close by asking each of us to think about what it would be like to wake up tomorrow morning infected with Ebola and not have a single person in your community to turn to for care, or to have your infant child this evening show signs of malaria and have nowhere to take them. This is the reality for far too many, and it must be changed now. We would be doing a great disservice to the 346 health workers who, as of the end of November, have given their lives to help turn the tide on this Ebola epidemic if we did not focus on their colleagues' immediate needs, while working fervently to ensure we never again have a crisis of this scale in public health. I thank you very much, and I look forward to answering your questions. [The prepared statement of Mr. Gaye follows:] Prepared Statement of Pape Gaye Chairman Coons, Ranking Member Flake, and other distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of IntraHealth International, I would like to thank you for the honor of inviting me to testify today on this issue of paramount importance to the security and well-being of our friends in West Africa, as well as to us here in the United States. I ask that my full written testimony be submitted for the record. In my native Senegal, there is a Wolof proverb, ``Nit, nit ay garabam.'' It means ``the best medicine for a person is another person.'' I am fortunate to lead an organization, IntraHealth International, which, for 35 years, has been a firsthand witness to this proverb in action through the awe-inspiring efforts of frontline health workers we have supported in 100 countries around the world, including all the Ebola-affected countries. Tragically, however, far too many people in my native West Africa have not had access to that person--that health worker--who has the training and support necessary to prevent the Ebola virus from desolating their communities and threatening the well-being and security of their countries, their region, and the world. Stories from this epidemic--such as the five Liberian children who were left at home with the corpses of their Ebola-infected parents for three days because of overwhelmed ambulance services--make us sick to our stomachs and heighten our resolve to end the crisis as soon as possible. The heroic efforts of health workers on the front lines of the epidemic have given us hope that, if our resolve to support them does not waiver, that day is coming soon. But as this Ebola epidemic has already started to fade from the consciousness of some, one of the crucial underlying conditions that helps the virus spread remains: the absence of a sustainable and resilient global health workforce to both stop threats like Ebola in their tracks and complete the daily work of saving and making lives healthier in every community. Let there be no misunderstanding: if health workforce deficiencies do not get the high-level political attention the issue sorely needs and it continues to languish as a global health policy afterthought, it will continue to threaten both global health security and the tremendous progress the United States has helped to lead in saving women's and children's lives and fighting diseases such as HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis. Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea all had fewer than three doctors, nurses, and midwives per 10,000 people even before the Ebola outbreak began. More people could very well die due to Ebola's impact on such fragile workforces and systems than directly from the Ebola virus itself. Yet, these countries are hardly alone. The World Health Organization last year estimated 83 countries are below the minimum threshold of 22.8 doctors, nurses, and midwives per 10,000 people needed to provide essential services to a population. The countries that have the most acute workforce crises--the Ebola- affected countries in West Africa among them--have long recognized the gravity of inaction on health workforce strengthening for their communities, and they have been committed to action. Unfortunately, chronic lack of attention and significant reduction of formal development assistance to the West Africa region as a whole has exacerbated the problem. Last year, I had the pleasure of speaking to government and civil society leaders and health workers at the Third Global Forum on Human Resources for Health in Recife, Brazil. At this forum, 57 countries-- including Liberia and Guinea--made specific health workforce commitments, for several of which IntraHealth provided technical guidance in crafting. Guinea's commitment focused on its desire to get more frontline health workers to two rural provinces where they were largely absent. One of those regions, N'Zerekore, is the same region where ``patient zero'' of the current Ebola epidemic was believed to be infected--less than a month after Guinea made this commitment. Yet as many African countries stood up to make their commitments clear in Recife, only one donor commitment to health workforce strengthening was made. That financial commitment was made by Ireland. Let me be clear: because of the generosity of the American people and the know-how and innovations of implementing partners such as IntraHealth, the United States government has made huge inroads in helping countries improve the numbers, the competencies, and the support for health workers in West Africa and around the world. For example, a major issue Liberia now faces is the need to quickly get the latest information to its health workers. IntraHealth and UNICEF are currently working with the Liberian Government on a tool called mHero to allow the Ministry of Health and health workers to instantly communicate critical information to one another. The USAID- supported, open source, online personnel management system IntraHealth is using for this effort, called iHRIS, has already saved our low- income country partners approximately $232 million in 20 countries around the world--and many of these countries are using iHRIS data to successfully drive more domestic investment in health workers. In Liberia, more than 8,000 health workers are registered in iHRIS. This open source system will save Liberia more than $3.1 million in proprietary fees over the next 5 years--equivalent to the annual salaries of 317 Liberian nurses for 5 years. These nurses could provide 634,000 Liberians access to lifesaving services. Innovations such as iHRIS that are supported by American foreign assistance are critical to addressing some specific workforce challenges, but certainly not all of them. I believe if you asked any administration official to articulate the United States strategy or its cumulative results across agencies in assisting partner countries in strengthening their health workforce, they could not tell you. The Frontline Health Workers Coalition, an alliance of 41 U.S.- based public- and private-sector organizations and of which IntraHealth is proud to host the Secretariat and help lead, last month released recommendations for how the United States can lead in helping the countries of West Africa and other low-income country partners build the resilient and sustainable workforce we need for the 21st century. I've included our full recommendations as an addendum to my testimony. In brief, there must be a more concerted effort to address the needs of local health workers in Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea. This includes ensuring timely delivery of hazard pay, ensuring an effective and efficient supply chain management system that provides personal protective equipment and other necessary supplies with requisite training, creating supply outposts for local health workers, making psychosocial support available, addressing Ebola-related stigma that has arisen, and increasing the authority of local management of health workers. This support to local workers--a critical first step to rebuilding the health systems of these countries--must be backed by an equally fervent political push for global action to meaningfully address the most critical deficiencies of the global frontline health workforce. A 2010 IntraHealth report estimated that by 2020, the United States needs to invest at least $5.5 billion in health workforce strengthening to achieve the global health goals and targets to which it has committed. The robust bipartisan support for global health must also continue to ensure Ebola does not set back the extraordinary progress we've made in the last decade. And I believe each procurement for those investments should be required to show how it will help strengthen health workforces and systems. U.S. health workforce investments must be guided by a multiyear, costed, cross-agency strategy with an implementation plan that sends an unequivocal message to our developing country partners: that America is committed to this issue and we expect others to respond in kind. This clear sign of commitment would go a long way in helping to ensure a serious and coordinated effort by all governments for a financed global health workforce strategy with specific timelines and targets. I would like to close by asking each of us to pause and think about what it would be like to wake up tomorrow morning infected with Ebola and not have a single person to turn to for health care. Or to have your infant child this evening show signs of malaria, and have nowhere to take her. This is reality for far too many--and it must be changed now. Frontline health workers have started to turn the tide on Ebola at great risk to their own lives--WHO reports as of November 30, 622 health workers have been infected during the epidemic, 346 of whom have died. We would be doing a great disservice to health workers' sacrifices if we didn't focus on their immediate needs and at the same time work just as fervently to ensure we never again have a crisis of this scale in public health. Thank you very much, and I look forward to answering your questions. ATTACHMENT IntraHealth International--Building a Resilient, Sustainable Health Workforce to Respond to Ebola and Other Future Threats frontline health workers coalition policy recommendations--november 2014 The Ebola virus disease epidemic in West Africa has highlighted the urgent need for increased support for frontline health workers and the systems that support them in the region and around the world. The World Health Organization (WHO) reports that as of Nov. 2, 2014, 546 health workers have been infected with Ebola since the onset of the epidemic, and 310 of them have died cari