- PROMOTING THE WELL-BEING AND ACADEMIC SUCCESS OF COLLEGE ATHLETES
[Senate Hearing 113-726] [From the U.S. Government Publishing Office] S. Hrg. 113-726 PROMOTING THE WELL-BEING AND ACADEMIC SUCCESS OF COLLEGE ATHLETES ======================================================================= HEARING before the COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION UNITED STATES SENATE ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION __________ JULY 9, 2014 __________ Printed for the use of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 96-246 PDF WASHINGTON : 2015 ----------------------------------------------------------------------- For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC 20402-0001 SENATE COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER IV, West Virginia, Chairman BARBARA BOXER, California JOHN THUNE, South Dakota, Ranking BILL NELSON, Florida ROGER F. WICKER, Mississippi MARIA CANTWELL, Washington ROY BLUNT, Missouri MARK PRYOR, Arkansas MARCO RUBIO, Florida CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri KELLY AYOTTE, New Hampshire AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota DEAN HELLER, Nevada MARK BEGICH, Alaska DAN COATS, Indiana RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut TIM SCOTT, South Carolina BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii TED CRUZ, Texas EDWARD MARKEY, Massachusetts DEB FISCHER, Nebraska CORY BOOKER, New Jersey RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin JOHN E. WALSH, Montana Ellen L. Doneski, Staff Director John Williams, General Counsel David Schwietert, Republican Staff Director Nick Rossi, Republican Deputy Staff Director Rebecca Seidel, Republican General Counsel and Chief Investigator C O N T E N T S ---------- Page Hearing held on July 9, 2014..................................... 1 Statement of Senator Rockefeller................................. 1 Statement of Senator Thune....................................... 4 Statement of Senator Coats....................................... 58 Statement of Senator Heller...................................... 60 Prepared statement........................................... 60 Statement of Senator McCaskill................................... 64 Statement of Senator Klobuchar................................... 78 Statement of Senator Nelson...................................... 81 Statement of Senator Blumenthal.................................. 82 Statement of Senator Booker...................................... 84 Statement of Senator Ayotte...................................... 88 Statement of Senator Scott....................................... 90 Witnesses Myron Laurent Rolle, Student-Athlete, Florida State University College of Medicine............................................ 6 Prepared statement........................................... 8 Devon Jahmai Ramsay, Former College Football Player, University of North Carolina.............................................. 11 Prepared statement........................................... 14 Taylor Branch, Author and Historian.............................. 15 Prepared statement........................................... 19 William D. Bradshaw, Past President of the National Association of the National Association of Collegiate Directors of Athletics (NACDA).............................................. 23 Prepared statement........................................... 25 Dr. Richard M. Southall, Associate Professor, Department of Sport and Entertainment Management and Director, College Sport Research Institute, University of South Carolina............... 27 Prepared statement........................................... 29 Dr. Mark A. Emmert, President, National Collegiate Athletic Association.................................................... 40 Prepared statement........................................... 42 Appendix Letter dated August 4, 2014 to Hon. John Thune from Mark A. Emmert, President, National Collegiate Athletic Association.... 97 PROMOTING THE WELL-BEING AND ACADEMIC SUCCESS OF COLLEGE ATHLETES ---------- WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 2014 U.S. Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Washington, DC. The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:36 p.m. in room SR-253, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. John D. Rockefeller IV, Chairman of the Committee, presiding. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER IV, U.S. SENATOR FROM WEST VIRGINIA The Chairman. This hearing will come to order, and I want to thank all of you very much for coming here. You're a bit squeezed in there but water is on the house. [Laughter.] The Chairman. So be comfortable, and be glad. College sports has an absolutely extraordinary position in the culture of our country. Not only have college sports inspired incredible fan passion all across the country but they have provided a very important way for young men and women to, as is written, both do athletics as an avocation and get an education. We are going to talk about that today. For many young people, however, athletics has provided an avenue to college that would have otherwise not have existed, and it is important to understand that. College athletes and athletics are rooted in the notion of amateurism. The history of that is very interesting and important, going back to the founding of the NCAA in 1906 and all the rest of it and going back, actually, to the Greek's concept of amateurism. Playing college sports is supposed to be an avocation. Students play college sports for the love of the game not for the love of money. That is the ideal but many people believe this notion of college sports as being undermined by the power and the influence of money. I remember a meeting I had in my office with the three top executives of ESPN and it was one of those meetings in which I didn't say a word because they just went around in circles, each talking about what a great business model they had and how they had the control and the power that no other broadcast system would ever have and how thrilled they were with it, and how they were going to make it even stronger. There's a growing perception that college athletics, particularly Division I football and basketball, are not avocations at all. What they really are is highly profitable commercial enterprises. They believe that. Critics of big-time college athletics say that the goal of these programs is not to provide young people with a college education, but to produce a winning program that reaps financial rewards for the athletic departments and their schools. It is not, however, about the students; they're part of what generates the money. It's about capturing the billions of dollars of television and marketing revenues that college sports do generate. And it will generate even more. Colleges and universities say that these revenues benefit college athletes and their student bodies at large. But I think we have to consider whether the lure of such riches could corrupt the basic mission of athletic programs. Winning teams get higher payouts than losing teams which creates a strong incentive to win--an incentive which land-grant public universities and others are more than happy to follow. And win at any cost. Much of the money is often funneled right back into those sports programs in the form of multimillion-dollar coaching salaries and state-of-the-art facilities--many of them paid for by the taxpayers to perpetuate the cycle of winning. I think somewhere in my reading here, about $48 million of all the $900 million that NCAA gets from their broadcasting--March Madness and all the rest of it, a very small portion--goes specifically to academics. But even that is hard to figure because nobody has the figures. Mr. Emmert works for them. They make the decisions. He carries out what they want and, yet, I think a subject of discussion is: how does he carry out what they want? What powers do you have, Mr. Emmert, for actually carrying out what you think is a good idea? You've been president of three major universities, different places. Then, I would think, your passion for education would need to show itself. Athletics to me are meant to serve schools and their public duty to educate students, not the other way around. That's the way it's always put forward and that's the way it should be. Dr. Mark Emmert is here to present the perspective of the colleges and universities that belong to the NCAA and I would like to thank you for testifying. You could have declined to do so. Some do, but you didn't. And I'm grateful for that. I believe that you were put at the helm of the NCAA because you have impressive academic credentials and a sterling reputation. And I think that we all appreciate that you're extremely well compensated. Your commendable individual qualities and capabilities are not what trouble me. I think I'm just very skeptical that the NCAA can ever live up to the lofty mission that you constantly talk about, and which is written and printed in speeches and statements and responses to Penn State this or something else that. The mission--nothing comes before education--is always there but the actions don't appear to be. I don't see how the NCAA will ever be capable of truly making a safe, good education experience for students its number one priority. I want you to tell me that I'm wrong, that I am wrong and that I'm particularly wrong about the future. But I'll be a tough sell. I think we believe that the NCAA has largely been left to its own to determine what reforms are appropriate and how to accomplish its mission. As we continue to learn more about what goes on at some major universities and colleges, we want to know if the NCAA is seriously considering how college athletes are faring under this system. Not just living as they do but injured as they often become, racked by poverty if they don't do well and maybe their stipends are cut off. And is there an advantage in a mandated four-year scholarship. All of these things are put at play. How are young men, who strap on their helmets on a football field in front of 100,000 passionate and paying customers, how are they doing? How are young men who lace up their shoes and play basketball for March Madness, which consumes the nation, is deliberately spread out over a long period of time so that no kid, 12 years or 10 years or over, can ever hope to do any homework because there's always basketball on? Are colleges and universities living up to their end of the bargain in providing them with a good education? Are these young athletes entitled to any of the billions of dollars that are reaped from their athletic services? And when young men and women put their bodies at risk from playing sports for their schools, whether women's lacrosse or men's soccer, do they have adequate health insurance? I don't know. I don't know. And I never go into a restaurant or a barber shop or anything without asking, sometimes to their discomfort, ``Do you have health insurance?'' Because I know the answer is going to be no. And I care about health care and I get very unhappy when people who work in places don't make a lot of money, don't have health insurance. Do the schools and athletic leagues sufficiently minimize the risk of concussions? And what happens to a student who is injured before graduation? Can he or she finish out their studies or does the scholarship run dry? Well, a couple of months ago, we all heard the deeply troubling comments of Shabazz Napier, the talented University of Connecticut guard who was the most valuable player of the 2014 NCAA basketball tournament. In the midst of a tournament that generated hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue for the NCAA and its members, Mr. Napier talked about how sometimes he did not have enough to eat during college. How did college sports benefit Mr. Napier on the nights he had to go to bed hungry? Now, you can look at that two ways. So there he is, he's trying to pick out a sensational example of a famous athlete and turn it into some very large problem. I'm not trying to do that. I think it is a problem. And the whole sense of giving students a safety net and a sense of confidence that, if they don't turn out to be as good running backs or point guards or whatever and they don't make the team or they're let off in their third year. Are they dropped? Do they get the scholarships or what happens? I don't know. The title of today's hearings is ``Promoting the Well-Being and Academic Success of College Athletes.'' I want to have an objective, open-minded and frank discussion on this subject. I'm going to try my best to. The NCAA has the same goal as I do. Dr. Emmert is going to tell us that the NCAA's mission is to protect college athletes from abusive practices and exploitation and to promote college sports as a means towards achieving academic excellence. Today, I want to explore whether the NCAA is fulfilling its mission. We still hear too many reports of fraudulent academics. We still hear too many tragic stories of former college athletes who have absolutely nothing to show for the services they provided even though they helped generate millions and millions of dollars. This subject is often discussed, but I'm here to tell you that--and if perchance the Democrats should control the Congress next time, and nobody is quite sure of that, John Thune has one idea, Bill Nelson has another idea, and you. Yes, okay. [Laughter.] The Chairman. And that I think that we want to continue this. We want to make this a continuing surge of this oversight committee. We have jurisdiction over sports--all sports. All sports. And we have the ability to subpoena; we've created a special investigations unit. We're very into this subject. I personally am. I think our members are. And so, this is the part of a process here. So I'm going to have some tough questions for our panel: is the NCAA and its member schools: is it simply a legal cartel; have college sports become a multibillion-dollar commercial enterprise which is no different than the other corporate witnesses who have appeared before this committee; or is the NCAA truly different; and does the 100-year-old organization, in fact, have the best interest of college athletes? They're large questions and important to be answered. I turn now to my very distinguished Ranking Member, Senator John Thune, from the state of South Dakota. STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN THUNE, U.S. SENATOR FROM SOUTH DAKOTA Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding the hearing today. And I want to thank our panelists for the opportunity to examine the current state of collegiate athletics. And, like you, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses including the President of the National Collegiate Athletic Associate on how the NCAA and its member institutions are fulfilling the commitments made to our collegiate student- athletes. I'm an avid sports fan and I know other members of this committee are as well. As a former basketball player in high school and college, and the proud father of a daughter who competed at the Division I level, I certainly recognize that participation in organized sports not only requires physical and mental strength, but also teaches teamwork and other skills that serve you throughout life. However, the college student- athlete is, and should be, a student first. Colleges and universities must remember and prioritize their academic obligation to student-athletes. As the popularity of college sports has grown, particularly the popularity of college football and men's and women's basketball, so too has the profitability of many collegiate athletic programs. In the current environment, the stakes have been raised both for the student-athlete who wants to succeed and for the university that has a financial interest in winning games. Increasing revenues for some schools in conferences, due in large part to lucrative contracts for the broadcast rights to football and basketball games, have become more common. Revenues from ticket sales and merchandising efforts for some schools are also significant. And, of course, alumni want to see their teams win, and may be inspired to contribute to winning programs. As we'll hear today, the NCAA is a member-driven organization whose stated mission is ``to integrate intercollegiate athletics into higher education so that the educational experience of the student-athlete is paramount.'' However, a major criticism of college sports is that some institutions appear unable to balance the core academic mission of the university and the commercial considerations that often accompany college athletics, particularly in high-profile sports. Many feel the commitment to the student-athlete is falling short. Another point of contention involves athletic scholarships and whether the practice of offering annual, as opposed to multiyear, scholarships unfairly places student-athletes at risk of losing their scholarships as a result of poor- performance or injury. But, while multiyear scholarships may benefit student-athletes, they may disadvantage smaller schools who can't match the resources of larger institutions. Clearly, collegiate athletics in America is not without controversy, and we will hear from some of the NCAA's most vocal critics today. While I'm sure that today's hearing will highlight a host of important issues, I hope we will not lose sight of the positive impact that amateur athletics has made on the lives of countless student-athletes. And we must remember that college athletics is not just about football and basketball. The Director of Athletics at the University of South Dakota recently shared the results of the student-athlete exit interviews he conducts annually to evaluate the school's athletic program for the vantage point of the athletes themselves. He underscored two stories that stood out from this past year's athletes. The Athletic Director at USD reiterated how Dustin Gens, a sophomore diver at USD, recovered from open-heart heart surgery to qualify to dive at the NCAA's Zone Championships, a feat that would not have been possible without the work of a dedicated training staff, academic support, coaches, team, and family. He also noted the moving story of Hanna Veselik, a sophomore swimmer, who leaned on friends, family, and teammates to help her through the tragic loss of her father who passed away early in the season. With this support, Hanna was able to return to the pool and achieve lifetime best times in all of her swimming events at the Summit League Championships. As the USD Athletic Director puts it, ``These two are just a sample of what college athletics should mean. If you strip away the money, fancy locker rooms, charter flights, and large budgets, you're left with student-athletes who often have to overcome personal, social, economic, academic, and athletic adversity, all just to compete. But they frequently do it with passion and a determination that makes us all proud.'' That's from the Athletic Director at the University of South Dakota. Recognizing the challenges exist, it is my hope that the NCAA, its member institutions, the student athletes themselves, and other stakeholders will seek solutions that promote the education, health, and well-being of student athletes and seek to preserve amateurism in collegiate athletics. This is an area where Congress can provide a forum, but the solutions are most likely to come from those most directly involved in the education and development of student-athletes. Mr. Chairman, thank you again for holding this hearing, and I look forward to hearing and having an opportunity to question our witnesses. Thank you. The Chairman. Thank you, sir. What we are going to do now is we are going to hear the testimony. And then, both Senator McCaskill and Senator Booker, both of whom are sterling and wonderful people, are going to get very, very angry at me. Because I'm going to charge into the regular order and I'm going to allow Senator Coats to ask the first question, which violates all the rules of the Committee but---- Senator McCaskill. Oh, I'm mad. The Chairman. That'll make you a better questioner. Senator Booker. As the most junior member on the Committee, I must say that Senate rules do not allow me to be mad at you, Chairman. [Laughter.] Senator Coats. And, Mr. Chairman, for what it's worth, I was under the impression, also, that we were the first to arrive and ask questions in order. So I arrived at 2:10---- The Chairman. See? Senator Coats.--just so I can be first. The Chairman. What am I going to do? [Laughter.] Senator Coats. Because I didn't want to put you in a bad spot or breach the rules either. The Chairman. You never do and you are wonderful. So you will ask the first questions after the two of us. Mr. Rolle, and thank you for being here. And don't be nervous. STATEMENT OF MYRON LAURENT ROLLE, STUDENT-ATHLETE, FLORIDA STATE UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF MEDICINE Mr. Rolle. OK. The Chairman. I mean it. Mr. Rolle. All right. The Chairman. It's a wonderful opportunity to say what's in your heart and on your mind. Mr. Rolle. Yes, sir. First, I want to thank you and the Committee for inviting me here today to share some of my experience and knowledge on this very important subject, very complicated subject as well. I've had many conversations with fellow student-athletes on this issue about the current role of student-athletes today in this giant scheme of collegiate athletics. And we often walk away from those conversations with more questions than answers. So I'm hoping today is a first step toward answering some of those questions and providing some context and some clarity to this discussions so that we can see our student-athletes receive maximum edification in all aspects of their person, be it a student, and athlete, a leader, and a man and a woman. That's very important to me. I want to start my remarks by beginning at the genesis of my story. My parents are from the islands of the Bahamas, my brothers are as well. I was born here in the states and I was raised in New Jersey. I went to high school in Princeton, New Jersey. And after my school days in Princeton, I would go over to the university and I saw this big poster, a statue, and trophies of this guy who became my hero. His name was Bill Bradley. He was just a rock star, in my opinion, an epitome of what a student-athlete ought to be; college basketball American, best player in college at a school like Princeton, Hall-of-Famer, a U.S. Senator, and a Rhodes Scholar. That's the first time I heard those two words, Rhodes Scholar, used in the same sentence. And once I finished high school in Princeton, I had 83 scholarship offers to go anywhere I want to to play football and I was rated the number one high school prospect in the country by ESPN. I decided to go to Florida State. And when I got to Tallahassee on campus, first thing I did was go to the Office of National Fellowships and told them that I wanted to be a Rhodes Scholar like my hero Bill Bradley. If he did it, I want to try and do it as well. And so, 3 years later, I was fortunate to earn that scholarship. Then, I went to see my teachers and academic advisors at FSU and tell them that I want you guys to help increase my intellectual capital so 1 day I can be an outstanding pediatric neurosurgeon, like another one of my influences, Dr. Ben Carson. Now, I'm a second year medical student hopefully able to do that in the future. And last, I went to my strength coaches and my athletic trainers and my football coaches, Bobby Bowden included, and told them that I want them to equip my body and get me ready for a career as a national football player. And fortunately, I was able to be drafted by the Titans and play for the Steelers as well. Now, it may sound like my story is pristine and ideal, and maybe used as the poster child for which you want a collegiate student-athlete to have experienced, but I will say that my story is quite rare and unique. And some people even call it an anomaly because, outside of Senator Cory Booker, the last major Division I football player to earn a Rhodes Scholarship was a guy named Pat Haden. And that was in the 1970s, he played at USC, and played for the Las Angeles Rams as well as a quarterback. There are very few student-athletes who I've come in contact with that have had the same infrastructure as I've had; the family support, had the foresight, not come from a broken school system in high school, and not come from a broken family who are able to engage in their college experience and maximize their time. Many more of my teammates and friends and fellow student- athletes struggled in the college environment; they struggled mightily, struggled economically. Because, now, with the scholarship stipend that they receive they became, believe it or not, the main breadwinners for their families and would have to send some of their scholarship money home to take care of their immediate and extended family. They also struggled academically as well. A lot of them would go through this academic machinery in their colleges and be spit out at the end of that machine left torn, worn and asking questions, and with really no direction, no guidance, on where they should go; no purpose, no idea of their trajectory and sometimes left with a degree in hand that didn't behoove any of their future interest. So I hope today we can shed light on this aspect, as you said, Chairman Rockefeller, that we are really pouring energy and life and money and exposure, and highlighting on TV, the life of the athlete. But I believe that we're still falling a bit short of edifying and improving, augmenting, the aspect of the students; the person, the man, the woman, and even the philanthropist and the leader. And I believe if we can do that, we can not only see our student-athletes at these major schools go on to be productive athletes in the professional ranks but, more importantly, be productive leaders and citizens that go on to be leaders of industry and leaders of men, leaders of women, and just really have an indelible impact as they go on into their future. So thank you for having me here. And I'm looking forward to joining this discussion. [The prepared statement of Mr. Rolle follows:] Prepared Statement of Myron Laurent Rolle, Scholar-Athlete, Florida State University College of Medicine Introduction Chairman Rockefeller, Ranking Member Thune, and Members of the Committee, it is a pleasure and a blessing to have this opportunity to be in your presence and present my thoughts on a compelling matter concerning college athletics. Let me first thank you and your wonderful staff for the invitation. In the confines of academia, I am what is commonly referred to as a ``Scholar-Athlete.'' I wear that mantle proudly and I strived each day to be an outstanding person, student and athlete. As my career has transitioned, I am today striving to be the best medical student I can be at The Florida State University College of Medicine with a view to being a pediatric neurological surgeon. I used the values my parents, Whitney and Beverly Rolle, instilled in me at an early age and in my brothers, as the foundation for my growth and the light to the path of life. In our household, education superseded sports and our Christian faith superseded all. The message was very clear and understood. My parents taught me how to value life, education, respect authority, treat others as you would like to be treated, respect our elders, serve our community, set lofty goals and never say never. These principles have made me who I am today. Academic and Athletic Background Before I address the collegiate athlete compensation issue, let me briefly recap my academic and athletic careers as this may shed light on my thoughts on the subject matter of concern. In primary, high school and college, I took an active role in student life outside of athletics. I served as a student leader in all levels of my academic life. I was Student Council President in both Primary and High School. I served as Vice President of our Student Athlete Advisory Council at FSU. I was editor of my primary and high school newspapers. I played the baritone saxophone, participated on Brain Bowl Teams and played the lead role of Tevye in Fiddler on the Roof. I spent hours visiting the elderly in Absecon Manner in Galloway, New Jersey, where I grew up and served Habitat for Humanities in Florida and West Virginia during my high school years at The Peddie School and The Hun School. My athletic career started on the playing fields at Gabriel Fields and basketball courts throughout South Jersey. I was athletically gifted and participated at a high level in Baseball, Basketball, Track and Football. By the time my high school career was over, I was ranked the Number One High School Football Player in America by ESPN. At Florida State University, I started at strong safety on a full athletic scholarship throughout the three years I spent at FSU. I earned both academic and athletic All-American honors. We will discuss FSU later in this conversation. In 2010, I was drafted in the sixth round of the NFL draft by the Tennessee Titans and remained in the NFL for three years. I recently completed my first year as a full-time medical student at Florida State University College of Medicine. Influences At an early age I felt I knew what I wanted in life. I wanted to serve. Today, I envision myself as a combination Servant and Transformative Leader. At the Smithville School in Galloway, New Jersey we studied the nervous system. This intrigued me to the extent that my older brother bought me a book ``Gifted Hands'' by Ben Carson. I completed this book in 3 days and I was hooked. I knew I wanted to be a neurosurgeon. My parents encouraged me and allowed me to participate in a very valuable program The National Youth Leadership Forum on Medicine--where I spent time during my high school breaks at LSU and Tulane University shadowing doctors and being exposed to the medical profession as it truly is performed. Another life changing episode in my young life happened while at The Hun School of Princeton. The Hun School is minutes away from Princeton University where one of your former colleagues, Senator Bill Bradley was an outstanding All-American Basketball Player and also a Rhodes Scholar. While I did not have definitive plan as to how to accomplish what Senator Bradley accomplished, it set my thoughts in motion. During my recruitment by all of the major Universities, I emphasized education was my priority and football would be secondary. Florida State University accepted this condition and I was allowed to pursue my academic endeavors without hindrance and thus my connection to the Office of National Fellowships. The relationship with the Office of National Fellowships allowed me to make the dreams that Senator Bradley's accomplishments instilled in me to become a reality and my earning the Rhodes Scholarship in 2009. Serving my community was indeed an active part of my life. As I grew and matured, I wanted this aspect of my life to continue. Using the platform that my FSU career and the Rhodes Scholarship provided, I along with my family, formed The Myron L Rolle Foundation whose mission statement embodies my very being--``Dedicated to the support of health, wellness, education and other charitable initiative throughout the world that benefit children and families in need.'' We have annually hosted for five years the Myron Rolle Wellness and Leadership Academy at Camp Blanding, Starke, Florida for foster children in the State of Florida. We have conducted the ``Our Way To Health'' program for Native Americans in Florida, New Mexico and Arizona, Rhodes to Success program in Florida and now a Bahamas version of the Myron Rolle Wellness and Leadership Academy. College Life I spent three full years at FSU immersed with the football program and players with the exception of a six week period that I spent in Europe at FSU's London Study Centre Abroad, graduated magna cum laude from FSU in two and one-half years and won the Rhodes Scholarship in my final year. As a member of the football team, we trained during the off-season and during the season together, we spent much of our down- time together, enjoyed off-campus life together, we studied together and generally lived together. During this period, I was able to participate in student life as a normal student by being involved in extra-curricular activities including pledging for my Fraternity, Kappa Alpha Psi, participating in human mesenchymal stem cell research and serving an executive role in Seminole Student Boosters. Because of the unique position in which I placed myself at FSU, I was able to see both sides of the student-athlete challenges, conflicts and now the controversial positions relative to compensating college athletes. I can appreciate the traditional arguments from the University perspective that they are providing one a full-four year scholarship that values in excess of US$250,000.00 or the claims from non-athlete students that the athlete is taking a position that a more qualified non-athlete student should have occupied. There are many legitimate arguments to support the University's and non-athlete student's positions. However, there is an equally compelling argument from the athletes. Let me talk about a few scenarios that I have personally experience and one shared with me second-hand. Playing football in a major university program is almost like a full time job. There is very little margin for error in managing your time. Typically during the season, your day begins with either a 5:00 or 6:00 AM work-out in the weight room or a study session at the football facilities. This is followed by getting dressed and breakfast between 7:00 and 8:00 AM. After breakfast, most players have morning classes that can take you through the morning and up to 1:00 PM. Lunch is normally at an on-campus restaurant or cafeteria. There may be a little down-time between lunch and the time you must be at the facilities. If you have an injury, you make every effort to get that treated during this down-time. Around 2:30 PM or 3:00 PM, players report to their section meetings dressed. Around 4:00 PM players report to the field for practice that can last anywhere from 1\1/2\ to 2\1/2\ hours. After practice the players shower and clean-up for supper that is around 6:30 or 7:00 PM. Depending on the situation, there may be position meetings after supper or study sessions. A player normally could leave the facility between 8:00 PM and 9:30 PM and return to his dorm or apartment where he must study his films as well as his class work. Bed time could be any-time between 11:00 PM and 1:00 AM. At 5 or 6:00 AM the process repeats itself. As you can see a significant portion of the football players day is consumed by football and at the football facility. The University provides a small monthly stipend to the athletes to cover food and rent at a minimal but acceptable living standard. Many of my team mates struggled to make ends meet on a monthly basis. Why you may ask? Many of the athletes come from deprived economic backgrounds where they must support their families back home so that the family could survive. Many of them take a portion of their allowance and send it home to support their family. If by chance an unplanned child is involved, the athlete must provide for that child as best he can. With the schedule delineated above there is no possible chance the athletes can take a second job to supplement his monthly stipend. Here are some of the issues and challenges the athlete and University face. The vast majority of the athletes are not prepared and ready for the rigorous and regimented life style of college football. In high school they were promoted socially and not provided the tools to navigate their way through an intense college curriculum that will provide for them once the college or NFL careers come to an end. The vast majority of college football players' careers end when their college eligibility ends. There are a few and a small select group who manage to make it to the NFL and survive where they can create financial security for their family. The universities are pressured to accept marginal students in order to remain competitive and share in the enormous wind-fall of bowl and television revenues. While many athletes enter college ill-equipped, the universities have excellent educational support systems that manage to keep the athletes eligible. The universities provide the opportunities for the athletes to change the trajectory of their and their families' lives. Some embrace this opportunity and others do not. My argument with universities is that they should evaluate each case on its own merit and develop a program where the individual's dreams and passion are channeled into the direction where once a course of study is completed the athlete becomes a productive citizen maximizing his or her skills. Compensation to Athletes Compensation to athletes is an administrative nightmare but time has come to walk through the door and in the words of Spike Lee ``Do the right thing''. I am a proponent of compensating athletes. All college athletes should be compensated but not at the same level. However, I believe athletes in revenue generating sports should be compensated more than those in non-revenue generating sports. There are many who struggle with the idea of paying college athletes. Maybe a Managed Fund should be set-up that will be available to the athlete upon graduation or some criteria that demands some level of academic accomplishment from the athlete. This Managed Fund could be an outstanding way to fiscally support the continued education of the student-athlete once their playing days cease. A portion of the overall revenues generated from the product within which the athletes participate should fund the Managed Fund. A certain portion for non- revenue generating sports should also be set-aside. It is my view that there should be a mechanism in place to address the immediate needs of the athlete who struggles with the standard monthly stipend. Maybe the monthly stipend needs to be increased or a means test be developed to ascertain the economic immediate needs which could carefully be deducted from the Managed Fund. Paying college athletes is the right thing to do and now is the right time to do it. Once we sharpen the mechanism in which to deliver this novel system, I believe we will see more successful student- athletes making significant contributions beyond the playing field. Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look forward to answering your questions. The Chairman. Thank you very, very much. And now, Devon Ramsay. Welcome. STATEMENT OF DEVON JAHMAI RAMSAY, FORMER COLLEGE FOOTBALL PLAYER, UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA Mr. Ramsay. Good afternoon, Chairman Rockefeller. The Chairman. Devon, right? Yes. Mr. Ramsay. Good afternoon, Chairman Rockefeller and members of the Committee. It is an honor and a pleasure to have this opportunity to be in your presence and share my story and thoughts on the current state of college athletics. Let me first thank you and your staff for the invitation. I was born to Sharon Lee and Devon Anthony Ramsay on December 8, 1988 in Red Bank, New Jersey. My mother always valued a strong education and sent me to the Rumson County Day School, which was a Blue Ribbon private winning school that covered kindergarten through eighth grade. At Rumson, I excelled in the classroom and participated in athletics. And by the time it was for me to leave, I had the opportunity to go to the Lawrenceville School, which is right down the road in Princeton where I played against Myron. [Laughter.] Mr. Ramsay. I decided this would be the best academic and athletic environment for me. I would go on to have a successful academic and athletic career, graduating in 2007. And I decided to sign my letter of intent to go to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. And what drew me to that school was not only its esteemed reputation as a top academic institution but also as the new hire of then new head coach, Butch Davis. This showed that the university had an all-around commitment to excellence. Now, my career at the University of North Carolina has been one filled with adversity. I've undergone five surgeries, been through three head coaches, and been asked if I wanted to transfer or if I wanted to take a medical redshirt. However, despite all this, I managed to succeed, being named an offensive starter for another 6 years and, by NFL draft analyst Mel Kiper, named the top three in my position. But most importantly, I got my degree in public policy with a concentration of business. After graduating, I moved back to Red Bank, where I would pursue my hopes of making an NFL team. However, I didn't make the team at Tampa Bay. Now, in the summer of 2010, two of my teammates had violated NCAA rules and attended a party thrown by sports agents. The University of North Carolina then launched their own investigation into the matter and discovered several potential counts of academic fraud. After the final practice of the week, before we played Clemson, I was told to report to one of the conference rooms and brought in for questioning by University officials. Before the questioning began, I was told that this conversation would be recorded and was asked if I needed a lawyer. I thought I had been called in there to see if they could find any more leads for the investigation, but then they began to ask me about my definition of academic fraud, academic dishonesty and plagiarism. And that is when they brought up a two-year-old e-mail correspondence between myself and a tutor. In the said e-mail, I ask the university's tutor for help with grammar and overall quality in the paper. And she replied by adding four to five sentences to a two and half page paper. They ask me if this is the exact same paper I turned in. However, I couldn't remember since it was 2 years ago. In the following 4 weeks that I was held out of competition, they sent me to the University's Honor Court. And the Attorney General of the Honor Court said that there was no case here; that there wasn't enough evidence. They had no final version of the paper, it wasn't submitted electronically and, I don't know, most people don't keep papers from 2 years ago. As I was being held out by UNC, an official from the compliance office proposed that if I were to plead guilty after being held out for so many games, that the NCAA would, in fact, allow me to play. At this time, I believe that the UNC's compliance office which was very well-versed in NCAA policy. However, it was a shocking blow that the NCAA then ruled me guilty of academic fraud which strips away my remaining eligibility and tarnishes my reputation. After coming to the realization that UNC was more concerned with penalties and losses of scholarships than protecting one of its own, my mother and I set out to find lawyers that would hopefully have my best interests at heart. However, none would stand against the NCAA nor its membership. Fortunately for me, Robert Orr, a State Supreme Court judge, reached out to my mother after reading an article that she had been involved with in The News and Observer. Without Judge Orr's legal knowledge and tenacity, I would have no one to turn to. As we went through the appeals process, which was possible with the endorsement of the University of North Carolina, the leadership at UNC once again wanted me to take a plea for a reduced sentence. However, Judge Orr, my mother and I needed to have my name unsullied. By going back and looking at the original interview, reviewing a lack of evidence and disregarding the guided testimony, the NCAA overturned its ruling and reinstated my eligibility. Unfortunately, the first game of the next season, I tore three ligaments in my knee. After receiving my sixth year of eligibility, I was not able to return to the field of play until my final game; which I participated in two plays. Now, one of the things that was, looking back at my career, that I wish I could have partaken in was in internships. A few of my friends from Lawrenceville went on to play at the Ivy League. It's not as demanding as, you know, high-level Division I football. They were allowed to go and pursue other things during the summer. And upon graduation, some of my friends got great job offers. An internship gives you direction, teaches you valuable life lessons and prepares you for a level of professionalism. At a competitive football school, completing an internship is almost impossible. In order to be eligible to receive your scholarship stipend during the summer and granted aid, if you're eligible, one was if you were enrolled in a certain number of credit hours. I've seen several teammates attempt to manage school, summer workouts and their internship. Most of these athletes ended up quitting their internship because of the sheer level of exhaustion experienced on an average day. Only one was able to complete this internship because it counted towards his credit hours so he wasn't required to go to any classes. At the University of North Carolina, football players are one of the only teams not allowed to participate in University camps, which would hone skills for those that would want to get into coaching and create another source of income. In fact, during a panel discussion about the documentary ``$chooled: The Price of College Sport,'' Head Coach of the George Mason men's basketball team Paul Hewitt stated that his team has to do an internship before they graduate a mandatory one. I think this is a great practice. If the NCAA truly wants to develop student-athletes and prepare them for success off the field, then they should mandate that all athletes complete an internship. The reason it needs to be mandated is because there exists a culture that demonizes any activity that won't directly help a program. Players that go home for a semester, and I had friends that had done this, are labeled as selfish and lazy and almost a cancer to the team. But, in fact, he's just going home. He's still working out. He's just trying to improve his own value for the likelihood that he's not going to make the NFL. I've come to realize that there is a void in college athletics. The NCAA, as an institution, no longer protects the student-athlete. They are more concerned with signage and profit margins. As I was called up to the initial meeting with UNC's investigators, I wasn't aware that I needed to defend myself against my university and the NCAA. And, as a student, I lack the resources and the knowledge to defend myself against an 80 year-old institution. My family lacked the resources to hire a lawyer. And if I refused to be interviewed, I would have been held down until I testified. In the NCAA, college football players have a very small window of opportunity to prove our worth to the NFL. Therefore, every game you miss is a lost opportunity and a means to devalue your worth. There needs to exist an entity that quickly and effectively advocates for the student-athlete. I was extremely fortunate that Judge Orr reached out to my family to help. However, it terrifies me how many students might have had their eligibility unjustly taken and their reputation damaged. The student-athlete has a short career and is an amazing new, renewable resource. And because of that, the NCAA is able to take advantage of naive young men and women. There needs to be an organization that will, in fact, protect the college athlete and has no ties to the financial being of the universities or to the NCAA. Allowing the NCAA continue to intimidate schools and athletes is dangerous and unfair. To quote a famous Roman poet, ``Who will watch the watchmen?'' Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. [The prepared statement of Mr. Ramsay follows:] Prepared Statement of Devon Ramsay, Former College Football Player, University of North Carolina Introduction Good afternoon Chairman Rockefeller and Members of the Committee, it is an honor and a pleasure to have this opportunity to be in your presence and share my story and thoughts on the current state of college athletics. Let me first thank you and your staff for the invitation. Academic and Athletic Background I was born to Sharon Lee and Devon Anthony Ramsay on December 8th 1988 in Red Bank, New Jersey. My mother has always valued a strong education and sent me to the Rumson County Day School, a Blue Ribbon winning private school that covered kindergarten through the eighth grade. At Rumson, I excelled in the classroom and participated in athletics. By 2003, My achievements at Rumson County Day School garnered the attention of many prestigious boarding schools along the east coast. I decided to attend the Lawrenceville School, an elite preparatory and boarding school outside of Princeton New Jersey. This would be the best environment academically and athletically. At Lawrenceville, I would go on to have a successful academic and athletic career graduating in 2007. In 2007, I signed a letter of intent to attend the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. What drew me to this amazing school was its esteemed reputation as a top academic institution and the hire of then new head coach Butch Davis. This showed that the University had an all around commitment to excellence. My career at the University of North Carolina has been one filled with adversity. I have underwent five surgeries, been through three head coaches, have been asked if I wanted to transfer and if I wanted to take a medical redshirt. However, despite all the adversity, I have managed to succeed being named an offensive starter for four out of my six seasons, named as one of the top three fullbacks in the country by NFL Draft Analyst Mel Kiper Jr. and most importantly attaining a degree in Public Policy with a concentration in business. After graduation, I moved back home to Red Bank, where I pursued my dreams of making an NFL team. I would get an opportunity with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers; however, I did not end up making the roster. NCAA Case In the summer of 2010, two of my teammates had violated NCAA rules and attended a party thrown by sports agents. The University of North Carolina then launched their own investigation into the matter and discovered several potential counts of academic fraud. After the final practice before we are to play Clemson, I was told to report to one of our conference rooms and brought in for questioning by University officials. Before the questioning began and was told that this conversation would be recorded and I was asked if I needed a lawyer. I thought I had been called to see if they could find any more leads in the investigation. They then proceed to ask my definition and understanding of plagiarism. After which the investigators presented a two year old e-mail correspondence between myself and a tutor. In said e-mail, I ask the university's tutor for help with grammar and overall quality. She replies by adding four sentences to a two and half page paper. They began to ask me if I turned in the paper as the tutor sent it and I couldn't remember since it had been two years for a two and half page paper. In the following four weeks that I was held out of competition, I was sent to see the Attorney General of UNC's Honor Court who came to the conclusion that since there was no final version of the paper present, this case would not go to trial due to lack of evidence. As I was being held out by UNC, an official from the compliance office proposed that if I were to plead guilty after being held out for so many games that the NCAA would in fact allow me to play. At this time, I believed that UNC's compliance to be well versed in NCAA policy. It was a shocking blow when the NCAA had ruled I was guilty of ``academic fraud'' which strips away my remaining eligibility and tarnishes my reputation. After coming to the realization that UNC was more concerned with penalties and loss of scholarships than protecting one of its own, my mother and I set out to find lawyers that would hopefully have my best interests at heart. However, none wanted to stand against the NCAA nor its membership. Fortunately, Robert Orr, a former State Supreme Court judge, reached out to my mother after reading an article in The News and Observer. Without Judge Orr's legal knowledge and tenacity, I would have no one to turn to. As we went through the appeals process, which was only possible with the endorsement of the University of North Carolina, the leadership at UNC once again wanted me to take a plea for a reduced sentenced. However, Judge Orr, my mother and I needed to have my name unsullied. By going back and looking at the original interview, reviewing a lack of evidence and disregarding the guided testimony, the NCAA overturned its ruling and reinstated my eligibility. Unfortunately, the first game of the next season, I tore three ligaments in my left knee. After receiving a sixth year of eligibility, I was not able to make a return to the field of play in my final game. Internships A few of my friends from the Lawrenceville School went on to play football in the Ivy League and one of the things I noticed and admired is that they were able to participate in assorted internships during their summers and upon graduation received great job offers. An internship gives you direction, teaches you valuable life lessons and prepares you for a level of professionalism. At a competitive football school, completing an internship is almost impossible. In order to be eligible to receive your scholarship stipend and grant in aid (if you're eligible) one must be enrolled in a certain number of credit hours. I've seen several teammates attempt to manage school, summer workouts and their internship. Most of these athletes ended up quitting their internship because of the sheer level of exhaustion experienced on an average day. Only one was able to complete his internship because it counted towards his credit hours. At the University of North Carolina, football players are one of the only teams not allowed to participate in University camps, which would hone skills for those that want to get into coaching and create another source of income. During a panel discussion about the documentary ``$chooled: The Price of College Sport,'' Head Coach of the George Mason Men's Basketball team Paul Hewitt stated that his team has to do an internship before they graduate. I think this is a great practice. If the NCAA truly wants to develop ``student athletes'' and prepare them for success off the field, then they should mandate that all athletes complete an internship. The reason it needs to be mandated is because there exists a culture, that demonizes activity that won't directly help a program. Players that go for a semester are labeled as ``selfish'' and ``lazy'', when in fact he is only improving his value for the likelihood that he will not make the NFL. I have come to realize that there is a void in college athletics. The NCAA as an institution no longer protects the ``student athlete''. They are more concerned with signage and profit margins. As I was called up to the initial meeting with UNC's investigators, I wasn't aware that I needed to defend myself against my university and the NCAA and as a student I lacked the resources and knowledge to defend myself against an eighty year old system. My family lacked the resources to hire a lawyer and if I refused to be interviewed I would have been held out until I testified. In the NCAA, college football players have a small window of opportunity to prove their worth to the NFL. Therefore, every game you miss is a lost opportunity and a means to devalue your worth. There needs to exist an entity that quickly and effectively advocates for the ``student athlete'' I was extremely fortunate that Judge Orr reached out to my family to help. However, It terrifies me how many students might have had their eligibility unjustly taken and their reputation damaged. The ``student athlete'' has a short career and is an amazing renewable resource and because of that the NCAA is able to take advantage of naive young men and women. There needs to be an organization that will in fact protect the college athlete and has no ties to the financial well being of the Universities or to the NCAA. Allowing the NCAA to continue to intimidate schools and athletes is dangerous and unfair. To quote a famous Roman poet, ``Who will watch the watchmen?'' Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I look forward to taking your questions. The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Ramsay. We appreciate it a lot. Mr. Taylor Branch is from Baltimore. He is an author and an historian. And he has written one of the, what I call, five best books ever written in terms of my own reading preferences, about the civil rights movement and the development of it. And he's also an expert on this subject and has written extensively. We welcome you, sir. STATEMENT OF TAYLOR BRANCH, AUTHOR AND HISTORIAN Mr. Branch. Thank you. Thank you, Senator Rockefeller. Thank you, Senator Thune. Thank you, members of the Committee, guests, sports fans and educators. I am honored to be here. The subject for your hearing today, college sports and the well-being of college athletes, is full of mine fields and myths. I hope to offer some summary comments for possible discussion under three headings: amateurism, balance and equity. Amateurism has become the distinguishing feature of NCAA governance. It is identified in official pronouncements as the bedrock principle of college athletics. The NCAA Bylaws define and mandate amateur conduct as follows: ``Student athletes shall be amateurs in an intercollegiate sport, and their participation should be motivated primarily by education and by the physical, mental and social benefits to be derived. Student participation in intercollegiate athletics is an avocation, and student athletes should be protected from exploitation by professional and commercial enterprises.'' That's NCAA Bylaw 2.9. The word ``amateur'' reflects conflicted attitudes about money, youth, and the purposes of recreation. Its broad ambivalence has opened a muddled flexibility in public habits, allowing the United States to become the world's only nation to develop commercialized sports at institutions of higher learning. Even the major universities involved, which were founded to uphold intellectual rigor, routinely ignore or excuse the contradictions of a multibillion-dollar side industry built on their undergraduate students. Confusion and mythology begin with the word itself. Dictionary synonyms for ``amateur'' range from a wholesome ``enthusiast'' or ``devotee'' to a bumbling ``dabbler'' or ``rookie.'' Merriam-Webster gives a stinging illustration of the latter tone: ``The people running that company are a bunch of amateurs.'' Accordingly, the same word expresses praise and scorn without distinction. This ambiguity gains reinforcement in our uniquely designed popular world of sports, where fans are encouraged to cheer and boo without thinking objectively. The ideal of ancient Greek amateurism has always been misleading, because the athletes of Olympus actually competed for huge prizes. Aristotle researched well-rewarded champions back through records of the earliest Olympic festivals. And modern scholars have confirmed evidence of high-stakes victory and loss. ``Ancient amateurism is a myth,'' noted the classicist David Young. ``Purists who refused to mix money with sport did not exist in the ancient world,'' concludes Michael B. Poliakoff, ``and victors' monuments boast of success in the cash competition as openly as they boast of victory in the sacred contests.'' Golf legend Bobby Jones is enshrined in modern sports history as the ideal, as the model amateur, and gentleman who decline every championship prize he earned. His reputation fits the true definition of amateur, which is derived from the Latin ``amator'' or ``lover,'' specifying one who chooses to pursue a skill out of subjective devotion rather than the hope of financial gain. Some non-college sports still allow athletes to declare and renounce amateur status. Significantly, students themselves called themselves amateurs when they invented intercollegiate sports after the Civil War. Until 1905, students retained general control of the new phenomenon in everything from scheduling and equipment to ticket sales. They recruited alumni to construct Harvard Stadium in 1903 with zero funds from the college. ``Neither the faculties nor other critics assisted in building the structure of college athletics,'' declared Walter Camp, Yale class of 1880, who became the father of college football in his spare time. The NCAA, created in 1906, slowly transformed the amateur tradition inherited from college athletes. Its board declared a goal of total faculty control as late as 1922, and the weak NCAA organization could not hire its first full-time staff member until 1951. After that, however, burgeoning revenue from television contracts allowed NCAA officials to enforce amateur rules as an objective requirement rather than a subjective choice. This is problematic because attempts to regulate personal motivation and belief commonly run afoul of the Constitution. Even if internal standards were allowed, and somehow could be measured, NCAA rules contradict the key requirement that college sports must be an avocation, or calling, which comes from ``vocare,'' to call, and ``vox,'' voice, by denying athletes an essential voice. NCAA rules govern the players by fiat, excluding them from membership and consent. Balance. Checks and balances are required for sound governance, and the NCAA structure is unbalanced in at least four basic respects. First, NCAA enforcement suffers an inherent conflict of interest between alleged violations in football as opposed to basketball, because the organization lost its television revenue from college football and is almost wholly dependent on a sole-source broadcasting contract for the March Madness basketball tournament. Second, the NCAA structure creates a false impression of common practice between the very few schools that aggressively commercialize college athletics, roughly 100 to 150 of some 1,200 NCAA members, and the vast majority of schools with small crowds and negligible sports revenue. An elastic NCAA amateurism stretches all the way from a Division III cross- country race to Notre Dame Football on ESPN. Third, NCAA officials resolutely obscure differences between commercialized sports and the academic mission on campus. In the classroom, colleges transfer highly valued expertise to students, but this traditional role is reversed in big-time sports. There, athletes deliver highly valued expertise to the colleges. This distinction is basic and fundamental to your Committee's stated purpose of promoting educational integrity. College athletes are, or should be, students in the classroom and competitor players in the athletic department. They face multiple roles in careers like many Americans, but their conflicting demands cannot be managed or balanced unless they are squarely recognized. The NCAA undermines this logical separation by insisting that sports are an educational supplement for a hybrid creature under its jurisdiction called the student-athlete. Universities implicitly concur by offloading some of their academic responsibility to the NCAA. Fourth, the NCAA and its member schools strip rights from athletes uniquely as a class. No college tries to ban remunerative work for all students, and no legislature could or would write laws to confiscate earnings from one targeted group of producers in a legitimate enterprise. On the contrary, universities sponsor extensive work study programs, and student-citizens everywhere exercise freedom to market skills everywhere from bookstore jobs and pizza delivery to the entrepreneurial launch of Facebook, unless they are athletes. For college athletes alone, the NCAA brands such industry unethical. Equity. Basic fairness requires attention to the rights and freedom of participants above the convenience of observers. Applied to college sports, this principle would mean that no freedom should be abridged because of athletic status. While I am neither a lawyer nor a professional economist, I find ample historical evidence that experts object to collusion in the NCAA's regulatory structure. In Microeconomics, a prominent textbook, professors Robert Pindyck and Daniel Rubinfeld make the NCAA a featured example of an economic cartel that reaps anti-competitive profit. The courts have agreed in two landmark cases. In NCAA versus Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma in 1984, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down the NCAA's exclusive control of college football broadcasts as an illegal restraint of trade. Overnight, the major football schools won the freedom to sell every broadcast their markets would bear, without having to share proceeds with the smaller schools through the NCAA. ``We eat what we kill,'' bragged one official at the University of Texas. In Law v. the NCAA, 1998, assistant coaches won a $54 million settlement along with an order vacating the NCAA's $16,000 limit on starting salaries. The compensation of assistant football coaches has cracked the $1 million barrier since then with salaries skyrocketing even in non-revenue sports. By 2010, the University of Florida paid its volleyball coach $365,000. Thus, the supervisors of college sports have won economic freedom, and they enjoy enormous largesse from a distorted cartel marketplace that now shackles only the most vital talent: the players. ``To reduce bargaining power by student athletes,'' wrote Pindyck and Rubinfeld, ``the NCAA creates and enforces rules regarding eligibility and the terms of compensation.'' NCAA officials, of course, steadfastly assert that their whole system is devoted to the educational welfare and benefit of the college athletes. ``Football will never again be placed ahead of educating, nurturing and protecting young people,'' NCAA president Mark Emmert, sitting near me, vowed when he announced NCAA sanctions for the recent scandal at Penn State. Such professions must be reconciled somehow with NCAA rules that systematically deny college athletes a full range of guaranteed rights from due process and representation to the presumption of innocence. These rules can turn words on their head, like Alice in Wonderland. The NCAA's bedrock pledge to avoid commercial exploitation of college athletes, for instance, aims to safeguard them from getting paid too much, or at all, rather than too little in the ordinary usage of the word exploit, to use selfishly for one's ends, as employers who exploit their workers. In closing, I would suggest one hopeful precedent from the past work of your Commerce Committee. This is not the first time that the governance of amateur sports, together with the education of college athletes, has presented a daunting tangle of passions and vested interests. Fifty years ago, an early bonanza in sports revenue intensified the bitter feud between the NCAA and the Amateur Athletic Union, AAU, which controlled access to the Olympic Games. AAU leaders accused an ``unpatriotic'' NCAA of sabotaging U.S. chances to win medals. They claimed that college athletes already were paid, and therefore not amateurs at all since the NCAA approved athletic scholarships in 1956. NCAA officials retorted that AAU coaches were parasites on college training facilities. These two sides nitpicked, boycotted, sabotaged, and disqualified each other until President Kennedy enlisted no less a mediator than General Douglas MacArthur to foster U.S. hopes for the 1964 Tokyo Olympics. The squabbling exhausted MacArthur, who recommended a Blue Ribbon commissions that brought proposals eventually to this committee. Your predecessors shaped what became the Olympic and Amateur Sports Act of 1978. One key provision of that law secured for active athletes a 20 percent share of the voting seats on each of the 39 new U.S. Olympic Committees. Though small, this representation soon transformed amateur sports. Granted a voice, athletes tipped the balance on governing committees in the United States and inexorably around the globe. Marathon races, then tennis tournaments, recognized a right for players to accept prize money and keep their Olympic eligibility. New leagues sprang up to popularize volleyball and other games with corporate sponsors. Olympic officials came to welcome professional competitors in every sport except boxing. By 1986, when the International Olympic Committee expunged the word amateur from its bylaws, the modified games defied every prediction of disasters. Indeed, most people scarcely don't notice the change. Some of you helped recognize success in the revised Ted Stevens Olympic and Amateur Sports Act of 1998. This example suggests a good place to start. Wherever possible, make athletes true citizens rather than glorified vassals in college sports. Where markets extend into college sports, make them fair and competitive. Recognize the rights, uphold the rights, of college athletes. Give them a voice, and challenge universities, in turn, to make wise, straightforward decisions about the compatibility of commercialized sports with education. Thank you. [The prepared statement of Mr. Branch follows:] Prepared Statement of Taylor Branch Thank you, Senator Rockefeller. Thank you, Senator Thune. Thank you, members of the Committee. I am honored to be here. My name is Taylor Branch, from Baltimore, Maryland. My educational background includes an AB degree in history from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (1968) and an MPA (Master of Public Affairs) degree from the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University (1970. Since 1976, I have made my living primarily as an independent author of books. Pertinent to the title for your session today, ``Pursuing the Well- Being and Academic Success of College Athletes,'' I wrote a capsule history of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) for the October 2011 issue of The Atlantic Monthly, entitled ``The Shame of College Sports.'' Because of widespread public debate that ensued, I expanded the Atlantic article into a digitally published e-book called The Cartel, and I proposed a short ``Three-Point Reform Agenda for Sports in Higher Education.'' The agenda is available on my website at http://taylorbranch.com/2012/06/14/a-three-point-reform-agenda-for- sports-in-higher-education/. What follows are summary comments for possible discussion under three headings: Amateurism, Balance, and Equity. Amateurism ``Amateurism'' has become the distinguishing feature of NCAA governance. It is identified in official pronouncements as ``a bedrock principle of college athletics \1\.'' The NCAA Bylaws define and mandate amateur conduct as follows: ``Student athletes shall be amateurs in an intercollegiate sport, and their participation should be motivated primarily by education and by the physical, mental and social benefits to be derived. Student participation in intercollegiate athletics is an avocation, and student athletes should be protected from exploitation by professional and commercial enterprises.\2\'' --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ Opening sentence of the NCAA website page headed, ``Office of the President, Remaining Eligible, Amateurism,'' at www.ncaa.com. \2\ NCAA Bylaw 2.9. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- The word ``amateur'' reflects conflicted attitudes about money, youth, and the purpose of recreation. Its broad ambivalence has opened a muddled flexibility in public habits, allowing the United States to become the world's only nation to develop commercialized sports at institutions of higher learning. Even the major universities involved, which were founded to uphold intellectual rigor, routinely ignore or excuse the contradictions of a multi-billion-dollar side-industry built on their undergraduate students. Confusion and mythology begin with the word itself. Dictionary synonyms for ``amateur'' range from a wholesome ``enthusiast'' or ``devotee'' to a bumbling ``dabbler'' or ``rookie.'' Merriam-Webster gives a stinging illustration of the latter tone: ``The people running that company are a bunch of amateurs.'' Accordingly, the same word expresses praise and scorn without distinction. This ambiguity gains reinforcement in our uniquely designed world of sports, where fans are encouraged to cheer and boo without thinking objectively. The ideal of ancient Greek amateurism has always been misleading, because the athletes of Olympus actually competed for huge prizes. Aristotle researched well-rewarded champions back through records of the earliest Olympic festivals, and modern scholars have confirmed evidence of high-stakes victory and loss \3\. ``Ancient amateurism is a myth,'' noted the classicist David Young.\4\ ``Purists who refused to mix money with sport did not exist in the ancient world,'' concludes Michael B. Poliakoff, ``and victors' monuments boast of success in the cash competitions as openly as they boast of victory in the sacred contests.'' \5\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \3\ Michael B. Poliakoff, Combat Sports in the Ancient World. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1987, pp. 3, 131. \4\ David Young, The Olympic Myth of Greek Amateur Athletics. Chicago: Ares Press, 1985, p. 7. \5\ Poliakoff, Combat Sports in the Ancient World, p. 19. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Golf legend Bobby Jones is enshrined in modern sports history as the model amateur, and gentleman, who declined every championship prize he earned. His reputation fits the true definition of ``amateur,'' which is derived from the Latin ``amator,'' or ``lover,'' specifying one who chooses to pursue a skill out of subjective devotion rather than the hope of financial gain.\6\ Some non-college sports still allow athletes to declare and renounce amateur status. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \6\ http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/amateur. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Significantly, students called themselves amateurs when they invented intercollegiate sports after the Civil War.\7\ Until 1905, students retained general control of the new phenomenon in everything from schedule and equipment to ticket sales. They recruited alumni to construct Harvard Stadium in 1903 with zero funds from the college.\8\ ``Neither the faculties nor other critics assisted in building the structure of college athletics,'' declared Walter Camp (Yale class of 1880), who became the ``father'' of college football in his spare time.\9\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \7\ Joseph N. Crowley, In the Arena: The NCAA's First Century. Indianapolis: The NCAA, 2006, p. 37. \8\ Mark F. Bernstein, Football: The Ivy League Origins of an American Obsession. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2001, p. 72. \9\ Ronald A. Smith, Sports & Freedom: The Rise of Big-Time College Athletics. New York: Oxford University Press, 2006, pp. 83-88, 118. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- The NCAA, created in 1906, slowly transformed the amateur tradition inherited from college athletes.\10\ Its board declared a goal of ``total faculty control'' as late as 1922, and the weak NCAA organization could not hire its first full-time staff member until 1951.\11\ After that, however, burgeoning revenue from television contracts allowed NCAA officials to enforce amateur rules as an objective requirement rather than a subjective choice.\12\ This is problematic, because attempts to regulate personal motivation and belief commonly run afoul of the Constitution. Even if internal standards were allowed, and somehow could be measured, NCAA rules contradict their requirement that college sports must be an ``avocation,'' or calling (``vocare,'' to call, from ``voc-, vox,'' voice), by denying athletes an essential voice. NCAA rules govern the players by fiat, excluding them from membership and consent. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \10\ Crowley, In the Arena: The NCAA's First Century, p. 44. \11\ Ibid., p. 67. \12\ John Sayle Watterson, College Football: History, Spectacle, Controversy. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 200, pp. 265-276; Paul R. Lawrence, Unsportsmanlike Conduct: The National Collegiate Athletic Association and the Business of College Football. New York: Praeger Publishers, 1987, pp. 71-82 --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Balance Checks and balances are required for sound governance, and the NCAA structure is unbalanced in at least four respects. First, NCAA enforcement suffers an inherent conflict of interest between alleged violations in football, as opposed to basketball, because the organization lost its television revenue from college football and is almost wholly dependent on a sole-source broadcasting contract for the March Madness basketball tournament.\13\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \13\ Lawrence, Unsportsmanlike Conduct, p. 148; Keith Dunnevant, The Fifty-Year Seduction. New York: St. Martin's Press, 2004, pp. 160- 167. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Second, the NCAA structure creates a false impression of common practice between the few schools that aggressively commercialize college athletics--roughly 100-150 of some 1,200 NCAA members--and the vast majority of schools with small crowds and negligible sports revenue. An elastic NCAA ``amateurism'' stretches all the way from a Division III cross-country race to Notre Dame football on ESPN. Third, NCAA officials resolutely obscure differences between commercialized sports and the academic mission on campus. In the classroom, colleges transfer highly valued expertise to students, but this traditional role is reversed in big-time sports. Athletes there deliver highly valued expertise to the colleges. This distinction is basic, and is fundamental to your committee's stated purpose of promoting educational integrity. College athletes are, or should be, students in the classroom and competitors in the athletic department. They face multiple roles, like most Americans, but their conflicting demands cannot be managed or balanced until they are squarely recognized. The NCAA undermines this logical separation by insisting that sports are an educational supplement for a hybrid creature under its jurisdiction, called the ``student-athlete.'' Universities implicitly concur by offloading some of their academic responsibility to the NCAA. Fourth, the NCAA and its member schools strip rights from athletes uniquely as a class. No college tries to ban remunerative work for all students, and no legislature could or would write laws to confiscate earnings from one targeted group of producers in a legitimate enterprise. On the contrary, universities sponsor extensive work-study programs, and student-citizens exercise freedom to market skills everywhere from bookstore jobs and pizza delivery to the entrepreneurial launch of Facebook--unless they are athletes. For college athletes alone, the NCAA brands such industry ``unethical.'' Equity Basic fairness requires attention to the rights and freedoms of participants above the convenience of observers. Applied to college sports, this principle would mean that no freedom should be abridged because of athletic status. While I am neither a lawyer nor a professional economist, I find ample historical evidence that experts object to collusion in the NCAA's regulatory structure. In Microeconomics, a prominent textbook, professors Robert Pindyck and Daniel Rubinfeld make the NCAA a featured example of an economic cartel that reaps anti-competitive profit.\14\ The courts have agreed in two landmark cases. In NCAA v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma (1984), the U.S. Supreme Court struck down the NCAA's exclusive control of college football broadcasts as an illegal restraint of trade.\15\ Overnight, the major football schools won freedom to sell every broadcast their markets would bear, without having to share the proceeds with smaller schools through the NCAA. (``We eat what we kill,'' bragged one official at the University of Texas.) In Law v. NCAA (1998), assistant coaches won a $54-million settlement along with an order vacating the NCAA's $16,000 limit on starting salaries.\16\ The compensation of assistant football coaches has cracked the $1 million barrier since then,\17\ with salaries skyrocketing even in ``non-revenue'' sports. By 2010, the University of Florida paid its volleyball coach $365,000.\18\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \14\ Robert S. Pindyck and Daniel L. Rubinfeld, Microeconomics (Eighth Edition). New York: Prentice Hall, 2001, pp. 480-481. \15\ Dunnevant, The Fifty-Year Seduction, pp. 160-167. \16\ Law v. NCAA, 134 F.3d 1010 (10th Cir. 1998). \17\ Kevin Zimmerman, USC's Monte Kiffen's Salary Highest Among NCAA assistant coaches,'' SB Nation, Dec. 18, 2012. \18\ Joe Drape and Katie Thomas, ``As Colleges Compete, Major Money Flows to Minor Sports,'' New York Times, Sept. 2, 2010. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Thus, the supervisors of college sports won economic freedom, and they enjoy enormous largesse from a distorted cartel market that now shackles only the most vital talent: the players. ``To reduce bargaining power by student athletes,'' wrote Pindyck and Reubinfeld, ``the NCAA creates and enforces rules regarding eligibility and the terms of compensation.'' \19\ NCAA officials, of course, steadfastly assert that their whole system is devoted to the educational benefit of college athletes. ``Football will never again be placed ahead of educating, nurturing, and protecting young people,'' NCAA president Mark Emmert vowed when he announced NCAA sanctions for the recent scandal at Penn State.\20\ Such professions must be reconciled with NCAA rules that systematically deny college athletes a full range of guaranteed rights--from due process and representation to the presumption of innocence. These rules can turn words on their head, like Alice in Wonderland. The NCAA's bedrock pledge to avoid ``commercial exploitation'' of college athletes, for instance, aims to safeguard them from getting paid too much, or at all, rather than too little in the ordinary usage of the word exploit: ``to use selfishly for one's ends--employers who exploit their workers.'' \21\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \19\ Pindyck and Rubinfeld, Microeconomics, p. 455. \20\ Emmert quoted in Taylor Branch, ``The NCAA Entrenches Itself as Part of the Problem,'' The Chronicle of Higher Education, August 1, 2012. \21\ Listing for ``exploit'' at www.dictionary.reference.com. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- In closing, I would suggest one hopeful precedent from the past work of your Commerce Committee. This is not the first time that the governance of amateur sports, together with the education of college athletes, has presented a daunting tangle of passions and vested interests. Fifty years ago, an early bonanza in sports revenue intensified a bitter feud between the NCAA and the Amateur Athletic Union (AAU), which controlled access to the Olympic Games. AAU leaders accused an ``unpatriotic'' NCAA of sabotaging U.S. chances to win medals. They claimed that college athletes already were ``paid,'' and therefore not amateurs at all, once the NCAA approved athletic scholarships in 1956. NCAA officials retorted that AAU coaches were ``parasites'' on college training facilities. The two sides nitpicked, boycotted, sabotaged, and disqualified each other until President Kennedy enlisted no less a mediator than General Douglas MacArthur to mediate U.S. hopes for the 1964 Tokyo Olympics. The squabbling exhausted MacArthur, who recommended Blue Ribbon commissions that brought proposals eventually to this Committee. Your predecessors shaped what became the Olympic and Amateur Sports Act of 1978.\22\ One key provision of that law secured for active athletes a twenty-percent share of the voting seats on each of the thirty-nine new U.S. Olympic Committees. Though small, this representation soon transformed amateur sports. Granted a voice, athletes tipped the balance on governing committees in the United States and inexorably around the globe. Marathon races, then tennis tournaments, recognized a right for players to accept prize money and keep their Olympic eligibility. New leagues sprang up to popularize volleyball and other games with corporate sponsors. Olympic officials came to welcome ``professional'' competitors in every sport except boxing. By 1986, when the International Olympic Committee expunged the word ``amateur'' from its bylaws, the modified Games defied every prediction of disaster. Indeed, most people scarcely noticed the change. Some of you helped recognize success in the revised Ted Stevens Olympic and Amateur Sports Act of 1998. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \22\ Kenny Moore, Bowerman and the Men of Oregon. New York: Rodale, Inc., 2006, p. 349; Joseph M. Turrini, The End of Amateurism in American Track and Field. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2010, pp. 74-83, 140-147. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- This example suggests a good place to start. Wherever possible, make the athletes true citizens rather than glorified vassals in college sports. Challenge universities in turn to make wise, straightforward decisions about the compatibility of commercialized sports with education. Thank you. The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Branch. And I want to be very critical of myself because the general rule around here is that witnesses speak for five or 6 minutes, but I failed to make that clear. And so, we just got-- -- Mr. Branch. It says 5 minutes right here, but I wasn't watching. [Laughter.] Mr. Branch. Sorry. The Chairman. But I want to just sort of keep it to five or six or seven minutes. That would be the best. And I thank you for your testimony. And it was my fault. Mr. Bradshaw, who is the former Director of Athletics at Temple University, we welcome you, sir. STATEMENT OF WILLIAM D. BRADSHAW, PAST PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COLLEGIATE DIRECTORS OF ATHLETICS (NACDA) Mr. Bradshaw. Chairman Rockefeller, Ranking Member Thune, ladies and gentlemen of the Committee, good afternoon. Your invitation to me to testify today about promoting the well- being and academic success of our student-athletes is much appreciated. It is an honor for me, this afternoon, to represent the 1,600-plus institutions and 11,000-plus individual members of NACDA and its athletics administrators who are the practitioners of our enterprise and representing, in excess, of 500,000 student-athletes across all three NCAA divisions, as well as the NAIA and junior-community colleges. NACDA serves as the professional association for those in the field on intercollegiate athletic administration. It provides educational opportunities and serves as a vehicle for networking the exchange of information and advocacy on behalf of the association. My career in higher education includes positions as an assistant baseball coach, head baseball coach, director of alumni and, before retiring a year ago, 36 years as a Division I athletic director at three universities. My athletic career includes 3 years as a student-athlete and one as a walk-on, followed by 2 years as a professional baseball player in the Washington Senators organization where two broken ankles influenced a career change and a Master's Degree. I trust my ankles are safe with you Washington Senators here today. These experiences proved valuable to my subsequent 36 years as a Division I athletic director at La Salle, DePaul, and Temple Universities, retiring from this wonderful profession one year ago. During the five decades of my career, I have seen significant improvements and the commitment by universities to the academic, athletic and personal experiences of student- athletes. From state-of-the-art academic support services, elite coaching and training, athletic facilities, to the much improved equipment, safety requirements and emerging NCAA permissive benefits, our student-athletes have never had it better. And yet, we know we can do better. We, as educators, are committed to maximizing and developing the enormous academic, athletic and personal potential that our talented student-athletes bring to our universities. In assessing the well-being of student-athletes, it's important to examine our university's performances and trends in the areas of academics, financial security, health safety and life skills. Academics. Over the past 20 years, graduation rates, by any metric, have drastically improved for student-athletes. In 2013, the Graduation Success Rate measure for all student- athletes in Division I was 82 percent, including 71 percent for Division I FBS football participants, and 73 percent for men's basketball student-athletes. Among the reasons for this dramatic improvement in graduation rates are: increased NCAA requirements for initial eligibility and continued eligibility, and universities' proactive response to the Academic Progress Rate metric instituted by the NCAA to measure individual teams' classroom performance each semester. Health and safety. While universities strive to use best practices, we can never do too much to ensure the health and safety of our student-athletes. The prevention and detection of concussions, for example, particularly in the sport of football, remain as one of the highest priorities for every athletic director at every level. Best practices that have become commonplace include: hiring strength and conditioning coaches, dieticians, and nutritionists; required seminars for all student-athletes to discuss drugs and alcohol, assault, date rape, and gambling, as well as comprehensive regular drug testing and follow-up. Financial security. As we all know, the real costs to attend college have risen above inflation for years, causing many students to have massive debt upon graduation and proving too costly for others to even attend the college of their choice. Currently, Division I student-athletes receive $2.1 billion in athletic scholarships, and this total will continue to escalate with anticipated NCAA legislation covering real costs of education, combined with the annual increases in tuition, room and board, books and fees. In addition to the real value of an athletic scholarship, and according to the U.S. Census data, a college graduate, on the average, earns $1 million more over a lifetime than a non- graduate. Other financial benefits for student-athletes include: universities' health insurance; NCAA catastrophic insurance; multi-year athletic grants; and student assistance funds available to conference offices. The vastly improved conditions afforded student-athletes have resulted in their unprecedented performances in the classroom, on the playing fields, and in preparation for life. Few other campus activities or clubs produce such natural diversity as intercollegiate athletics, bringing together young men and women from various races, religions, nations, beliefs, with the common denomination being their academic profiles and athletic skills. Less than 1 percent of Division I student-athletes will ever participate in professional sports, and that professional career, on average, lasts only a few years. This reality underscores the value of a college education, an education that many young men and women could not afford without an athletic scholarship. In our profession of intercollegiate athletics, the student-athletes under our care are the center of our universe, and the most important people to consider in our decisionmaking. If we always ask ourselves, before allocating resources, building facilities, or hiring coaches, is this decision in the best interest of our student athletes, then I believe that answer has helped us to arrive at the right decision. Any of your questions are most welcome. Thanks, again, for inviting me to be with you this afternoon. [The prepared statement of Mr. Bradshaw follows:] Prepared Statement of William D. Bradshaw, Past President of the National Association of Collegiate Directors of Athletics (NACDA) Chairman Rockefeller, ladies and gentlemen of the Committee, good afternoon. Your invitation to me to testify today about promoting the well-being and academic success of our student-athletes is much appreciated. It is an honor for me, this afternoon, to represent the 1,600-plus institutions and 11,000-plus individual members of NACDA and its athletics administrators who are the practitioners of our enterprise and representing in excess of 500,000 student-athletes across all three NCAA divisions, as well as the NAIA and junior/community colleges. NACDA serves as the professional association for those in the field of intercollegiate athletics administration. It provides educational opportunities and serves as a vehicle for networking, the exchange of information and advocacy on behalf of the association. My 45 years of experience in higher education includes completion of a bachelor's degree at La Salle University, one year as a walk on member of the baseball team, followed by three years on an athletic scholarship. Following graduation, I played two years of professional baseball in the Washington Senators organization and, following two broken ankles, I completed my master's degree at Niagara University, while serving as a resident assistant and volunteer baseball coach. I continued at Niagara as the head baseball coach for two years, followed by two years as the director of alumni. These experiences proved valuable to my subsequent 36 year career as a Division I Athletics director at La Salle (9), DePaul University (16) and Temple (11), retiring from this wonderful profession one year ago. During the five decades of my career, I have seen significant improvements in the commitment by universities to the academic, athletic and personal experiences of student-athletes. From state-of- the-art academic support services, elite coaching and training, athletic facilities, to the much improved equipment, safety requirements, and emerging NCAA permissive benefits--our student- athletes have never had it better. And yet, we know we can do better. We, as educators, are committed to maximizing and developing the enormous academic, athletic and personal potential that our talented student-athletes bring to our universities. In assessing the well-being of student-athletes, it's important to examine our universities performances and trends in the areas of academics, financial security, health/safety and life skills. Academics Over the past 20 years graduation rates, by any metric, have drastically improved for student-athletes. In 2013, the Graduation Success Rate (GSR) measure for all student-athletes in Division I was 82 percent, including 71 percent for DI FBS football participants, and 73 percent for men's basketball student-athletes. Among the reasons for this dramatic and continued upward momentum are: The NCAA has increased academic requirements for initial eligibility and mandated progress toward a specific degree for a student-athlete to maintain eligibility once enrolled. The NCAA also initiated the Academic Progress Rate (APR) metric, measuring progress of teams' academic performance each semester, with penalties for those teams that do not meet a minimum threshold. Universities have responded vigorously to the new standards by committing resources, additional hires, facilities and summer school opportunities, to improve academic advising for student-athletes. Financial Security As we all know, the real costs to attend college have risen above inflation for years, causing many students to have massive debt upon graduation and proving too costly for others to even attend their college of choice. Currently, Division I student-athletes receive $2.1 billion in athletic scholarships, and this total will only increase with anticipated permissive NCAA legislation covering real costs of education, together with annual increases in tuition, room/board, books and fees. In addition to the real dollar value of an athletic scholarship, and according to the U.S. Census data, a college graduate, on average, earns $1 million more over a lifetime than a non-graduate. The universities ability to cover health insurance, and the NCAA's catastrophic injury insurance program that picks up medical costs above $90,000, provide full and unlimited coverage for student-athletes. Multi-year athletic grants now can provide security to student-athletes as they complete their degree requirements at the institutions they originally enrolled in. Many student-athletes also take advantage of student assistance funds, managed by the athletic conferences and funded by the NCAA, which provides emergency and other necessities to student-athletes with documented, miscellaneous needs. Health and Safety While universities strive to utilize best practices, hire certified trainers and strength and conditioning coaches, provide personnel certified in CPR and first aid at practices and contests, we can never do too much to insure the health and safety of our student-athletes. As we hire dieticians and nutritionists to help our student- athletes with healthy choices, we are continuously challenged to find solutions to prevent drug and alcohol abuse by student-athletes. Comprehensive drug testing programs and policies are provided by the NCAA and each member institution. The prevention and detection of concussions, particularly in the sport of football, remain as one of the highest priorities for every athletic director at every level. At the same time, many of our athletic departments require student- athletes to attend seminars which address issues of drugs and alcohol, assault, date rape and gambling. Life Skills At the vast majority of Division I institutions, there are required life skills programs organized for student-athletes, many requested by the student-athletes themselves. These programs often utilize an outside expert, and include topics such as: Career counseling Etiquette training Resume preparation/job interviews Financial planning after graduation In addition, many of the student-athletes most meaningful and memorable experiences come from the myriad of community service projects available to each team during the academic year. And quite helpful to many of us are the individual questionnaires and exit interviews we conduct with our graduating seniors. Their candid evaluations of their student-athlete experience are invaluable toward best practices in the future. The vastly improved conditions affo