Trump mania hits Four Seasons Arena at Great Falls rally
Buy Photo President Donald Trump enters the Four Seasons Arena during his Great Falls campaign rally on Thursday, July 5, 2018. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/RION SANDERS)Buy Photo

A capacity, exuberant crowd turned out to see President Donald Trump at a campaign rally Thursday in Great Falls where he lauded the state's Republican candidates, lashed out at the media and U.S. Sen. Jon Tester and touted his border security and economic policies while promising to "make America even better."

Some 6,500 people crammed into Four Seasons Arena to hear the 45th president speak in support of Montana Republican candidates for the U.S. House of Representatives and U.S. Senate.

Many in the sea of Trump supporters wore red ball caps advertising "Make America Great Again" on the fronts and waved miniature flags and Trump-Pence signs.

Trump began his speech at 4:26 p.m. and concluded at 5:38.

TRUMP RALLY:

A receptive crowd stood and cheered at times as the president jumped from topics ranging from immigration to Russian President Vladimir Putin to the controversy over NFL players refusing to stand during the national anthem to issues that hit more closely to home such as public lands and the military.

He blasted the "dishonest media" and called Tester, D-Mont., who is in the midst of a highly contested campaign, two-faced.

"It's time to retire liberal Democrat Jon Tester," Trump said to cheers.

Tester, he said, says one thing in Montana and does the opposite in Washington, which garnered boos for the Big Sandy farmer.

Buy Photo President Donald Trump visits Great Falls for a campaign rally in the Four Seasons Arena on Thursday, July 5, 2018. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/RION SANDERS)

The president criticized Tester over several of his votes including voting not to repeal the Affordable Care Act, also known as "Obamacare."

"A vote for Jon Tester is vote for Chuck Schumer, Nancy Pelosi and the new leader of the Democratic party, Maxine Waters," Trump said.

He criticized Tester for publicly airing unproven allegations that Navy admiral and doctor and presidential physician Ronny L. Jackson drank on the job, improperly prescribed and dispensed medications and created a “toxic” work environment. The Navy rear admiral later withdrew his bid to lead the Department of Veterans Affairs.

Trump said the attacks were "dishonest" and "could have ruined a lesser man" and that he felt guilty for getting Jackson into politics.

"But Jon Tester said things about him that were horrible and that weren’t true. And that’s probably why I’m here because I won Montana by so many points I don’t have to come here," Trump said.

TRUMP RALLY:

Buy Photo President Donald Trump visits Great Falls for a campaign rally in the Four Seasons Arena on Thursday, July 5, 2018. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/RION SANDERS)

He also criticized Tester for voting against the confirmation of Neil Gorsuch's nomination for the Supreme Court. Trump said he would have an announcement Monday on a replacement for Anthony Kennedy, who is stepping down from the court.

The Tester campaign pointed out that Trump praised two pieces of Tester legislation during his speech —- the VA Accountability and Whistleblower Protection Act, and the VA MISSION Act.

“Montanans want someone who will roll up their sleeves and go to work fighting for Montana," Tester's office said in a statement. "Jon’s record is clear — if it’s good for Montana, Jon works with anyone from either party to get things done. If it’s bad for Montana, he’ll stand up to anyone."

Tester, a former school teacher, has billed himself as a tireless advocate of veterans and public land protections who gets legislation passed — including 16 bills signed by Trump — and isn't afraid to give bureaucrats in Washington, D.C. hell when it comes to protecting Montana's interests.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-888-424-8742. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The Tester-Rosendale battle is considered one of the most competitive races in the country.

Trump praised Matt Rosendale, the state auditor running against Tester, saying, "he's going to be your next senator," and Republican Congressman Greg Gianforte, who also is running for re-election.

Buy Photo President Donald Trump visits Great Falls for a campaign rally in the Four Seasons Arena on Thursday, July 5, 2018. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/RION SANDERS)

He encouraged the crowd to “get your ass out to vote.”

Gianforte, who is running against Democrat Kathleen Williams, and U.S. Sen. Steve Daines flew into Great Falls with the president aboard Air Force One.

"Every morning I wake up and I say, 'Thank God Hillary Clinton is not president of the United States,'" Daines said, to more applause, and 'Thank God Donald J. Trump is."

Trump also had praise for Montana's big skies and the big hearts of the state's hearty pioneers, saying Montana was forged by "people who tamed the wilderness."

“I did look at those skies I heard so much about," said Trump. "Not seeing pollution is a wonderful thing."

With the Guns N' Roses song "Sweet Child of Mine" and its screaming guitar and the refrain, "Where do we go, where do we go now" blasting through the rafters, the crowd waited in anticipation for Trump's arrival.

When the president walked through a doorway at the edge of the platform, underneath the Montana flag, he clapped his hands as he moved across the stage to thunderous applause.

The song switched to Lee Greenwood's "God Bless the USA."

Buy Photo President Donald Trump visits Great Falls for a campaign rally in the Four Seasons Arena on Thursday, July 5, 2018. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/RION SANDERS)

Trump, seeing the capacity crowd, immediately joked that he had asked "my people" why they had not arranged for a larger arena. He apologized to the few thousand people outside who were unable to get inside.

He praised Daines, who he said had been helpful with tax cuts, and noted that both would be running for election again in 2020.

"So we're running together Steve," he said.

Trump, wearing a black suit and red tie, gained steam as the speech continued, his voice rising as he spoke of protecting the country's borders and supporting U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement and U.S. Customs and Border Patrol.

"We believe in coming into this country legally," said Trump, who pledged to build a wall along the border with Mexico.

A chant of "build that wall" rang out at one point.

TRUMP RALLY:

Buy Photo Rally goers tip their hats to President Donald Trump during his Great Falls campaign rally in the Four Seasons Arena on Thursday, July 5, 2018. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/RION SANDERS)

Every day he is president, he said, he would work to take down drug dealers and "criminal aliens."

Trump brought up fake news when talking about his dealings with North Korea leader Kim Jong-un and Russian President Vladimir Putin. He was criticized for inciting war with North Korea, he said, and then for being too nice after he met with Kim Jong-un, he said.

“Getting along with Russia and getting along with China and getting along with other countries is a good thing, it's not a bad thing," Trump said. "I would say for stupid people, well for political people, all they are is good at obstruction, good at resisting.”

Trump said he was scheduled to meet with Putin next week.

Buy Photo President Donald Trump visits Great Falls for a campaign rally in the Four Seasons Arena on Thursday, July 5, 2018. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/RION SANDERS)

As for journalists, 75 percent of those people are "downright dishonest," said Trump, who said reporters rely too much on anonymous sources

“I see the way they write, they’re so damn dishonest," he said. "And I don’t mean all of them because some of the finest people are know are journalists.”

The president touted increased spending for the military and economic improvements that have occurred since he took office including what he said was the lowest unemployment level in 65 years.

Trump credited the tax cuts touted by Republicans for the improvements.

In an issue that hits close to home in Montana, Trump noted his administration's approval of the Keystone XL Pipeline, which crosses the state.

Before his father took the stage, Donald Trump Jr. said it's not true the Republicans are out to sell public lands as Democrats and conservation groups are alleging.

"That's their big sound bite for the outdoorsman," Trump Jr. said.

Buy Photo President Donald Trump mentioned his idea for a sixth branch of the military that he's referred to as "Space Force" during his Great Falls campaign rally in the Four Seasons Arena on Thursday, July 5, 2018. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/RION SANDERS)

Sharply-dressed Secret Service agents kept an eye on the event.

It was the first time a president made a visit to the Electric City since George W. Bush spoke in 2005, also at Four Seasons.

As early as 9:30 a.m. Trump fans had formed huge lines that stretched down 3rd Street N.W. and 6th Street N.W.

TRUMP RALLY:

The 3rd Street N.W. line extended north all the way to the Northwest Bypass before cutting west and ending across from the Buffalo Wild Wings restaurant.

“Probably about 8,000 people from what I’ve been told,” Cascade County Sheriff Bob Edwards said at 1:30 p.m. of people waiting in line to see Trump, as he assisted in answering questions and monitoring the lines near the entrance to Four Seasons Arena.

The capacity of Four Seasons is 6,600. Cascade County, which owns the Four Seasons Arena, said the crowd was over 6,500.

Edwards said there had been no crowd-related issues except for three minor medical related issues related to the heat, although a few people posed as volunteers in an attempt to get in to see the president. One person attending the event was led out of the arena by security officials.

When the gates opened at 10:30 a.m., people lined up along 6th Street N.W. sprinted across the wide-open concrete parking lot to get in line as if they were attending a rock concert. They stood between yellow police tape that snaked toward Four Seasons Arena.

“What an opportunity,” Roberta Strouss, 71, who traveled to the rally from Bigfork, 230 miles northwest of Great Falls, as she sat on a bench as the line inched along. “I wouldn’t want to miss it because I think he’s a good president, and I think he’s doing a good job.”

Buy Photo President Donald Trump visits Great Falls for a campaign rally in the Four Seasons Arena on Thursday, July 5, 2018. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/RION SANDERS)

Seated next to her was Todd Dighaus, 54, of Helena, who works at Walmart.

“He’s doing what’s needed for our country,” Dighaus said, who ripped both Democrats and Republicans for the country’s debt and other policies that are “not good for us out here in flyover country.”

“Trump, at least he has business sense and is trying to spend the money more wisely,” said Dighouse, sporting a colorful Hawaiian shirt.

Inside, Levi Johnson and his father Joe, both from Havre, were waiting for seats as crowds filled the floor below the stands.

“I’m a veteran,” Levi said. “He’s done a lot for veterans and the economy. People can’t say they can’t get jobs anymore.”

Tester’s rebuttal to Trump’s attacks is his work in Congress for veterans, highlighted in a full-page ad he took out in the Great Falls Tribune and 13 other area newspaper Thursday. The ad names several of Tester’s veteran-focused bills Trump signed into law.

But Joe was unfazed.

“He’s been there 12 years. They’re still waiting in line,” he said, referring to veterans waiting for health care at VA facilities.

Randy Sharpe was standing in line with his 5-year-old daughter to buy a hot dog Thursday. They had traveled to Great Falls from Lewistown Wednesday night and got in line at 8 a.m.

“I like my president,” Sharpe said. “He’s doing great things for the country.”

Sharpe said he shares Trump’s disdain for the mainstream media. His own frustrations were borne out of the Bundy Ranch standoff, where Sharpe said he stood with the Bundy family.

“Small government,” Sharpe said. “That’s why I’m here.”

One of the seating volunteers, Julie Ritzschke, said Trump had kept his promises, like pushing for the wall along the border with Mexico. She’s worried about illegal immigrants coming to Great Falls to work at the proposed slaughterhouse project east of town. She also opposes the slaughterhouse, for fear that the project may disrupt the water levels and cause a stench that would turn people away from Great Falls.

From western Montana, Mark Payton also drove to Great Falls on Wednesday night in time to catch the fireworks. He said he’s spent $400 in Great Falls alone on the trip and hoped those who spent that much didn’t get stuck outside because of capacity issues.

Buy Photo Trump supporters laugh at one President Donald Trump's jokes during his Great Falls campaign rally in the Four Seasons Arena on Thursday, July 5, 2018. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/RION SANDERS)

“USA! USA! USA!,” the crowd began shouting at at 2:24 p.m., an hour-and-a-half from Trump’s scheduled arrived.

Attorney General Tim Fox arrived at Four Seasons at about 2:15 p.m.

An hour later he was giving a Trump pep talk, telling the pumped-up crowd that Trump was reversing what he called the Barack Obama administration's overreach. The arena’s audio system blasted rock tunes as if the campaign rally was a concert, and the Trump fans did the wave with signs such as “Trump Pence,” “Women for Trump,” “Make America Proud Again” and others.

Trump is campaigning for senators and representatives in advance of the Nov. 6 mid-term elections when all 435 seats in the House of Representatives and 35 of the 100 seats in the Senate are being contested.

He stopped in the Electric City to campaign on behalf of Rosendale.

RELATED:

Trump came to Billings as a GOP presidential candidate in May 2016, while son Donald Jr. has made several political appearances, most recently at a statewide Republican convention in Billings in June.

Trump won the state by 20 points over Democrat Hillary Clinton in Montana.

"We're going to win and win and we're going to win more," the president said. "Because we are finally putting America first."

Read or Share this story: https://gftrib.com/2tZRoPN