Cory Booker says he will run campaign like he ran in track, without eyes on Joe Biden
CLOSE Cory Booker says it's great for voters to have a diverse group of candidates to choose from, but that he believes he's the best person for the Democratic nomination. Anna Lee, zlee@greenvillenews.com

SPARTANBURG – U.S. Sen. Cory Booker of New Jersey made another appearance in the Upstate this week when he stopped by a rally in the Arkwright community as part of his “Justice for All” campaign tour.

It was Booker’s second visit to the area since announcing his presidential bid in February. He spoke for nearly an hour in a packed room at the C.C. Woodson Community Center, where audience members in attendance included three city councilmen, two state representatives and state Sen. Karl Allen of Greenville.

Here are the key takeaways from Booker's visit.

Joe Biden's candidacy

Booker spoke briefly to the media after the rally and gave his reaction to the news that former Vice President Joe Biden had formally joined the crowded Democratic presidential contest earlier Thursday.

"I think it's wonderful that all Democrats now have a big field of people — the most diverse field — we've ever had in a presidential election," Booker said. "I think it's wonderful that folks have a lot of great choices."

Buy Photo Cory Booker, U.S senator from New Jersey, and a 2020 democratic presidential candidate, held a rally at the C.C Woodson Community Center in Spartanburg during his visit to the city Thursday, Apr. 25, 2019. (Photo: MATT BURKHARTT/Staff)

He said he believes he's still the best person for the nomination and used a sports analogy to describe his campaign.

"The way I learned how to run an election is to run like I learned in high school track. You get in the blocks. You don't worry about the runner next to you or the runner on the other side of you, and you run your race."

Environmental justice for all

Booker said he chose Spartanburg to kick off his environmental justice platform because it reminds him of his hometown of Newark, New Jersey, where he once represented tenants taking on slumlords. He served as Newark's mayor from 2006 to 2013 before being elected to the Senate.

“Just like Newark, a whole lot of folk came into the community and did wrong. Corporate polluters from the textile mills to the fertilizer plant to the chemical company to the dump that people put their trash in right here in this community — (they) were poisoning people,” Booker said.

CLOSE Cory Booker, a Democrat running for the presidential nomination, said "Before you tell me about your religion, first show it to me in how you treat other people." Matt Burkhartt, The Greenville News

He also cited a Princeton University study that showed people who live near Superfund sites have a dramatically higher rate of being born with birth defects and having stillbirths and miscarriages.

President Trump’s border wall, affordable housing

Booker then spoke briefly about the border wall and immigration after opening up the room to questions from the audience.

While it’s important to keep the country safe, Booker said President Trump’s border wall is doing the opposite.

“We can’t violate the values of this country like we’re doing at the border right now —putting children in cages and separating families. This is wrong. It doesn’t make us safer. It makes us less safe," he said.

State Rep. Rosalyn Henderson-Myers, who represents District 31 in Spartanburg, asked Booker about his solutions to gentrification and the affordable housing problem. She said downtown Spartanburg is surrounded by historically black neighborhoods that are gentrifying as longtime residents get pushed out because they can no longer afford their property taxes.

Booker presented tax credits as a potential solution. The tax credit would be rewarded to people who spend more than 30 percent of their income on the area median rent. He said he would have communities faced with a housing crisis shave to put forward a plan to build affordable and workforce housing.

"And if they don't have a plan than we'll actually take away some of those funding streams that they use for things that are not affordable," Booker said.

More: Cory Booker campaigns in Greenville County: Key takeaways from the candidate's visit

Read or Share this story: https://www.greenvilleonline.com/story/news/politics/2019/04/25/cory-booker-democratic-presidential-candidate-visits-spartanburg-sc/3564446002/