John Legend and Chrissy Teigen Just Donated $25,000 to Students Fighting Gun Violence
John Legend and Chrissy Teigen are the latest celebrity philanthropic supporters of the Parkland shooting survivors and the anti-gun March for Our Lives movement—the couple just donated $25,000 to the cause.



"We support the students," Legend told AP Entertainment, while promoting NBC's upcoming TV special, Jesus Christ Superstar Live. "We're proud of the students. We've already sent them money. We sent them $25,000 to help with whatever costs they have for organizing, and we believe that our gun culture needs to change in America."

SPOUSAL SUPPORT: @JohnLegend and @ChrissyTeigen have donated $25,000 to students organizing nationwide marches against gun violence @AMarch4OurLives pic.twitter.com/7LscKxQBiN — AP Entertainment (@APEntertainment) February 27, 2018

Legend also suggested that widespread changes need to be made to prevent future gun-related tragedies, both large and small-scale.



"We stand out among other major countries in the world when it comes to these types of massacres, but also in the everyday gun violence that people have to deal with," the singer continued. "I don't think that we should accept that as normal. I think we've decided that everyone having unfettered access to guns is more important than all of us being safe, and I think we need to reshape that balance a bit so that we're all more safe."

Legend—who's a father to one-year-old Luna and has a second child on the way—talked about the country's responsibility to protect children. "I don't want our kids to keep going to these shooter drills, and all these other things that I can't even believe kids are dealing with right now," he explained. "They shouldn't have to deal with that. But I'm glad these kids from Parkland are saying enough is enough, and we support them."

From celebrity parents like John Legend and Chrissy Teigen and George and Amal Clooney, to fashion labels like Gucci, we're all about those with influence supporting the brave Parkland students and the greater fight for gun control.