Twitter Is Freaking Out About Taylor Swift's Political Instagram Post
Until this weekend, Taylor Swift had kept her political opinions completely hush-hush. She infamously kept quiet during the 2016 election (save one post reminding fans to hit the polls), inciting backlash from critics for not using her platform to take a stand against Donald Trump.

But last night, in a lengthy Instagram post put out to her 112 million followers, the pop star publicly criticized Republican Tennessee senate nominee Congresswoman Marsha Blackburn, endorsed Democratic candidates Phil Bresden and Jim Cooper, and encouraged all of her followers to register to vote.

John Shearer Getty Images

"In the past I’ve been reluctant to publicly voice my political opinions, but due to several events in my life and in the world in the past two years, I feel very differently about that now. I always have and always will cast my vote based on which candidate will protect and fight for the human rights I believe we all deserve in this country," Swift captioned a black and white Polaroid photo of herself.

"I believe in the fight for LGBTQ rights, and that any form of discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender is WRONG," she added. "I believe that the systemic racism we still see in this country towards people of color is terrifying, sickening and prevalent."

Read Swift's full post below.

Naturally, the internet had a lot to say about Swift speaking out. Some criticized her silence until this point as irresponsible, some praised her for influencing her young audience to get involved, and others just had to laugh it off.

Here are some of the best.

Taylor Swift just took the mic from Kanye. — Scott Dworkin (@funder) October 8, 2018

Taylor Swift cares more about black people than Kanye West and now I need to lay down because I got a headache just from tweeting that. — Ragnarok Lobster (@eclecticbrotha) October 8, 2018

Huge congratulations to whoever finally convinced Taylor Swift to get on the right side of history. — KB (@KaraRBrown) October 8, 2018

I think now is a safe enough time to admit I still listen to the RED album with semi regularity. — Phillip Picardi (@pfpicardi) October 8, 2018

Do you know how bad it has to be for Taylor Swift to get political? — Jensen Karp (@JensenKarp) October 8, 2018

So... Kanye is MAGA and Taylor Swift is endorsing Democrats in TN. This screening of Interstellar 2 is fascinating. Buy a lottery ticket. Anything is possible in this timeline. — roxane gay (@rgay) October 8, 2018

woke twitter finally diving into ‘reputation’ after a year of exercising moral self-restraint pic.twitter.com/HjqUpsMvaN — Jill Gutowitz (@jillboard) October 8, 2018

If you had told me two years ago Kanye would be running around in a MAGA hat while Taylor Swift was endorsing democratic candidates, I would have smacked you to the ground and stolen your wallet for wasting my time. — KB (@KaraRBrown) October 8, 2018

REPLACE ALL CONFEDERATE STATUES WITH STATUES OF TAYLOR SWIFT!!!!!! — Phillip Henry (@MajorPhilebrity) October 8, 2018

I don’t have much of an opinion on Taylor Swift, but I know that even her very measured statement today will result in countless threats & attacks on her, and that she did it anyway, so even if it’s belated, I respect it. Every voice helps. — Anil Dash 🥭 (@anildash) October 8, 2018

I SAID OH MY, WHAT A MARVELOUS TUNE pic.twitter.com/Ck96JjzP0F — Dana Schwartz (@DanaSchwartzzz) October 7, 2018

Look how you made her vote — Sam Lansky (@samlansky) October 8, 2018

Taylor just wrapped up the North American leg of her Reputation concert tour, and is scheduled to open at the American Music Awards tomorrow night in her first award show performance in years.