Final Rule Rapidly Eases Restrictions On Non-ACA-Compliant Association Health Plans
On June 19, 2018, the U.S. Department of Labor (Department) released a final rule that significantly alters the way that association health plans (AHPs) are regulated. The rule was accompanied by a press release and new webpage.

The rule was developed in response to an October 2017 executive order from President Donald Trump that directed the federal government to expand access to AHPs, short-term limited duration insurance, and health reimbursement arrangements. In his executive order, President Trump directed the Department to reconsider its definition of “employer” under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) and identify ways to promote AHP formation on the basis of common geography or industry.

The Department’s final rule largely adopts the changes contained in a proposed rule from January 2018 and makes it much easier for an association to be considered a single multi-employer plan under ERISA. As a single multi-employer plan under ERISA, AHPs do not have to comply with many of the Affordable Care Act’s (ACA’s) most significant consumer protections, such as the law’s rating rules and the essential health benefits.

The changes finalized by the Department include relaxing a long-standing “commonality of interest” requirement that associations must exist for a reason other than offering health insurance and allowing self-employed “working owners” to enroll in AHP coverage. The Department also maintained proposed nondiscrimination protections that prohibit associations from conditioning membership based on a health factor (although not other factors such as gender, age, geography, and industry). The rule does not disturb state regulatory authority over AHPs, but the Department leaves open the potential of granting exemptions for AHPs from state requirements in the future.

The Department largely ignored requests from state insurance regulators and others to delay implementation of the rule until 2020 to give states time to assess their existing laws and adopt new protections if needed. Instead, the rule will have staggered applicability dates, beginning with September 1st, 2018 through April 1, 2019. This gives states only a matter of months before the first part of the rule goes into effect—at a time when most state legislative sessions have already closed for 2018. Even the last wave of applicability—in April 2019—occurs before most state legislatures will have ended for 2019. This quick turnaround could limit state policymakers who want to increase their oversight of or apply additional state-level consumer protections to AHPs.

Background

Business and employer trade associations—such as chambers of commerce or farm bureaus—often offer health insurance to their members. Historically, these associations claimed ERISA preemption from state insurance regulation, identifying themselves as employers or employee organizations under ERISA. A number of these associations defrauded their members and left millions in unpaid claims when they became insolvent.

In 1983, Congress amended ERISA to give states regulatory authority over self-insured multiple employer welfare arrangements (MEWAs) and some regulatory authority over fully insured MEWAs to ensure solvency, require state licensure, and require financial reporting. AHPs are one type of MEWA. In 1996, Congress amended ERISA to give the Department the authority to require fully insured and self-insured MEWAs to register with the Department. Although states have had a far better track record of addressing fraudulent association plans than the federal government, fraud and abuse by association plans has continued, as evidenced by recent successful prosecution of AHP fraud by the Department of Justice under the Trump administration.

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) did not outlaw AHPs but took steps to limit their abuses. The ACA included reporting requirements for MEWAs, imposed criminal penalties on MEWA fraud, and authorized the Department to take immediate action to address fraudulent MEWAs. It also dropped an exception from the “guaranteed availability” provision of the Public Health Service Act that had existed for bona fide association plans. Thus, an insurer that offers coverage through an association must offer the same plan to non-members who want it (and are aware of it). Associations themselves are not subject to guaranteed availability requirements.

The ACA did not recognize AHPs as having special status. Distinctions under prior law for “bona fide” associations more or less disappeared. The ACA simply defined large group, small group, and individual plans, without reference to how they were offered. Association plans continued under the ACA, but largely under existing ACA rules. This “look through” doctrine disregards the association in determining which rules apply and looks solely at whether the participating individual or employer is obtaining individual, small group, or large group coverage. This means that individual or small group coverage obtained through an association is regulated under the same standards that apply to the individual market or the small group market, respectively. This includes many of the ACA’s most significant consumer protections, such as coverage of preexisting conditions, new ACA’s rating rules, and the essential health benefits package.

When The Association Becomes An Employer And The AHP Becomes A Single Multi-Employer Plan Under ERISA

The exception to this rule is when the coverage sponsored by an association constitutes a single ERISA-covered multi-employer plan. By treating an association itself as an employer who is sponsoring a single health plan for its members, the AHP is regulated as a group health plan under ERISA. Group health plans are subject to various reporting, disclosure, and fiduciary requirements imposed by ERISA, requirements imposed by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), and some, but not all, of the Affordable Care Act’s market reforms.

Group health plans are, however, exempt from most state regulation. Although insurers that insure group health plans are subject to state laws and regulations (such as fair marketing practices), states cannot regulate the underlying employer-health plan. As a large group health plan, an AHP would not have to comply with many of the ACA’s most significant consumer protections (such as coverage of the essential health benefits package or rating rules) that apply in the individual and small group markets or many state requirements.

To date, the Department has interpreted this AHP exception quite narrowly to apply only when a “bona fide” group of employers is bound together by a commonality of interest (other than simply providing a health plan) with vested control of the association so that they effectively operate as a single employer. Thus, under current rules, eligible association members must share a common interest, join together for purposes other than providing health insurance, exercise control over the AHP, and have one or more employees in addition to the business owner and spouse. Association plans offered by general business groups or that include individual members do not qualify, a position that the Department reaffirmed as recently as 2017.

This exception—where an AHP can be treated as a group health plan under ERISA—is the target of the Department’s rule. The rule will make it far easier for an association to be considered a single multi-employer plan under ERISA, allowing the proliferation of AHP coverage that can be sold across state lines and that does not have to comply with the ACA.

Analysis Of The Proposed Rule

In January 2018, the Department released its proposed rule on AHPs, but the rule contained little analysis of its expected impact. The Department noted that “the incidence, nature and magnitude of both positive and negative effects are uncertain.” The preamble to the rule cited factors that make the analysis uncertain, such as a lack of data on the risk profile of associations and their members and state discretion in regulating AHPs. Because of these limitations, federal regulators provided “a mostly qualitative assessment” of the impact of the proposed rule rather than a quantitative prediction.

In part due to these limitations and a lack of analysis of the rule’s impact, a coalition that includes academic institutions, advocacy organizations, and the D.C. marketplace called on the Department to withdraw or substantially delay the AHP rule. The letter was issued in conjunction with a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request asking the Department to release information, data, and statistics about its history of enforcement regarding AHPs, AHP financial abuses and insolvency, and policy and regulation regarding these plans. In asking the Department to release this information and withdraw the proposed rule, the stakeholders noted that the public lacked “a full understanding of the Department’s comprehensive analysis for proposing an expansion of arrangements with a history of financial fraud and mismanagement without proposing any additional solvency or other substantial safeguards to prevent future financial harm for participants and beneficiaries.” To my knowledge, data has not yet been produced in response to the FOIA request.

The lack of federal analysis notwithstanding, there have been a number of quantitative and qualitative analyses on the impact of the proposed rule. Three analyses—one from Avalere, one from Oliver Wyman, and one from the Society of Actuaries—each showed that the proposed rule on AHPs would have a significant impact on the traditional ACA individual and small group markets. Avalere found that up to 4.3 million people enrolled in the individual and small group markets would shift to AHP coverage, premiums would rise by up to 4 percent, and up to 140,000 additional individuals would become uninsured by 2022. Oliver Wyman found that the AHP rule would increase claim costs in D.C.’s individual market and small group market by up to about 11 percent and 26 percent, respectively. The Society of Actuaries found that up to 10 percent of current enrollees in the overall individual market could shift to AHP coverage and claims in the individual ACA market would increase by about 4.4 percent.

These quantitative analyses were complemented by qualitative analyses from researchers at the Georgetown University Center on Health Insurance Reforms and the former general counsel of the Montana Insurance Department on behalf of the consumer representatives to the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. Both studies discuss the impact of AHPs on state insurance markets from a historical perspective and identify the challenges that state regulators have faced in oversight of AHPs.

Given these negative impacts, a number of states have already taken action to try to insulate their insurance markets from the AHP rule. In New Jersey, the state’s newly adopted individual mandate specifies that coverage obtained through a MEWA does not qualify as minimum essential coverage for purposes of state law—unless that coverage complies with certain state consumer protections, such as benefit mandates and rating rules. Because individuals that enroll in this type of coverage would have to pay the penalty under state law, New Jersey’s requirement is likely to discourage the offering of and enrollment in these products. D.C.’s individual mandate, which remains under consideration, included a similar requirement. On the other end of the spectrum, states such as Iowa are moving to fast-track the creation of AHPs under the new rule.

Finally, the vast majority of stakeholders that commented on the proposed rule opposed it outright or expressed serious concerns. An analysis by the Los Angeles Times found that more than 95 percent of comments on the proposed AHP rule were critical. As the article notes, “not a single group representing patients, physicians, nurses or hospitals voiced support” for the AHP rule. Substantive summaries of many of these comments—from state insurance regulators, state attorneys general, consumer advocates, insurers, and business representatives—are available here. Supportive comments generally came from associations—such as the National Association of Realtors and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce—that have indicated their intent to offer or promote AHPs under the rule.

The Final Rule

To increase the availability of AHPs, the Department adopts a new definition of “employer” for purposes of determining when employers can join together to offer or enroll in an AHP that is treated as a group health plan under ERISA. In doing so, the Department broadens the current definition, codifies this definition in regulations, and supersedes previous subregulatory guidance on AHPs.

Existing AHPs Can Continue Operating

Some commenters raised the concern that current associations did not design their AHPs with the new requirements in mind and may not be able to comply with the final rule’s requirements. Citing its goal of not reducing access to AHP coverage, the Department confirms that the final rule offers an additional way for groups or associations to qualify as an “employer” under ERISA—rather than the only way to qualify. This allows current AHPs to continue operating in a way that is consistent with previous Department guidance.

At the same time, new AHPs can form and choose to follow either the old guidance or the new rules. The Department opted to allow new AHPs to operate under either the new rule or the old guidance instead of simply grandfathering in existing AHPs. By extending this option to both existing and new AHPs, new AHPs can compete on equal footing with existing AHPs.

This means that new or existing AHPs could engage in experience rating by underwriting premiums for individual employer members based on health status. (As discussed below, this is prohibited under the new final rule.) However, AHPs that wish to do so must continue to meet the Department’s prior, more stringent standards in areas such as commonality of interest; they could not, for instance, enroll working owners in AHP coverage.

Primary Purpose Of The Association

The final rule relaxes the current requirement that associations must exist for a reason other than offering health insurance, albeit with a slight adjustment from the proposed rule. The current requirement—that a group or association must exist for a bona fide purpose other than offering health coverage to be an employer under ERISA—had been outlined in previous Department advisory opinions. It was intended to distinguish between associations offering AHPs and those offering private health insurance (“commercial-insurance-type arrangements”), where there is no employment relationship between the plan and enrollees.

In a slight shift from the proposed rule (which would have allowed associations to offer AHPs even if the association existed only to offer health insurance), the final rule requires the group or association to have at least one “substantial business purpose” that is unrelated to providing benefits. In making this adjustment, the Department noted concerns raised by diverse commenters that the previous standard would diminish the market power of existing AHPs, invite fraud or insolvency, and result in newly formed associations that lack the requisite knowledge and expertise.

This change, however, may not be a high standard even for new associations to meet. The Department confirms that an association’s principal purpose can be the provision of benefits. The association must just have at least one “substantial business purpose”—such as holding conferences, offering classes or educational materials, or promoting common business or economic interests—to qualify. The rule includes a safe harbor: a substantial business purpose exists if the association would be a viable entity even if it did not sponsor an AHP. The Department also identifies activities that would fall under the safe harbor such as acting as a standard-setting organization, engaging in public relations (such as advertising or education), or the (ever-amorphous) “advanc[ing] the well-being of the industry.”

An existing association’s substantial business purpose would not be eliminated even if the association created a subsidiary to administer an AHP. The business purpose does not have to be a for-profit activity.

Commonality Of Interest

To qualify as a group health plan under ERISA, the association must have a “sufficiently close economic or representational nexus to the employers and employees that participate in the plan.” Where an employment relationship to the association does not exist, the only connection between a member employer and the association is the health coverage itself. Historically, this analysis has centered on 1) whether the association is a bona fide organization that has purposes and functions unrelated to providing benefits; 2) whether the employers share some commonality and genuine organizational relationship unrelated to providing benefits; and 3) whether the employers that participate in a benefit program exercise control over the program.

When this commonality of interest does not exist, courts have held that the relationship is more similar to a relationship between an employer and a state-regulated private insurer, whose coverage would be subject to many more consumer protections. Courts have also required there to be a “cohesive relationship” between an association and its members to ensure that they are tied by a common economic or representational interest. This relationship should be unrelated to the provision of benefits such as health insurance.

In the final rule, the Department moves away from this previous standard to adopt “a more flexible test” for the commonality of interest requirement. Under the final rule, an association can show commonality of interest among its members if they are either 1) in the same trade, industry, profession, or “line of business”); or 2) being in the same principal place of business within the same state or a common metropolitan area even if the metro area extends across state lines (“geography”). These criteria are separate: associations whose members operate in the same industry can sponsor AHPs, regardless of geographic distribution, while members in the same geographic area may work in entirely different industries.

Although commenters urged the Department to clarify terms such as “trade,” “industry,” and “line of business” for purposes of the commonality test, the Department declined to do so. Instead, the commonality test will be applied based on relevant facts and circumstances. Rather than defining these terms or classifying industries, the Department “intends for these terms to be construed broadly.” The use of any generally accepted classification system for industries—such as the definition of voluntary employees’ beneficiary association under Department of Treasury regulations, codes issued by the North American Industry Classification System, or codes for the Standard Industrial Classification—will be considered sufficient for meeting the commonality requirement.

The rule also clarifies that the line of business test applies regardless of for-profit or nonprofit status. A nonprofit employer does not fail to have commonality with for-profit employers in the same line of business solely because of its nonprofit status. The Department also indicates an openness to market segmentation within an AHP—among, say, association members who choose to segment themselves within a trade or industry due to minority or veteran status or based on the structure of their business. Employer members can do so within the AHP so long as it is not a subterfuge for discrimination based on a health factor. For instance, veterans who own restaurants—a subset of restaurant owners—could satisfy the “line of business” commonality test without having to cover the entire restaurant industry. The Department allows this to enable employers with shared culture, principles, or values to organize amongst themselves.

AHPs can also satisfy the commonality requirement by limiting themselves to a smaller geographic region, such as a city or county. In the preamble, the Department affirms that associations are not required to cover an entire state or metro area to qualify as bona fide. Examples of metro area include the Greater New York City Area/Tri-State region, the Kansas City metro area, and the DC metro area, all of which extend into at least two states. An area that matches a Metropolitan Statistical Area or a Combined Statistical Area, as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, constitutes a metro area under the rule. But the Department “leave[s] open the possibility that other geographic areas may also qualify” based on facts and circumstances. The Department indicates its intent to preserve “substantial flexibility” for associations to cover parts of a geographic area that meet the commonality test so long as the geographic area segmentation is not a subterfuge for discrimination based on a health factor.

The Department finalized the geography test despite many comments on this provision. Some sought clarification of what would constitute a metropolitan area while others opposed this expansion of the commonality test. Some commenters believed that the geographic provision is overly broad, invites fraud, would allow AHP sponsors to evade state regulation by offering multi-state products, and could enable or encourage redlining (a practice where insurers avoid offering coverage in areas where residents are more likely to face chronic health conditions).

In response to many comments raised on both elements of the new commonality test, the Department points to the rule’s inclusion of a new “subterfuge” provision. Under this provision, an association that offers health coverage to a segment of an industry or geography as a subterfuge for discriminating on the basis of a health factor does not satisfy the commonality test. The Department believes that this provision will adequately address concerns about the potential for AHPs to be designed in a way that avoids high-cost areas and industries. Beyond this provision, the Department expects state regulators to take on the burden of preventing redlining by AHPs and is “confident” that states will use their authority to limit fraud and abuse by AHPs.

The Department had considered including other bases for showing commonality of interest. These proposed bases had included ownership characteristics (e.g., an association of owners who are veterans), business size, and shared religious or moral convictions—or no commonality whatsoever. However, the Department ultimately declined to adopt these options, concluding that it already maximized flexibility through the line of business and geography tests so that additional bases are not needed. For instance, the Department concludes that employers with shared moral convictions could sponsor an AHP if they satisfied the geography standard. And like-minded employers could create industry-specific subgroups under the line of business standard. Each of these subgroups could qualify as an “employer” under ERISA and establish an AHP without geographic limitations for subgroup members. (In this instance, the new rule’s requirements—regarding, say, the control test noted below—would apply at the subgroup level while membership in a national association would satisfy the substantial business purpose requirement noted above.)

By relaxing the “commonality of interest” standard, the Department makes it easier for employers—tied only by being in the same line of business or geographic area—to band together and form an association for the sole purpose of offering health coverage (assuming the association has an additional substantial business purpose).

Organizational Structure And Employer Control

The final rule requires a group or association to have an organizational structure and be functionally controlled by its members, either directly or by electing a board or other representatives. Some commenters considered the “control” test to be “a largely illusory safeguard” in light of previous experience with fraudulent AHPs where employer members had only nominal control of the association. Other commenters opposed a control test altogether.

The Department maintained its control test (with some slight variation) in the final rule. The rule requires that the functions and activities of a group or association be controlled by its members who must control the plan, in both form and substance. The rule also requires an association to have a governing body and by-laws and to maintain other legal formalities based on the type of entity the association is.

The control test is independent of and unrelated to whether the association’s key officials or board members are considered fiduciaries of the AHP. AHPs must also comply with all ERISA provisions applicable to group health plans, including the fiduciary responsibility and prohibited transaction provisions in Title I of ERISA. The AHP sponsor is responsible for operating and administering the AHP as well as complying with these requirements.

The Department believes that the control requirement will help prevent the formation of entities that claim to be AHPs but operate as traditional health insurers. In response to a request from commenters for examples of how to satisfy the control requirement, the Department notes that it will not require members to manage the “day-to-day affairs” of the association and will, instead, look to the facts and circumstances to determine if the association is sufficiently controlled by its members. The preamble identifies three conditions that associations can meet to satisfy the requirement of sufficient control: 1) members regularly nominate and elect officials for a governing body of the association and plan; 2) members have authority to remove these officials with or without cause; and 3) members enrolled in the AHP can approve or veto decisions regarding plan formation, design, changes, and termination.

Eligible Participants

The final rule includes a slight change to limit enrollment in a group health AHP to the association members’ current employees, former employees of a current member (who was entitled to coverage during their employment), and their beneficiaries. The final rules adopts the definition of “beneficiary” under ERISA, rather than the terms “spouses,” “dependent children,” and “family member” which had been used in the proposed rule.

The Department declined to offer a safe harbor to insurers and third-party administrators (TPAs) who enroll an ineligible person in an AHP if they rely on representations by the association regarding eligibility. Although it notes an expectation of data sharing, the Department did not grant insurers or TPAs access to documentation to verify employee eligibility. Rather, these “issues of legal responsibility” will depend on facts and circumstances on the ground.

Some commenters urged the Department to adopt set open enrollment periods during which AHP coverage would be available to eligible participants. The final rule does not establish an open enrollment period requirement but it does allow AHPs to adopt an open enrollment period if they wish. (AHPs are, however, required to offer special enrollment periods under certain circumstances and cannot impose a waiting period longer than 90 days, among other federal requirements.)

With the exception of meeting COBRA continuation coverage requirements, individuals eligible for AHP coverage as working owners (and their beneficiaries) cannot continue to be eligible for coverage for any plan year after it is determined that they no longer qualify as working owners. AHPs must provide COBRA continuation coverage and other post-employment coverage to those eligible for coverage due to an employment relationship with an association member if they have a connection to the association and the AHP. Employment unrelated to membership in the association is insufficient for an individual to be eligible for AHP coverage.

Insurers Cannot Sponsor AHPs

Under the final rule, health insurers cannot serve as the sponsor for an AHP. This also applies to an entity that is owned or controlled by a health insurer or a subsidiary or affiliate of a health insurer. Despite comments that urged otherwise, the Department maintained this provision from the proposed rule and expanded it to include subsidiaries or affiliates of insurers.

Insurers can be members of an association or sponsor an AHP for their own employees. However, insurer representatives cannot sit on an AHP governing body, unless doing so is temporary or in a non-voting capacity. The final rule extends this prohibition to network providers, health care organizations, and other health care business entities. The goal of this limitation is to prevent conflicts of interest between insurers, health care entities, and association members.

These limitations notwithstanding, insurers and other health care business entities can offer administrative services to an AHP. Such services might include provider or pharmacy network design, formulary design, wellness program administration, or audit services. These entities can also assist associations in setting up an AHP and sell health insurance products to the AHP in a fully-insured arrangement.

Working Owners

Historically, AHP enrollment has been limited to the association members’ employees, former employees, and their families or beneficiaries. This has meant that individuals—including sole proprietors with no common law employees—generally have not been able to enroll in group health AHPs. Caselaw and Departmental advisory opinions have confirmed this limitation, emphasizing that there has to be an employer relationship to obtain AHP coverage and that associations sponsoring an AHP must be bona fide employment-based associations (not simply general membership organizations offering health coverage).

Setting this long-standing precedent aside, the final rule expands the availability of AHP group coverage to self-employed individuals referred to as “working owners.” A working owner without common law employees can qualify as both an employer and an employee for purposes of enrollment in a group health AHP. This “dual treatment” allows a self-employed individual to be an employer (to participate in the AHP and offer group coverage) and an employee (of their own business to qualify for the health coverage offered by the AHP).

The final rule includes a definition of “working owner” that is quite broad—even broader than what had been included in the proposed rule. A working owner is a person who has any ownership right in a trade or business (whether that business is incorporated or not), earns wages or self-employment income, and works at least 20 hours/week (or 80 hours/month) or has wages or self-employment income that equals the cost of coverage in the AHP. (The hourly requirement was reduced from the proposed rule’s 30 hours/week or 120 hours/month in the name of industry flexibility. The Department also eliminated a provision that would have made a working owner ineligible to participate in the AHP if they were eligible to participate in a subsidized group health plan for another employer or a spouse’s employer.)

A working owner can demonstrate their hours through a work history or projection. Hours and wages worked in the same trade can be aggregated across jobs or contracts. This means that a driver for both Lyft and Uber, for instance, could aggregate their hours or wages on both platforms to show their eligibility for an AHP.

The proposed rule included a provision that would have allowed the AHP sponsor to “reasonably rely” on written representations from an individual (such as an attestation) regarding AHP eligibility. Commenters raised concerns that the use of an attestation, without more, would be insufficient to address fraud and abuse. Thus, commenters urged the Department to strengthen its verification or audit requirements regarding eligibility for working owners. Others asked that insurers be allowed to separately verify eligibility before providing coverage, or to require working owners to have been in business for a set period of time before enrolling in an AHP.

The Department agreed that an attestation or other written representation, alone, could be insufficient and thus eliminated that provision from the final rule. Instead, the rule clarifies that AHP fiduciaries have a duty to reasonably determine that eligibility criteria are satisfied and monitor continued eligibility. This, the Department believes, will provide groups and associations with flexibility for making working owner (and other) eligibility determinations.

Although the rule provides additional flexibility, the preamble essentially allows the same standard as under the proposed rule: a fiduciary could rely on written documentation or a sworn statement from a working owner, even without independent verification, unless there is information that would cause a reasonable fiduciary to question the accuracy or completeness of the documentation. Groups or associations can establish separate verification processes and requirements for working owners, employers, or employees as a condition of membership in the group or association. Similarly, health insurers that do business with AHPs can establish a verification and monitoring requirement as part of their policies or administrative service arrangements with an AHP.

The Department makes clear that AHPs are not required to cover working owners in their plans. Groups or associations have the flexibility to set their own membership requirements, including whether to cover working owners. Groups or associations that do cover working owners can adopt criteria for working owner participants that are more stringent than the minimum criteria in the final rule, so long as those criteria do not run afoul of the rule’s nondiscrimination provisions.

The rule does nothing to disturb the ability of self-employed individuals to deduct the cost of health insurance under federal tax law (or any associated reporting requirements) even though the dual treatment approach will consider working owners to be both employers and employees.

Nondiscrimination Based On Health Factors

The final rule includes nondiscrimination protections that groups and associations must comply with when offering AHP coverage. These build upon existing health nondiscrimination provisions applicable to group health plans under HIPAA, as amended by the ACA, but they are applied slightly differently. The final rule largely adopts the same provisions as the proposed rule with one clarification and the addition of four new examples.

Groups or associations cannot condition membership in the group or association based on any health factor. Further, AHPs cannot discriminate in eligibility (including enrollment, effective coverage dates, waiting periods, late or special enrollment, and eligibility for benefit packages), benefits, or premiums against an individual within a group of similarly situated individuals based on a health factor. A health factor is defined as health status, medical condition (both physical and mental illnesses), claims experience, receipt of health care, medical history, genetic information, evidence of insurability, or disability of an employee, former employee, or family member or beneficiary.

The HIPAA health nondiscrimination rules prohibit health discrimination within groups of similarly situated individuals but do not prohibit discrimination across different groups of similarly situated individuals. In determining what constitutes such a group under HIPAA and the ACA, plans may treat participants as distinct groups based on bona fide employment-based classifications (such as full-time versus part-time, different geographic location, the date of hire, and different occupations, among others). Plans can also treat participants and beneficiaries as distinct groups and make distinctions based on the relationship between the participant and beneficiary (such as marital or student status). Plans cannot, however, make these distinctions if doing so is directed at an individual or group based on health factors.

In applying these rules to AHPs, the final rule prohibits groups or associations from treating the employees of different employer members as distinct groups of similarly situated individuals based on a health factor. This limits the ability of associations to engage in employer-by-employer risk rating (by, for instance doing health status underwriting for one employer in the association but not another). If an association could treat different employer members as different groups, the nondiscrimination protections would be of little use, allowing AHPs to charge higher premiums to specific employers based on health status.

Although the nondiscrimination provisions prohibit discrimination based on a health factor, these rules do not prohibit underwriting based on other factors, such as age, industry, gender, or geography. Many commenters urged the Department to address these non-health factors (which can be closely related to health status), because “rating on these criteria would actually be a pretext for discrimination based on health factors.” Commenters raised concerns that an uneven playing field between AHPs and the traditional ACA markets—where AHPs could adopt more actuarially fair premiums based on these types of factors—would result in adverse selection against the ACA markets.

Other commenters urged the Department to do away with the nondiscrimination requirements and allow AHPs to experience-rate each employer member based on health status. The Department rejected this approach because allowing experience-rating would be more consistent with activities by a commercial insurance provider, not a sponsor of an ERISA-covered plan. Without the nondiscrimination protections, rating practices for AHPs created under the new rule “could too closely resemble medically-underwritten individual or small employer market commercial-type insurance coverage.”

In the final rule, the Department maintained the nondiscrimination provisions based on health factors but declined to adopt additional rating requirements in the final rule. Thus, AHPs cannot make distinctions among employer members based on health factors but can do so based on non-health factors, including industry, geography, age, and gender. To illustrate this, the final rule includes three new examples where an AHP could charge different premiums to different member employers based on bona fide business classification principles (such as full-time versus part-time status).

AHPs could charge different premiums based on these factors while still complying with the nondiscrimination provisions, assuming that the distinctions between members are not targeted at any health factor. For instance, an agricultural AHP can offer a different benefit package or charge different premiums based on subsector: this means an AHP can offer different benefits or premiums to dairy farmers versus corn growers. A metro AHP could similarly offer different premiums to retailers versus restaurateurs—or a retail association could charge different employee premiums based on occupation (such as cashier, stocker, and sales associate).

Finally, AHPs must comply with state nondiscrimination requirements and other rules, such as additional rating requirements. The Department repeatedly suggests that states can impose additional rating rules on insured AHPs (by regulating the underlying insurance policies obtained by AHPs) and self-insured AHPs.

Allowing Wellness Programs

Although the Department goes to great lengths to discuss the importance of the nondiscrimination provisions, the final rule includes a major change for consumers. In one of its new examples, the Department makes clear that HIPAA’s wellness program provisions apply to AHP coverage. This allows AHPs to vary benefits and employee contributions based on whether an individual satisfies a wellness program’s standards. Thus, AHPs can use rewards or penalties of up to 30 percent of the total cost of plan coverage (or up to 50 percent if the wellness program is designed to prevent or reduce tobacco use). These penalties would apply to premiums on top of existing non-health factor underwriting.

Notice Requirements

The Department had solicited comment on whether it should adopt new or additional notice requirements to ensure that members of associations as well as participants and beneficiaries are adequately informed of their rights or responsibilities with respect to AHP coverage. The final rule notes existing notice requirements that apply to AHPs under ERISA. These include filing of the Form M-1 by MEWAs and provision of the Summary of Benefits and Coverage and a summary plan description, among other disclosure requirements under ERISA and the ACA.

However, the rule does not adopt additional notice requirements, noting only that the Department intends to review existing reporting requirements to enhance state and federal oversight capability. New reporting requirements would, in particular, focus on capturing data to minimize the risk of unpaid claims. The Department will consider imposing AHP-specific audit requirements to help identify and minimize potential risks for AHP’s failing to pay health claims when due.

Declining To Adopt A Minimum Benefit Standard

Because AHPs will not be subject to major ACA provisions such as coverage of the essential health benefits package, commenters raised concerns that AHPs would offer skimpier coverage and lead to adverse selection against the ACA markets. As discussed in the analyses above, skimpier AHP products—or AHP products with benefit designs that otherwise discourage the enrollment of individuals with preexisting conditions or other health needs—would have lower premiums that attract healthier individuals. Those in worse health, or those who could not afford an AHP product based on non-health factor-related underwriting, would seek out more comprehensive ACA coverage, resulting in higher premiums and less stable ACA risk pools.

To address some of these concerns, commenters had urged the Department to apply a minimum benefit standard to AHPs. The Department could, for instance, require all AHPs to cover the essential health benefits, meet some other minimum benefit standard, or comply with the ACA’s minimum value standard as already defined for purposes of the employer mandate.

The Department rejected these proposals, citing the need to promote flexibility and maintain a level playing field between small employers in AHPs and large employers who are generally not subject to essential health benefits requirements. Despite this stated goal of maintaining a level playing field with large employers, the Department also rejected a requirement that AHPs offer minimum value coverage (a requirement that large employers have to comply with if they want to avoid penalties under the employer mandate). In rejecting a minimum value requirement, the Department notes the need for AHPs to have flexibility in benefit design and cost-sharing “without the burden of certain federal restrictions.”

The preamble does note that employers who are subject to the employer mandate and receive their coverage through an AHP may still face penalties if the AHP fails to provide minimum value coverage. If an AHP chooses to cover an essential health benefit, the AHP must 1) count an individual’s out-of-pocket spending for in-network provision of that benefit towards the plan’s out-of-pocket maximum; and 2) cover that benefit without any lifetime or annual dollar limit. Any essential health benefits in excess of the out-of-pocket maximum must be covered without cost-sharing.

Application Of Other Laws To AHPs

The rule states that AHPs must comply with other relevant federal and state laws, but additional guidance is needed. The preamble cites as an example Title VII, as amended by the Pregnancy Discrimination Act which generally provides that employers with 15 or more employees must reimburse pregnancy-related expenses for employees and spouses in the same way as other medical conditions; another cited example is Section 2713 of the ACA, which requires the coverage of certain preventive services without cost-sharing. In a footnote, the Department confirms that AHPs covering employers with 15 or more employees need to offer maternity coverage to comply with Title VII and encourages all AHPs—regardless of the size of employer members—to offer maternity benefits “for administrative simplicity and other reasons.”

Beyond these examples, however, the Department declined to clarify whether a variety of other federal laws apply to AHPs even if they are not grounded in ERISA. Commenters, for instance, raised questions about the employer mandate, network adequacy standards, and other federal nondiscrimination laws. In terms of state laws, the Department notes that state benefit mandates that apply to fully-insured large group plans would also apply to AHPs (and states can extend these mandates to self-insured AHPs).

For federal laws that only apply to certain group sizes—such as the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act (MHPAEA) and COBRA continuation coverage—the Department (alongside colleagues at other agencies with appropriate jurisdiction) will make interpretations as needed regarding how these laws apply to AHPs and employer members. In particular, the Department and other agencies will determine whether the AHP itself is considered a large employer for purposes of some federal laws, but not others. For MHPAEA, for instance, the Department has determined that applicability will be based on the size of the AHP (rather than each individual employer member within the AHP). The size of the AHP is the number of employees employed in the aggregate during the preceding calendar year by the group or association’s employer members. For the applicability of COBRA coverage, the Department will consult with the Department of Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) before giving additional guidance.

Some commenters, however, raised concerns regarding whether states could apply certain state rules, such as rating rules or essential health benefits requirements, to AHPs when the stated goal of the final rule is to not apply ACA standards to AHP coverage. Although other parts of the preamble indicate that rating rules and benefit mandates would be permissible, the Department declined to address these specific comments and (somewhat inexplicably) noted its view that ERISA’s preemption provision is “clear and well established.”

The Department also addressed concerns raised by commenters that AHP arrangements could implicate the Fair Labor Standards Act. Commenters specifically asked for clarity that a person or entity who contracts with independent contractors does not become an employer or joint employer of these contractors simply by participating in an AHP. The Department notes that the final rule is not intended to suggest that AHP participation under the rule gives rise to joint employer status under federal or state law. The final rule should not be read to indicate that an entity with independent contractors becomes the employer of those contractors simply by participating in an AHP alongside those independent contractors who participate as working owners.

State Regulation And Enforcement

Throughout the preamble, the Department affirms that the final rule does nothing to displace the traditional oversight and regulatory authority that states have over AHPs and MEWAs. The final rule does not modify or otherwise limit existing state authority under Section 514 of ERISA.

For fully insured AHPs, states can impose solvency standards and other rules that apply to health insurers that sell policies to AHPs. The Department adds that states clearly have the authority to impose licensing, registration, certification, financial reporting, examination, audit, and any other standards on fully insured AHPs that are necessary to ensure compliance with the state solvency standards. For self-insured AHPs, states can apply insurance laws to the AHP so long as the state law is “not inconsistent” with ERISA.

Some commenters, however, raised concerns regarding whether states could apply certain state rules, such as rating rules or essential health benefits requirements, to AHPs when the stated goal of the final rule is to not apply ACA standards to AHP coverage. Although other parts of the In particular, the Department and other agencies will determine whether the AHP itself is considered a large employer for purposes of some federal laws, but not others. For MHPAEA, for instance, the Department has determined that applicability will be based on the size of the AHP (rather than each individual employer member within the AHP). The size of the AHP is the number of employees employed in the aggregate during the preceding calendar year by the group or association’s employer members. For the applicability of COBRA coverage, the Department will consult with the Department of Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) before giving additional guidance. indicate that rating rules and benefit mandates would be permissible, the Department declined to address these specific comments and (somewhat inexplicably) noted its view that ERISA’s preemption provision is “clear and well established.”

In terms of enforcement, the Department recognizes “the vast expertise of the states in combating MEWA fraud and mismanagement” and intends to coordinate and work with states even more so than in the past. There are currently cooperative enforcement agreements between the Department and 34 states; these agreements will be reviewed to ensure they continue to serve their purpose under the final rule. The Department also hopes to adopt additional agreements with other states ahead of the applicability dates discussed below.

The Department also rejected an “increased federal role” in regulating AHPs (specifically self-insured AHPs). The Department declined to adopt minimum federal standards for self-insured AHPs that were recommended by commenters, such as solvency standards, criminal background checks, or a cap on broker commissions. Other commenters recommended that the Department exercise its authority under ERISA to exempt fully-insured MEWAs from state insurance law, arguing that associations and groups need uniform standards to enable the growth of multi-state AHPs.

The Department notes that its exemption authority is not unlimited. For instance, the Department does not have the authority to exempt fully insured AHPs from state insurance laws that apply to a fully insured MEWA plan, nor can the Department exempt self-insured AHPs from state insurance laws that can be applied to fully insured AHPs. But the Department also did not rule out granting such an exemption in the future. In the rule, it specifically notes that the exemption process “provides a potential future mechanism for preempting state insurance laws that go too far in regulating non-fully-insured AHPs in ways that interfere with the important policy goals advanced by this final rule.”

Applicability Dates

The Department largely ignored requests from state insurance regulators and others to delay implementation of the rule until 2020 to give states time to assess their existing laws and adopt new protections if needed. Quick action, the Department reasons, is needed to allow the proliferation of AHPs. This need for speed is among the reasons that the Department declined to hold a public hearing on the AHP proposed rule; it concluded that a public hearing was not necessary and would not “meaningfully add data and information” relevant to consideration of the rule.

Instead, the final rule itself will go into effect on August 20, 2018—60 days from publication in the Federal Register—with staggered applicability dates, depending on the type of entity. For fully insured AHPs, the rule will apply beginning on September 1, 2018. For self-insured AHPs already in existence as of August 20, 2018, the rule will go into effect beginning on January 1, 2019. These AHPs are currently in compliance with the Department’s previous guidance and rules on bona fide groups or associations but can choose to expand their group or association pursuant to the new rule. And for new self-insured AHPs that would be set up pursuant to the new rule, the rule will apply beginning on April 1, 2019. The Department intends to provide significant technical assistance to ensure efficient and effective implementation and plans to examine its forms to make appropriate changes.

The staggered effective date scheme begins with fully insured AHPs because, the Department reasons, these plans already exist. State insurance regulations, which apply to insurers and policies offered to group health plans, also apply to fully-insured AHPs. These AHPs have also historically been the least likely to experience fraud. The Department then phases in the rule’s requirements for existing self-insured AHPs, noting that changes to those existing plans should not present immediate or acute new challenges for state regulators. The final phase-in for new self-insured AHPs will be delayed because such plans have historically had the greatest risk of fraud and are less common than fully insured AHPs. For this reason, state regulators “may benefit from extra time to strengthen their enforcement programs” for self-insured AHPs.

As noted, this gives states only a matter of months before the first wave of the rule goes into effect, and occurs at a time when most state legislative sessions have already closed for 2018. Even the last wave of applicability, on April 1, 2019, occurs before most state legislatures will have ended for 2019. This quick turnaround could make it challenging for state policymakers who want to increase their oversight over AHPs or apply additional state-level consumer protections.

Commenters also noted that the applicability dates do not correspond with rate filing deadlines for the individual and small group markets. Because insurers develop their premiums between March and May of 2018, the impact of the AHP rule may not be factored into all 2019 premiums. Federal regulators also plan to modify reporting requirements for AHPs and other MEWAs, which will require rulemaking and a notice and comment process under the Paperwork Reduction Act.

Severability

The final rule includes a new severability provision that had not been previously proposed. This part of the regulation provides that the rest of the rule would remain operative even if parts of the rule were found to be invalid or unenforceable. The preamble uses an example regarding working owners: if a federal court rules that the working owners provision is void, this provision should be severed from the rest of the regulation and thus would not impact, say, the ability of an association to meet the final rule’s updated commonality of interest test.

Implications

AHPs are neither new nor innovative—and are not a panacea for our health care woes. Many have left a legacy of insolvency and fraud, with millions in unpaid claims for policyholders and providers. These issues are among the reasons why stakeholders such as the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, the National Governors Association, the National Conference of Insurance Legislators, and over 1,000 state government, business, labor, consumer, and provider groups have historically expressed concerns about AHPs and opposed federal legislation that would exempt AHPs from state law and oversight.

The final rule acknowledges this long history and the challenges that the Department has faced in overseeing AHPs. Since 1985, the Department has pursued a total of 968 civil enforcement cases involving MEWAs and 317 criminal MEWA-related cases. These enforcement actions resulted in more than $235 million in civil monetary restitution and $173 million in criminal restitution. Even so, the Department itself recognizes that its enforcement efforts “often were too late to prevent or fully recover major financial losses.”

Yet, by broadening the availability of AHPs and relaxing commonality of interest standards, the final rule is expected to open the door to additional fraudulent AHP behavior, insolvency, and unpaid claims. The rule acknowledges that the “the increased flexibility” it offers “will introduce increased opportunities for mismanagement or abuse, in turn increasing oversight demands on the Department and state regulators.”

Given the risk of these new plans to consumers, the Department will need to dramatically increase its enforcement activities and oversight of expanded AHPs. Doing so will likely take significant resources: when AHP legislation was considered by Congress in 2005, the Congressional Budget Office estimated that the Department needed to hire 150 additional employees and spend an additional $136 million over 10 years to properly oversee AHPs. Even more recently, the Department—in a report on its efforts to enforce mental health parity under MHPAEA—noted that it has about 400 investigators and 100 benefits advisors to oversee over 5 million health, pension, and other employee benefit plans; this amounts to less than one investigator for every 12,500 plans and is limiting the Department’s ability to enforce mental health parity which is considered a top agency priority. The Department and Congress should take note of these increased funding needs to help promote oversight of AHPs and ensure that consumers and providers are not defrauded.

State Enforcement And Oversight

The Department seems to rely heavily on oversight and enforcement by states, noting that the impact of the rule is “highly dependent on state regulatory practices” and that “the final rule importantly depends on state insurance regulators for oversight and enforcement.” States certainly have been more effective at oversight of AHPs than the federal government, but gaps remain and state authority varies significantly. Further, the Department’s rapidly approaching effective and applicability dates provide little time for states to impose new standards on AHPs or update their authority as needed to regulate these new products. Two Democratic attorneys general, from New York and Massachusetts, have already indicated their intention to sue the Trump administration regarding the rule.

The Department intended its delay of the applicability date to “provide sufficient time for the Department and the states to implement a robust supervisory infrastructure and program” and provide regulatory certainty. However, a delay of less than one year for new self-insured AHPs—especially when most insurers have already submitted rates for 2019—will likely have the opposite effect regarding certainty and market stability.

The Department confirmed throughout the rule that it does not disturb the existing state and federal regulatory framework for AHPs. As a result, AHPs will continue to be generally subject to state insurance regulation. The rule also notes that state benefit mandates in the large group market will apply to fully insured and self-insured AHPs. The Department expects state approaches to vary widely and to “range from steps that maximize AHPs’ flexibility and impacts to those that minimize them.”

The rule brings some clarity to whether a state can regulate AHPs in a way that exceeds the standards in the rule—by, for instance, applying small group rating rules to such plans. However, there could still be questions regarding whether such state-level protections go so far as to frustrate the purpose or intent of the rule and are thus preempted under ERISA. This concern is exacerbated by the Department noting again its authority under ERISA Section 514(b)(6)(B) to exempt self-insured MEWAs from most state regulation, either by granting individual exemptions or class exemptions. As noted above, the Department suggests that it might use this authority to address state laws that “go too far” in regulating certain AHPs in ways that interfere with the rule’s policy goals.

Impact On Consumers And ACA Markets

As with the proposed rule, the Department does not fully quantify the impact of the rule. The rule does, however, acknowledge that AHPs will siphon healthy risk away from the traditional individual and small group markets through lower premiums and skimpier benefits. The Department also cites numerous studies (many of which are discussed above) which show that the final rule will result in risk segmentation and adverse selection against the ACA markets.

This risk segmentation results from the AHPs’ ability to design products in a way that makes them unattractive to those with health needs. AHPs may opt not to, for instance, cover prescription drugs or mental health coverage as a way of keeping premiums low and discouraging enrollment of sicker employers or self-employed individuals. In the rule itself, the Department even mentions that AHPs could “keep their provider networks narrow” to help leverage their bargaining power to negotiate provider discounts.

Since the ACA’s rating rules do not apply, AHPs can develop more actuarially fair premiums based on factors that include age, gender, industry, and more. The final rule prohibits these premiums from varying based on health status, but the other factors can be used without running afoul of the rule’s nondiscrimination provisions. Because of this, a comment letter from BlueCross BlueShield suggested that AHPs could rate engineers 9 percent lower than insurers could and rate taxi drivers 15 percent higher; young men could be rated more than 40 percent lower by AHPs compared to insurers while young women could be rated more than 30 percent higher.

These rating practices are exacerbated by the rule’s new provision regarding wellness programs. The final rule makes it clear that AHPs can penalize individual enrollees—by as much as 50 percent of an enrollee’s total premium—based on participation in a wellness program.

Although wellness programs themselves are not supposed to be designed to penalize or screen out individuals in poor health, they can have this effect in practice. The Department recognizes the potential that “some AHPs’ wellness programs in practice may have a disparate negative impact on those in poorer health.” This means that even with the rule’s nondiscrimination provisions, individual employees could face a premium surcharge of 30 or 50 percent based largely on health status (or a proxy for health status).

Premium Increases

The Department acknowledges that the rule will result in increased premiums in the ACA markets but expects these to be modest, on average. The Department notes estimates from some studies that suggest that individuals that remain in the ACA-compliant markets could face premium increases of between $7.7 billion and $14.1 billion. Only in passing does the rule mention that these increased premiums may also increase premium tax credits paid by the federal government. The Department also cites comment letters—from the American Academy of Actuaries and Consumers Union, among others—to acknowledge that some small employers will face higher premiums and that choice and affordability for consumers in the ACA-compliant markets will generally be eroded.

In particular, the Department notes that higher-income people and small businesses that lack affordable AHP options will not be protected from premium increases (compared to those who are subsidy-eligible). Small businesses and working owners that remain in the ACA-compliant markets may go uninsured or be less able to invest in their business as a result of the rule.

Potential Impact

The Department expects that a substantial number of uninsured people will enroll in AHPs because AHP coverage will be more affordable than ACA-compliant coverage. In 2015, working owners, small business employees, and their dependents accounted for about 15 million of the 25 million people insured through the individual market. The Department estimates that all of these individuals could become eligible for AHP coverage under the final rule, but that some are more likely than others to enroll. The Department believes that young single men and healthier individuals are likely to be most attracted to AHP options, as are the 1 million working owners whose incomes are too high to qualify for subsidies.

Because of this uncertainty about how many of these individuals would enroll in AHP coverage, the Department does not provide its own estimate and expects only to “deliver health insurance to millions of people.” It also notes an analysis from the Congressional Budget Office that found that an estimated 4 million additional people will enroll in AHPs, including 400,000 people who would have been uninsured and 3.6 million people who would have had other coverage.

Finally, the Department acknowledges that the AHP rule will insure healthier people at the expense of sicker people. The rule notes that the AHPs are likely to result in expanding coverage to those from “low-risk demographics” while those with higher health costs from “high-risk demographics” are more likely to be uninsured. Rather than addressing this concern and the potential impact on the ACA risk pool, the rule says only that “states may pursue steps to more generously subsidize high risk individuals.”