Judge Hears Oral Arguments In Texas v. United States
On September 5, 2018, Judge Reed O’Connor of the federal district court in the Northern District of Texas held a three-hour hearing in Texas v. United States, a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the individual mandate and, with it, potentially, the entire Affordable Care Act (ACA). The hearing addressed the plaintiffs’ request for a preliminary injunction against some or all of the ACA, and whether to apply it to all or only some states.

Texas was filed by 20 Republican state attorneys general and governors as well as two individuals. Plaintiffs challenge the constitutionality of the individual mandate now that the penalty for failing to have health insurance will be $0 beginning in 2019. They argue that the individual mandate cannot be severed from the rest of the ACA; thus, if the mandate falls, so too should the rest of the law (including non-insurance-related provisions such as closing the Medicare drug donut hole, creation of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation, and restaurant menu labeling).

The Department of Justice (DOJ) has agreed with the plaintiffs that some, but not all, of the ACA should be struck down. This leaves defense of the ACA to Democratic state attorneys general from 16 states and DC who were allowed to intervene in the case. The intervenors have argued that the mandate remains constitutional and, even if it is not, it is entirely severable from the ACA. Previous posts include a more detailed explanation of the parties’ positions.

During the hearing, Judge O’Connor posed challenging questions to both the plaintiffs and defendants. Much of the hearing focused on arguments about congressional intent—in particular, which Congress the court should look to—and severability. Far less time was devoted to the threshold question of standing, and Judge O’Connor seemed to be unconvinced that the mandate, with a zeroed-out penalty, remained constitutional.

Although it is risky to try to predict the outcome of a case from oral argument, Judge O’Connor’s questions on severability, in particular, suggest he may be considering striking down some or all of the ACA. This is, however, only at the stage of a preliminary injunction, and all parties expect any ruling, regardless of the outcome, to be appealed immediately. Moreover, given the upcoming open enrollment period (and perhaps with an eye towards the mid-term elections), the DOJ asked that a decision beyond the constitutionality of the individual mandate be delayed until 2019.

Judge O’Connor heard arguments from the plaintiff states (Texas and Wisconsin), the individual plaintiffs, the DOJ, and the intervenor states (California on behalf of itself and Oregon, DC, and Massachusetts). Judge O’Connor asked questions of all parties, and each was given time at the end to present a rebuttal and closing words.

As noted above, the hearing was about whether Judge O’Connor should issue a preliminary injunction against some or all of the ACA and whether to apply it to all or some states. To obtain a preliminary injunction, the plaintiffs must show: 1) that they are likely to succeed on the merits of the case; 2) that they are likely to suffer irreparable harm in the absence of the injunction; 3) that the balance of equities favor their argument; and 4) that an injunction is in the public interest. The hearing touched on all four components of this standard as well as standing.

Standing

A plaintiff must have standing—a sufficient legal interest in an issue—to bring a lawsuit in federal district court in the first place. Thus, standing is a threshold question as to whether litigation can proceed. Despite the fact that standing is a threshold issue, the plaintiff states devoted little time to it during oral argument. They asserted that they are harmed by the individual mandate (zeroed out or not) through higher enrollment in state employee health plans, Medicaid, and CHIP. They further argued that the mandate does not have to apply directly to them to produce an injury, and they took issue with the fact that the mandate more generally “conflicts with state sovereignty” regarding health care.

In contrast, the intervenor states focused a great deal of their argument on whether the plaintiffs have standing to sue and, relatedly, whether they can show clear irreparable harm without an injunction. They argued that, first, the plaintiff states’ complaints are generalized grievances over the ACA (which the Fifth Circuit has already held are insufficient to confer standing to sue). Second, the plaintiff states have produced insufficient data to support their alleged injury through higher Medicaid and CHIP enrollment. Third, the plaintiffs lack standing because their alleged injuries would not be addressed by an injunction.

Judge O’Connor asked why the intervenor states took the position that the mandate, without the penalty, did not harm the individual plaintiffs. They responded that there can be no harm from a $0 penalty and that the Supreme Court’s decision in National Federation of Independent Businesses v. Sebelius (NFIB) made it clear that consumers had a choice to buy insurance or pay the penalty. Just as they could under the previous mandate, the individual plaintiffs can choose to purchase coverage or not; beginning in 2019, they will pay zero dollars in penalties if they choose to be uninsured. The intervenor states also noted Supreme Court precedent that individuals cannot “manufacture standing merely by inflicting harm on themselves” through making this choice to purchase coverage.

Finally, the intervenor states argued that the plaintiffs must have standing to sue for every provision they challenge (meaning that their challenge over the mandate should not extend to other ACA provisions). In response to a question from Judge O’Connor, the DOJ partially agreed with this, noting that it would be inappropriate for the court to sever or to invalidate provisions—other than guaranteed issue and community rating—if the plaintiffs do not have standing to challenge those provisions. (Although the parties refer to guaranteed issue and community rating throughout the brief, they are believed to be referring collectively to additional provisions related to the coverage of preexisting conditions.)

Constitutionality Of The Mandate

The parties continued to argue over the constitutionality of the mandate beginning in 2019. The plaintiffs argued that the outcome of the case is essentially dictated by the Supreme Court's decision in NFIB: that the mandate is unconstitutional unless construed as a tax. If it cannot be construed as a tax, it should be struck down, and it cannot be construed as a tax if it does not raise revenue.

Judge O’Connor asked the plaintiffs what would happen if a new Congress in 2019 changes the individual mandate penalty again (say, back to $695 or any other amount). In that case, the plaintiffs admitted that the savings interpretation in NFIB would “kick back in,” meaning the mandate would be constitutional again and the court would need to revise its injunction or judgment. The plaintiffs largely dismissed this though, noting that any speculation about a new tax adopted by a future Congress would be “a different law.” This seems to be a significant admission: if a future tax increase would create a “different” law, then by the same reasoning the 2017 tax bill also created a “different” law, one that should be judged by the intent of the Congress that enacted it in 2017, not by the intent of the Congress that created the original ACA.

The intervenor states continued to argue that the mandate is constitutional under Congress’ authority to tax or, alternatively, under the Commerce Clause. NFIB did state that revenue is an essential feature of any tax, but they argued that the Supreme Court did not hold that the mandate had to raise revenue each year it was in existence; in fact, the Supreme Court upheld the mandate in 2012, two years before it went into effect and before it had generated any revenue. The intervenor states argued that the mandate itself will continue to result in revenue for the federal government beyond 2019 and that its other “tax-like features” remain present. The DOJ disagreed with this, asserting that additional revenue that may trickle in during and potentially after 2019 does not sufficiently invoke Congress’ taking power.

On the Commerce Clause, the intervenor states argued that the zeroed-out penalty removes the compulsion on individuals to purchase health insurance. Without a penalty to compel individuals to buy coverage, the mandate can now be sustained under the Commerce Clause. If the mandate is found to be unconstitutional, the intervenor states argue that the appropriate remedy is for the court to strike the amendment to the ACA and reinstate the prior tax amount of $695.

In questions to multiple parties, Judge O’Connor asked how to apply a “tax test” laid out in NFIB. He identified the components of this test as 1) the amount paid into the Department of Treasury; 2) whether the provision produces some revenue for the government; and 3) whether the penalty is calculated based on traditional tax formulas. He asked the parties to identify the various components of a tax outlined in NFIB and whether there were other factors he should consider in determining whether the zeroed-out mandate is, indeed, still a tax. For instance, Judge O’Connor asked the intervenor states if there would still be a need to calculate the penalty (based on, say, the number of filers in a household, income, etc.) after the mandate had been eliminated. The intervenor states responded that there would be no need to make these calculations because the $0 mandate would be the same for everyone.

Congressional Intent

The parties seem to agree that the case turns on legislative intent, but disagree on whose legislative intent—the Congress that adopted the ACA in 2010 or the Congress that zeroed out the individual mandate penalty in 2017.

The plaintiffs and the DOJ believe that the case turns on the intent of Congress when it passed the ACA in 2010 and the legislative findings that remain unchanged since then. These findings state that the mandate “is essential to creating effective health insurance markets in which improved health insurance products that are guaranteed issue and do not exclude coverage of pre-existing conditions can be sold.” Because these findings remain in federal statute, the plaintiffs argued that the intent of the Congress in 2017 is irrelevant and that the statements from senior Republican Senators—such as Sens. Alexander, Collins, Hatch, and Scott—are “not to be exalted above the words of Congress.” The plaintiffs and the DOJ also relied on King v. Burwell, in which the Supreme Court cited these same legislative findings in upholding the availability of premium tax credits and concluded that guaranteed issue and community rating would not work without the individual mandate.

The intervenor states argued that congressional intent should be based on the Congress that passed the amendment in 2017 and that this intent is clear based on its actions: In December 2017, Congress amended the mandate and deliberately kept the rest of the ACA in place. They point to the fact that Congress did not want to make more dramatic changes to the ACA—such as eliminating federal subsidies or protections for those with preexisting conditions—because it had repeatedly tried and failed to do just that for the previous year. CBO reports confirmed that repeal of the penalty would not result in unstable marketplaces, and senior Senators made comments to suggest that repealing the mandate was just that: a repeal of the penalty and nothing more.

The intervenor states referred to the non-operative legislative findings from 2010 as being “for a different statute passed by a different Congress.” Even if the court looks to congressional intent in 2010, the intervenor states argued that Congress would not have wanted the entire ACA to be struck down solely because the mandate penalty was zeroed out. They point to the fact that the ACA’s provisions are independent of one another. Many went into effect in 2010, well before the mandate, guaranteed issue, or community rating went into effect in 2014. There are also no statutory cross-references between the mandate, guaranteed issue, or community rating, or any of the ACA’s other provisions.

In response to a question from Judge O’Connor, the intervenor states acknowledged that the Obama administration had erred in conceding that guaranteed issue and community rating should be struck down alongside the individual mandate in NFIB. They thought the Obama administration “put undue emphasis on these legislative findings” and treated this language as a severability clause rather than the rationale for how the mandate affects interstate commerce. Judge O’Connor then asked how this can be squared with the Supreme Court’s decision in King where the Court relied on the same legislative finding outside of the context of the Commerce Clause analysis. He also noted that, based on his review, every Supreme Court justice who considered the question has concluded that Congress’ intent is clear that the mandate cannot be separated from guaranteed issue and community rating.

In response, the intervenor states stated that Chief Justice Roberts drew on those findings in King because he had to in order to avoid striking down an isolated provision that could be fatal to the law but was likely the result of a drafting error. Here, the intervenor states said the congressional findings should not be used at all in the severability analysis because they were drafted for purposes of Congress’s authority under the Commerce Clause.

If the findings must be looked to, they are focused on “creating effective health insurance markets.” In 2017, these markets had already been created and would continue to be stable even without the individual mandate penalty, which Congress knew from a CBO report. As the attorney put it, “whatever Congress may have believed in 2010 in order to create these markets and marketplaces, Congress in 2017 made a categorically different judgment.” To support this, the intervenor states cited additional amicus briefs filed by health care stakeholders, including a brief filed by America’s Health Insurance Plans which rebuts the plaintiffs’ argument that repeal of the penalty will result in a death spiral if guaranteed issue and community rating are not also struck down.

Judge O’Connor seemed to challenge the intervenor states’ characterization of Congress’ intent in 2017. He noted that it was not the clear intent of Congress to maintain the other provisions of the ACA just because it zeroed out the individual mandate penalty. He specifically asked the intervenor states to offer legal authority that it would be appropriate for him to look to what Congress did not do. He then questioned whether he should rely on individual statements from members of Congress regarding the mandate. The intervenor states emphasized that they were aware of no member of Congress who believed they were voting to take away subsidies or preexisting condition protections based on zeroing out the penalty. They also raised concerns about what this could mean for political accountability if a minor change to a large piece of legislation could be used to strike down the entire law.

Judge O’Connor pressed the intervenor states on why Congress should not be presumed to act with the knowledge of the Supreme Court’s decision in NFIB that the mandate, without a tax-like penalty, could be unconstitutional. The intervenor states responded that this, too, would be troubling from the perspective of a functioning democracy: that Congress would be passing federal laws that it knows to be unconstitutional. Further, they argued that regardless, the severability analysis should be limited to the individual mandate alone.

Judge O’Connor asked why Congress did not simply amend the ACA’s legislative findings regarding the “essential” nature of the mandate. The intervenor states responded that 1) Congress does not revoke legislative findings because those provisions are non-operative; and 2) the 2017 legislation was adopted through the budget reconciliation process, which does not allow Congress to make non-budgetary amendments. Congress did not otherwise have enough votes to change the legislative findings or any of the other core ACA provisions.

Judge O’Connor inquired whether ignoring the legislative findings would violate the legal canon that implied repeals of laws are disfavored. The plaintiffs later emphasized this point: under budget reconciliation, Congress could not have explicitly repealed the legislative findings, and so the only way for the court to ignore those findings is to conclude that they were implicitly repealed. The intervenor states responded that they are not arguing for implicit repeal and attacked the plaintiffs for trying to “have it both ways”: if there were not enough votes to change the legislative findings, there also were not enough votes to amend the provisions on guaranteed issue or community rating. In other words, the plaintiffs themselves have asked the court to recognize the implicit repeal of guaranteed issue and community rating, thus seeming to violate the same canon of statutory interpretation that they rely on to counter the intervenor states.

Severability

If the individual mandate is found to be unconstitutional, the plaintiffs argue that the entire ACA should be invalidated in all 50 states and DC, based on the position that four Supreme Court justices—Justices Scalia, Kennedy, Thomas, and Alito—took in dissenting opinions in NFIB: that the mandate was inseverable from the rest of the ACA and the entire law should fall.

In the absence of a ruling against the entire ACA, the plaintiffs had initially requested an injunction of at least the mandate and the ACA provisions on guaranteed issue and community rating. However, during oral argument, they appeared to go further, taking aim at all of Title I of the ACA. (Title I includes the insurance market reforms, the marketplaces, the subsidies, the employer mandate, the small business tax credit, and nondiscrimination protections, among others.) They asked the court to “strongly consider” also striking “the other insurance regulations which are of a very similar character to guaranteed issue and community rating” that result in “improved insurance products” under the ACA. They ask that this injunction apply in only the 20 plaintiff states.

The plaintiffs did not explicitly define what provisions they would include as related to “improved insurance products.” But, at a minimum, this appears to mean the benefit-related provisions of the ACA such as coverage of the essential health benefits package, coverage of preventive services without cost-sharing, coverage of dependents up to age 26, the ban on annual and lifetime dollar limits, and the medical loss ratio standards, among others.

According to the plaintiffs, these insurance regulations are so intertwined with the marketplace subsidies that Congress would have not have intended to provide subsidies for insurance products that do not meet its standards. If the subsidies are invalidated, the ACA’s taxes should also be invalidated because the taxes are only there to pay for the subsidies; if there are no subsidies, then there is no need for taxes. This argument goes on in a similar way for the marketplaces, the employer mandate, funding cuts from disproportionate share hospitals, and Medicaid expansion.

The plaintiff states acknowledge that their argument is weaker for the ACA’s “grab bag of other provisions” that are not tied to the core provisions acknowledged above. Nonetheless, they urge the court to strike down the ACA in its entirety. In response to a question from Judge O’Connor, the DOJ noted that it has limited its position to striking down the mandate, guaranteed issue, and community rating (instead of the entire ACA) because of the Obama administration’s previous position, King, and the “textual clues” between those provisions that do not exist with respect to all other parts of the ACA.

The intervenor states urged the court to reject the “extreme severability position” advocated by the plaintiffs that would result in striking down hundreds of lawful provisions simply because one provision is unconstitutional, in contrast to the Supreme Court’s presumption of severability. Here, the attorneys for the intervenor states cited an amicus brief by ideologically diverse legal scholars—some of whom are considered key architects of previous challenges to the ACA—who all agree that the arguments put forward by the plaintiffs and DOJ on severability are inconsistent with settled law.

Intervenors also noted that the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit—the only appellate court to reach this question—concluded that the individual mandate was unconstitutional but severable from the rest of the ACA. Because the loss of the individual mandate did not prevent the ACA’s remaining provisions from being fully operative, the Eleventh Circuit found that it was irrelevant that the ACA did not include a severability clause. (In reaching this conclusion, the Eleventh Circuit noted “the Supreme Court’s strong presumption of severability” and the “overwhelming majority of cases” where the Supreme Court has opted to sever a constitutionally defective provision from the remainder of the statute. That court ultimately used this “well-established” doctrine to find the mandate to be severable “as a matter of judicial restraint.”)

Indeed, the Supreme Court did not use this approach in NFIB when it concluded that the ACA’s Medicaid expansion was optional. The Supreme Court could have struck down Medicaid expansion altogether or the entire ACA, but it chose instead to sever the Medicaid expansion from the ACA and make it optional for states. Judge O’Connor posed a question on this issue to the plaintiffs: the dissent in NFIB advocated that Medicaid expansion was inseverable from the mandate but the majority held that it was not. Given this, is Judge O’Connor to assume that the section on severability in the joint dissent in NFIB is an inaccurate representation of the law? Here, the plaintiffs—who rely heavily on the dissent in NFIB—acknowledge that the dissent is not binding and is only persuasive authority.

Many of Judge O’Connor’s questions focused on severability. He quizzed the intervenor states on a number of cases regarding severability, including Booker, Murphy, Free Enterprise, and Alaska Airlines. Based on his questions, his reading of the caselaw seems to be that courts should look to the Congress that adopted the underlying statute (in this case, the Congress that enacted the ACA in 2010) rather than the later Congress that enacted the amendment. He posed the same question to the DOJ, which reiterated the belief that the court should look to the Congress that enacted the original law and rely on the legislative findings that still exist in statute.

He also asked whether the severability framework outlined in the joint dissent in NFIB is the proper framework to use. The intervenor states do not believe this is the appropriate framework because it departed from settled law on the presumption of severability and incorrectly stated a severability rule from Alaska Airlines. They believe the standard is that it must be evident and clear-cut that the provisions being struck down were so important to Congress that they would not have passed those other provisions.

Balancing The Equities And the Public Interest

To obtain a preliminary injunction, the plaintiffs must show that the balance of equities are in their favor and that an injunction is in the public interest. The burden is on the plaintiffs to meet these standards. Here, the plaintiff states continued to argue that they are harmed by the ACA. They dismiss the arguments made by the intervenor states as simply claiming that “the ACA is good policy” and summarily asserted—with respect to the potential loss of federal funding in the intervenor states—that the harm to those states is “at best minimal and likely non-existent.”

The intervenor states responded that there is “an enormous imbalance in the harm” and that the plaintiffs have failed to meet their burden. On the one hand, individual plaintiffs will no longer face a penalty for being uninsured and states will not be affected because they were not subject to the mandate in the first place. On the other hand, the intervenor states stand to lose nearly $610 billion in federal funds for marketplace subsidies and Medicaid expansion and the loss of protections for millions of residents with preexisting conditions. The intervenor states argued that the plaintiffs have yet to address the practical effects and disruption that would result from an injunction.

Both the plaintiffs and intervenor states acknowledged that the ACA touched almost every aspect of the American health care system. The intervenor states used this point of agreement to note that the ACA’s reach is so broad that “an injunction would be devastating to Americans, to the healthcare system, to all levels of government, and to the economy.”

What Comes Next

Judge O’Connor is expected to rule on the plaintiffs’ request for a preliminary injunction and said he hoped to do so “just as quickly as I can.” He could uphold the ACA entirely, strike down only the individual mandate, strike down the individual mandate and other provisions that he deems to be inseverable from the mandate, or strike down the entire ACA. He could also limit an injunction to only those states that brought the lawsuit, or impose it nationwide.

All parties expect any ruling to be immediately appealable. The intervenor states asked the court to stay an injunction pending an appeal or, at a minimum, extend a stay for a limited period of time to allow the states to seek a separate stay by the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals.

Timing, And Preliminary Injunction Or Ruling On The Merits

The DOJ and intervenor states both ask Judge O’Connor to deny the request for a preliminary injunction. Both want to proceed to the merits of the case and submitted additional briefing for the court to consider.

The DOJ raised significant concerns about timing of a ruling, noting that a preliminary injunction this fall—any time before the end of the open enrollment period—would introduce “chaos in the insurance markets.” If the court insists on moving forward more quickly, the DOJ asked that a declaratory ruling be limited to the constitutionality of the individual mandate beginning in 2019 and that any question of the remedy or scope of severability be deferred into 2019. This would be after the close of the next open enrollment period (which ends on December 15th in most states but extends through January in many states with their own marketplaces) and the mid-term elections. DOJ noted the need for additional briefing on the timing and effect of an injunction on state insurance markets, as well as the need to potentially issue new regulations and address the multi-year process by which insurers must get their products approved for sale.

In lieu of a preliminary injunction, the DOJ asked for an additional 30 days to submit more evidence or arguments on the scope of any remedy. The intervenor states noted that Judge O’Connor may not be able to consider the case on its merits yet because the DOJ has not formally responded to the original complaint in the case.

The parties also differ on what relief they think the court should give. The DOJ urged the court to issue a declaratory judgment, rather than an injunction. The agency prefers a declaratory judgment because it believes that is all that is needed in this case, it operates in a manner similar to an injunction, and it provides a definitive interpretation of the statute that would advise the public about their legal obligations.

20 States Or All States

The plaintiffs continue to ask for a nationwide injunction of the entire ACA or, alternatively, a more limited injunction that would apply only to their 20 states. The DOJ strongly opposes nationwide injunctions and would advocate that any injunction be applied only to the plaintiff states and the two individual plaintiffs. The plaintiffs suggested that an injunction on only the mandate, guaranteed issue, and community rating in their 20 states would not throw their insurance markets into chaos at all.

The intervenor states argued that their states would still be harmed if an injunction were limited only to the plaintiff states. The intervenor states would expect individuals with medical conditions to move to their states, enroll in public coverage programs, and drive up the cost of uncompensated care. They also raised a number of practical concerns that have not been addressed by the plaintiffs or DOJ regarding how other parts of the ACA—such as calculating the subsidies and administering the risk adjustment program—would be administered if guaranteed issue and community rating are no longer in place.