How Medicaid Health Care Expansion Affects You
Some states have expanded their Medicaid programs to cover all people with household incomes below a certain level. Others haven’t.

Whether you qualify for Medicaid coverage depends partly on whether your state has expanded its program.

In all states: You can qualify for Medicaid based on income, household size, disability, family status, and other factors. Eligibility rules differ between states.

In states that have expanded Medicaid coverage: You can qualify based on your income alone. If your household income is below 133% of the federal poverty level, you qualify. (Because of the way this is calculated, it turns out to be 138% of the federal poverty level. A few states use a different income limit.)

See if you qualify for Medicaid in your state based on income alone Find out if your state is expanding Medicaid and if you qualify based only on your household income. We’ll also tell you if you qualify for savings on a health insurance plan instead. FIND OUT NOW

If your income is low and your state hasn’t expanded Medicaid

If your state hasn’t expanded Medicaid, your income is below the federal poverty level, and you don't qualify for Medicaid under your state's current rules, you won’t qualify for either health insurance savings program: Medicaid coverage or savings on a private health plan bought through the Marketplace.

Find out why When the health care law was passed, it required states to provide Medicaid coverage for all adults 18 to 65 with incomes up to 133% (effectively 138%) of the federal poverty level, regardless of their age, family status, or health.

The law also provides premium tax credits for people with incomes between 100% and 400% of the federal poverty level to buy private insurance plans in the Health Insurance Marketplace.

The U.S. Supreme Court later ruled that the Medicaid expansion is voluntary with states. As a result, some states haven’t expanded their Medicaid programs.

Adults in those states with incomes below 100% of the federal poverty level, and who don’t qualify for Medicaid based on disability, age, or other factors, fall into a gap. Their incomes are too high to qualify for Medicaid in their states. Their incomes are below the range the law set for savings on a Marketplace insurance plan.

States are continuing to make coverage decisions. They could expand Medicaid in the future.

Apply for Medicaid coverage, even if your state hasn’t expanded

Even if your state hasn't expanded Medicaid and it looks like your income is below the level to qualify for financial help with a Marketplace plan, you should fill out a Marketplace application.

Each state has coverage options that could work for you – particularly if you have children, are pregnant, or have a disability. And when you provide more detailed income information you may fall into the range to save.

How to apply for Medicaid.

If you don’t qualify for either Medicaid or Marketplace savings