North Carolina Medicaid: eligibility, enrollment and benefits
How to apply Online at HealthCare.gov or at ePass. You can enroll by phone at 1-800-318-2596. You can also apply in person at your local County Department of Social Services office or complete a paper application.



Who is eligible The aged, blind, and disabled. Also, parents with dependent children are eligible for Medicaid with a household income up to 45 percent of poverty level, and children are eligible for Medicaid or CHIP with incomes up to 211% of poverty; maternity-related coverage is available for pregnant women with incomes up to 196% of poverty.



By Louise Norris

healthinsurance.org contributor

July 28, 2015

The tide may be turning in NC

North Carolina has not expanded Medicaid under the ACA, although Governor Pat McCrory said in late October that he’s “trying to figure out what to do with Medicaid and whether to expand that or not,” and he’s “doing that assessment right now.” Continuing to resist Medicaid expansion could ultimately cost North Carolina $51 billion. McCrory has said in the past that he’s open to the idea of Medicaid expansion, but only after they “fix the current system.” This is a reference to the legislature’s Medicaid reform efforts, discussed below in more detail.

But in early January, McCrory met with President Obama to discuss a possible Medicaid expansion waiver, and McCrory reported that the President is “… open to certain waivers that I’m looking at to present to my legislature.” McCrory has made it clear that he would want some sort of work requirement tied to Medicaid eligibility for able-bodied adults, but a similar provision was ultimately removed from the waiver proposal in Pennsylvania, and so far, no states have successfully petitioned the federal government to allow a work requirement and still receive federal funding for Medicaid expansion.

Also in early January, Brad Wilson, President and CEO of Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina, threw his weight behind the push for Medicaid expansion, noting that “expanding Medicaid is the right thing to do for North Carolinians.”

Thom Tillis, who was sworn-in as US Senator for North Carolina on January 3, used to be strongly opposed to Medicaid expansion. But in October, just two weeks before the election, he noted that “we’re trending in a direction where we should consider potential expansion… I would encourage the state legislature and the governor to consider it.” (Tillis defeated incumbent Democrat Kay Hagan in the 2014 election; Hagan supported Medicaid expansion).

Utilizing Medicaid funds to purchase private health insurance for newly-eligible enrollees is a popular model among states that have sought Medicaid expansion waivers, but there was concern during the first half of 2015 that the private individual health insurance market could destabilize in states that use Healthcare.gov (including North Carolina) if the Supreme Court were to rule with the plaintiffs in King v. Burwell. But on June 25, the Court ruled that subsidies are legal in every state, upholding the ACA and preventing a melt down in the individual insurance market. That renewed calls for Medicaid expansion in states that haven’t moved forward yet.

But by late July 2015, McCrory still had not revealed his proposal for Medicaid expansion, and advocates had begun to tire of waiting, pushing the Governor to reveal his plan or admit that he doesn’t have one. And State Rep. Ken Goodman (D, Richmond) – a Medicaid expansion supporter – has questioned whether McCrory would have the political clout to expand coverage anyway, given that the majority of the state legislature is opposed to Medicaid expansion.

Likely voters in North Carolina favor Medicaid expansion by a 57 to 28 margin.

No Medicaid expansion – yet – in North Carolina

For now, though, North Carolina is one of 22 states that does not have an expanded Medicaid program. North Carolina was one of the last states to adopt the Medicaid program in the first place; only two states took longer to implement original Medicaid coverage. The first states to provide Medicaid did so in January 1966, and North Carolina’s program didn’t become effective until January 1970.

The ACA called for Medicaid expansion in every state, covering all legally-present residents with incomes up to 133 percent of poverty (138 percent with the built-in five percent income disregard). The federal government will pay the full cost of expansion through 2016, after which the states will start to pick up a small fraction of the cost. The states’ portion will never exceed ten percent though.

By not expanding Medicaid, North Carolina is missing out on $39.6 billion in federal funding over the next decade. Instead, the state is subsidizing the cost of expanding Medicaid in other states, since federal tax dollars come from residents of every state, but are being distributed to states that are expanding Medicaid.

Because Medicaid was expected to be available for all low-income residents nationwide, the subsidies to purchase private plans in the exchange were not designed to apply to people living below the poverty level. But in 2012, the Supreme Court ruled that states could not be penalized if they didn’t expand Medicaid, and North Carolina has so far chosen that path.

As a result, there are 318,710 people in North Carolina who are in the coverage gap. Their incomes are under the poverty level, but they are not eligible for Medicaid or for subsidies to help them purchase private health insurance through the exchange. Including the people with incomes between 100 percent and 138 percent of poverty level (who are currently eligible for subsidies in the exchange), there are about half a million people in North Carolina who would qualify for Medicaid if the state expanded the program under the ACA’s guidelines.

North Carolina Medicaid reform

In May 2014, House Bill 1181 was introduced in the North Carolina legislature in an effort to reform the Medicaid system and move away from a fee-for-service reimbursement system and towards a model that would “reward advances in quality and patients’ health outcomes… and hold providers accountable for meeting budget targets and quality goals.”

The legislation was later revised to call for a shift to a provider-led capitated health plan model that would achieve numerous cost-containment and efficiency goals and would be implemented for the majority of the state’s Medicaid population by July 2020. A slightly tweaked third version of the bill passed the House with unanimous support on July 2, 2014. Governor McCrory praised the House for their passage of the bill and urged the Senate to pass it as well. But the House and Senate did not agree on the specifics of the Medicaid reform bill though, and the Senate’s version included more radical changes to Medicaid. The Senate passed their version in July, but the House unanimously rejected the Senate’s bill.

The North Carolina legislature reconvened on January 14, 2015, and in March, legislation (H 330) was once again introduced to expand Medicaid. But ultimately, the bill never made it out of committee. A variety of bills, including S 574, S 696, H 525, S 703, and H 372, were also introduced during the 2015 session to “modernize” Medicaid by switching the existing fee-for-service program to a managed care model. But none of those bills made it out of committee either.

Medicaid reform is likely to be a contentious topic again in the 2016 session – especially if the Governor introduces a proposal to expand coverage. Providers in the state are closely watching the progress of the legislation, and it remains to be seen whether the proposed solution (assuming there is one) will be a combination of provider-led and non-provider-led capitated plans, or just provider-led plans. It’s also unclear whether an expanded Medicaid program would be run by the state Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) or by a separate agency.

Who is eligible now?

The state’s Medicaid eligibility guidelines have not changed in 2014. In addition to the aged, blind, and disabled, Medicaid is available to the following legally-present residents:

Maternity-related coverage for pregnant women with household incomes up to 196 percent of poverty.

Children with household incomes up to 211 percent of poverty are eligible for Medicaid or CHIP. In addition, North Carolina provides coverage for some 19 and 20 year olds with income up to 46 percent of poverty level.

Parents with dependent children are eligible for Medicaid with a household income up to 45 percent of poverty level (for a family of three, income cannot exceed $667 per month).

The Medicaid-run family planning program, Be Smart, is available to residents with incomes up to 195 percent of poverty. Be Smart provides free family planning and birth control. It was initially set up as a waiver (demonstration) from CMS, but was granted permanent status on October 1, 2014.

Childless non-disabled adults are not eligible for Medicaid regardless of how low their income is.

How do I apply?

Medicaid enrollment is available year-round.

How many people are enrolled?

Despite the fact that North Carolina has not yet expanded Medicaid, total enrollment in the program grew by 248,889 people from the summer of 2013 through April 2015. These are people who were eligible under the existing guidelines but were not aware of that fact or had not enrolled for some other reason. The publicity surrounding the ACA and the community advocacy groups that have been helping to enroll people have had a significant impact on getting Medicaid-eligible people enrolled. As of April 2015, the state’s total Medicaid enrollment stood at 1,844,841 people.