Refugee Health Statistics

Updated 10/2018

The Refugee Health Program maintains a surveillance system to monitor disease trends among newly arriving refugees. The data and summary reports are used to:

Develop health interventions, research studies and targeted community health education for refugees

Assess health disparities, service gaps and resource needs in refugee populations

Evaluate and revise refugee screening and data collection protocols, and provide resources for health professionals

Build strong relationships with partners including counties that screen refugees, public and private clinics, and resettlement agencies (VOLAGS).

On this page:

eSHARE - Electronic System for Health Assessment of Refugees

Primary Refugees

Secondary Refugees

Health screening data

Minnesota Refugee Health Report

Additional resources for refugee statistics

eSHARE - Electronic System for Health Assessment of Refugees

The Electronic System for Health Assessment of Refugees, or eSHARE, is a Web-based application developed by the MDH Refugee Health Program (RHP) for collecting demographic information and domestic health screening results to conduct surveillance activities. eSHARE permits data entry from remote sites.

If interested in using or obtaining eSHARE, visit the eSHARE Web page which includes frequently asked questions and an informational flyer.

Primary Refugees

Primary refugees are refugees who are initially resettled in Minnesota. Refugees include refugees, asylees, entrants/parolees, victim of trafficking and Amerasians.

Primary Refugee Arrival Data

Secondary Refugees

Secondary refugees are refugees who originally resettled to another state in the United States before moving to Minnesota.

Currently, there is no systematic way to identify all secondary refugees migrating to Minnesota. The Refugee Health Program is generally notified of secondary refugee arrivals by local public health, clinics, or resettlement agencies that have partnered with the program on the "Secondary Refugee Project" to assist with linkage to care.

Only secondary refugee notifications made to the Refugee Health Program are included in these arrival data summaries.

Secondary Refugee Arrival Data Updated 10/2018

Health Screening Data

Minnesota Refugee Health Report

This annual report describes the demographics of primary refugee arrivals to Minnesota and provides a summary of the health screening indicators and outcomes.

Additional Resources for Refugee Statistics

Minnesota State Demographic Center

A data-driven site offering detailed statistics on immigration trends, language demographics, and more for the state of Minnesota.

Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR) Refugee Arrival Data

Data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services on refugee arrivals by country of origin and state of initial resettlement.

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Figures at a Glance

Provides data, trends, and statistical reports on refugees, asylum-seekers, returned refugees, internally displaced, and stateless persons in more than 150 countries.