Florida Governor: Q&A with Andrew Gillum
Candidates for the 2018 Florida election were sent questionnaires and bio requests by the Herald-Tribune

Name, including middle initial: Andrew D. Gillum

Office sought: Governor

Political party: Democrat

Address: 1550 Melvin Street, Tallahassee, FL 32303

Website address: www.AndrewGillum.com

Email address: Andrew@AndrewGillum.com

Campaign phone: 951-970-3268

Date of birth: 7/26/1979

Birthplace: Miami, FL

Marital status: Married to R. Jai Gillum

Family: Three children — Jackson, 4; Caroline, 4; Davis, 1

Education (please list dates, names of schools and degrees, if any): B.A., Florida A&M University, 2003; Gainesville High School, 1998

Current occupation and professional experience: Mayor of Tallahassee

Government offices held (appointed or elected), including dates: Mayor of Tallahassee, 2014-present; Tallahassee City Commissioner, 2003-14

How long have you lived in the district you seek to represent? My entire life — 38 years

Community involvement: I’ve worked with People for the American Way to promote voter registration and civic participation, created mentorship opportunities for young people through the 1,000 Mentors program, and helped reduce juvenile crime by establishing restorative justice programs.

Endorsements: I’m honored to have received the endorsement of NextGen America, Our Revolution, Democracy for America, the Progressive Change Campaign Committee, Indivisible, the Working Families Party, the National Nurses Union, New Florida Majority, Florida Democratic Black Caucus, U.S. Rep. Alcee Hastings, U.S. Rep. Frederica Wilson, U.S. Rep. Ro Khanna, U.S. Rep. Luis Gutierrez, former U.S. HHS Secretary Julian Castro, State Rep. Carlos Guillermo Smith, two former Florida Democratic Party chairs, and dozens of Democratic state and local elected officials and activists across Florida.

Campaign message: As the son of a school bus driver and a construction worker, and the product of Florida’s public schools, I believe my lived experience is more reflective of the average Floridian’s than anyone else running. I’m proud to be the most viable progressive candidate for Governor in Florida’s history. And as the only non-millionaire (or billionaire) in this race, I don’t believe you need a sizable bank account or famous last name to serve the people. My experience in public office is shaped by my values; values which include supporting Medicare-for-All, a state constitutional right to healthcare, raising the state corporate tax to generate $1 billion for public school investment, a $15 minimum wage, a $50,000 starting teacher salary and raising veteran teacher pay, an economy that works for all, and a state that respects and affords opportunity to everyone, no matter where you’re from, what you believe, who you love, or what you look like.

Do you support automatic restoration of voting rights for felons who have completed their sentences, parole or probation, and paid restitution, except for murderers and sex offenders?

Florida has one of the most unnecessarily onerous systems for rights restoration. I fully support automatic restoration, as well as Amendment 4, which will restore the voting rights of 1.5 million Floridians who have paid their debt to society; those most likely to be disenfranchised are people of color. Should Amendment 4 fail, as Governor I will issue an executive order restoring their rights.

Would you advocate for giving cities and counties the authority to design local firearms ordinances that could be stricter than those currently allowed only under state law?

Preemption is personal to me. I’m the only candidate for Governor to be sued — twice — by the NRA and gun lobby for running afoul of state preemption, and to win both times. That’s why I founded a national education initiative that helps local governments defend their communities from state interference that threatens local progress on higher wages, paid sick leave, wage theft, non-discrimination, public health, environmental, and gun safety matters. We’re seeing a rise across the country — but especially in Florida — in corporate-backed preemption that puts profits before people. I’ll push hard as Governor to restore respect for home rule and local democracy.

Would you be open to Medicaid expansion, given that the uninsured rate among working-age adults in Florida has climbed even in the past two years, according to analysts?

I believe that healthcare is a fundamental right — not a privilege. As Governor, I’ll expand Medicaid and make accessible healthcare for 1 million working-age Floridians. I believe we must push further than expanding Medicaid and defending the Affordable Care Act — that’s why I’m proud to be the first candidate in this race to support Sen. Sanders’ Medicare for All bill. I’m also proud to be the only candidate with a comprehensive series of healthcare proposals to defend Floridians’ care — protecting coverage for those with pre-existing conditions and no-cost contraception for women, and ensuring women won’t pay more than men for coverage.

Under what circumstances would you consider raising taxes?

For too long, Florida’s tax structure has benefited the wealthy and corporate interests at the expense of working people. Without a state income tax, and with inadequate corporate tax rates, Florida is still heavily dependent on tourism and sales taxes to generate revenue for public services. Yet, nearly 90% of businesses in Florida pay no corporate income tax; those that do pay, contribute too little. I’m the only candidate for Governor with a plan to right this wrong. That’s why I introduced my “Fair Share for Florida’s Future” plan, which will raise the state corporate tax rate to 7.75% from 5.5%, generating $1 billion for investment in education, healthcare, and infrastructure. This is competitive with neighboring states, and will ensure that Florida’s large corporations pay their fair share towards a better Sunshine State for all.

Should Florida’s growth management laws, mostly rolled back in 2011, be strengthened to improve state oversight of major development projects that cross county lines or enter environmentally sensitive areas?

Florida’s ecosystem is home to some of the world’s most unique, unparalleled natural environments — and to extraordinary private property interests directly adjacent. As Mayor, I’ve welcomed responsible development that respects and is enhanced by the surrounding environment. As Governor, I would re-establish growth management policies that promote smart growth across jurisdictions, as well as take on climate change that is threatening not only lives, but also real property, and property values that are diminishing due to sea level rise.

Are Florida’s public schools and students hurt or helped by the growth of charter schools and the expansion of tax-credit and other programs that steer taxpayer money to private schools?

Charter schools have a record of waste and unaccountability that we would never tolerate from public schools. Yet, our state’s education budget continues rewarding charter schools at the expense of public schools; for example, the 2018-19 budget allocates $145 million to charter school maintenance — three times the amount allocated to public schools. As a product of Florida’s public schools, I believe we make a promise to our state’s children to provide high-quality, accessible, public schools. We weaken that promise every time we divert taxpayer funds into private and religious education that benefits some students, but not all.

Has Florida’s economy become even more dependent on tourism the past eight years, and do you see any steps that can be taken to diversify it?

Florida is the Sunshine State — we should be the world leader in creating jobs and opportunity through solar energy production. Instead, we rank behind places like New Jersey and Germany. As Governor, I’ll lead our fight against climate change and towards clean, renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and biomass — establishing a business climate for good, clean energy jobs that can't be outsourced. To prepare for these high-skill, high-paying jobs, I'll push for increased investment in SHOP 2.0 and vocational and technical education.

Do you expect that full legalization of marijuana will take effect during your years as governor? Do you support it? Would you attempt to stop such efforts?

We cannot continue putting people — disproportionately young people and people of color — in jail over the use of a drug that is far less dangerous than alcohol. We need to fully legalize marijuana, tax it, and use the revenue to take Florida’s public schools from 29th in the nation to 1st. I’m proud to be the first candidate for Governor to call for legalization; as Governor, I’ll push to ensure no one is prevented from getting a job, or keeping a job, from the responsible use of something that should be — and will be — legal.

In your role, what steps would you take to reduce pollution of Lake Okeechobee and discharges of algae-fouled water?

Florida's unique waterways are just too important to allow both pollution and inaction to run rampant. For too long, nutrient runoff has decimated our lakes and rivers, and Lake Okeechobee's historic water flow has been interrupted — all while politicians siphon off the Everglades restoration funding the people of Florida demanded. As Governor, I'll ensure that Florida Forever is properly funded at its original levels. Lawmakers won't be able to kick the can on Amendment 1 any longer. I'll also ensure that the Everglades Agricultural Area reservoir, filtration marshes, and water restoration projects are done right — not done with big industries in mind. And I'll make sure that our nutrient standards are strictly enforced, so that our bays, beaches, and waterways stop harboring toxic algae that harm our health and our tourism economy.

Do you support or oppose the allocation of performance-based funding for state universities to equip them for pre-eminence?

In its current format, the performance funding model for our state universities is exacerbating inequalities and unfairly punishing some universities, including Florida’s largest institution of higher education dedicated to serving people of color. Not only have some universities received zero state performance funding, but an individual university’s own budget is harmed by not receiving back its own share of institutional investment. That’s wrong. All of our state universities should have a fair chance to succeed — and a one-size-fits-all approach isn’t doing that. It makes no sense to pit universities with different missions against each other — our state college system performance funding of comparing improvement against own past performance is much more fair.

Do you support or oppose tighter state limits on tuition at state colleges and universities?

I believe we need to hold harmless our students and families from rising tuition and fees — a product of our failure to adequately invest in our education system. We can't expect Floridians to thrive when weighed down by a mountain of higher education debt — that's why I propose making Florida's public colleges and universities free for those who commit to stay in Florida and teach our next generation.

How would you approach illegal immigration as it relates to the labor demands of Florida’s agriculture industry?

As Donald Trump, Rick Scott, and their Republican allies threatened to tear apart immigrant families and sow distrust in Florida, as Mayor I stood up and declared our city a welcoming community where people can live free from fear — because “illegals” is not a noun, and people are not “illegal.” As Governor I'll defend the right of people to live and work in the communities they call home, and will promote mutual trust and cooperation between law enforcement and immigrant communities, regardless of immigration status.