Election Fraud Cases
Florida 2017 Gladys Coego Criminal Conviction Altering The Vote Count bit.ly/2hmygEr, bit.ly/2w9hoax Gladys Coego, a temporary worker in the Miami-Dade County elections department during the November 2016 election, pleaded guilty to filling out the mail-in ballots of other voters in favor of Republican mayoral candidate Raquel Regalado. While she admitted to altering the ballots of at least two individuals, detectives believe that Coego likely fraudulently marked numerous other absentee ballots. She was sentenced to two years of house arrest.

Florida 2017 Anthony Grant Criminal Conviction Fraudulent Use Of Absentee Ballots bit.ly/2sAF7PP, bit.ly/2sQc0dl, bit.ly/2tsZBdr Former Eatonville Mayor Anthony Grant was convicted of a felony voting fraud charge, a felony election violation, and misdemeanor absentee voting violations. During the 2015 election while he was running for election, he coerced absentee voters to cast ballots for him. In at least one case, Grant personally solicited an absentee vote from a non-resident of Eatonville. Grant, who had previously served as mayor, lost the in-person vote, but still won the election with more than twice the number of absentee ballots than were cast for incumbent Bruce Mount. Following his indictment, Grant was suspended by Florida Governor Rick Scott. He was sentenced to 400 hours of community service and four years' probation.

Florida 2017 Mia Antoinette Nowells Criminal Conviction Fraudulent Use Of Absentee Ballots at.wftv.com/1Usdkv0, bit.ly/2sVEcMp, bit.ly/2sAF7PP Mia Antoinette Nowells, a campaign worker for former Eatonville Mayor Anthony Grant, was found guilty of coercing Layota Jackson to vote for Grant in the 2015 election. Nowells was charged with intimidating voters and tampering with absentee ballots. She was sentenced to two years' probation and 200 hours of community service.

Florida 2015 Annique Lesage Newton Criminal Conviction Ineligible Voting bit.ly/2feLP81, bit.ly/2feNaf2, bit.ly/2eedK5d Newton, a serial fraudster, was convicted of embezzlement, insurance fraud, and voter fraud, and sentenced to eight years in prison and 15 years' probation after violating her probation stemming from a 2009 case in which she stole $400,000 from her employer. The vote fraud charges stemmed from registering to vote without informing election officials that she was a convicted felon.

Florida 2015 Eric Haynes Civil Penalty False Registrations bit.ly/2sVxOVy Eric Haynes, a Lauderdale Lakes City Commissioner, voted using a false address in the 2012 general election. He had moved to a different precinct before Election Day, but he still certified at the polls that he was living at his former address. He was fined $500 by the Florida Election Commission.

Florida 2015 William Hazard Criminal Conviction False Registrations bit.ly/2fvW7DS William Hazard, 53, of West Boynton, pleaded guilty to one felony voter registration charge and three misdemeanor charges of attempting to submit false voter registration information. He was initially charged with multiple counts of false voter registration. He was sentenced to 10 days in the county jail, 36 months' probation, and was ordered to pay a $7,500 fine. Hazard was hired by a consulting firm to register Republican voters; in the process he illegally switched party registrations for multiple voters and even registered his uncle, an Iowa resident, to vote in Florida.

Florida 2014 James Webb Baker Criminal Conviction Miscellaneous bit.ly/2eVhOLE James Webb Baker, of Seattle, pleaded guilty to ID Fraud and intimidation of voters. Responding to perceived suppression of Hispanic voters who favored Democrat candidates, Baker mailed fake county election documents to Palm Beach County, Florida, residents demanding proof of citizenship to avoid having their voter registrations cancelled. Nearly 200 residents were targeted, all with connections to the Republican Party.

Florida 2013 Deisy Penton de Cabrera Criminal Conviction Fraudulent Use Of Absentee Ballots bit.ly/2feMlCZ, bit.ly/2fvSzSc Deisy Cabrera pleaded guilty to charges of being an absentee ballot broker (boletera) as part of a massive absentee voter fraud scheme. Her notebook contained the names and addresses of over 500 voters who were mostly elderly Hispanics in Hialeah. The lists, titled Deisy's Voters, reportedly included information as to whether the voter was illiterate or was blind, deaf, or had Alzheimer's. She was sentenced to one year of probation.

Florida 2013 Jeffrey Garcia Criminal Conviction Fraudulent Use Of Absentee Ballots bit.ly/2f1x2MN Chief of Staff to Florida Rep. Joe Garcia (D_26), Jeffrey Garcia, resigned and pleaded guilty to orchestrating a plot involving the submission of hundreds of fraudulent absentee-ballot requests during the primary in 2012. Garcia was sentenced to 90 days in prison and 18 months' probation. He was ordered to spend the first three months of probation under house arrest.