Why Sanders Is Wrong on ISIS and Iran

Hillary Clinton said it best herself – we need a president that can do all parts of the job. No part of the job is more important than assuming the role of Commander-in-Chief.

Needless to say, no candidate on either side of the aisle can match the foreign policy resume that Hillary Clinton brings – she’s spent hours in the Situation Room, making the toughest calls, and her long record of accomplishments speaks for itself (unprecedented nuclear sanctions to bring Iran to the negotiating table; a cease-fire to stop Hamas rockets from raining down on Israel; a New START Treaty to reduce the threat of nuclear war; and the list goes on…).

But we all know experience isn’t the only qualification for this job. What Hillary Clinton has made clear throughout this campaign is that nobody has thought more carefully, prepared more diligently, or spoken more deliberately about the challenges the next Commander-in-Chief will face.

Hillary Clinton has delivered nuanced speeches and rolled out comprehensive plans on one issue after the next – from defeating ISIS and the global infrastructure of terrorism to confronting Iran, from bolstering our homeland security to overhauling support for our veterans and military families – that demonstrate the seriousness with which she approaches this endeavor.

This is a stark contrast with Bernie Sanders, who has largely ignored the issue of national security. When the topic has come up, Sanders has put forth proposals that indicate a lack of engagement and fundamental misunderstandings about the challenges before us:

As part of his plan for defeating ISIS, Senator Sanders has repeatedly called for sending more Iranian troops to Syria. [9/30/14 Sanders Press Release, 10/12/14 Sanders Press Release, 11/14/15 Democratic Debate]

This call could not be more misguided. Sending Iranian troops to the doorstep of Israel – a nation which Iran wishes to wipe off the face of the Earth – is the last thing we should be encouraging. Moreover, Iranian troops are already in Syria and they’re not fighting ISIS – they’re propping up Assad and attacking US-backed moderate opposition groups.

Even more perplexing is that Sanders has called for those Iranian troops to fight as part of a coalition that includes Saudi Arabia – Iran’s mortal adversary.

Finally, there is Senator Sanders’ recent call to “move as aggressively as we can to normalize relations with Iran” and to foster “warm relations” with this “very powerful and important country.”

Secretary Clinton supports diplomacy with Iran. She helped launch the diplomacy that produced the landmark nuclear agreement. But she’s also been clear that we can’t take our eye off the ball. She has called for not only a vigorous, ‘distrust and verify’ approach to enforcing the deal, but also has laid out a plan for confronting Iran’s other nefarious behavior in the region. So some of the progress we are making is encouraging – but warm and normal relations with Iran? President Obama doesn’t agree with that. Secretary Clinton doesn’t agree with that. It’s hard to understand why Senator Sanders is arguing for that.

When you look at the ideas he’s putting forward, it’s pretty apparent that Senator Sanders just hasn’t thought through the most crucial national security issues the next president will face. And when he’s been asked about these haphazard proposals, he’s chosen to attack Hillary Clinton, even comparing her to Dick Cheney, rather than address the very legitimate concerns being raised.

People should keep asking him these important questions that he refuses to answer, because the stakes couldn’t be higher.