Statement of Disbursements
Introduction

The Statement of Disbursements (SOD) is a quarterly public report of all receipts and expenditures for U.S. House of Representatives Members, Committees, Leadership, Officers and Offices. The House has been required by law to publish the SOD since 1964.

The Chief Administrative Officer of the House publishes the SOD within 60 days of the end of each calendar year quarter (January–March, April–June, July–September and October–December).

Since 2009 the SOD has been published online to increase governmental transparency and accountability.

As a result of a new House financial system, all SODs from the fourth quarter of 2010 onward will display new transaction codes while maintaining the same data transparency as before. These codes (AP for Accounts Payable; AR for Accounts Receivable and GL for General Ledger) will replace all previously used SOD transaction codes. More »

Viewing the Statement of Disbursements requires a PDF reader compatible with Acrobat 7 or higher. Although many software packages can read PDF files, these files have only been tested with Acrobat Reader. Download the free Adobe Acrobat Reader.

Current Statement of Disbursements of the House

(January 1, 2019 to March 31, 2019)

You can view each SOD’s three volumes in a single PDF or in three files that match the published volumes. You can also view archived SODs beginning with July–September 2009. These files have all been digitally signed by the U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO). Learn more about digital signatures and how to determine if you are reading the certified document.

Single Volume View all three volumes in a single file (11.3MB PDF)

This version contains a linked table of contents, bookmarks to major sections, and is best for text searches. Searchable Format Statement of Disbursement information is also provided as a CSV document, which can be viewed using Microsoft Excel or other spreadsheet software. Using spreadsheet software, the data can be sorted and searched (e.g., you may sort by organization, cost category, etc.) The data contained in the Statement of Disbursements has been reviewed for accuracy and completeness and has been approved for publication by the Office of the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO). The House of Representatives shall not be held responsible for any subsequent use, application, interpretation, or manipulation of the information and data contained therein. View the searchable Statement of Disbursements information in a searchable CSV format. A CSV viewer such as Microsoft Excel or other spreadsheet software is required. SOD DETAIL TRANSACTIONS (34.7MB CSV)

SOD SUMMARY DATA (1.2MB CSV) Three Volumes Part 1 of 3 (3MB PDF)

Pages 1 - 1013 House Leadership Offices, Salaries and Expenses

Salaries, Officers and Employees

Official Expenses of Members (ABR-GOS) Part 2 of 3 (3MB PDF)

Pages 1044 - 2027 Official Expenses of Members (GOS-ROG) Part 3 of 3 (3.9MB PDF)

Pages 2028-3047 Official Expenses of Members (ROG-ZIN)

Committees

Government Contributions

Stationery Revolving Fund

Equipment Revolving Fund

Telecommunications Revolving Fund

Child Care Revolving Fund

Attending Physician

Allowances & Expenses

Member of Congress Mass Mail Information

Member of Congress Mass Communication Information

Index of House Officers and Employees

* Download Adobe Acrobat Reader