Immigration deal doubles agents on the border
WASHINGTON - Sen. John Cornyn's high-profile border security amendment was scuttled by the Senate Thursday amid political maneuvering that produced an even tougher enforcement proposal that would double the size of the Border Patrol and construct 700 miles of fencing.

The new proposal by Republican Sens. John Hoeven of North Dakota and Bob Corker of Tennessee immediately won the blessing of the bipartisan Gang of Eight in an attempt to woo the support of conservative Republicans and wavering Democrats for comprehensive immigration reform.

The Hoeven-Corker plan addressed persistent Republican complaints that the original measure did not include additional Border Patrol agents. The new proposal was embraced by most immigration reform backers because, unlike Cornyn's measure, it would not require "operational control'' of the border before undocumented immigrants can begin their pathway to citizenship.

"If this amendment passes, I don't know how anyone could argue that we are not securing the border,'' Corker added.

Hoeven and Corker unveiled their new proposal 90 minutes after the Senate defeated Cornyn's so-called "RESULTS Amendment'' on a 54-43 vote along party lines. Cornyn's amendment demanded 100 percent "situational awareness'' of the Southwest border before undocumented immigrants could obtain Resident Provisional Immigrant status - but not citizenship.

Senate Majority Leader Sen. Harry Reid of Nevada repeatedly called the Cornyn amendment a "poison pill'' designed to kill the bill, but Cornyn countered that it was an "antidote'' to the legislation because the Gang of Eight proposal would be "dead on arrival'' in the House without it.

The new border security plan was greeted warily by some of the strongest supporters of comprehensive reform, who worried that it would destroy the delicate Gang of Eight compromise.

Fernando Garcia, executive director of Texas' Border Network for Human Rights, said he is "outraged'' with the Gang of Eight's acceptance of the new border security plan. He said it would give the United States "one of the most militarized borders in the world."

Rep. Beto O'Rourke, an El Paso Democrat, called the Corker-Hoeven proposal "fiscally irresponsible,'' adding that he "cannot vote for a bill with these wasteful and senseless provisions.''

Hidalgo County Sheriff Lupe Trevino, who attended President Obama's recent speech on immigration and discussed the border Wednesday with Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano, complained that "local law enforcement has been left out'' during the drafting of border security provisions.

"I support the bill in concept,'' he said. "But it's going to need some tweaking and fine-tuning.''

Cornyn expressed his own displeasure after Thursday's setback. The Texas senator said he felt "shock and amazement'' that the Gang of Eight would accept a new amendment that requires an additional 350 miles of border fencing and even more border patrol agents than the 5,000 Cornyn proposed ­- a whopping 20,000.

"How is it going to be paid for?'' Cornyn asked Hoeven. The San Antonio Republican noted that critics had "disparaged'' his amendment "as a budget-buster.''

Hoeven said the $30 billion needed to fund the "border surge'' would come from the $197 billion in new government revenue generated by the law, an estimate made Tuesday by the Congressional Budget Office.

The Senate proposal is scheduled for a final vote by a July 4 deadline.

House Republicans have also called for beefed-up border enforcement. Speaker John Boehner vowed to bring a bill to the floor only if it was supported by a majority of Republicans, calling border security "absolutely essential.''

Boehner will hold a House-wide discussion of immigration legislation on July 10.

Richard S. Dunham of the Hearst Washington bureau and Aaron Nelsen of the San Antonio Express-News contributed to this report.