Thumbs up, thumbs down: Guess who made the biggest political splash this week
[Thumbs up] It finally happened. After endless debate about debating, Republican U.S. Sen Ted Cruz and his Democratic challenger, Beto O’Rourke, debated Friday night. In honor of the first match-up in Texas’ most watched race, we’re dedicating this week’s Thumbs entirely to politics.

[Thumbs down] Hold on to your burnt ends, folks. Cruz jokes that if O’Rourke gets elected, Texas barbeque will be banned. The prediction wasn’t aroused by any sacrilegious brisket-bashing on O’Rourke’s part. It was all about red meat for Cruz’s base. He made the comment after the animal rights group PETA protested his recent rebuke of tofu by serving up barbequed coagulated soy product at his campaign rally in Columbus. To Cruz, it was an unsavory omen of “just how bad things can get” if a Democrat is elected.

[Thumbs down]Actually, the Dems know just how bad things can get. It happened this week when a former game warden beat a former Democratic congressman in a special election for a Texas Senate district that apparently hadn’t been represented by a Republican in over a century. At the victory party for Pete Flores, who beat Pete Gallego, Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick was photographed high-fiving a Republican Party official. Democrats flubbed this one, starting with Carlos Uresti, the senator whose seat had to be filled because he was found guilty of 11 felonies. Instead, Democrats blame Republicans for robbing Pete by supporting Pete. Oh, for Pete’s sake.

[Thumbs down]The Democrats need to get more creative. Take Ted Cruz. He doesn’t let any stinking sense of propriety or the potential confusion of an 88-year-old grandma get in his way of effective campaigning. He’s up to old tricks, sending fundraising solicitations across Texas in a government-mustard-colored envelope that says “Official Travis County Summons,” and in all-caps: “OPEN IMMEDIATELY.” Election officials say it’s legal. So, what do you do?

[Thumbs up] We know what Willie Nelson would do darn near anything but support Ted Cruz. The 85-year-old music legend is still catching flak from fans after he endorsed fellow guitarist O’Rourke. It was the last thing they needed the first thing this morning. The redheaded stranger reminded Rolling Stone that he’s no stranger to politics. He’s been on the road again for candidates since cowboy singer Tex Ritter ran for Senate in 1970. It should come as no surprise to any true Texan that Willie’s heroes have always been cowboys — and liberals.

[Thumbs twiddled] The voters? Hard to tell. A poll Tuesday showed Cruz with a 9-point lead over O’Rourke among likely voters, dampening Democrats’ hopes of an upset. Just a day later, another poll had the El Paso congressman inching slightly above the Republican in a statistical tie. It’s a nail-biter.

[Thumbs down] What else but palpable fear of losing could have possessed incumbent GOP Congressman John Culberson to tell such a whopper? In a digital ad, he alleged his challenger Lizzie Pannill Fletcher, a Democrat, supports single-payer health care. That was probably quite a surprise to the left-leaning candidates she beat in the primary. Fletcher has consistently supported universal health care that isn’t single-payer.

[Thumbs down] But hey, there are worse things to get wrong. Like a newspaper ad offending a religion with more than 1 billion adherents worldwide. The Fort Bend County Republican Party did just that after running a newspaper ad ahead of the festival Ganesh Chaturthi, which honors an aspect of the divine depicted with an elephant’s head. “Would you worship a donkey or an elephant?” the ad asked. Hindus were outraged, not only because the ad mixed the sacred with the political, but because it implied Hindus worship animals, a common misconception that can lead to bullying. The party has apologized. But, as Willie sings: forgiving you is easy, but forgetting seems to take the longest time.