Down payment on border wall in doubt in Congress
WASHINGTON – The next casualty of the perennial budget wars in Congress could be the first installment on President Donald Trump's border wall.

The initial down payment on the wall, the centerpiece of Trump's 2016 campaign, was supposed to be tucked into a stopgap funding measure to avoid a potential government shutdown on April 28, five days after lawmakers return from Easter recess.

But even as lawmakers look for new ways to fortify the border and speed up deportations, skepticism has been spreading in Congress about the billions of dollars Trump wants to build a wall.

Congressional leaders in both parties are signaling that decisions about big new border expenditures likely will be put off until later, to overcome both Democratic resistance and Republican jitters about spending on a massive wall.

The closer to the border, the sharper the questions get.

"In Texas, we have a river. We have property owners. I think Texans see it differently," said House Homeland Security Committee Chairman Michael McCaul, a Republican whose district extends from Houston to Austin. "We have 1,200 miles out of a 2,000-mile border, and I don't think a 30-foot concrete wall is going to be the answer."

McCaul's comment, in an appearance Wednesday at Lone Star College in Tomball, underscored his view that any physical border upgrades need to be integrated into more efficient investments in lights, sensors, planes and other modern technologies.

"We're not going to write a blank check," McCaul said. "And me working with the appropriators, we're basically going to put conditions on it that better define how this thing is accomplished."

Whatever comes out of the continuing scrutiny on Capitol Hill, it is becoming increasingly clear that Congress is not on the same timetable as the president.

That could push back Trump's schedule for awarding contracts, which the administration hopes to do by the end of the year. More than 230 companies - including 10 in Houston - have sought design or construction contracts for a physical barrier on the U.S.-Mexico border, according to government records.

Added to the GOP's stalled Obamacare repeal, another top campaign promise, the funding snag for Trump's controversial border wall threatens to cap a first 100 days in office that has seen frustration on health care, refugees, border security, and continuing FBI and congressional probes into his campaign's Russian connections.

Complicating matters is that any deal to keep the lights on in Washington after the current funding expires at the end of the month will need the help of Senate Democrats, who have stood steadfast against Trump's wall.

Before the Easter recess, Sen. John Cornyn, the No. 2 Senate Republican, told Texas reporters that the negotiations were "still a work in progress" and that any spending deal would need the backing of both Democrats and Trump.

Republicans, though a majority in both houses of Congress, hold just 52 Senate seats, not enough to block a Democratic filibuster. "There's a lot of leverage for Democrats," said U.S. Rep. Henry Cuellar, a Democrat from Laredo.

Whether Trump would sign a spending bill for the remainder of 2017 without money for the wall remains to be seen. A White House spokeswoman, speaking on background, would say only that "discussions are ongoing."

The fine-print details

Some top Republicans, including Cornyn, sound resigned to cutting a short-term deal to avert a shutdown and push the issue off into the next round of budget negotiations later in the spring or summer.

In part, that reflects a more nuanced GOP vision of border security than the one put forward by Trump during his campaign, when he also promised that Mexico would pay for a wall.

"When I hear the president talk about the wall," Cornyn said, "I think he's speaking metaphorically."

Two other Republicans in Congress, Reps. Will Hurd of Texas and Martha McSally of Arizona, pointedly have asked the administration for specifics on a $1 billion request to plan, design and construct the first installment of the wall, which would cover an estimated 62 miles of new or existing barriers in the Rio Grande Valley, El Paso and around San Diego.

About two-thirds of that first tranche - $644 million - would pay for 34 miles of new levee and border wall in the Rio Grande Valley, a top priority for the Customs and Border Protection agency.

"As representatives of the communities that make up the southern border, we recognize the need for robust border security," the lawmakers wrote in a letter to Homeland Security Secretary John Kelly and Office of Management and Budget Director Mick Mulvaney. "We also have an obligation to be good stewards of taxpayer dollars and as such have a number of questions."

Hurd and McSally, whose districts comprise 880 miles - nearly half - of the border, are pressing for fine-print details about costs, infrastructure and hiring standards for the coming border patrol surge. "While we have both publicly stated in the past that we believe physical barriers to be one of many tools required to gain operational control of the border," they wrote, "we also believe that an expenditure this large, and submitted with limited details, deserves additional scrutiny."

Your browser does not support the iframe HTML tag. Try viewing this in a modern browser like Chrome, Safari, Firefox or Internet Explorer 9 or later.

Credibility on the line

Altogether, Trump is asking Congress for $1.5 billion this year to begin work on the wall, part of a $30 billion "supplemental" spending request for defense and border security. The plan was brought to Congress last month, immediately triggering warnings about a potential government shutdown standoff with Democrats, who called the wall spending a "poison pill."

"We believe it would be inappropriate to insist on the inclusion of such funding in a must-pass appropriations bill that is needed for the Republican majority … to avert a government shutdown so early in President Trump's administration," Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer and other top Democrats wrote in a letter to their GOP counterparts.

The shutdown threat does not come only from Democrats. As GOP leaders saw in the health care debate, hard-liners on the right present a potential for further party in-fighting, raising the prospect of a shutdown over federal spending cuts.

For some, the GOP's credibility is on the line.

"They will not have the threat of an Obama veto to explain away any aspect of the budget," said Rick Manning, president of Americans for Limited Government. "Failure to fund, for example, the wall, out of concern that it might offend Senate Democrats would be a slap in the face to voters who elected President Trump and gave Republicans majorities in both houses of Congress."

Nevertheless, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, intent on averting a government shutdown, has said he will need Democratic help to get new spending measures through Congress, both for this month's stopgap budget measure, which would run through September, and then for a longer-term 2018 appropriations bill.

"All of that will have to be done on a bipartisan basis," McConnell said as lawmakers adjourned for Easter.

As far as Democrats are concerned, that means no wall funding, at least not anytime soon. Said Rep. Vicente Gonzalez, a Democrat who represents part of the Rio Grande Valley sector, "There are far more cost-effective and diplomatic methods of securing our border."

Trump has asked for another $2.6 billion for the wall in 2018, another installment on a multi-year construction project that has been estimated to cost between $10 billion and $25 billion or more. Trump's campaign initially used a figure of $12 billion, though a Homeland Security report obtained by Reuters listed a price tag of $21.6 billion.

Nearly 700 miles of the border already are fortified, leaving another 1,250 miles to cover, though some of that is on rugged terrain like Texas' Big Bend National Park, where massive cliffs line the Rio Grande in some places.

Government estimates take into account the costs of acquiring private land, including substantial court costs for expected eminent domain challenges from owners of border property. Trump's initial funding request includes more than $2 million for legal help in acquiring land and fending off condemnation challenges.

The administration also is seeking funds for new immigration courts along the border and as many as 34,000 bed spaces for immigration detainees, according to a leaked Department of Homeland Security memo.

The memo outlines plans to expand cooperative agreements with local law enforcement and expedite the addition of 5,000 new border patrol agents by downgrading polygraph, physical fitness and Spanish language tests for new hires.

Estimates 'premature'

Despite the mounting costs, the Border Protection agency has called any final estimates for the wall "premature" until prototypes are evaluated and designs selected by July. The agency issued two requests for proposals: one for a "solid concrete wall," and another for alternative designs.

Not counted in the official list of "interested vendors" is a proposal by New York architect Vijay Duggal for a barrier constructed of solar panels and wind turbines, an idea that he says would turn the wall into a renewable energy project that would pay for itself, removing the need to press Mexico for the money.

An array of Mexican officials repeatedly have said that their government will not pay, despite continuing assurances by the White House that it will - sooner or later.

Until then, House Speaker Paul Ryan has said he is willing to work with Trump to "front" the money for the project, even if the funding mechanism is to be decided later.

Lydia DePillis contributed to this story.