Katherine Baicker

Adjunct Professor of Health Policy and Economics

677 Huntington Avenue

Kresge, 4th Floor

Boston, Massachusetts 02115



Katherine Baicker, PhD, is Adjunct Professor of Health Policy and Economics in the Department of Health Policy and Management at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. She is the Dean of the Harris School of Public Policy at the University of Chicago and holds the Emmett Dedmon professorship. She is a research associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research, an affiliate of the Jameel Poverty Action Lab, a nonresident senior fellow of the Brookings Institution, and an elected member of the National Academy of Medicine (IOM) and the National Academy of Social Insurance. She also holds an appointment at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government.

Professor Baicker serves on the Congressional Budget Office’s Panel of Health Advisers; as a Director of Eli Lilly; and on the Editorial Boards of Health Affairs and the Journal of Health Economics. She has served as Chair of the Board of Directors of AcademyHealth; as Chair of the Massachusetts Group Insurance Commission; as Chair of the NIH Social Sciences and Population Studies Study Section; and as a Commissioner on the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. From 2005-2007, she served as a Senate-confirmed Member of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers, where she played a leading role in the development of health policy.

Professor Baicker’s research focuses primarily on the factors that drive the distribution, generosity, and effectiveness of public and private health insurance, with a particular focus on health insurance finance and the effect of reforms on the distribution and quality of care. Her research has been published in journals such as the New England Journal of Medicine, Science, Health Affairs, and the Quarterly Journal of Economics, and has been featured in outlets such as the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal, and National Public Radio. She is currently one of the leaders of a research program investigating the many effects of expanding health insurance coverage in the context of a randomized Medicaid expansion in Oregon.

She received her BA in economics from Yale and her PhD in economics from Harvard. She has served on the faculty of the Department of Public Policy in the School of Public Affairs at the University of California, Los Angeles; the Harris School of Public Policy at the University of Chicago; the Economics Department at Dartmouth College; and the Center for the Evaluative Clinical Sciences and the Department of Community and Family Medicine at Dartmouth Medical School.

Links:

BaickerCV

Oregon Health Insurance Experiment