Mike Huckabee Calls For National 'Chick-Fil-A Appreciation Day'
Mike Huckabee, the former governor of Arkansas and Fox News host, has had enough of what he called the "vicious hate speech and intolerant bigotry" aimed at Chick-fil-A.

On his Facebook page, Huckabee announced that Aug. 1 will be "Chick-fil-A Appreciation Day," a day on which he is encouraging people to patronize the fast food chain.

SCROLL DOWN FOR UPDATE

The former presidential candidate is upset that the fast food chicken chain has been the target of criticism in the wake of Chick-fil-A President Dan Cathy's saying last week that his company supports "the biblical definition of the family unit."

The National Organization for Marriage, a group organized to oppose same-sex marriage, called him a "corporate hero for marriage," while others were quick to condemn his comments.

Boston Mayor Thomas Menino even went so far as to tell the Boston Herald that "Chick-fil-A doesn’t belong in Boston."

"You can’t have a business in the city of Boston that discriminates against a population," he said, according to the Herald. "We’re an open city, we’re a city that’s at the forefront of inclusion."

And on Friday, the Jim Henson Company, the group behind "The Muppets" and "Fraggle Rock," released a statement saying it has "notified Chick-fil-A that we do not wish to partner with them on any future endeavors." Jim Henson's "Creature Shop" toys are currently available in the company's kid's meals.

Huckabee further explained the purpose of his pro-Chick-fil-A campaign on his Facebook Page:

The goal is simple: Let's affirm a business that operates on Christian principles and whose executives are willing to take a stand for the Godly values we espouse by simply showing up and eating at Chick Fil-A on Wednesday, August 1. Too often, those on the left make corporate statements to show support for same sex marriage, abortion, or profanity, but if Christians affirm traditional values, we're considered homophobic, fundamentalists, hate-mongers, and intolerant.

State Sen. Dan Patrick (R-Texas) and the group Concerned Women for America have promoted the event, which is not affiliated with Chick-fil-A.

So far, more than 80,000 people have signed up to participate in the event.

UPDATE: 5:55 p.m. EST:

The Facebook event is no longer available, and Gov. Huckabee has written the following on his Facebook page:

A number of you are asking questions about the Chick Fil-A event. The event disappeared from my page this morning and we have asked Facebook to look into this. I will update you as soon as I know more. The event is still on and the info should be back up soon.

Huckabee's full statement about "Chick Fil-A Appreciation Day" is on his website.

UPDATE: July 25, 2012:

The Facebook event is back and more than 125,000 people have signed up to participate on August 1.

Check out the slideshow below to see companies and products that have been boycotted because of their support for gay rights.

25 LGBT-Friendly Products & Companies Targeted By Boycotters