HUD.gov / U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
HUD-VASH Vouchers

Overview

The HUD-Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH) program combines Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) rental assistance for homeless Veterans with case management and clinical services provided by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). VA provides these services for participating Veterans at VA medical centers (VAMCs) and community-based outreach clinics.

Every year since 2008, HUD and VA have awarded HUD-VASH vouchers based on geographic need and public housing agency (PHA) administrative performance. The allocation process for HUD-VASH vouchers is a collaborative approach that relies on three sets of data: HUD’s point-in-time data submitted by Continuums of Care (CoCs), VAMC data on the number of contacts with homeless Veterans, and performance data from PHAs and VAMCs. After determining which areas of the country have the highest number of homeless Veterans, the VA Central Office identifies VA facilities in the corresponding communities. HUD then selects PHAs near to the identified VA facilities, taking into consideration the PHAs’ administrative performance, and sends the PHAs invitations to apply for the vouchers. There is at least one site in each of the 50 states, in the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and Guam.

HUD has awarded funding for approximately 10,000 HUD-VASH vouchers each year in 2008-2010 and 2012-2015. Congress appropriated $50 million in 2011 to serve approximately 7,000 voucher families, $60 million in 2016 to serve approximately 8,000 families, and $40 million in both 2017 and 2018 to serve approximately 10,000 total families. In addition, HUD has held three competitions, in 2010, 2014, and 2015, to competitively award a total of over 2,600 project-based HUD-VASH vouchers. HUD has awarded over 97,500 HUD-VASH vouchers to public housing agencies since 2008. In addition, another $40 million was appropriated for new HUD-VASH vouchers for FY 2019.

Generally, the HUD-VASH program is administered in accordance with regular HCV program requirements (24 CFR Section 982). However, the 2008 Consolidated Appropriations Act (Public Law 110-161) allows HUD to waive or specify alternative requirements for any provision of any statute or regulation affecting the HCV program in order to effectively deliver and administer HUD-VASH voucher assistance. The alternative requirements are established in the HUD-VASH Operating Requirements (including the waivers and alternative requirements from HCV program rules), which were published in the Federal Register on May 6, 2008 and updated March 23, 2012. The operating requirements, notices related to HUD-VASH, and other helpful tools and resources are provided in the sections below.

Funding Opportunity

Related Notices and Guidance

Webcasts

Tools and Resources

VHA Directive 1162.05(1): The VHA’s directive revises VHA policy and procedures for implementing the HUD-VASH program (amended October 2017)

Letter from Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary Castro Ramirez - This letter from the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary gives an overview of tools available to HUD-VASH PHAs to improve HUD-VASH leasing.

HUD-VASH Reference Guide - This two-page document provides an easy-to-read overview of the unique requirements that govern the voucher side of the HUD-VASH program.

HUD-VASH Best Practices - Version 1.0: The purpose of this working document is to spread the word about effective strategies for administering HUD-VASH, as well as highlight the innovation and dedication of HUD-VASH sites and our partners in the field. It summarizes the most unique and innovative practices submitted by PHAs and VAMCs in response to a request for the submission of best practices sent out via the HUD-VASH listserv in the fall of 2011. Other reports and conversations exchanged among federal agencies, PHAs, and community partners also have informed and will continue to inform this best practices list. Because HUD-VASH continues to be a work in progress, we have compiled these best practices into a working document that will be edited when effective new approaches are identified and not-so-helpful ones are discarded.

HUD-VASH Leasing Schedule Templates : The first document below provides leasing schedule templates that partnering PHAs and VAMCs have the option of using for their 12-month leasing schedules. The second document provides template instructions and a glossary of terms used in the templates. HUD-VASH Leasing Schedule Templates Leasing Schedule Template Instructions

: The first document below provides leasing schedule templates that partnering PHAs and VAMCs have the option of using for their 12-month leasing schedules. The second document provides template instructions and a glossary of terms used in the templates. HUD-VASH listserv : Click here to sign up for the HUD-VASH listserv in order to receive periodic news and information related to the program

: Click here to sign up for the HUD-VASH listserv in order to receive periodic news and information related to the program HUD-VASH Resource Guide: The VA has developed this in-depth guide mainly for VA Case Managers. However, the information provided may also be helpful for PHAs and other entities that support the HUD-VASH program. The guide can be found on the VA’s HUD-VASH page here: http://www.va.gov/HOMELESS/HUD-VASH.asp.

HUD-VASH Contact Information

Helpful Links

The following links to other Federal and community websites may provide additional information on assisting Veterans that are homeless or at-risk of becoming homeless: