About Us
The IISS was founded in the UK in 1958 with a focus on nuclear deterrence and arms control. Today, it is also renowned for The Military Balance, its annual assessment of countries' armed forces and for its high-powered security summits, including the IISS Shangri-La Dialogue.

Promoting sound policies

A registered charity headquartered in London, the IISS also has offices in Washington, Singapore and Manama, Bahrain. The IISS is a non-partisan organisation, independent of government and other bodies. Its mission is to promote the adoption of sound policies to further global peace and security and maintain civilised international relations.





Research and consultancy

Research is central to IISS activities. The institute's research programmes are divided by global region and according to policy themes (from non-proliferation, transnational threats and geo-economics to climate change and security). IISS experts deliver impartial, rigorous analysis. They are drawn from all over the world, and include established world-class strategists, as well as the brightest young analysts. The institute's corporate advisory arm offers strategic advice and political-risk analysis to commercial and government clients.





Publications

Besides The Military Balance and the Military Balance+ online database, the definitive reference sources on the world's armed forces, IISS publications include:







Summits and other events

Heads of state, foreign and defence ministers, high-level diplomats and officials attend IISS security summits for the opportunity to discuss policy in private as well as in public, assisting in greater international understanding and conflict avoidance. Since its launch in Singapore in 2002, the IISS Shangri-La Dialogue has become recognised as the premier institution in the Asia-Pacific for defence diplomacy. The IISS Manama Dialogue in Bahrain similarly enjoys the status of the most important international security meeting held in the Middle East and attended by government ministers.



As well as these prestigious summits, the IISS hosts regular speeches, workshops, meetings, and other events.