Congressional Staff Directory
Edward E. (Ted) Kaufman (D) to fill Biden Senate Seat



Delaware Gov. Ruth Ann Minner (D) announced November 24 that she would appoint Edward E. (Ted) Kaufman to fill the next two years of Vice President-elect Joseph R. Biden’s term until a special election can be held in 2010 to fill the remaining four years of Biden's term. Kaufman will probably take the oath of office sometime in January, after Sen. Biden resigns from the Senate to assume the Vice Presidency.



A graduate of Duke University and the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, Kaufman, 69, was a member of Biden Senate staff for over 20 years and served as a senior adviser to both the Biden presidential campaign and the Obama-Biden transition team. Kaufman is Senior Lecturing Fellow at the Duke University of Law, and has also taught at Duke’s J.B. Fuqua School of Business and Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy.

House Republicans choose Leaders for 111th Congress



House Republicans, meeting on November 19 to organize for the new 111th Congress, elected the following leaders –



Minority Leader: John A. Boehner (R OH-8) won a second term Minority Whip: Eric Cantor (R VA-7), succeeds Rep. Roy D. Blunt (R MO-7) Republican Conference Chair: Mike Pence (R IN-6), succeeds Rep. Adam H. Putnam (R FL-12) Republican Policy Committee Chair: Thaddeus McCotter (R MI-11), won a second term National Republican Congressional Committee Chair: Rep. Pete Sessions (R TX-32), succeeds Rep. Tom Cole (R OK-4)



Sen. Stevens (R AK) loses bid for Seventh Term



Sen. Ted Stevens (R), the longest serving Republican in U.S. Senate history, has lost his bid for reelection to Anchorage’s Democratic mayor, Mark Begich. Sen. Stevens, who turned 85 on November 18, has represented Alaska in the Senate for nearly 40 years. The Alaska Division of Elections has determined that Begich leads Stevens by 3,724 votes with about 2,500 ballots yet to be counted.



The announcement came shortly before the fortieth anniversary of the day – December 24, 1968 – Stevens was appointed by then-Gov. Walter J. Hickel (R) to succeed the late Democratic Sen. E.L. (Bob) Bartlett. Stevens went on to win election to the seat in his own right in 1970, and won six reelection tries – until this year.

House Democrats tap Reps. Larson and Becerra for Caucus Posts



House Democrats on November 18 elected Rep. John B. Larson (D CT-1) as Chair of the Democratic Caucus, succeeding Rep. Rahm Emanuel (D IL-5), who has been designated as President-elect Barack Obama’s White House Chief of Staff. Rep. Xavier Becerra (D CA-31) was elected Vice Chair of the Caucus.



Other House Democratic leaders – Speaker Nancy Pelosi, Majority Leader Steny Hoyer, and Minority Whip James E. Clyburn – were reelected to their posts for the upcoming 111th Congress.

President-Elect Obama to resign Illinois Senate Seat on November 16



President-elect Barack Obama announced on November 13 that he would resign his Illinois Senate seat on Sunday, November 16. President-elect Obama’s resignation will enable Illinois Gov. Rod R. Blagojevich (D) to appoint a replacement to serve out the remaining two years in Obama’s Senate term, which expires in January 2011. Potential candidates to fill the vacancy include U.S. Rep. Jesse L. Jackson, Jr. (D IL-2), U.S. Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D IL-9), Illinois Senate President Emil Jones, Jr. (D), Illinois Attorney General Lisa Madigan, and Illinois Department of Veterans Affairs Director Tammy Duckworth, who ran unsuccessfully for the U.S. House in 2006.

Jeff Merkley (D) declared winner of Oregon Senate Race; Minnesota, Alaska results still in doubt; Georgia faces December Runoff



Oregon House Speaker Jeff Merkley (D) has defeated Republican Sen. Gordon H. Smith by about 52,000 votes out of more than 1.6 million cast. Sen. Smith is the first Oregon Senator to lose a reelection bid since four-term incumbent Wayne Morse (D) fell in 1968 to Republican Bob Packwood.



In Minnesota, the campaigns of incumbent Sen. Norm Coleman (R) and comedian and author Al Franken (D) are preparing for an automatic recount that is not scheduled to begin until after the results are made official on November 18. Sen. Colman currently leads Franken by 236 votes out of nearly 2.9 million cast.



Alaska’s Sen. Ted Stevens (R), leads challenger Mark Begich (D) by about 3,400 votes, while roughly 55,000 absentee ballots remain to be counted.



In Georgia, incumbent Sen. Saxby Chambliss (R) and former State Rep. Jim Martin (D) expect a runoff to be held on December 2. Under Georgia law, a runoff is automatic if the leading candidate is unable to pass the 50 percent threshold after votes have been counted in the regular general election. Sen. Chambliss currently has 49.9 percent of the vote, with thousands of provisional and absentee ballots still being counted.



The following House races await official tabulation of absentee and provisional ballots before a winner can be declared:



California 4th District: Tom McClintock (R) vs. Charlie Brown (D) Maryland 1st District: Andy Harris (R) vs. Frank M. Kratovil, Jr. (D) Ohio 15th District: Steve Stivers (R) vs. Mary Jo Kilroy (D) Virginia 5th District: Tom Perriello (D) vs. incumbent Rep. Virgil H. Goode, Jr. (R) Washington 8th District: Incumbent Rep. Dave Reichert (R) vs. Darcy Burner (D)



Rep. Emanuel (D IL) named Obama White House Chief of Staff



Rep. Rahm Emanuel (D IL-5) has been chosen by President-elect Barack Obama (D) as White House Chief of Staff. Rep. Emanuel, who turns 49 in three weeks, has served in the House since 2003, and as Chair of the House Democratic Caucus since 2007. He had also worked in the Clinton White House as a senior advisor during 1993-98, and was finance chair of then-Gov. Bill Clinton’s 1992 presidential campaign. Rep. Emanuel succeeded the late Rep. Robert T. Matsui as Chair of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee in January 2005, and was later hailed by fellow Democrats as one of the architects of their comeback in 2006, when they won 31 seats to become the House’s majority party for the first time in 12 years.

Reps. Blunt (R MO) and Putnam (R FL) to give up House Republican Leadership Positions



Rep. Roy D. Blunt (R MO-7) announced November 6 that he would not seek reelection as House Majority Whip. Rep. Blunt endorsed the current Chief Deputy Minority Whip, Rep. Eric Cantor (R VA-7) for the Minority Whip position; Rep. Cantor, 45, had already indicated that he would seek the job.



Rep. Blunt’s announcement follows a statement by Rep. Adam H. Putnam (R FL-12) on November 5 that he would be leaving the post of Republican Conference Chair. Rep. Jeb Hensarling (R TX-5), the outgoing chair of the House’s Republican Study Committee, has said he will run for the Conference Chair’s job, and other candidates may follow.



House Minority Leader John Boehner (R OH-8) has already told his fellow Republican Members in a letter that he wants to be reelected for another term as their leader in the new 111th Congress, which convenes in January 2009.

2008 Senate, House and Governor Election Winners



Please note: As of 9:00 a.m. EST, November 5, 2008, some races were still too close to call and may be subject to recount.



Projected Senate Party Affiliations in the 111th Congress – (100: 56 Democrats, 40 Republicans, 4 Undecided)



New Senators elected on November 4, 2008 – (7: 5 Democrats, 2 Republicans)



Kay Hagan (Democrat, North Carolina) Mike Johanns (Republican, Nebraska) Jim Risch (Republican, Idaho) Jeanne Shaheen (Democrat, New Hampshire) Mark Udall (Democrat, Colorado) Tom Udall (Democrat, New Mexico) Mark R. Warner (Democrat, Virginia)



Projected House Party Affiliations in the 111th Congress – (435: 251 Democrats, 173 Republicans, 11 Undecided)



New Representatives elected on November 4, 2008 – (50: 28 Democrats, 22 Republicans)



John Adler (Democrat, New Jersey - 3) Steve Austria (Republican, Ohio - 7) John Boccieri (Democrat, Ohio - 16) Bobby Bright (Democrat, Alabama - 2) Bill Cassidy (Republican, Louisiana - 6) Jason Chaffetz (Republican, Utah - 3) Mike Coffman (Republican, Colorado - 6) Gerry Connolly (Democrat, Virginia - 11) Kathy Dahlkemper (Democrat, Pennsylvania - 3) Brian Davis (Republican, Minnesota - 1) Steve Driehaus (Democrat, Ohio - 1) Marcia L. Fudge (Democrat, Ohio - 11) Alan Grayson (Democrat, Florida - 8) Parker Griffith (Democrat, Alabama - 5) Brett Guthrie (Republican, Kentucky - 2) Debbie Halvorson (Democrat, Illinois - 11) Gregg Harper (Republican, Missouri - 3) Martin Heinrich (Democrat, New Mexico - 1) Jim Himes (Democrat, Connecticut - 4) Duncan D. Hunter (Republican, California - 52) Lynn Jenkins (Republican, Kansas - 2) Ann Kirkpatrick (Democrat, Arizona - 1) Larry Kissell (Democrat, North Carolina - 8) Suzanne Kosmas (Democrat, Florida - 24) Leonard Lance (Republican, New Jersey - 7) Chris Lee (Republican, New York - 26) Blaine Luetkemeyer (Republican, Missouri - 9) Ben Luján (Democrat, New Mexico - 3) Cynthia Lummis (Republican, Wyoming - At Large) Dan Maffei (Democrat, New York - 25) Betsy Markey (Democrat, Colorado - 4) Eric Massa (Democrat, New York - 29) Glenn Nye (Democrat, Virginia - 2) Pete Olson (Republican, Texas - 22) Erik Paulson (Republican, Minnesota - 3) Gary Peters (Democrat, Michigan - 9) Pedro R. Pierluisi (Republican, Puerto Rico) Chellie Pingree (Democrat, Maine - 1) Jared Polis (Democrat, Colorado - 2) Bill Posey (Republican, Florida - 15) Phil Roe (Republican, Tennessee - 1) Tom Rooney (Republican, Florida - 16) Mark Schauer (Democrat, Michigan - 7) Aaron Schock (Republican, Illinois - 18) Kurt Schrader (Democrat, Oregon-5) Steve Stivers (Republican, Ohio - 15) Harry Teague (Democrat, New Mexico - 2) Glenn Thompson (Republican, Pennsylvania - 5) Dina Titus (Democrat, Nevada - 3) Paul Tonko (Democrat, New York - 21)



New Governors elected on November 4, 2008 – (4: 3 Democrats, 1 Republican)



Luis G. Fortuno (Republican, Puerto Rico) Jack Markell (Democrat, Delaware) Jay Nixon (Democrat, Missouri) Beverly E. Perdue (D, North Carolina)



Sen. Stevens (R AK) Convicted on Financial Disclosure Form Charges



Six-term Alaska Republican Sen. Ted Stevens was convicted October 27 in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia of willfully filing false financial disclosure forms that concealed renovations to his Girdwood, Alaska home and gifts he received from an Alaska oil services company. Sen. Stevens is scheduled to be sentenced on January 26, 2009.



Sen. Stevens, who served as chair of the Senate Appropriations Committee during 1997-2005, is currently seeking a seventh full term against the Democratic nominee, Anchorage Mayor Mark Begich, whose father, Nick, served as Alaska’s lone U.S. House member from 1971 until his disappearance in October 1972 while flying between Juneau and Anchorage. Sen. Stevens was originally appointed to the Senate in December 1968 to fill a vacancy caused by the death of incumbent Democratic Sen. E.L. (Bob) Bartlett, and won election to his first full term in 1970.



The last sitting U.S. Senator to be convicted in a criminal case was Harrison J. Williams, a New Jersey Democrat found guilty in May 1981 of bribery and conspiracy charges related to the “Abscam” affair. He resigned his Senate seat ten months later.

Rep. Tubbs Jones, Democrat of Ohio, Dies at 59



Rep. Stephanie Tubbs Jones (D OH-11), Chair of the House Committee on Standards of Official Conduct (Ethics Committee) and the first African-American woman to represent Ohio in Congress, died August 20 at Huron Road Hospital in East Cleveland, Ohio. She three weeks shy of her 59th birthday. Rep. Tubbs Jones, who was running for reelection to a sixth term in the House, suffered an aneurysm on the night of August 19 while driving in Cleveland Heights.



A graduate of Case Western Reserve University and its Franklin Thomas Backus School of Law, Rep. Tubbs Jones served as Cuyahoga County (Cleveland) Criminal Prosecutor for seven years, and also served as a judge in both the Cleveland Municipal Court and the Ohio Court of Common Pleas for Cuyahoga County. A prominent supporter of Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton’s 2008 presidential campaign, Rep. Tubbs Jones endorsed Illinois Sen. Barack Obama for the Democratic nomination after Sen. Clinton suspended her campaign in early June.

Sen. Stevens (R AK) gives up top Committee and Subcommittee Posts



In accordance with the rules of the Senate Republican Conference, Sen. Ted Stevens (R AK) on July 30 voluntarily relinquished his positions as Ranking Minority Member on the Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee; the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee; and the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Disaster Recovery Subcommittee. Sen. Stevens stepped down from these committee and subcommittee slots following his indictment by a Washington, D.C. grand jury for making false statements on the Senate’s yearly financial disclosure forms; he has denied any wrongdoing.



Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison (R TX) replaced Sen. Stevens as Ranking Minority Member on the Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee. Sen. Thad Cochran (R MS) replaced Sen. Stevens as Ranking Minority Member on the Senate Appropriations Defense Subcommittee. Sen. Pete V. Domenici (R NM) replaced Sen. Stevens as Ranking Minority Member on the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Disaster Recovery Subcommittee.

Donna Edwards (D) Wins Maryland House Seat in Special Election



Democrat Donna Edwards became the first African-American woman to represent Maryland in Congress when she won a comfortable victory June 17 in a special election that will make her the new Representative of Maryland’s Fourth Congressional District. Edwards, 49, succeeds Democratic Rep. Albert R. Wynn, who resigned from the House on May 31 to become a partner with the law and public relations firm Dickstein Shapiro. Edwards will now fill out the remainder of Rep. Wynn’s term, which expires in January 2009. She will also be on the ballot for the regular November 4, 2008 general election for a full term ending in January 2011.

Rep. Fossella (R NY-13) won’t run for Sixth Term



Rep. Vito J. Fossella (R NY-13), announced May 20 that he would not be a candidate for reelection in 2008. Rep. Fossella, a member of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, is scheduled to be tried on June 27 in Alexandria, Virginia General District Court on misdemeanor charges of driving while intoxicated. Following his arrest, he acknowledged that he has a daughter from an extramarital relationship.



Republicans mentioned as possible candidates for the Thirteenth Congressional District seat include Staten Island District Attorney Daniel M. Donovan, Jr.; State Sen. Andrew J. Lanza of Great Kills; and New York City Council members Vincent Ignizio and James Oddo. Stephen A. Harrison of Bay Ridge, who unsuccessfully ran against Rep. Fossella in 2006, has already declared his candidacy for 2008. New York City Council member Domenic M. Recchia, Jr. is also seeking the Democratic nomination. Other Democrats said to be weighing candidacies include State Rep. Michael J. Cusick; City Councilman Michael McMahon; and State Sen. Diane J. Savino.

Travis Childers (D) wins Mississippi House Seat in Special Election



Democrat Travis Childers won a May 13 special election runoff to fill the vacancy in Mississippi’s First Congressional District caused by former Rep. Roger Wicker’s December 2007 appointment to the U.S. Senate. Childers, the Travis County, Mississippi Chancery Clerk since 1992, defeated Southaven Mayor Greg Davis, 54 percent to 46 percent, according to unofficial figures. Childers and Davis will face one another again in the regular general election in November. The First District had been represented by Wicker for 13 years, and for almost 54 years before that by Democratic Rep. Jamie L. Whitten.





Steve Scalise (R) and Don Cazayoux (D) Win Lousianaa House Seats in Special Elections



Republican Steve Scalise, a 12-year veteran of the Louisiana House of Representatives, won a May 3 special U.S. House election in Louisiana’s First Congressional District. Scalise, 42, won over 75 percent of the vote against Democrat Gilda Reed and two minor candidates. Scalise will succeed Republican Bobby Jindal, who resigned January 14 to be inaugurated to the office of Governor that he won last October in Louisiana’s off-year election. No Democrat has represented the First Congressional District since 1977.



Democratic State Rep. Don Cazayoux won a May 3 special election in Louisiana’s Sixth Congressional District, ending a 33-year Republican hold on representing the Baton Rouge-based area in the U.S. House. Cazayoux, 44, narrowly defeated Republican Louis (Woody) Jenkins with 49.2 percent of the vote to Jenkins’ 46.3 percent, with the remainder divided by three independent candidates. Cazayoux will succeed 11-term Rep. Richard H. Baker, who resigned February 2 to lobby for the hedge fund industry.





Jackie Speier (D) Wins California House Seat in Special Election



Democrat Jackie Speier, a former Congressional staffer who served for 18 years in the California Legislature, won an April 8 special election to succeed the late Rep. Tom Lantos (D) in California’s 12th Congressional District. Speier, 57, avoided a possible June runoff by winning nearly 76 percent of the vote against a Democratic, two Republican and one Green Party opponent. Under California law, every candidate in the race was listed on the same ballot, regardless of party affiliation.



Speier worked on Capitol Hill as Legislative Counsel for Rep. Leo J. Ryan (D CA). She was seriously wounded on November 18, 1978 at an airstrip in Guyana by gunmen associated with Peoples Temple cult leader Jim Jones. Speier and Ryan were among a delegation that had traveled to the remote location to investigate claims of abuse by the cult. She ran in the 1979 special election to succeed Ryan but lost to Republican Bill Royer. Rep. Lantos won the seat in 1980 and held it until his death in February.





Rep. Andrews to challenge Sen. Lautenberg in New Jersey Democratic Contest



Nine-term New Jersey Rep. Robert E. Andrews (D) announced April 2 that he will challenge 84-year old incumbent Sen. Frank R. Lautenberg in the state’s June 3 primary. Rep. Andrews, 50, said in a statement that “after consulting with family, friends, supporters and people from all points of view, I have decided that I will place my name and my credentials before the people of New Jersey to serve as their new United States senator. The people of New Jersey deserve to choose their senator.



Rep. Andrews’s announcement comes despite the efforts of the seven members of New Jersey’s Democratic Congressional delegation to discourage him from running. The state’s six other Democratic House members — Rush Holt, Frank Pallone, Jr., William J. Pascrell, Jr., Donald M. Payne, Steve Rothman and Albio Sires — have all pledged to share their ballot line in their districts with Sen. Lautenberg. U.S. Sen. Robert Menendez (D), Gov. Jon Corzine (D), State Democratic Party chair Joseph Cryan, Jersey City Mayor Jerramiah Healy, and Newark Mayor Cory Booker have also announced their support for Sen. Lautenberg.



State Sen. Joseph Pennacchio of Montville, college educator Murray Sabrin of Fort Lee and businessman Andrew Unanue are seeking the Republican Senate nomination.





Rep. Wynn (D MD-4) to resign from House in June



Rep. Albert R. Wynn (D MD-4), who lost his bid for renomination to a ninth term in last month’s Congressional primary, announced March 27 that he plans to resign from Congress in June to join the Government Law and Strategy Group of the Washington, D.C. law firm of Dickstein Shapiro.



Rep. Wynn’s departure could set the stage for a special election where the Democratic nominee who defeated him in February, Donna Edwards, would be favored to win in Maryland’s Fourth Congressional District, which takes in parts of Prince George’s and Montgomery counties. However, Maryland election laws also give Gov. Martin O’Malley (D) the option of leaving the seat vacant until the regular general election on November 4.





Rep. Reynolds (R NY-26) won’t seek Sixth Term in 2008



Rep. Thomas M. Reynolds (R NY-26) announced March 20 that he would not run for reelection to the House seat he has held since 1999. Rep. Reynolds, 57, barely fended off a well-funded challenge in 2006 from silicon carbide heating element industrialist Jack Davis of Newstead. This year, Davis and two other Democrats, Jonathan Powers of Clarence and Alice J. Kryzan of Buffalo, are seeking their party’s nomination. Among Republicans, State Assemblyman James E. Hayes of Amherst and State Sen. George D. Maziarz of Newfane are considering their possible entries into the race.





Rep. Cramer (D AL-5) won't run for 10th Term



Rep. Robert E. (Bud) Cramer, Jr., a member of the House Appropriations Committee and the conservative-leaning House Democratic “Blue Dog Coalition,” announced on March 13 that he would not run for a 10th term this year. Rep. Cramer, 60, said in a statement that “[A]fter 28 years of public service it is time for me to step aside, spend more time with my family and begin another chapter in my life.” He is the sixth Democrat who will not stand for election to the House; 24 Republicans have also decided against seeking re-election in 2008.



The filing deadline for Alabama’s June 3 primary is on April 4. Democrats being mentioned as possible Fifth Congressional District candidates include State Senators Tom Butler of Madison and Parker Griffith of Huntsville, and State Rep. John Robinson of Scottsboro. Among area Republicans, Madison County Commissioners Mo Brooks and Dale Strong, as well as State Senator Arthur Orr of Decatur, may run for the seat.