Messer says Congress should begin funding for border wall
A Mexican national looks through the U.S.-Mexico Border wall during Opening the Door of Hope/Abriendo La Puerta De La Esparana at Friendship Park in San Ysidro, Calif., on Saturday, Nov. 19, 2016. (Photo: Sandy Huffaker, AFP/Getty Images)

WASHINGTON — Rep. Luke Messer never expected that comments he made Thursday about Congress putting up the money to build a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border would get so much attention — including from President-elect Donald Trump.

Messer, R-Shelbyville, a member of the House GOP leadership, told reporters that lawmakers could include funding for the wall in the spending bill Congress will need to pass by the end of April to keep the government running.

Messer said he didn’t think that would be controversial since it would be providing the funding already authorized in legislation passed in 2006.

U.S. Rep. Luke Messer, R-Ind. (Photo: Provided photo)

But the move has been viewed as a reneging of Trump’s pledge to get Mexico to pay for the wall.

“Trump asking Congress, not Mexico, to pay for border wall,” was the headline on CNN’s story.

Trump tweeted early Friday the media got it wrong.

“The dishonest media does not report that any money spent on building the Great Wall (for sake of speed), will be paid back by Mexico later!” he tweeted.

The dishonest media does not report that any money spent on building the Great Wall (for sake of speed), will be paid back by Mexico later! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 6, 2017

Messer said his wife’s first words to him Friday morning were: “Mr. Trump essentially tweeted an agreement with you.”

“I was a little surprised that I was suddenly part of a series of incidents that led to Trump tweeting this morning,” he said.

Building a wall along the southern border was one of Trump’s key campaign promises.

Trump did not specify in his tweet whether his administration would seek to build the wall with taxpayer money, although he suggested in a speech in October that U.S. government funds could initially be used to get the project off the ground.

"I said Mexico is paying for the wall, with the full understanding that the country of Mexico will be reimbursing the United States for the full cost of such a wall, OK?" Trump said at a rally in Gettysburg, Pa., on Oct. 22. "We’re going to have the wall. Mexico is going to pay for the wall."

President-elect Donald Trump during a rally in Hershey, Pa. (Photo: Associated Press)

Trump spokesman Sean Spicer referred to that speech Friday in dismissing the idea that having Congress approve the money is a new development.

“The idea that we’re going through the appropriations process and figuring out how to pay for it shouldn’t be news,” he told reporters.

Messer said the idea of using the 2006 legislation as the authorization for new border spending has been pushed over the years. The act already allows some types of enclosures along the United States' southern border.

“My hope would be to both find a way to begin funding the existing law and enhance security on the border,” he said.

Messer said no decision has been made among House Republicans on whether funding would be included in the next spending bill or whether it would be offset. He said some of the billions in cost could be paid for by preventing undocumented immigrants from getting tax credit refunds for their children.

A government audit issued in 2011 said the government spent $4.2 billion in 2009 on the tax credit for those who file taxes with an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number, instead of a Social Security number.

While most of those tax filers are undocumented immigrants, most of the children qualifying for the credit are U.S. citizens, according to PolitiFact.com.

NEWSLETTERS Get the News Alerts newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-888-357-7827. Delivery: Varies Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for News Alerts Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Trump has proposed paying for the wall by confiscating the wages earned by undocumented immigrants from Mexico.

Spicer said Friday there’s an ongoing discussion with Congress on how to fund it “and then obviously the logistics to make it work.”

“Those are both things that are going to take a little bit of time in terms of figuring out,” he said.

The United States already has hundreds of miles of fencing and other barriers along its southwest border.

Ronald Vitiello, deputy chief of the U.S. Border Patrol, told Congress in 2015 that the fencing was a lot more expensive and difficult to build than anticipated. And while fencing has reduced illegal immigration, Vitiello testified it's not necessary to have a barrier along the parts of the border that are difficult to get to on foot.

The most ardent critics of U.S. immigration policy are calling not for a wall on the border, but for cracking down on immigrants who overstay their visas and on the companies that employ them.

USA TODAY reporter Kim Hjelmgaard contributed to this story.

Contact Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/2i1I5JB