Mysterious outside group with ties to Pence associates helping Rep. Luke Messer's Senate bid
CLOSE Closing statements from the Indiana Republican Senate Primary Debate between candidates Luke Messer, Todd Rokita and Mike Braun at Emmis Communications in Indianapolis on Tuesday, Feb. 20, 2018. Michelle Pemberton/IndyStar

Screenshot of ad from outside group praising Rep. Luke Messer, one of three Republicans running for the U.S. Senate. (Photo: Maureen Groppe, USA TODAY)

WASHINGTON — An outside group whose backers don’t have to be identified is running ads in Indiana praising Rep. Luke Messer, one of three Republicans locked in a contested primary battle for the chance to take on Democrat Sen. Joe Donnelly this fall.

The American Economic Freedom Alliance is running more than $330,000 in ads thanking Messer for trying to stop illegal immigrants from receiving tax credits.

The group is a nonprofit, registered in Washington, D.C., and doesn’t have to disclose its donors.

“It’s a huge problem,” said Fred Wertheimer, president of the Democracy 21 watchdog group. “When you can give a huge amount of secret money that benefits a particular candidate, it’s unaccountable and there’s no way to police it to see if it’s corrupting money.”

The ads began about the same time that Messer launched his first ads in advance of the May 8 primary.

Messer campaign manager Chasen Bullock declined to comment when asked if Messer knows who is behind the outside group's ads.

Get more politics news: Sign up for IndyStar's Hoosier Politics newsletter

The group is registered at the same D.C.-area address as IMGE, a public affairs firm whose services includes political advertising. IMGE's top officials include Marty Obst, senior political adviser to Vice President Mike Pence.

Matt St. Clair, a Republican operative, tweeted in January that he joined American Economic Freedom Alliance to do opposition research for Indiana's Senate race.

"I'll be working closely with and reporting directly to the senior political advisor to Mike Pence!" St. Clair tweeted in a post that was "liked" by Bullock.

Just signed on as Research Director for the American Economic Freedom Alliance doing opposition research for the Indiana Senate Race! I’ll be working closely with and reporting directly to the senior political advisor to Mike Pence! pic.twitter.com/8kbamPbomE — Matt St. Clair (@matt_stclair) January 17, 2018

Obst did not respond to a request for comment about the group.

The group’s director is Michael Adams, a lawyer who is listed as a treasurer on more than a dozen political action committees. Adams is also the lawyer for Vice President Mike Pence’s leadership PAC, which has paid both IMGE and Obst's own consulting firm, MO Strategies.

Pence has not endorsed Messer — or Rep. Todd Rokita or former state Rep. Mike Braun — although Messer’s bid cleared the way for Pence’s brother to run for Messer’s House seat.

The first shot in the ad is of Messer standing next to President Donald Trump and Pence.

Contacted about the American Economic Freedom Alliance’s involvement in the race, Adams said he would refer the query to someone at the alliance, which has not responded.

NEWSLETTERS Get the News Alerts newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-888-357-7827. Delivery: Varies Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for News Alerts Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

As a nonprofit group, and not a political action committee, the alliance does not have to file a disclosure report with the Federal Election Commission. Such groups are not supposed to spend more than half their funds on politics. But Wertheimer said that rule is not enforced by the IRS.

The American Economic Freedom Alliance has run ads in at least one other state in the past year. The group ran ads in New York last fall to push three GOP lawmakers to work to repeal one of the taxes imposed by the Affordable Care Act, according to Politico.

A super PAC was created last year to help Braun but has not reported spending any money yet.

Contact Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/2tvgZST