FBI Source: Vegas Shooter Found with Antifa Literature, Photos Taken in Middle East
The Las Vegas shooter didn’t commit suicide as the mainstream media is reporting, but was killed by a FBI hostage rescue team who also found Antifa literature in his hotel room, according to a source linked to the team.

The FBI team took the suspect out after he opened fired on them, according to the source, and afterwards the team found photos taken in the Middle East of a woman linked to the suspect, 64-year-old Stephen Paddock.

A police scanner transcript (from the Daily Mail) collaborates with the source’s revelation:

And the Daily Mail reported:

ISIS recently took responsibility for the mass shooting, and the AP even admitted ISIS doesn’t take responsibility unless it’s at least loosely associated with the attack:

AP: ISIS “is not known to have claimed any attacks to which it was not at least loosely linked.” pic.twitter.com/s6LsNj9Tnt — Paul Joseph Watson (@PrisonPlanet) October 2, 2017

Even further, a deep-level intelligence insider who spoke to Infowars said the attack was “very, very strange.”

According to the intel source:

This was an average 64-year-old white male with no criminal record. He was an apartment owner with a pilot’s license and owned two airplanes.

His brother described him as an average person who was not into firearms and never owned that many guns. He claimed he just, “snapped.”

His hotel room was filled with guns, including several long guns. Where did those guns come from?

But, this was clearly a pre-planned attack and the group [the target] was specifically chosen.

The target was a concert of the group that represents traditional America.

These were patriotic, God-fearing Americans. This group is pro-Second amendment, pro-Constitution and anti-NWO.

This is the group Obama accused of “Clinging to their guns and religion.”

We are still awaiting all the facts, but the concern is we have seen the government engage in false flags events in the past, and an example of this is CIA Operation Gladio in Italy.

As I examined the 9/11 attacks, I was forced to reach the conclusion that it was more than just a terrorist attack. It has finger prints of a possible false flag event itself.

So, sadly we now have to consider that as a possibility here.

That is a dramatic conclusion and one that most Americans cannot get their mind around. It is just too shocking.

We can be sure this will increase the Shadow Government’s surveillance state, specifically inside the United States.

Interestingly, as previously reported, the mainstream media was already in Las Vegas to cover the OJ Simpson release right before the shooting occurred.