Intelligence Careers
The overall efforts of the IC are administered by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI). ODNI's role is to organize and coordinate the efforts of the other 16 IC agencies. Those agencies are divided into three groups:

To navigate screen reader accessible member agencies Press Tab.

Office of the Director of National Intelligence IC Administrator

The Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) was established to manage the extensive efforts of the IC. The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) heads up the ODNI and serves as the principal adviser to the president, the National Security Council and the Homeland Security Council. The DNI also coordinates intelligence matters related to the Department of Defense with the under secretary of defense for intelligence.



Visit: The Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) was established to manage the extensive efforts of the IC. The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) heads up the ODNI and serves as the principal adviser to the president, the National Security Council and the Homeland Security Council. The DNI also coordinates intelligence matters related to the Department of Defense with the under secretary of defense for intelligence.Visit: Office of the Director of National Intelligence

Central Intelligence Agency Program Manager

The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) provides national security intelligence to senior U.S. policymakers. CIA preempts threats and furthers U.S. national security objectives by collecting intelligence; producing objective, all-source analysis; and conducting effective covert action as directed by the president.



Visit: The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) provides national security intelligence to senior U.S. policymakers. CIA preempts threats and furthers U.S. national security objectives by collecting intelligence; producing objective, all-source analysis; and conducting effective covert action as directed by the president.Visit: Central Intelligence Agency

Defense Intelligence Agency Program Manager

The Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) is a Department of Defense (DoD) combat support agency. DIA is a major producer and manager of foreign military intelligence, and it provides military intelligence to warfighters, defense policymakers and force planners in the DoD and the Intelligence Community.



Visit: The Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) is a Department of Defense (DoD) combat support agency. DIA is a major producer and manager of foreign military intelligence, and it provides military intelligence to warfighters, defense policymakers and force planners in the DoD and the Intelligence Community.Visit: Defense Intelligence Agency

Federal Bureau of Investigation Program Manager

The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is responsible for understanding threats to our national security and penetrating national and transnational networks that want to harm the U.S. The FBI's National Security Branch (NSB) includes counterterrorism, counterintelligence, weapons of mass destruction, and intelligence elements. It also includes the Terrorist Screening Center, which provides actionable intelligence to state and local law enforcement, and the High-Value Detainee Interrogation Group, which collects intelligence from key terror suspects to prevent attacks against the U.S. and its allies.



Visit: The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is responsible for understanding threats to our national security and penetrating national and transnational networks that want to harm the U.S. The FBI's National Security Branch (NSB) includes counterterrorism, counterintelligence, weapons of mass destruction, and intelligence elements. It also includes the Terrorist Screening Center, which provides actionable intelligence to state and local law enforcement, and the High-Value Detainee Interrogation Group, which collects intelligence from key terror suspects to prevent attacks against the U.S. and its allies.Visit: Federal Bureau of Investigation

National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency Program Manager

The National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) provides timely, relevant and accurate geospatial intelligence in support of national security objectives. NGA provides support to civilian and military leaders, and contributes to the state of readiness of U.S. military forces. The agency also contributes to humanitarian missions, such as tracking floods and fires, and in peacekeeping efforts.



Visit: The National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) provides timely, relevant and accurate geospatial intelligence in support of national security objectives. NGA provides support to civilian and military leaders, and contributes to the state of readiness of U.S. military forces. The agency also contributes to humanitarian missions, such as tracking floods and fires, and in peacekeeping efforts.Visit: National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency

National Reconnaissance Office Program Manager

The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) designs, builds and operates the nation's reconnaissance satellites. NRO products can warn of potential trouble spots around the world, help to plan military operations and monitor the environment.



Visit: The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) designs, builds and operates the nation's reconnaissance satellites. NRO products can warn of potential trouble spots around the world, help to plan military operations and monitor the environment.Visit: National Reconnaissance Office

National Security Agency/Central Security Service Program Manager

The National Security Agency/Central Security Service (NSA/CSS) is the nation's cryptologic organization that coordinates, directs and performs highly specialized activities to protect U.S. information systems and to produce foreign signals intelligence information. A high-technology organization, NSA is at the forefront of communications and information technology. NSA supports military customers, national policymakers, and the counterterrorism and counterintelligence communities, as well as key international allies.



Visit: The National Security Agency/Central Security Service (NSA/CSS) is the nation's cryptologic organization that coordinates, directs and performs highly specialized activities to protect U.S. information systems and to produce foreign signals intelligence information. A high-technology organization, NSA is at the forefront of communications and information technology. NSA supports military customers, national policymakers, and the counterterrorism and counterintelligence communities, as well as key international allies.Visit: National Security Agency/Central Security Service

Department of Energy Departmental

The Department of Energy's (DOE) Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence protects vital national security information and technologies, representing intellectual property of incalculable value. It also provides unmatched scientific and technical expertise to the U.S. government to respond to foreign intelligence, terrorist and cyber threats; to solve the hardest problems associated with U.S. energy security; and to address a wide range of other national security issues.



Visit: The Department of Energy's (DOE) Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence protects vital national security information and technologies, representing intellectual property of incalculable value. It also provides unmatched scientific and technical expertise to the U.S. government to respond to foreign intelligence, terrorist and cyber threats; to solve the hardest problems associated with U.S. energy security; and to address a wide range of other national security issues.Visit: Department of Energy Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence

Department of Homeland Security Departmental

The Office of Intelligence and Analysis within the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) uses information and intelligence from multiple sources to identify and assess current and future threats to the United States. DHS Intelligence focuses on four strategic areas: promote understanding of threats through intelligence analysis; collect information and intelligence pertinent to homeland security; share information necessary for action; and manage intelligence for the homeland security enterprise.



Visit: The Office of Intelligence and Analysis within the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) uses information and intelligence from multiple sources to identify and assess current and future threats to the United States. DHS Intelligence focuses on four strategic areas: promote understanding of threats through intelligence analysis; collect information and intelligence pertinent to homeland security; share information necessary for action; and manage intelligence for the homeland security enterprise.Visit: Department of Homeland Security

Department of State Departmental

The Bureau of Intelligence and Research within the Department of State (DOS) provides the secretary of state with timely, objective analyses of global developments, as well as real-time insights from all-source intelligence. It serves as the focal point within the DOS for all policy issues and activities involving the Intelligence Community.



Visit: The Bureau of Intelligence and Research within the Department of State (DOS) provides the secretary of state with timely, objective analyses of global developments, as well as real-time insights from all-source intelligence. It serves as the focal point within the DOS for all policy issues and activities involving the Intelligence Community.Visit: Department of State Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Department of the Treasury Departmental

The Treasury's Office of Intelligence and Analysis (OIA) is responsible for the receipt, analysis, collation and dissemination of foreign intelligence and counterintelligence information related to the operation and responsibilities of the department. OIA is a component of the Treasury's Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (TFI), which aims to safeguard the financial system against illicit use and combat rogue nations, terrorist facilitators, weapons of mass destruction proliferators, money launderers, drug kingpins and other national security threats.



Visit:

The Department of the Treasury's Office of Intelligence and Analysis. The Treasury's Office of Intelligence and Analysis (OIA) is responsible for the receipt, analysis, collation and dissemination of foreign intelligence and counterintelligence information related to the operation and responsibilities of the department. OIA is a component of the Treasury's Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (TFI), which aims to safeguard the financial system against illicit use and combat rogue nations, terrorist facilitators, weapons of mass destruction proliferators, money launderers, drug kingpins and other national security threats.Visit:

Drug Enforcement Administration Departmental

The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is responsible for enforcing the controlled substance laws and regulations of the United States. DEA's Office of National Security Intelligence (ONSI) seeks to enhance U.S. efforts to reduce the supply of drugs, protect national security, and combat global terrorism.



Visit: The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is responsible for enforcing the controlled substance laws and regulations of the United States. DEA's Office of National Security Intelligence (ONSI) seeks to enhance U.S. efforts to reduce the supply of drugs, protect national security, and combat global terrorism.Visit: Drug Enforcement Administration Intelligence

U.S. Air Force Services

The Twenty-Fifth Air Force provides policy, oversight and guidance to all Air Force intelligence organizations. The Twenty-Fifth Air Force organizes, trains, equips and presents forces to conduct intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance for combatant commanders and the nation.



Visit: The Twenty-Fifth Air Force provides policy, oversight and guidance to all Air Force intelligence organizations. The Twenty-Fifth Air Force organizes, trains, equips and presents forces to conduct intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance for combatant commanders and the nation.Visit: 25th Air Force

U.S. Army Services

U.S. Army Intelligence (G-2) is responsible for the overall coordination of the five major military intelligence (MI) disciplines within the Army: Imagery Intelligence, Signals Intelligence, Human Intelligence, Measurement and Signature Intelligence, and Counterintelligence and Security Countermeasures.



Visit: U.S. Army Intelligence (G-2) is responsible for the overall coordination of the five major military intelligence (MI) disciplines within the Army: Imagery Intelligence, Signals Intelligence, Human Intelligence, Measurement and Signature Intelligence, and Counterintelligence and Security Countermeasures.Visit: Army Intelligence

U.S. Coast Guard Departmental

The intelligence elements of the Coast Guard support Coast Guard tactical and operational commanders, strategic planners and decision makers. In addition, the Coast Guard supports the IC, Department of Homeland Security, and federal, state, local, tribal and foreign partner agencies. Coast Guard intelligence provides objective, accurate, timely, relevant intelligence about the maritime domain; potential threats; and adversaries' capabilities, limitations and intentions.



Visit: The intelligence elements of the Coast Guard support Coast Guard tactical and operational commanders, strategic planners and decision makers. In addition, the Coast Guard supports the IC, Department of Homeland Security, and federal, state, local, tribal and foreign partner agencies. Coast Guard intelligence provides objective, accurate, timely, relevant intelligence about the maritime domain; potential threats; and adversaries' capabilities, limitations and intentions.Visit: Coast Guard

U.S. Marine Corps Services

The U.S. Marine Corps produces tactical and operational intelligence for battlefield support. Its IC component provides geospatial intelligence, advanced geospatial intelligence, signals intelligence, human intelligence and counterintelligence, as well as ensures that there is a single synchronized strategy for the development of the Marine Corps Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Enterprise.



Visit: The U.S. Marine Corps produces tactical and operational intelligence for battlefield support. Its IC component provides geospatial intelligence, advanced geospatial intelligence, signals intelligence, human intelligence and counterintelligence, as well as ensures that there is a single synchronized strategy for the development of the Marine Corps Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Enterprise.Visit: Marine Corps Intelligence