Prof. Gabriel Eckstein's Biography
Professor of Law, Texas A&M; University School of Law

Director, International Water Law Project

Principal, International H2O Solutions. LLC

Of Counsel, Sullivan & Worcester



LL.M., American University, 1997

J.D., American University, 1995

M.S., Florida State University, 1991

B.A., Kent State University, 1989



Professor Eckstein’s curriculum vitae

Follow Professor Eckstein on Twitter @GabrielEckstein

Gabriel Eckstein is a professor of law at Texas A&M; University School of Law, in Fort Worth, TX, where he is a Member of the Texas A&M; University Water Management and Hydrological Science Graduate Faculty and the Texas A&M; University Energy Institute. Professor Eckstein specializes in water and environmental law and policy at both the US and international levels. He has served as an expert advisor and consultant on US and international environmental and water issues to various organizations and programs, including the Geneva Initiative, the U.N. Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization’s International Hydrological Programme (UNESCO-IHP), the U.N. International Law Commission (UNILC), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization (UNFAO), the US Agency for International Development (USAID), World Commission on Dams, Organization of American States (OAS), the UNESCO/OAS ISARM Americas Programme, and various local water entities in the United States.

Prior to joining Texas A&M; University, Professor Eckstein held the George W. McCleskey Chair in Water Law at Texas Tech University where he also directed the Texas Tech University Center for Water Law & Policy. Before that, he served as Senior Counsel for CropLife America, an agrichemical trade association, working on environmental regulation and legislative matters, and as a litigator in private practice working on environmental, toxic tort, and asbestos cases.

Currently, Professor Eckstein is Director of the Internet-based International Water Law Project, and is Principal of the international consultancy International H2O Solutions. He also serves on the executive boards of the International Water Resources Association and the International Association for Water Law, is an Associate Editor of the journal Brill Research Perspectives: International Water Law, and is a member of the Editorial Board of the Journal of Water Law.

Professor Eckstein holds LL.M. and JD degrees from American University’s Washington College of Law, M.S. in International Affairs from Florida State University, and a B.S. in Geology from Kent State University. He is admitted to the bars of New York, West Virginia, and the District of Columbia.