News
The Hershey Company Selects IRI as Its Market Insights and Analytics Provider 8/1/2017 CHICAGO — Aug. 1, 2017 — IRI®, the global leader in innovative solutions and services for consumer, retail, media and over-the-counter health care companies, today announced that The Hershey Company has selected IRI as its preferred market insights and analytics provider. With iconic products beloved around the world such as Hershey’s Chocolate Bars, Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups, Hershey’s Kisses Chocolates, Kit Kat® bars and Twizzlers Twists, The Hershey Company is one of the largest confectionery and snacking manufacturers in North America.



Hershey sees IRI’s Unify® visualization capabilities on the IRI Liquid Data® technology platform as a long-term solution for enabling integration of multiple, disparate data sources, to quickly get to real-time actionable insights. IRI’s platform will help Hershey better understand retail performance, partner with customers and build long-term relationships for enhanced sales.



“The decision to partner with IRI was very strategic, since they will be a central pillar to help us provide advanced decision support enabled by highly integrated data and tools connecting key decision makers across the company,” said Abby Asem, senior director of Advanced Digital Capabilities for The Hershey Company. “IRI’s industry-leading solutions will help us make faster and better decisions, so that we can target the right consumers in the right channel at the right moment.”



“We look forward to helping The Hershey Company find new growth by precisely connecting with its consumers,” said Piyush Chaudhari, president of the Americas for IRI. “Our granular insights and industry-leading technology will help Hershey cut through the clutter, compete and grow its business for decades to come.”



About the IRI Partner Ecosystem

IRI fundamentally believes that delivering differentiated growth for clients requires deep, highly integrated partnering with a variety of best-of-breed companies. As such, IRI works closely with a broad range of industry leaders to create innovative joint solutions, services and access to capabilities to help its clients more effectively compete in their various markets and exceed their growth objectives. IRI is committed to its partnership philosophy and continues to actively enhance its ecosystem of partners through alliances, joint ventures, acquisitions and affiliations. The IRI Partner Ecosystem includes such companies as 84.51°, Adobe, The Boston Consulting Group, comScore, Experian, GfK, Gigwalk, GuestMetrics, Ipsos, Kantar Millward Brown, Kantar Shopcom, MarketVantage, Mastercard Advisors, MaxPoint, Mu Sigma, Oracle, Pinterest, PlaceIQ, Research Now, SPINS, Univision and others.



About IRI

IRI is a leading provider of big data, predictive analytics and forward-looking insights that help CPG, OTC health care organizations, retailers, financial services and media companies grow their businesses. A confluence of major external events – a change in consumer buying habits, big data coming into its own, advanced analytics and personalized consumer activation – is leading to a seismic shift in drivers of success in all industries. With the largest repository of purchase, media, social, causal and loyalty data, all integrated on an on-demand, cloud-based technology platform, IRI is empowering the personalization revolution, helping to guide its more than 5,000 clients around the world in their quests to remain relentlessly relevant, capture market share, connect with consumers, collaborate with key constituents and deliver market-leading growth. For more information, visit



About The Hershey Company

The Hershey Company, headquartered in Hershey, Pa., is a global confectionery leader known for bringing goodness to the world through its chocolate, sweets, mints and other great-tasting snacks. Hershey has approximately 18,000 employees around the world who work every day to deliver delicious, quality products. The company has more than 80 brands around the world that drive more than $7.4 billion in annual revenues, including such iconic brand names as Hershey's, Reese's, Hershey's Kisses, Jolly Rancher, IceBreakers and Brookside. Building on its core business, Hershey is expanding its portfolio to include a broader range of delicious snacks. The company remains focused on growing its presence in key international markets while continuing to extend its competitive advantage in North America.



At Hershey, goodness has always been about more than delicious products. For more than 120 years, Hershey has been committed to operating fairly, ethically and sustainably. Hershey founder, Milton Hershey, created the Milton Hershey School in 1909, and since then the company has focused on giving underserved children the skills and support they need to be successful. Today, the company continues this social purpose through 'Nourishing Minds,' a global initiative that provides basic nutrition to help children learn and grow. From neighborhoods across the United States to the streets of Shanghai and Mumbai and villages of West Africa, our goal is to nourish one million minds by 2020.

To learn more, visit:



# # #



The Hershey Company Contact:

Jennifer Sniderman

Email:

Phone: +1 717.534.6275



IRI Contact:

Shelley Hughes

Email:

Phone: +1 312.474.3675

— IRI, the global leader in innovative solutions and services for consumer, retail, media and over-the-counter health care companies, today announced that The Hershey Company has selected IRI as its preferred market insights and analytics provider. With iconic products beloved around the world such as Hershey’s Chocolate Bars, Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups, Hershey’s Kisses Chocolates, Kit Katbars and Twizzlers Twists, The Hershey Company is one of the largest confectionery and snacking manufacturers in North America.Hershey sees IRI’s Unifyvisualization capabilities on the IRI Liquid Datatechnology platform as a long-term solution for enabling integration of multiple, disparate data sources, to quickly get to real-time actionable insights. IRI’s platform will help Hershey better understand retail performance, partner with customers and build long-term relationships for enhanced sales.“The decision to partner with IRI was very strategic, since they will be a central pillar to help us provide advanced decision support enabled by highly integrated data and tools connecting key decision makers across the company,” said Abby Asem, senior director of Advanced Digital Capabilities for The Hershey Company. “IRI’s industry-leading solutions will help us make faster and better decisions, so that we can target the right consumers in the right channel at the right moment.”“We look forward to helping The Hershey Company find new growth by precisely connecting with its consumers,” said Piyush Chaudhari, president of the Americas for IRI. “Our granular insights and industry-leading technology will help Hershey cut through the clutter, compete and grow its business for decades to come.”IRI fundamentally believes that delivering differentiated growth for clients requires deep, highly integrated partnering with a variety of best-of-breed companies. As such, IRI works closely with a broad range of industry leaders to create innovative joint solutions, services and access to capabilities to help its clients more effectively compete in their various markets and exceed their growth objectives. IRI is committed to its partnership philosophy and continues to actively enhance its ecosystem of partners through alliances, joint ventures, acquisitions and affiliations. The IRI Partner Ecosystem includes such companies asand others.IRI is a leading provider of big data, predictive analytics and forward-looking insights that help CPG, OTC health care organizations, retailers, financial services and media companies grow their businesses. A confluence of major external events – a change in consumer buying habits, big data coming into its own, advanced analytics and personalized consumer activation – is leading to a seismic shift in drivers of success in all industries. With the largest repository of purchase, media, social, causal and loyalty data, all integrated on an on-demand, cloud-based technology platform, IRI is empowering the personalization revolution, helping to guide its more than 5,000 clients around the world in their quests to remain relentlessly relevant, capture market share, connect with consumers, collaborate with key constituents and deliver market-leading growth. For more information, visit www.iriworldwide.com The Hershey Company, headquartered in Hershey, Pa., is a global confectionery leader known for bringing goodness to the world through its chocolate, sweets, mints and other great-tasting snacks. Hershey has approximately 18,000 employees around the world who work every day to deliver delicious, quality products. The company has more than 80 brands around the world that drive more than $7.4 billion in annual revenues, including such iconic brand names as Hershey's, Reese's, Hershey's Kisses, Jolly Rancher, IceBreakers and Brookside. Building on its core business, Hershey is expanding its portfolio to include a broader range of delicious snacks. The company remains focused on growing its presence in key international markets while continuing to extend its competitive advantage in North America.At Hershey, goodness has always been about more than delicious products. For more than 120 years, Hershey has been committed to operating fairly, ethically and sustainably. Hershey founder, Milton Hershey, created the Milton Hershey School in 1909, and since then the company has focused on giving underserved children the skills and support they need to be successful. Today, the company continues this social purpose through 'Nourishing Minds,' a global initiative that provides basic nutrition to help children learn and grow. From neighborhoods across the United States to the streets of Shanghai and Mumbai and villages of West Africa, our goal is to nourish one million minds by 2020.To learn more, visit: www.thehersheycompany.com # # #Jennifer SnidermanEmail: JSniderman@hersheys.com Phone: +1 717.534.6275Shelley HughesEmail: Shelley.Hughes@IRIworldwide.com Phone: +1 312.474.3675