islam-watch.org
About Us

Who are we?

We are a group of Muslim apostates, who have left Islam out of our own conviction when we discovered that Islam is not a religion at all. Most of us took a prolonged period of time to study, evaluate and contemplate on Islam, the religion of our birth. Having meticulously scrutinized Islam, we concluded that it is not a religion of peace at all, as touted by smooth-talking, self-serving Muslims and their apologists from non-Muslim backgrounds. The core of Islam—namely the Qur'an, Hadis and Sharia—is filled with unbounded hatred of the unbelievers, unbelievably intolerant toward them, and extremely cruel and merciless to those Muslims, who dare to deviate from its doctrines.

We also realized that Islam is beyond reformation, because Muslims—who attempt to modernize and reform its unremitting bigotry, irrational rituals, and cruel and draconian punitive measures—are targeted for annihilation. Our verdict was that the only way to escape from the tyranny of Islam is to leave it altogether. We have, therefore, discarded Islam from our life, so that we can be free to enjoy a normal, pleasant and humane life in complete harmony with all peoples on earth, irrespective of their religion, race or creed.

Having thoroughly understood—through our meticulous investigation of Islam for years to decades—that Islam was nothing but a lie, most of us have left Islam silently, because of the mortal threats of Islam on our life. As Islamic terrorism and violence overwhelms the world, particularly in the post-9/11 years, we also felt that it's a responsibility upon us to make world's 1.4+ billion Muslims aware of the falsity of their religion and its cruel nature, so that they can make informed choices and leave Islam to live with love, respect and harmony with the rest of humanity.

We also felt it incumbent upon us to make the non-Muslim world aware of the reality of Islam, and undertake timely precautionary measures against this religion of terror, hatred and mayhem. We tell the world that the ongoing terrorism, unleashed by Islamic militants, is not an aberration from the so-called 'peaceful religion of Islam'; instead, it is the real Islam preached and practiced by its founder, Prophet Muhammad. A thorough study of the Qur'an and prophetic tradition (Hadith, Sunnah) makes that obvious.

We, therefore, have launched this website to expose the "real Islam"—the Islam that is determined to replace the modern civilization with the 7th-century Arab Bedouin barbarism, peddled by Muslims as the true Islamic Civilization. Let the world watch Islam through www.islam-watch.org and be warned.

'Islam Watch' is founded by a few Muslim apostates. Hailing mainly from South Asia, some of us left Islam after the 9/11; others have been apostates since prior to that. We aim to establish that Islam is false invention of Muhammad. We feel that it needs to be emasculated, or marginalized, or eliminated altogether, if the Muslim world wants to come out of its current backwardness and quagmire, characterized by poverty, corruption, illiteracy, violence, misrule and tyranny, in which they have been thrown in due to Islamic indoctrination.

To learn more about why some of us have left Islam, please read these testimonies:

Visit our Leaving Islam page for more testimonies.

Founders & members:

M. A. Khan (USA, Editor)

Abul Kasem (Australia)

Dr. Ali Sina (USA)

Sher Khan (USA)

Syed Kamran Mirza (USA)

Mumin Salih (UK)



Our Challenge

We challenge Muslims to debate on these assertions.

We assert that Islam is not a religion of peace but is founded on war, violence, terrorism, hatred and injustice.

We affirm that Islam is a false religion forged by Muhammad.

We conclude that Islam is responsible for rampant corruption, widespread misrule, implausible tyranny, mindless terrorism, unrelenting violence and pervasive social injustice in the Muslim world.

Our Mission (Why This Site)

Our ultimate aim is to guide Muslims out of the fold of Islam. We also expect that critical voice against Islam will render it somewhat benign.

We plan to achieve our goals in the following manner:

We will criticize and expose the real truth about Islam without minding about any political correctness, whatsoever. We will establish that Islam is false in the sense that it was not revealed by any God, but was created by Prophet Muhammad himself to fulfill his greed, ego and ambition. We will prove that Islam has nothing to do with peace; instead, it is a dangerous cult founded through violence, terror, plunder and extreme injustice by Muhammad. We will prove that Islam is incompatible with the modern world. Islamic precepts stand in contravention to the concept of democracy, tolerance, human rights and gender equality, and hence is dangerous for modern civilization. We will demonstrate that Islamic terrorism, as witnessed today, is sanctioned by Islam. Terrorists did not hijack Islam; instead, Islam itself has hijacked some otherwise good human beings and turned them into machines for terror, murder and destruction. We will also awaken the non-Muslim world, especially the West, about the short-term and long-term dangers Islam to their good and benevolent society. As nontheistic humanists, we strongly affirm that human life should be guided by human conscience, wisdom and judgment based on the Golden Rule. This is an ever-changing, dynamic, process; as people gain new experience, scientific knowledge and insights into the workings of the world and human life, our ethical wisdom will change. Opposed to rigid religious doctrines, no particular set of rules or values should be considered absolute and universal. We propagate that 'Live your own life and let other live theirs, as long as they don't harm and cause nuisance to others'. "Islam Watch" will be dominated by ex-Muslim and progressive Muslim writers. We will make some room for non-Muslim authors to help us gauge how the non-Muslim world grasps the truth about Islam. To create a critical mass of critics of Islam from Muslim backgrounds, one of our major aims will be to create new writers, critical of Islam, from amongst Muslims. We will put maximum effort in nurturing these nascent talents. To this end, we will urge Muslim writers to pen their critical thoughts on Islam, regardless of how good they are, and we will try to accommodate them in our website. Although "Islam Watch" has been launched by ex-Muslims coming mainly from South Asia, we aim to connect to Muslim apostates and critics from all corners of the world. We encourage them from all parts of the world to voice their opinions through "Islam Watch". We will publish a select number of Op-Ed/Articles of non-Muslim authors of strongly secular conviction. Selection of articles by non-Muslim authors would be solely at discretion of the editors.

Publishing Guidelines

We will follow the following guidelines in order to maintain the focus of our website as well as to maintain a decent atmosphere. We are be open to any criticism or modifications of these guidelines and will accommodate views which are fair, reasonable and which enhances our efforts to achieve our goals.