Fact Check: Did U.S. pay for McConnell's polio treatment?
Times-Union readers want to know:

I received an email saying that the U.S. government paid for Mitch McConnell’s care and rehabilitation when he had polio as a child. Did he really have polio and was his care subsidized by the government?

On June 22, the Occupy Democrats Facebook page posted a meme claiming that the United States government paid for McConnell’s care when the Republican senior senator contracted polio as an infant in 1944, Snopes.com reported.

This claim probably originated with McConnell’s support for the Senate Republican health care plan published that day. The meme states: "As a kid, Mitch McConnell had polio, and the government paid for ALL of his care and rehabilitation. Now, as the leader of the Republicans in the Senate, McConnell is taking government-funded care away from tens of millions of Americans. Let that sink in."

An article with the meme says: "Mitch McConnell has been relentlessly working to roll back Medicaid and deprive millions of Americans of government-sponsored healthcare coverage for eight years now.

"But if it weren’t for the government, McConnell wouldn’t be able to walk at all.

"Young Mitch came down with a terrible case of polio as a child in Alabama. ‘My mother was, of course, like many mothers of young polio victims, perplexed about what to do, anxious about whether I would be disabled for the rest of my life,’ he admitted in a 2005 interview.

"But luckily for him, his mother took him 50 miles to the Warm Springs, where President Roosevelt won his own battle with polio and established a polio treatment center that was paid for by the public.

"President Roosevelt asked the people of America to send in dimes to the White House as part of his "March of the Dimes" foundation. Over two and a half million dimes were mailed in, and they paid for Mitch’s physical therapy and treatment."

McConnell did have polio; in his 2016 memoir "The Long Game," he writes that he got polio at the age of 2 while staying with his mother in his aunt’s home in Five Points, Ala., and how his mother took him to Roosevelt’s polio treatment center in Warm Springs, Ga., about 60 miles away, for physical therapy.

So, yes, McConnell did receive help at the polio rehabilitation center. But neither the center nor the care given to him were government-funded, Snopes.com notes.

Snopes.com gives a history of the center: Roosevelt bought the property at Warm Springs and established a center there in 1927, having visited frequently for therapy for his own polio, which he contracted in 1921. He (and others) set up the Warm Springs Foundation, a nonprofit organization that depended on wealthy philanthropists and donations from members of the public.

"In 1934, Basil O’Connor (once a partner at Roosevelt’s law firm and a close associate of the recently elected president) began organizing fundraising for the foundation, set around the president’s birthday each year. Within four years, these birthday balls had raised $1,350,030 for the Warm Springs rehabilitation center (the equivalent of $23.3 million in 2017).

"In September 1937, Roosevelt reconstituted the Warm Springs Foundation as the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis (as polio was then widely known); in January 1938, the directors of the foundation launched the first "March of Dimes," a phrase coined by vaudeville star Eddie Cantor who helped promote a nationwide fundraising drive.

"In six months, the March of Dimes raised $81,073 (which would be about $1.4 million in 2017).

"Funds raised for the Warm Springs Foundation and National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis were in part distributed as research grants to scientists looking to cure polio.

"This came to fruition in the 1950s when Dr. Jonas Salk — who had received a grant from the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis — developed a successful polio vaccine."

Roosevelt did use his office to promote fundraising for polio care and research, but the actual funding came from the public, as well as wealthy celebrities and large corporations.

The foundation was operated as a nonprofit, not a federal or state agency, and it was not taxpayer- or government-funded when MccConnell visited there, Snopes.com points out. The center remained owned and operated by a nonprofit organization until 1974, when the state of Georgia took it over, only then making it government-run. Since 2014, it has been owned and operated by Augusta University.

Carole Fader: (904) 359-4635