Access to Medication Abortion Among California's Public University Students
Jump to Section Methods Medication abortion demand among California's public university students Facility information Distance and time to closest facility Results Monthly usage estimates Distance and time to closest facility Facility information Discussion Acknowledgments References

Projections from this study suggest that many students attending California's public universities need abortion care, but barriers for students include traveling to a facility off-campus or attending an appointment on a weekday, for which they may miss classes. While student health centers also have limited or no weekend hours, many offer the ability to make next day or same day scheduled appointments online, making it easier to fit in an appointment in between classes and obtain care sooner. College students have limited financial resources; they are often paying for tuition and room and board, and have reduced time for employment. While it is not yet known how much students would pay for an on-campus medication abortion, the costs are likely to be the same or lower than those going to an off-campus clinic. If students face delays in accessing a medication abortion for any of these reasons, they may exceed the gestational limit of 10 weeks and no longer be able to have a medication abortion.

Travel time is an important consideration for college students, as medication abortion must be obtained off-campus and usually requires two visits. Public transit time is salient because of low car ownership among college students; weighted by campus enrollment, 28% of UC students and 63% of CSU students have a car on campus [2x[2]U.S. News & World Report. National Universities. Available at: https://premium.usnews.com/best-colleges/rankings/national-universities.

Google ScholarSee all References, 3x[3]U.S. News & World Report. Regional Universities. Available at: https://premium.usnews.com/best-colleges/rankings/regional-universities.

Google ScholarSee all References].

This study is limited by an assumption that the closest abortion facility is the one that students are referred to or seek care from. However, some campuses may refer students to a campus-affiliated hospital rather than the closest public abortion facility. Additionally, these findings are limited to the campuses examined here and do not describe all barriers to seeking abortion care that college students may face. Estimates of the numbers of abortions are projections based on general population data, and actual abortion rates may differ for this population. Finally, the proposed legislation applies only to medication abortion, not aspiration abortion. Off-campus facilities may still be desirable to students who would prefer an aspiration abortion or who are not sure what type of abortion they want. Both types of first-trimester abortions could feasibly be offered on campus and ideally would be offered, so that student choice is not artificially constrained.

If medication abortion was available on campus, the travel, logistical, and cost burdens to students seeking abortion would likely be greatly reduced. Forcing students to leave campus for abortion when other health services can be obtained on campus disproportionately burdens students who require abortion care. Low-income students are particularly impacted as the cost of abortion, cost of travel, and lost time away from classes may be particularly prohibitive.