McNairy Regional Hospital to close in May
CLOSE

Tennova Healthcare logo (Photo: Submitted)

McNairy Regional Hospital and its affiliated clinic will permanently close in May after officials with parent company Tennova Healthcare conducted weeks of inspections, Tennova officials said Friday.

The hospital, located in Selmer, is set to close after 11:59 p.m. on May 18, according to a news release from Tennova.

Tennova said the hospital building needs extensive repairs, including the plumbing systems due to a recent breach, and crews would have to dig through the floors to replace sewer pipes that have deteriorated.

Making the repairs could have taken six months or more and would have required closing the hospital during that time, according to the release. Instead of making the repairs, Tennova has decided to make the closure permanent.

"As we considered these significant repairs, we also looked at how the community use of the hospital has changed in recent years," hospital CEO Pamela Roberts said in the release. "Our quality of care and patient satisfaction have been strong, but far fewer patients are using services here, whether inpatient, outpatient or ER. With the extensive repairs needed, disruption to operations and small number of patients using services, McNairy Regional Hospital is not sustainable.”

Since 2010, the number of patients admitted to McNairy Regional has steadily declined from about 1,700 patients annually to about 550 in 2015, Tennova said.

"As medical science has continued to advance, more services can be provided on an outpatient basis, which may be one reason for fewer admissions and less use of the hospital," Lori Smith, Tennova vice president of marketing and development for the West Tennessee market, said in an email to The Jackson Sun. "Another challenge is individuals without health insurance are more limited in their ability to seek elective procedures, a problem exacerbated by the lack of Medicaid expansion in Tennessee."

Emergency room visits also have decreased, averaging 24 a day over the past few months, according to the release. Many of those patients who required specialized treatment were stabilized and then transferred to Tennova Healthcare – Regional Jackson. Most of the other patients' needs could have been addressed in an urgent care or physician's office, the release said.

"As a rural hospital, McNairy Regional is also challenged by cuts in federal reimbursement for services as part of the Affordable Care Act," the release said. "These changes were based on more people having insurance, whether through Medicaid expansion or the insurance exchanges. Tennessee has not covered more individuals with Medicaid, leaving many of the state’s most vulnerable citizens without access to health insurance, and leaving no means to address the unsustainable burden of uncompensated care."

Emergency Medical Services will continue to provide ambulance service in McNairy County, after the hospital closes, to help patients access clinical care in emergencies, the release said. Three hospitals operate within 30 miles of Selmer, and three more within 40 miles, the release said.

“The history of service and care at McNairy Regional is the result of the nurses, physicians and other caregivers at the hospital who have been dedicated to their patients,” Roberts said. “We appreciate their professionalism as we work through these changes and thank them for all they have done.”

One clinic is associated with McNairy Regional and it is located on the hospital campus. Approximately 125 employees work at the hospital and clinic, Smith said.

Work will be done to help employees identify other opportunities to work at regional Tennova Healthcare facilities, the release said. Job fairs have been held at the hospital and more will be scheduled. Those who work until the hospital closes but are not placed in new positions will receive outplacement services and severance, officials said.

Tennova Healthcare is a statewide network that includes 17 hospitals and more than 100 physician clinics, according to previous statements from the company. In West Tennessee, other hospitals in the network include Tennova Healthcare – Regional Jackson, Tennova Healthcare – Dyersburg Regional, and Tennova Healthcare – Volunteer Martin. Those three hospitals and McNairy Regional joined the Tennova network in September 2015.

Henderson County Community Hospital and McKenzie Regional Hospital also are affiliated with Tennova Healthcare, according to the website Tennova.com.

For more information about Tennova call 1-855-TENNOVA (836-6682) or visit the website.

Read or Share this story: http://www.jacksonsun.com/story/news/local/2016/03/18/multiple-sources-mcnairy-regional-hospital-close/81983688/