White Folks And America Are The Problem – Michelle Obama Addresses All Black University With Divisive Message
In a speech at Tuskegee University, an institute of higher learning in which white people are “not allowed on the bus,” First Domestic Partner Michelle Obama gave the school’s commencement address with instructions to the future agitators of America to – what else? Go forth and agitate.

Her mission is an extension of that of Hussein Obama, to foment unrest and destabilize America. Her message was clear, “whatever is wrong in your life is whitey’s fault, and whitey owes you.”

She described the daily persecution inflicted upon her fellow victims at the hands of the plantation owner class as including police discrimination, the “nagging worries that you’re going to get stopped or pulled over for absolutely no reason.”

Vilifying the police is a job for the whole family at the Obama house. They’re not her type of Americans. They’re much too productive, too committed to the Constitution and of too strong a moral character for the Mooch and company. Give her some foul-mouthed parasitic anarchist street rats any day.

Never one to be accused of unifying the American people with a message of common purpose and shared ideals, the divisive Ms. Obama said, “I want to be very clear that those feelings are not an excuse to just throw up our hands and give up. Not an excuse. They are not an excuse to lose hope. To succumb to feelings of despair and anger only means that in the end, we lose.”

She didn’t mean the American people or our nation lose. She’s talking exclusively to black Americans and choosing sides, aligning herself with them in the conflict that she, her husband and their operatives are orchestrating against whites and the American system of representative self-government. There was a time when being president, and by extension the spouse, represented a commitment to all of the people, not just those of your favorite color or ethnicity. That was before the racist Marxists took over. Now, if you’re white, you are automatically assumed to be privileged and labeled as an oppressor.

While addressing the situations in Ferguson and Baltimore, Ms Obama said, “They’re rooted in decades of structural challenges that have made too many folks feel frustrated and invisible. And those feelings are playing out in communities like Baltimore and Ferguson and so many others across this country.” “Structural challenges” is a safe and politically acceptable way to cast racial aspersions on those who “don’t look like her” that is understood by every member of the audience.

Of course it is exactly those who look like her and others in the Democrat Party who are responsible for the mismanagement and urban decay which she and her comrades are now exploiting into social upheaval for political reasons. Ms Obama opted not to include those facts in her presentation. Admitting responsibility for their actions is not a Democrat strong suit, particularly in her family. More importantly, it doesn’t motivate the rabble to rise up.

FOR ENTIRE ARTICLE CLICK LINK