Nice Girls? Sex, Collegiality, and Bipartisan Cooperation in the US Congress
When women in Congress solve a high-profile problem, their colleagues and the media praise their ability to get Washington’s business done by collaborating and compromising in a way that men do not. The problem with this popularly held view is that it is entirely anecdotal. In assembling several new data sets to test this proposition systematically, we find that women are more likely than men to participate in the kinds of activities that foster collegiality. But we uncover almost no evidence that women’s legislative behavior on fact finding abroad, cosponsoring legislation, or engaging the legislative process differs from men’s. The partisan divide that now characterizes the legislative process creates strong disincentives for women (and men) to engage in bipartisan problem solving. To be sure, women’s presence in Congress promotes democratic legitimacy, but it does little to reduce gridlock and stalemate on Capitol Hill.

On June 11, 2015, 56 members of Congress (55 men and Linda Sanchez) arrived at Nationals Park ready to play ball. As has been the case since its inception in 1909, the annual congressional baseball game pitted the Republicans against the Democrats.1 Roll Call’s account of the “yearly partisan face off” read like ESPN’s banner headline. Well, sort of. Most sports coverage does not mention that the athletes had hours earlier faced a “nail-biting procedural vote to pave the way for a Friday floor vote on two trade measures” (Bowman 2015a). And rarely do baseball fans chant, “TPA! TPA,” referring to the Trade Priorities and Accountability Act of 2015. But for the most part, coverage was run of the mill. “Republicans had a rough start, making a series of errors in the bottom of the first inning that gave Democrats their first two runs,” reporters noted. And despite a “brief moment of hope in their last at-bat … the momentum ultimately did not shift in the GOP’s favor” (Bowman 2015a). The Democrats attained their seventh consecutive victory, besting the Republicans 5 to 2.2

Two weeks later, at Watkins Recreation Center in southeast Washington, DC, the scene was quite different. Whereas congressmen had spent an evening waging partisan war at the baseball stadium, 20 female members of Congress—11 Democrats and nine Republicans—joined forces to play the female press corps in what has become an annual seven-inning softball game. Checking their party affiliation at the edge of the field, the women engaged in an evening of bipartisan bonding. Democrat Kirsten Gillibrand bragged about convincing “top-recruit” Republican Elise Stefanik to join the team (Bellantoni 2015). Debbie Wasserman Schultz (D-FL) high-fived Martha Roby (R-AL) after securing a 1–0 victory over the “Bad News Babes” (Bowman 2015b). Described by Democrat Donna Edwards as a “wonderful way for us to get to know our colleagues” (Bowman 2015c) and by Republican Mia Love as an opportunity to “meet some people that I wouldn’t have had the chance to actually meet” (Bowman 2015b), the early summer face-off fostered across-the-aisle collegiality that rarely surfaces in the Capitol just a few blocks away.

The softball field is not the only place where female members of Congress have been known to cross party lines and socialize with one another. From chronicling bipartisan dinners to trips to the theater and bowling nights to baby showers, media accounts routinely highlight the friendships women in Congress have built with one another (see Newton-Small 2016). As a result of these friendships—so these popular accounts go—women are more likely to trust and cooperate with one another when it comes to governing. Democratic Senator Amy Klobuchar, for example, believes that social relationships allowed women in the Senate to “craft a long-term budget without the counterproductive barbs that some politicians throw at each other when they don’t agree” (Bassett 2013). Republican Senator Susan Collins contends that “women of the Senate are more likely to collaborate and to realize that we can disagree on an issue but still seek common ground” (Cousins 2015). When a bipartisan group of women—referred to by journalists at the time as the “only adults left in Washington”—received credit for ultimately ending the government shutdown in fall 2013, then-senator Mark Pryor raved, “Women in the Senate is a good thing. … We’re all just glad they allowed us to tag along so we could see how it’s done” (Bassett 2013). Political scientists who interview female members of Congress reach the same conclusion: “Collaboration across party lines is often fostered by participation in bipartisan activities, such as dinners, the congressional women’s softball team, the Congressional Caucus for Women’s Issues, and travel. These activities help to build relationships across party lines, which can lead to policy collaboration” (Dittmar, Sanbonmatsu, and Carroll 2017, 7).3 Because bipartisan solutions are more durable than legislation that passes with votes from only one party (Whyman 2016), this type of cooperation affects not only whether a problem is solved but also the likely longevity of the resolution.

As normatively appealing as these accounts might be, no systematic analysis has yet demonstrated that women are more collegial than men outside of Congress or that, as a result, they are more likely to cooperate with colleagues as they navigate through the highly partisan legislative process. In fact, for at least three reasons, we argue that it is premature to arrive at such a conclusion.

First, despite the common characterization of congresswomen’s social behavior as “different” from men’s, we have no sense of how often men engage in similar activities. It is just not newsworthy when male legislators dine together, take in a sporting event, or meet for a drink. But that is not to say it never happens. Republican Senator John Thune, for example, vouched for the authenticity of Democrat Chuck Schumer’s tears when discussing the implications of Donald Trump’s travel ban. Thune told a reporter, “I see Schumer every morning at the Senate gym. He’s an emotional guy. He was probably feeling it sincerely” (TMZ 2017). Or consider Senator Jeff Flake’s description of the congressional baseball game as “one of the best institutions in Congress” because of the camaraderie it fosters and bipartisan friendships it generates, even from opposing dugouts (Krishan 2015).

Second, women’s increasing numbers in Congress coincide with the growth of party polarization and the decline of comity. That is not to imply that women’s presence caused these changes, but it certainly did not inoculate the institution from them either. And why would it? In an era of unprecedented levels of party polarization, congressional candidates campaign as Democrats and Republicans, not as women and men (Hayes and Lawless 2016). Once they are elected, there is no reason to expect women, regardless of how friendly they are with their colleagues, to be any less likely than men to engage in the partisan politics that allowed them to win their seats in the first place. As a traditionally marginalized group, female legislators might actually have heightened incentives to toe the party line, ingratiate themselves to their party’s leadership, and avoid ruffling feathers (e.g., Reingold 2000).

Third, it is imperative to look beyond high-profile examples of cooperation before concluding that women govern differently. To be sure, women played an instrumental role in ending the 2013 shutdown. But members of Congress—women and men alike—have had plenty of other opportunities to set partisanship aside and collaborate to solve the nation’s problems. And they usually do not take them. Cooperation has taken a back seat to heated debates over raising the debt ceiling, repeated battles over the budget, and sustained partisan warfare over immigration and health care reform. In fact, during the 2016 budget dispute—in which Republicans and Democrats led the country once again to the precipice of a shutdown—a key sticking point was a critical “women’s” issue: funding for Planned Parenthood. Yet no part of the debate’s news coverage, deliberations, or eventual resolution suggested that women in Congress were any more civil, collaborative, or bipartisan than men in resolving this public policy challenge.

In this article, we offer the first comprehensive examination of the relationship between gender and bipartisan cooperation on Capitol Hill. Using more than a decade’s worth of social engagement activities, we find that women are, in fact, systematically more likely than men to participate in activities that foster a collegial work environment. But that is where gender differences in Congress seem to end. Our analysis of approximately 60,000 days that members of Congress spent traveling abroad, sponsorship and cosponsorship patterns of more than 1,500 senators and representatives, roughly 14,000 procedural votes, and the disposition of almost 5,000 amendments reveals that women’s and men’s records look strikingly similar. The role that a legislator’s sex plays in moving the legislative process along is substantially constrained by the party in which she or he serves. Although women’s presence in Congress promotes democratic legitimacy and simple justice and also provides the institution with some “social glue”—all of which are important in their own right—it does little to reduce the hyperpartisanship, gridlock, and stalemate rampant on Capitol Hill.

Women as Problem Solvers? Background and Expectations Go to Abstract Women as Problem Solvers?... Gender, Comity, and Colle... Gender and Problem Solvin... Discussion, Conclusion, a... References Notes

The supposition that women in Congress, even if they do not always agree substantively, are more likely than men to work across the aisle to solve problems rests on two conditions. First, women are more likely than men to develop personal relationships with their colleagues and, thus, a sense of trust. Second, women, having established this trust, are more likely than men to cooperate with colleagues to move the legislative process along. The first condition is well documented. For decades, studies from a range of disciplines have found that friendships in the workplace can promote organizational success and worker satisfaction (e.g., Berman, West, and Richter 2002; Pfeffer 1994). Because socializing outside of work can act as a repeated strategic interaction, the social capital that emerges beyond the workplace promotes general trust within it (Cohen and Prusak 2001; Spagnolo 1999). Friends are better able than mere acquaintances to resolve conflicts and perform decision-making tasks (Shah and Jehn 1993). Even members of Congress themselves tout the importance of social glue in getting their work done. New Jersey Democrat Josh Gottheimer, for example, considers the congressional gym one of the best places to get to know people because “no one’s wearing their partisan shirt” (Gangitano 2017). In fact, it was in the Senate gym that Democrat Dick Durbin approached Republican Marco Rubio about supporting a path to citizenship as part of a broad immigration reform package (Parker 2013). Republican Senator Shelly Moore Capito considers the “great team-building effort” that goes into the congressional women’s softball game a foundation for bipartisan cooperation (Cooney 2017). Because colleagues—including those who serve on Capitol Hill—want to avoid damaging their personal relationships, social relations often come with “expectations of trust and abstention from opportunism” (Granovetter 1985, 490). Indeed, “friendly relationships” in the House of Representatives (Asher 1973, 502) and “courtesy” in the Senate (Matthews 1959, 1069) were crucial in the development of the “Textbook Congress” (Shepsle 1989) that produced so many landmark pieces of legislation. A substantial body of research also finds that women are more likely than men to prioritize these personal relationships and, as such, to engage in collegial behavior professionally. Konrad, Kramer, and Erkut (2008), who study corporate boards, find that women are more collaborative than men and that this cooperation enhances the quality of board governance. Analyses of local and state-level elected officials reveal the same thing. Tolleson-Rinehart’s (1991) study of mayors, for instance, finds that women tend to adopt an approach to governing that emphasizes congeniality, whereas men tend to emphasize hierarchy (see also Weikart et al. 2007). In a similar vein, because female state legislators are motivated to build and maintain interpersonal relationships (Richardson and Freeman 1995), they spend more time negotiating with their colleagues than men do (Epstein, Niemi, and Powell 2005; see also Kathlene 1994; Rosenthal 1998). For female members of Congress, developing relationships with colleagues might even carry the added benefit of allowing them to feel like they “fit in,” which is important for marginalized groups (e.g., Blair and Stanley 1991; Crowley 2004; Reingold 1996). The words of Democratic Congresswoman Julia Brownley corroborate these lines of research: “Women, we’re a much smaller group, and so I think we have a tendency to know each other better” (Dittmar 2017). It is the second condition—women, because of the personal relationships they have built, will be more bipartisan than men in moving the legislative process along—that we view more skeptically. Although we do not doubt congresswomen’s impressions of how social engagement activities can contribute to bipartisan successes, a growing body of literature finds that a legislator’s party substantially and systematically limits the role sex plays in shaping substantive policy decisions (Frederick 2009; Schwindt-Bayer and Corbetta 2004; Swers 2013). Given the strong agenda control exercised by the majority party, there is little reason to expect that women and men will approach other facets of the legislative process—such as information gathering, cosponsoring bills, or shaping the procedures that structure floor debate—any differently either. It is actually on procedural grounds that the rise of congressional partisanship has been the most dramatic (Roberts and Smith 2003; Sinclair 2006; Theriault 2008). And no trip to the theater or softball game can mitigate that. Democratic Senator Brian Schatz, for instance, regularly plays basketball with Ted Cruz (R-TX) and often dines with Pat Toomey (R-PA), but he is quick to note that bipartisan friendships do not amount to bipartisan legislation within the chamber. That logic, he argues, is held “mostly among the chattering class that used to love their cocktail parties” (Stein 2017). Because female legislators will likely not be any more naive than men to these realities, they should not be any less likely to game the legislative process. Quite the contrary, women—in an attempt to “fit in”—might be particularly loyal to the party leadership. Party loyalty is a way for members to move up and be valued (Cox and McCubbins 1993; Rohde 1991). Taken together, then, the extant research suggests that women in Congress may be more likely than men to develop friendships across the aisle but that these relationships will not influence legislative behavior in the way that many expect.

Gender, Comity, and Collegiality: Assessing Patterns of Social Engagement Go to Abstract Women as Problem Solvers?... Gender, Comity, and Colle... Gender and Problem Solvin... Discussion, Conclusion, a... References Notes

The first step in determining whether women are more likely than men to be “problem solvers” is to assess whether they are more likely to contribute to building the social fabric in Congress. After all, assumptions about congresswomen’s penchant to cooperate are predicated, at least in part, on the expectation that the social relationships women develop outside the chamber generate a sense of trust and collegiality inside the halls of Congress. Tracking social engagement is difficult because no data repository houses information about who sends whom a holiday card or who attends whose baby shower. In addition, many of the high-profile, bipartisan social activities that garner attention, such as the female senators’ monthly dinners or bowling excursions, are single-sex events. But three regularly held social activities—two restricted to the Senate and one open to members of both chambers—allow us to test gender differences in social engagement. These activities have the important feature of being open to men and women, Democrats and Republicans alike. The first is the Secret Santa Gift Exchange. Initiated by former Democratic senator Al Franken in 2011 as a strategy to combat rampant partisanship, the activity elicits some of the broadest bipartisan language heard every year on Capitol Hill. Franken describes the gift exchange as a way to “create comity and good cheer in an institution badly in need of both” (Carney 2015). Republican Senator Tim Scott considers it a way “to sweeten the pot and improve the relationships; to get across the aisle” (Keith 2013). Senators who participate hold themselves to a $15 limit and select gifts with special meaning for the giver or the recipient. Al Franken, for instance, gave Indiana’s Joe Donnelly a map marked with all of the significant places in Donnelly’s life. West Virginia’s Joe Manchin had two lumps of his home state coal sculpted into a donkey and an elephant for New York’s Chuck Schumer. Seersucker Thursday provides a second opportunity to track social engagement. Started by then-senator Trent Lott in 1996, Seersucker Thursday is a way to “bring a little Southern charm to the Capitol” and to remind senators how their predecessors had to dress in the 1950s, before air conditioning cooled down the Capitol (Bedard 2007). On one Thursday each spring, senators can join the “fashion parade,” which, according to Lott, “some might call frivolous, but actually helps get things done.”4 Even the official web page of the US Senate mentions the collegiality the event aims to inspire, noting that “senators voluntarily make this annual fashion statement in a spirit of good-humored harmony.”5 Finally, the annual congressional baseball and softball games allow us to determine which members of Congress choose to “settle scores and solidify friendships off the floor and on the field.”6 Although both parties field nearly all-male teams for the congressional baseball game, women do participate from time to time. And while only women can wield a bat or wear a glove in the congressional softball game, their male colleagues have always coached the team. These games, in the words of Democratic Congressman Ed Perlmutter, “are a great time to meet other members of Congress, it’s just fun, we’re out doing something different than legislating” (Evans 2015). Because no official rosters of who participates in these activities exist, we combed through photos, news articles, and website archives, and we spoke with the offices of the Senate historian and the House historian to assemble lists of participants (see app. 1 for a description of the data sets and collection procedures). figure 1 p < .05 ). This pattern persists across party lines. We begin with the Secret Santa Gift Exchange, which, although it varies from year to year, averages around a 40% participation rate. The data presented inindicate that, with the exception of the inaugural year, female senators have been more likely than their male colleagues to participate. From 2011 to 2015, 49% of women, compared to 34% of men, participated in Franken’s event (). This pattern persists across party lines. p < .05 ). These results—which are consistent across party—have been quite stable through the years. The only notable exception is 2004, which was the first time women participated (see fig. 2 We also see greater female participation when we turn to Seersucker Thursday. The overall rates of participation are lower than they are for the holiday gift exchange—indeed, the average number of senators participating in any given year is only about 12—but gender differences are evident. Over time, women have been more than four times as likely as men to participate (33% of women, compared to 8% of men;). These results—which are consistent across party—have been quite stable through the years. The only notable exception is 2004, which was the first time women participated (see). Women’s greater rates of participation are notable, given not only that seersucker marketing campaigns are directed toward men but also that cultural seersucker touchstones—like barbershop quartets, ice cream vendors, train conductors, and Atticus Finch—are also men (see Haltom 2016 ). In other words, if participants chose to wear the suit simply because they owned one, men’s participation rates would likely exceed women’s. fig. 3 p < .05 ). Here, too, the gender differences are consistent across party lines. Skeptics might argue these results simply reflect the gender stereotypes that women are more likely than men to enjoy buying gifts or dressing up. But the story is much the same when we turn to the congressional baseball and softball games (see), where the stereotype would suggest that men would be more inclined than women to engage. Yet only 13% of men in Congress, on average, play baseball or coach softball, compared to the 21% of women who take to the field (). Here, too, the gender differences are consistent across party lines. 7 Insofar as these activities offer members an opportunity to build the social fabric of Congress, the results suggest that women place a higher premium on comity than men do. The results for each social engagement activity withstand controls for district partisanship, the member’s electoral safety, and the legislator’s experience (see app. 2). And they are not simply an artifact of women lacking access to the more informal bonding events in which men have engaged for decades. If that were the case, then first-term congressmen would also be disproportionately likely to engage in these activities, as they have not yet developed the relationships that would generate invitations to more informal social gatherings. Yet freshman men are no more likely than their longer-serving male colleagues to play baseball or wear a seersucker suit. They are somewhat more likely to participate in Secret Santa, but still at significantly lower rates than women.

Gender and Problem Solving: Assessing Legislative Behavior Go to Abstract Women as Problem Solvers?... Gender, Comity, and Colle... Gender and Problem Solvin... Discussion, Conclusion, a... References Notes

Whether women’s spirit of collegiality translates into legislative behavior is the question to which we now turn. The growing dominance of political parties in Congress suggests that even if women want to engage in bipartisan behavior that advances the legislative process, partisan constraints make it difficult to do so. From the outset, we recognize that across-the-aisle cooperation is not the only way that women might strive to solve problems. Perhaps they are more disposed than men to striking compromises within their own party. Or maybe they are more likely to engage with the bureaucracy to arrive at policy solutions outside the legislative process. From a practical standpoint, though, systematically gaining a handle on informal, behind-closed-doors behavior is essentially impossible from the outside. Observing bipartisanship in a variety of domains, however, can at least provide insight into how collaborative members are with their colleagues. Even then, no one data set is perfect for testing our argument, and none alone can speak conclusively to women’s and men’s proclivity to cooperate. So we offer four ways to measure a member’s propensity to “problem solve,” each of which sheds light on whether women are just as likely as men to play the partisan game. Test 1: Information gathering through congressional delegation travel Throughout the legislative process, members of Congress seek information that can help guide their preferences and policy positions (Baumgartner and Jones 2015). Taking fact-finding trips abroad as part of formal congressional delegations—known as CODELs—is one way to gather the information needed to make informed foreign policy decisions. These trips are much more than luxurious junkets that provide another potential source of social engagement. Alducin et al. (2014) show that more often than not, CODELs visit global hot spots where the work resembles committee information gathering. Thus, they afford members of Congress an opportunity to work together to gain a better grasp of foreign policy challenges and opportunities. CODELs are either partisan (all members traveling together are of the same party) or bipartisan (the trip includes at least one member from each party). If women prioritize accruing information in a more collaborative, cooperative way, then their ratio of bipartisan to partisan trips should exceed that of men.8 fig. 4A fig. 4B The evidence—based on 5,735 individual members’ CODEL behavior (which amounts to more than 60,000 days of travel from the 100th to the 112th Congresses)—does not suggest that women acquire firsthand knowledge of the United States’ role in a global world much differently from how men do. 9 Consider, first, partisan trips. Overall, roughly 20% of men and 20% of women took at least one partisan trip. Although the percentage of members traveling varies from congress to congress, women and men generally participate in partisan CODELs at similar rates (see). The story is much the same when we turn to bipartisan travel (see). And the same pattern holds when we analyze the data separately by party (results not shown). Women and men tend to spend a similar amount of time on these trips, too. Across congresses, Republican men traveled abroad with only fellow partisans an average of 1.1 days, which is the exact same number as GOP women. For Democrats, partisan travel was a bit more frequent for men (1.5 days) and women (1.8 days) alike. The number of days spent on bipartisan trips also does not significantly differ between women (9.7 days) and men (9.2 days). Thus, women of both parties actually spend more, not less, of their time abroad traveling only with fellow partisans than men do—a result counter to the notion that women’s ties to the partisan war are less tight. Of course, bivariate results do not account for other considerations that might contribute to the decision calculus underlying CODEL travel. Accordingly, we performed a series of regression analyses predicting the number of days the member spent on partisan trips and on bipartisan CODELs in each congress, accounting for not only the legislator’s sex but also the district’s partisanship and the member’s electoral safety and seniority. We also control for committee assignments, as Alducin et al. (2014) find that appropriations, foreign affairs, and armed services committee membership are important predictors of who travels and with whom. We perform the analyses separately by party because our question of interest is whether sex exerts any independent effect in the highly partisan legislative process. The comparisons in which we are most interested, therefore, are those between Democratic women and men and Republican women and men. The multivariate results generally confirm the bivariate findings (see app. 3).10 In no case are Republican women statistically different from their male copartisans. Democratic women do spend about 20% more time than Democratic men on bipartisan trips ( p < .05 ), which is consistent with the conventional wisdom. But they also spend about 20% more time on partisan trips, which is completely counter to it (and statistically significant if we relax the threshold; p < .08 ). Democratic women, in other words, travel more but not in a more strictly bipartisan fashion.11 Perhaps more importantly, though, the magnitude of the effect of a member’s sex on his or her travel pales in comparison to the other independent variables, especially the committees on which he or she serves. Test 2: Bipartisan sponsorship and cosponsorship activity Sponsoring and cosponsoring bills are often considered indicators of members’ purest form of issue positioning (Kessler and Krehbiel 1996; Krehbiel 1995; Woon 2008). It is no surprise, then, that sponsorship and cosponsorship data have been used to examine everything from legislators’ personal relationships to a proposal’s ideological tilt (e.g., Browne and Rinquist 1985; Fowler 2006; Harbridge 2015; Panning 1982; Theriault 2008). For our purposes, analyzing cosponsorship activity can shed light on whether women are more likely than men to collaborate with colleagues from across the aisle. The Lugar Center, which is “committed to thoughtful analysis and civil dialogue that facilitates bipartisan governance,” uses sponsorship and cosponsorship data to create a measure of members’ abilities to work across the aisle.12 The Center’s Bipartisan Index includes two equally weighted components: (1) the frequency with which a senator cosponsors a bill introduced by a member of the opposite party and (2) the frequency with which a senator’s own bill attracts cosponsors from the opposite party. Higher scores indicate greater levels of bipartisan sponsorship and cosponsorship activity.13 On its face, the measure is valid and consistent with senators’ reputations. Lincoln Chafee is at the top and Jim DeMint is at the bottom of the lifetime scores for bipartisanship in the Senate. fig. 5A fig. 5B If women are more likely to cross the aisle and craft bipartisan solutions, then they should have a systematically higher Bipartisan Index than the men with whom they serve. But we find little in the data to support this expectation. In no congress were Democratic women’s scores significantly different from Democratic men’s (). The gender differences among Republicans might look more apparent (), but in all but the 112th Congress, the difference is not statistically significant. And that one small blip of bipartisanship is not robust to multivariate testing. When we include the same set of controls that we used in the CODEL analysis (but substitute state-level partisanship for district partisanship), Democratic women and men are statistically indistinguishable from one another (see app. 4 ), as are their GOP colleagues. The Lugar Center has also computed the Bipartisan Index for members of the House of Representatives, but just for the 113th Congress. The results from that lone congress mirror the multiyear results from the Senate analyses. As far as Republicans are concerned, women’s scores do not differ from men’s (see app. 4). On the Democratic side of the aisle, women have lower scores than men.14 Test 3: Procedural votes If women are less likely than men to play partisan games, then we should uncover gender differences in members’ procedural votes, which include resolutions setting up the rules for debate, motions to adjourn, motions to instruct conferees, motions to waive rules, cloture motions to restrict filibusters, and motions to table amendments. Majority parties frequently use procedural votes to weaken the voice of minority parties, and minority parties often use them to try to construct legislative roadblocks to the majority party’s priorities. A bipartisan vote indicates that members of both parties are working together to move the legislative process along. 1. We determined which votes during each congress (dating back to the 100th Congress in 1987) were procedural. This involved coding as procedural or not 17,241 votes in the House of Representatives and 9,365 votes in the Senate. 16

2. For each procedural vote—7,312 in the House and 6,785 in the Senate—we coded how each member of Congress actually voted.

3. We employed Poole and Rosenthal’s (1997) W-Nominate algorithm in R to generate a “score” for each member based strictly on procedural votes. The algorithm essentially arrays members of Congress on a continuum from −1 to +1. We can think of it as placing the two members who disagreed with each other the most on procedural votes at the endpoints for each chamber in each congress. In the Senate in the 113th Congress, Kirsten Gillibrand (D-NY) was at one end (−1) and James Risch (R-ID) was at the other (+1). The remaining 98 senators are aligned on the continuum according to how often they voted with the senator at each endpoint. We computed these scores separately for each chamber from the 100th through the 113th Congress. Democrats’ scores typically—and increasingly over time—fall between −1 and 0. Republicans’ scores normally range from 0 to +1. We developed a multistep data collection and configuration process to analyze these votes: 15 The algorithm essentially arrays members of Congress on a continuum from −1 to +1. We can think of it as placing the two members who disagreed with each other the most on procedural votes at the endpoints for each chamber in each congress. In the Senate in the 113th Congress, Kirsten Gillibrand (D-NY) was at one end (−1) and James Risch (R-ID) was at the other (+1). The remaining 98 senators are aligned on the continuum according to how often they voted with the senator at each endpoint. We computed these scores separately for each chamber from the 100th through the 113th Congress. Democrats’ scores typically—and increasingly over time—fall between −1 and 0. Republicans’ scores normally range from 0 to +1. Although procedural votes create the voting agendas by which the chambers get to the final passage votes, they in no way lock a member into a final passage vote. The algorithm thus allows for someone who is an ideologue on substantive votes to be more “in the middle” on procedural issues. A comparison of two Democrats on these dimensions highlights this distinction. Former senators Kay Hagan and Carl Levin ranked as the eighth and ninth most moderate Democrats on procedural votes (they scored −0.459 and −0.452 respectively). On nonprocedural voting, however, Hagan had the third most moderate score among Democrats (−0.406), while Levin (−0.924) had the seventh most liberal. Levin, in other words, was more bipartisan than Hagan in establishing the procedures setting up the debate in the Senate, but he was much more liberal than she was when it came to actually deciding policy. Figure 6A We begin the analysis of procedural votes with the House of Representatives.presents the mean procedural vote score for Democrats in the House from the 100th through the 113th Congress. The circles indicate the mean score for women in each congress; the squares represent men’s mean scores. (The algorithm does not make the scores comparable across time, so a dip in mean scores from one congress to the next cannot necessarily be interpreted as a shift in procedural agreement. Thus, the dashed line is meant simply to train the eye to assess comparisons within each congress, not to illustrate any sort of connection across congresses.) Numbers closer to zero indicate a more bipartisan procedural vote profile, so if women are more likely than men to vote this way, Democratic women’s scores should be less negative than Democratic men’s, and Republican women’s scores should be less positive than Republican men’s. Yet these are not the trends that emerge from the data. In every single congress, the mean score for female Democrats is more negative than the mean score for Democratic men. In 11 of the 14 cases, the gender difference is even statistically significant ( p < .05 ). Among Republicans, in the 103rd, 105th, 106th, and 107th Congresses, women’s scores were statistically more bipartisan then men’s. In the six most recent congresses, however, these differences disappeared. We conducted a similar analysis in the Senate. Never have more than 21 women served in the US Senate, and Republicans have never had more than six at any one time. Still, as long as we interpret the results cautiously, these data can shed light on the relationship between sex and procedural votes in the chamber. Once we account for electoral performance and the partisan composition of the constituency, little differentiates women from men (see app. 5 for House and Senate multivariate results).17 For both parties in both chambers, notice that the coefficient on sex is virtually zero. Test 4: Senate amendments Amending behavior in the Senate is the fourth lens through which we assess the relationship between sex and cooperation on Capitol Hill. Until very recently, senators could offer any amendment to any part of a bill being debated on the floor.18 Amendments can serve multiple purposes. First—and most fundamentally—senators can attempt to reword legislation so that it more closely aligns with their preferred policy. Second, senators can attach unrelated provisions to a bill on the floor with the hope of fast-tracking their adoption. Third, they can place other senators on the record for controversial policies. Finally, amendments can slow down, or essentially kill, the passage of legislation. As long as 20 senators agree, amendments must be disposed of through roll-call votes, which can take up to 30 minutes to complete (as opposed to a 10-second voice vote). This “death by amendment” strategy stalls legislation by demanding roll-call votes on an endless number of amendments (Sinclair 2011). Teasing out the motivation for why a senator offers an amendment is exceedingly difficult, but we expect the position taking and electoral motivations for offering amendments to be fairly consistent across all senators. These motivations should result in a standard base number of amendments for each senator in each congress. Those senators who are then also motivated by nefarious reasons—such as stalling legislation—will offer additional amendments (Theriault 2015). As such, we interpret the more amendments a senator offers and on which he or she then demands roll-call votes as a sign of engaging in tactical maneuvers. If women are more likely than men to prioritize moving the legislative process forward, then it is reasonable to assume that they should offer fewer amendments overall and demand fewer roll-call votes on them. Figure 7 Figure 7A figure 7B To test this proposition, we identified the sponsor of all 4,488 amendments that resulted in a Senate roll-call vote from the 103rd to 113th Congresses (1993–2014). 19 presents the mean number of roll-call votes from the amendments that female (black lines) and male (gray lines) senators introduced.displays the data for Democrats, and, for Republicans. Although the mean number of amendments varies across the congresses, in all 22 comparisons (11 for each party), women and men are statistically indistinguishable. 20 Once again, these null results withstand controls for a state’s partisan composition as well as a senator’s previous vote margin and legislative experience (see app. 6). For neither Democrats nor Republicans does member sex account for any variation in amending behavior.21 To the extent that roll-call votes on amendments gauge a propensity to create problems, female senators are just as likely as men to present legislative obstacles to problem solving in the chamber.

Discussion, Conclusion, and the Questions That Remain Go to Abstract Women as Problem Solvers?... Gender, Comity, and Colle... Gender and Problem Solvin... Discussion, Conclusion, a... References Notes

A growing body of work—some scholarly, some popular—laments the dysfunction that now characterizes Washington, DC (Dionne 2013; Edwards 2012; Lawless and Fox 2015; Mann and Ornstein 2013). And political scientists have offered nuanced accounts of the causes and consequences of a political system mired in legislative gridlock, policy stalemates, and party polarization (Sinclair 2006; Theriault 2008). But when it comes to proffering solutions, the scholarship is far less rigorous. Although there seems to be a consensus that electing more women would make Washington “work better,” this conclusion—until now—has been based almost wholly on anecdotal evidence cited by political scientists and journalists or the statements of members of Congress themselves. Our analysis is the first systematic assessment of the extent to which women are more likely than men in Congress to engage in bipartisan collaboration and cooperation. The results—in their totality—suggest that they are not. And we do not draw this conclusion lightly.22 We conducted more than 100 statistical tests based on CODELs, cosponsorships, procedural votes, and amendment roll-call votes, for both parties, across both chambers, and throughout time. Some of these facets of the legislative process are “hard” tests for bipartisanship; procedural votes are especially partisan, and party leaders play an important role in extending CODEL invitations and approving trips abroad. Others—like cosponsorships and amendment introductions—are relatively “easy” ways for bipartisan collaboration to emerge. Yet no matter where we looked or how we analyzed the data, we found no systematic evidence that women are more likely than men to be bipartisan “problem solvers.”23 In fact, we uncovered virtually no evidence that social engagement activities affect legislative behavior in a positive way at all. In the 308 congress-specific regression equations referenced in the footnotes, the social engagement activities of baseball/softball, Secret Santa, and Seersucker Thursday were significantly related to CODEL travel, cosponsorships, procedural vote scores, and amending behavior in only 44 (or 16%) cases. And 59% of these significant results were negative—the direction opposite from what the conventional wisdom would predict. Number of Gender Comparisons*

(1) Number of Gender Differences†

(2) Consistent with Popular Accounts

(3) House CODEL travel, 100th–113th Congresses 32 3 1 House bipartisan cosponsorship index, 113th Congress 2 1 0 Senate bipartisan cosponsorship index, 103rd–113th Congresses 24 1 1 House procedural votes, 100th–113th Congresses 30 16 4 Senate procedural votes, 100th–113th Congresses 2 0 0 Senate amendments, 103rd–113th Congresses 24 0 0 Total 114 21 (18.4%) 6 (5.3%) We summarize our results in table 1 , which provides an overview of our statistical evidence. Column 1 presents the categories where we looked for gender differences or effects. For each, we list the total number of results we presented either in figures (bivariate) or tables (multivariate tests). The entries in column 2 report the number of statistically significant results—that is, gender differences—we uncovered in each category. The first row of the table, for example, includes the 32 CODEL analyses we conducted: 28 bivariate comparisons (14 for partisan trips and 14 for bipartisan travel) and four regression equations that predicted whether the sex of the legislator mattered for each type of travel. In only three cases did we uncover a gender difference that met the threshold for statistical significance. All told, we looked for gender differences in 114 possible places. In only 21 of them (18.4%) did we find statistically significant results. That number is misleadingly inflated, though, for two reasons. First, because so much of the discussion about women in Congress focuses on their propensity to problem solve, we also calculated, in table 1 column 3, the number of statistically significant differences that are consistent with that view. For example, our finding that Democratic women in two congresses took more partisan trips than men runs counter to the popular expectation. All told, despite some high-profile examples of female legislators’ problem-solving tactics, we find evidence that women are more likely than men to move the legislative process along in a constructive, bipartisan way in only six (out of 114) cases. Second, in almost all cases—regardless of statistical significance—the substantive effect of a member’s sex on legislative behavior was close to zero. In no way, however, do we suggest that women’s presence in Congress does not make a difference. Recent studies have found that women in Congress deliver more federal spending to their districts and sponsor more legislation than their male colleagues (Anzia and Berry 2011). They prioritize earmark requests pertaining to “women’s” issues (Schulze 2013; Schulze and Hurvitz 2016). They have greater success keeping their sponsored bills alive longer in the legislative process (Volden, Wiseman, and Wittmer 2013). When given an opportunity to speak about issues of their choosing during one-minute speeches, congresswomen in both parties are more likely than men to speak and to speak about women (Pearson and Dancey 2011). And women’s presence brings to Congress a greater sense of democratic legitimacy (see Mansbridge 1999). Beyond these benefits, we now also have systematic evidence that women are more likely than men to participate in the social engagement activities and traditions that contribute to the social fabric of Congress, which might signal to potential candidates that women in politics make the political arena a somewhat more civil, and somewhat less dysfunctional, place to work (see Lawless and Fox 2010, 2015). Yet the data do not bear out the kinds of bipartisan cooperation, collaboration, and problem solving members of Congress, journalists, and political scientists often refer to when issuing calls for more female candidates and lauding the successes of female legislators.24 Given these results, we should be careful not to place heightened expectations on our female elected officials. A 2014 Pew study, for example, found that 41% of women—and 27% of men—thought women in politics were better at “working out compromises” (Cohn and Livingston 2016). Such high expectations belie the highly partisan congressional work environment that legislators find themselves in today. Constituents will only be disappointed in their female members of Congress when it becomes clear that institutional constraints make it difficult for any factor to trump party in the legislative process. Ours is certainly not the last word on this subject. And our results raise at least as many questions as they answer. We encourage scholars to think broadly about how the conventional wisdom came to be. Why is there a disconnect between qualitative accounts of the experiences of members of Congress and quantitative analyses of their legislative behavior? Are there ways that gender differences affect legislative style and the legislative process that outcomes-based measures miss? Are there creative ways to measure social engagement that could speak to more sustained and long-term relationship building? Is it possible that but for the premium women place on collegiality, Congress would function even worse than it does now? Have we perhaps reached a point in time where levels of polarization and partisanship are so high that there is simply no room for comity and collegiality—on the part of either women or men—to shape legislative behavior? Do constituents expect more from female legislators because of campaign messages about women’s propensity to cooperate? Political science, after all, can be both inward and outward looking, not only serving the needs of the academy but also informing public debate, discourse, and practice.