Milwaukee doulas ask for the community's help to lower black maternal and infant mortality
Vanessa Johnson is a Milwaukee doula and registered nurse. She provides doula services — prenatal, and labor and delivery support for expectant mothers — to her clients through A Miracle Happened Birth Services.

A few months ago, Johnson said, she was talking with some of her colleagues about the same things their conversations always come back to. How the infant and maternal mortality rates are unacceptably high in Wisconsin. And how they're even higher in the African-American community. And about what they can do about it.

According to the most recent data, the average infant mortality rate in Wisconsin is 4.8 per 1,000 white infants, compared to 14.2 for African American infants. And, the maternal mortality rate in Wisconsin is five times higher for black women than for white women.

RELATED: Milwaukee may implement a pilot program for doulas to address infant mortality in 53206

Kisha Shanks, an infant mental health consultant and owner of Infinite Family Solutions, was part of that conversation. "A lot of times, it seems like the need for funding or the need to figure out programs, gets in the way of needs actually getting met," Shanks said.

Doulas help mothers throughout pregnancy and birth with a variety of techniques, many of which will be demonstrated at the "It takes a village: Community baby shower & resource fair." (Photo: Vanessa Johnson)

Meeting the needs of pregnant women is what Johnson, Shanks and doulas throughout Milwaukee do every day.

The women see themselves as advocates for their clients during one of the most stressful and most rewarding times in their lives. And, having that advocate is something that's been catching on across the country as a way to improve birth outcomes.

The doulas think a big reason for high African-American maternal and infant mortality rates is a lack of awareness, not only that doula services exist, but also about what happens during and after pregnancy.

Angela Mallett is a doula and co-owner of HoneyBee Sage Wellness. "There are so many moms who don't know the simple things they should know before they give birth," Mallett said. "Things like how long contractions will be, the changes that happen in a pregnant woman's body, how much pain there will be."

This group of women has made it a mission to educate Milwaukee women and spread awareness. And one way they're doing that is at "It Takes a Village: Community Baby Shower and Resource Fair" on March 23, during World Doula Week.

The event, which will take place at Sherman Phoenix, will help moms in three ways.

An interactive resource fair

NEWSLETTERS Get the Dish newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Food and dining news, reviews, recipes and more delivered weekly. Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Dish Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The first component is a resource fair. Johnson said there will be about 15 different vendors at the fair who will share important information about pregnancy, birth and parenting. And Johnson emphasized that the vendors won't just be passively handing out pamphlets to the women. "It's an interactive resource fair," she said. "People will be demonstrating things, playing games, running activities."

Doulas, midwives and health professionals will demonstrate labor and relaxation techniques at the "It takes a village: community baby shower and resource fair." (Photo: Vanessa Johnson)

Some examples?

Doulas will demonstrate how to use birthing balls.

Nutritionists will ask trivia questions.

Chefs will demonstrate healthy, easy meal prep for new moms.

Volunteers will lead children's story times and craft areas.

Doctors, nurses and midwives will answer questions.

A community baby shower

The second component is the baby shower. The doulas are hoping to receive enough donations of baby items to be able to give a gift bag to every expecting mom who comes to the fair. If they don't get quite enough donations, the plan is to raffle off the items.

New baby items will be accepted to give out to mothers at the "It takes a village; Community baby shower and resource fair." (Photo: Vanessa Johnson)

People can make their donations of (new!) items, such as diapers, wipes and baby clothes, at four different locations

A pampering party

The third component of the event will be a party to pamper expectant moms. Shanks said trauma and stress are prevalent in the low-income African-American community, factors that can lead to problems, including even infant and maternal mortality.

For all moms, especially those dealing with extreme stress, self-care and relaxation are important. Enter the chance for expectant moms to receive free pampering opportunities. "A lot of moms don't know about all these beneficial relaxation, holistic healing and nutrition techniques," said Johnson. "We're going to introduce those things here."

Expectant moms will be able to receive pampering services, such as massages, at the "It takes a village: Community baby shower & resource fair." (Photo: Vanessa Johnson)

The pampering part of the event will take place at Vibez Creative Arts Space, on the second floor of Sherman Phoenix. Moms can sign up for services ahead of time, such as the following:

yoga

infant massage class

full body massage

foot spa and massage

belly painting

canvas painting

This group of Milwaukee doulas is hoping that their event will go a long way toward empowering, educating and helping women. And, based on the outpouring of support and donations they've already gotten, they're confident they'll receive more support at the event.

Shani Toor, a doula and nursing student, is part of the group as well. "People want to help. No one wants to see a high black infant mortality rate," said Toor. "But they don't know how to help. This event will give people some good ideas."

If you go

When: Saturday, March 23, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.

Where: Sherman Phoenix, 3536 W. Fond du Lac Ave.

Admission and services are free. But, moms who want to take advantage of services at the pampering party are asked to register.

Contact Amy Schwabe at (414)559-2365 or amy.schwabe@jrn.com. Follow her on Twitter at @WisFamilyJS, Instagram at @wisfamilyjs or Facebook at WisconsinFamily.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/life/wisconsin-family/2019/03/18/milwaukee-doulas-try-lower-black-infant-and-maternal-mortality/3105103002/