Glendale officials oppose state plans for juvenile detention facility on Teutonia Avenue
Buy Photo Glendale-River Hills School Board President Andrew Franklin raises concerns about a 32-bed juvenile detention facility during a Glendale Common Council meeting on March 25. Pictured clockwise from left are Franklin, Department of Corrections Secretary Kevin Carr, State Sen. Lena Taylor, Glendale Alderman James Daugherty, Glendale Alderman John Gelhard, Glendale Alderwoman Tomika Vukovic, Glendale Mayor Bryan Kennedy and Glendale Alderman Richard Wiese. (Photo: Jeff Rumage/Now News Group)

GLENDALE - Glendale officials have issued formal opposition to the state's plan to put a 32-bed juvenile detention facility on the Glendale-Milwaukee border, saying the state made its decision abruptly and without any notice to Glendale.

Gov. Tony Evers announced on March 12 that the site on Teutonia Avenue north of Mill Road would be home to one of two new regional detention facilities housing serious-level juvenile offenders from Lincoln Hills School for Boys and Copper Lake School for Girls.

Located north of Wausau, the Lincoln Hills and Copper Lake detention facilities have been under criminal investigation for four years. The guards at the facility have kept inmates locked in solitary confinement for weeks at a time, managed behavior with pepper spray and caused serious injuries in some cases.

Legislators voted last year to close Lincoln Hills and Copper Lake and replace them with smaller, regional facilities that would keep young offenders closer to where they live. The state is under a deadline to shut down the facility by Jan. 1, 2021, but Evers wants to extend that deadline.

'We are more impacted'

Although the proposed detention facility would be in Milwaukee, Glendale Mayor Bryan Kennedy pointed out that it is 100 feet from the nearest Glendale business and just over 1,000 feet from Glen Hills Middle School. It’s also near a high-density Glendale neighborhood.

“You might as well be building it in the city of Glendale, for all intents and purposes," Kennedy said at a Common Council meeting March 25. "We are more impacted by this location, and none of us have ever been invited to any public meetings. We have never been invited to have a conversation with anybody about this location."

The council invited Milwaukee Common Council President Ashanti Hamilton, State Sen. Lena Taylor and Department of Correction Secretary Kevin Carr to the meeting. Hamilton and residents of his district have also said they were not consulted about the Teutonia location.

RELATED: Milwaukee residents rip mayor and county officials for ignoring input on juvenile facility

NEWSLETTERS Get the News from Now newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Top headlines from the suburbs delivered to your inbox twice a week Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Tues, Thurs Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for News from Now Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Carr, who has lived in Glendale since 1993, apologized to the council on behalf of the Evers administration for not meeting with them prior to announcing the Teutonia Avenue location.

"What's done is done, and I can't change that," he said. "All I can do is move forward and try and work with you and any other concerned parties as best I can to include you in the conversation, get your input as we move forward and try to address any concerns you may have as we move forward."

A state site selection committee had recommended a different location in Milwaukee, at 7301 W. Mill Road. But Carr said that site has four schools within a half-mile radius and has more population density, with 5,700 people compared within a half-mile radius compared with 2,500 for the Teutonia Avenue site.

The Teutonia Avenue site is also easier for inmates' families to access by public transportation, Carr said. It is adjacent to the Milwaukee Safety Academy, where police recruits are trained.

Taylor repeated her accusation that Ald. Chantia Lewis, who represents the Mill Road district, organized "fear-mongering" community meetings during which she inaccurately claimed that the facility would house 200 people. Lewis also claimed the facility would drive down property values and hurt local businesses, Taylor said.

RELATED: Milwaukee wants its juvenile offenders closer to home, but finding alternatives to Lincoln Hills proves tough

Direct Supply, a business about a mile north of the Mill Road site, was also vocal in its opposition to a juvenile detention facility near its headquarters.

Because the Mill Road property was "not the site favored by the city," Carr said the state would have faced difficulties in getting the site rezoned and permitted.

Instead, Milwaukee officials suggested the Teutonia Avenue site, where Milwaukee County officials had considered building a detention facility for juveniles accused of less-serious crimes.

"The City of Milwaukee was not going to support the 72nd and Mill Road site," Carr said. "In order for our project to move forward, the Teutonia and Mill Road site had no objection from the city. That meant we could get our project moving as quickly as possible."

Taylor said she did not appreciate the City of Milwaukee "strong-arming" the state into buying contaminated city-owned land on Teutonia Avenue instead of building on the state-owned land at 7301 W. Mill Road.

"I’m going to use everything I have to hold them accountable," she said. "I don’t believe the best choice has been made. I believe the (Evers) administration did what Mayor Barrett wanted and what Alderwoman Lewis wanted."

Glendale's position

Kennedy drafted a policy position expressing support for the state's desire to build a juvenile detention facility closer to the homes of juvenile offenders but opposing the Evers administration's "unilateral" approach to selecting the Teutonia Avenue site.

Kennedy suggested the state reconsider the site at 7301 W. Mill Road. Kennedy also urged the Legislature to extend the deadline for Lincoln Hills' closure, which he said would allow the state to do its due diligence in selecting a site.

The Glendale Common Council unanimously approved Kennedy's policy position, which will be sent to elected officials at the state level.

Carr said the detention facility will be secure. Carr and Taylor said they were not aware of any escapes from the facility, but according to WSAW-TV, at least two men escaped the facility in 2005.

Carr added that the detention facility will look like a "modern school building" with no plans for a guard tower or a razor wire fence around the perimeter. Juvenile offenders would spend their outdoor hours in a courtyard and would not be visible to the public, he said.

Contact Jeff Rumage at (262) 446-6616 or jeff.rumage@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter at @JeffRumage or Facebook at www.facebook.com/northshorenow.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/communities/northshore/news/glendale/2019/03/26/glendale-officials-oppose-site-new-juvenile-facility/3272295002/