Wisconsin broadband speeds lagging
Internet speeds in Wisconsin, overall, and Milwaukee are slower than the national average, although gains are being made in a competitive mobile wireless marketplace.

File (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Wisconsin lags behind other states in internet speeds, a new report shows, although gains have been made through the deployment of fiber optic cable and competition in the mobile wireless market.

Wisconsin ranks 49th among states and the District of Columbia in the average download internet speed for a wired connection, according to the report from Speedtest,a Seattle technology firm.

Graphic: Where Wisconsin ranks in average download internet speed.

That places Wisconsin behind Wyoming and Montana, but ahead of Ohio and Maine, in the Speedtest rankings.

The average download speed for Wisconsin was 28.59 megabits per second, compared with more than 54 mbps for the national average, Speedtest said.

Kansas had the highest ranking, of nearly 82 mbps, followed by Hawaii, 69.65, and Texas, 64.11.

Nationwide, average download internet speeds this year topped 50 mbps for the first time, up 40% since July 2015, according to Speedtest.

“That’s a really big milestone because the FCC benchmark for broadband is 25 megabits per second,” said Speedtest spokeswoman Adriane Holter.

Broadband is a high-speed internet connection capable of handling data through fiber optic cable or other means. Some rural areas are limited to a slow-speed connection that's unsuitable for certain purposes, such as online gaming or operating a business.

There are various rankings of how states compare, and while not everyone agrees on the numbers, few would say that broadband service isn't important in a knowledge-based economy.

"Speeds are continuing to increase for both the wired and wireless segments of the industry. That's what I am looking for in these types of rankings," said Bill Esbeck , executive director of the Wisconsin State Telecommunications Association.

While Wisconsin ranks near the bottom in average wired broadband speeds, according to Speedtest, the 28.59 megabits per second is still more than adequate for most internet users watching a movie on Netflix or telecommuting.

NEWSLETTERS Get the Business Watch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Get todays business headlines delivered to your inbox. Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Business Watch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"We are seeing more and more high speeds, but in practical applications most people have what they need," Esbeck said.

Among Wisconsin’s wired internet service providers, Speedtest said TDS Telecom, of Madison, had the fastest average download speed of 79.31 mbps, followed by Spectrum (the new Time Warner Cable and Charter) at 66.03. AT&T's U-verse had an average download speed of 29.51 mbps, while Century Link's speed was 23.46.

Verizon Wireless was the fastest mobile carrier in the state, according to Speedtest, with an average download speed of 26.2 mbps, followed by AT&T, 20.17, T-Mobile, 17.05, and Sprint at 16.23.

Nationwide, mobile internet customers have seen performance gains, up more than 30% since last year, with an average download speed of 19.27 mbps.

"The four major mobile carriers, Verizon, T-Mobile, AT&T and Sprint, are in a tight race for fastest download speeds. All four are also aggressively competing on price to attract new subscribers," Speedtest said.

"Competition is a good thing, and while we're seeing faster performance than ever before, the internet in the U.S. could certainly improve. The U.S. still lags from an international perspective, currently ranking 20th in fixed (wired) broadband and 42nd in mobile internet performance globally," the report noted.

"If you're an optimist, you'll see an annual 40% increase in fixed broadband speed performance, and a 30% increase in mobile internet performance, as a big step in the right direction. For the skeptics among us, you'll recognize that current speeds in the U.S. are still much slower than what many other countries receive."

Speedtest says its average-download-speed data is based on actual user experience from hundreds of millions of consumers around the world.

Upload speeds, where someone is posting a video to YouTube, for example, are much slower.

"Downloads matter more to the average user. Most of what people are doing on the internet is consuming information, streaming videos, reading articles and playing games," Holter said.

Monday, backers of a proposed municipal broadband service in Madison released a report that showed the service could cost more than $200 million.

If the plan is successful, Madison would become the largest Wisconsin city to have a municipal broadband service, competing with commercial internet providers.

The idea behind the project is to make a fiber optic cable broadband connection available to every business and residence in Madison. Currently there's a difference in the quality of service in the city, depending on the location.

The City of Madison Digital Technology Committee says it wants to narrow the "digital divide," which is the disparity between those who have access to advanced communications technology and those who don’t.

"The city understands that filling broadband service gaps is important to support robust economic development efforts, particularly for small and medium-size businesses whose needs are not met with residential-grade service offerings but that cannot afford business-class service," the Madison report said.

Madison has broadband service from AT&T, Charter Communications and TDS Telecom. However, the speeds aren't always as fast as they would be with fiber optic cable covering the entire city, said Barry Orton, chairman of the Digital Technology Committee.

Read or Share this story: http://on.jsonl.in/2banReD