Credit rating agency Moody's issues cautionary note on local Foxconn debt
Foxconn Technology Group has done extensive site preparation for what it says will be a large manufacturing and research complex in Mount Pleasant. (Photo: Curtis Waltz / aerialscapes.com)

Foxconn Technology Group's failure to hit its first Wisconsin hiring target highlights the financial risks Mount Pleasant and Racine County face as they spend money upfront to support Foxconn's stated plans for a massive manufacturing and research complex, a leading credit rating agency said Thursday.

Despite the cautionary comments, issued by Moody's Investors Service, both local governments retain high credit ratings. Those ratings remain unchanged.

But the Moody's note underlines the potential seriousness of even incremental developments related to the large, high-profile public subsidies of the Foxconn project.

FULL COVERAGE: Foxconn in Wisconsin

The immediate concern that caught the attention of Moody's is seemingly minor: The 178 Wisconsin jobs Foxconn created in 2018 fell short of the 260 needed for the company to immediately claim tax credits for the year.

The amount of credits potentially available to the company, $9.5 million, amounts to well under 1 percent of the $2.85 billion Foxconn could receive if it creates — as it has repeatedly said it will — 13,000 Wisconsin jobs and spends at least $9 billion on its Mount Pleasant complex.

Further, the Taiwan-based electronics manufacturer still could capture the 2018 credits by creating enough jobs in subsequent years.

RELATED: Foxconn falls short of first job-creation hurdle but reiterates ultimate employment pledge

Still, Moody's, which lowered the credit ratings of Mount Pleasant and Racine County last fall because of their Foxconn-related debt, took note.

"The missed target highlights the project's risks to Racine County (Aa2 negative) and the village of Mount Pleasant (Aa3 negative), given their exposure to upfront expenditures and bonding that support Foxconn's project," the Moody's analysts wrote.

The analysts noted that Foxconn has completed a 120,000-square-foot building at the Mount Pleasant site and has bought buildings in Eau Claire, Green Bay and Milwaukee.

"Despite the rapid increase in their footprint across the state, Foxconn's employment figures lag behind expenditures," the analysts wrote.

NEWSLETTERS Get the Business Watch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Get todays business headlines delivered to your inbox. Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Business Watch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

ELATED: Report says Foxconn suspending work on Wisconsin plant, Foxconn says plans are 'unchanged'

RELATED: Report: Foxconn may drop manufacturing as part of drastic rethinking of Racine County campus

The county's Aa2 credit rating is the third-highest among the 21 in the Moody's hierarchy, and the village's rating is the fourth-highest.

"Anything with Aa is judged to be of high quality and subject to very low credit risk," said David Jacobson, vice president of communications for Moody's public finance group.

The "negative" description indicates the presence of downward pressure that places the ratings at higher risk of being downgraded over the next 12 to 24 months, Jacobson said.

The village and county have borrowed $355 million so far in support of Foxconn. They have spent about $190 million of that, with most of the money going for land acquisition. Foxconn, meanwhile, has contributed $60 million for the village to use in buying land.

Local officials have said the communities will recoup their spending on the Foxconn project — now estimated to ultimately total $912 million — through taxes on the increased property value created by Foxconn and associated development.

If the increase in property value falls short of expectations, the contract with Foxconn essentially requires the company to cover the local costs.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/money/business/2019/01/31/moodys-issues-cautionary-note-local-foxconn-debt/2731560002/