Up-close view of Foxconn site shows massive project coming into focus
CLOSE Viewed from atop a 30-foot-high mound of topsoil scraped from the Foxconn factory site, the construction of the massive complex stretches over hundreds of acres where the foundation is being prepared for an initial group of display-panel manufacturing buildings. Rick Romell, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

Seen from atop a 30-foot mound of topsoil scraped from the site, the Foxconn construction acres spreads over hundreds of acres in Mount Pleasant. (Photo: Rick Romell / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

With construction now a few months old, the huge scope of the Foxconn project is coming into sharper focus — hundreds of workers on site, a dump truck coming or going every 12 seconds in the middle of the day and a 2- to 3-foot-thick base of aggregate being laid to support a complex of buildings more than a third of a mile long.

"It's a massive, massive footprint," Adam Jelen, senior vice president with Gilbane Building Co., said as he stood atop a 30-foot mound of topsoil overlooking a construction site crawling with dump trucks hauling in gravel and studded with some 150 pieces of excavation equipment, most of it idle for the moment because of recent rains.

"I think it's hard for folks to wrap their arms around the scale," Jelen said.

Gilbane and the Wisconsin Economic Development Corp. offered reporters an up-close look Thursday at the site, where Foxconn Technology Group plans a $10 billion manufacturing and research complex producing high-definition display panels.

FULL COVERAGE: Foxconn in Wisconsin

The visits came as officials mark nearly 100 days since the ceremonial groundbreaking for the project on June 28. Actual construction — beginning with excavating and scraping the site — began a couple months before that.

As immense as the current construction site Jelen showed off Thursday was, it's less than 1,000 acres. The total area earmarked for Foxconn and related development in Mount Pleasant is about 2,800 acres, or nearly the size of the city of Cudahy.

So far, according to Gilbane, which is overseeing construction, 3.5 million cubic yards of dirt have been moved — enough to fill the Empire State Building two and a half times.

The walls of the first structure, a 120,000-square-foot "multi-purpose building," are up, with the building expected to be substantially completed late this year. Sometime in the second quarter of 2019, workers are expected to begin pouring the concrete foundation for the far-larger first complex of manufacturing buildings, Jelen said.

Those buildings, covering millions of square feet, will house display-panel production. They must rest on an ultra-stable base and will consist predominantly of "clean rooms" equipped with high-efficiency air filters, necessary in panel manufacturing. Some such rooms are cleaner than a hospital operating room, Jelen said.

About 3,000 Wisconsin residents from 65 of the state's 72 counties are employed on either Foxconn construction or the associated work underway on infrastructure such as the widening of I-94 and local roads, according to the WEDC. The agency said 154 Wisconsin-based companies have received contracts for site preparation and construction of the first Foxconn building.

CLOSE Dump trucks hauling aggregate from four area quarries stream in and out of the Foxconn construction site. Early Thursday afternoon, a dump truck was entering or leaving every 12 seconds. Rick Romell, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

Officials have said the Foxconn campus ultimately will include 22 million square feet of building space. It would be one of the country's largest manufacturing complexes, and has been described by Gov. Scott Walker, who pushed to attract the company to Wisconsin, as "the single largest economic development project" in the state's history.

As part of that development, Foxconn stands to receive some $4 billion in public subsidies if it hits investment targets and creates 13,000 Wisconsin jobs.

The company has announced several other projects around the state — including what Foxconn is calling innovation centers in Green Bay, Eau Claire and Racine — and the firm potentially can earn payments from the state for jobs at those places. But Foxconn will receive state payments for its investments only on money the firm spends in the formally designated development zone in Mount Pleasant where it plans its factory and research complex.

Money spent by the firm elsewhere in Wisconsin, such as the $14.9 million it paid for a downtown Milwaukee office building or the up to $100 million it has pledged to the University of Wisconsin-Madison, will not count toward the investment tax credits.

Be MKE Who we are. Where we go. What we need to know. Each week in this newsletter, Sarah Hauer will serve as your city guide and share stories about Milwaukee, its people and what's happening around town. Sign up

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/money/business/2018/10/04/up-close-view-foxconn-site-shows-massive-project-coming-into-focus/1524759002/