Like tailgating for basketball: Thousands swarm Fiserv Forum plaza as Bucks drive deep into playoffs
CLOSE Thousands of wildly cheering Bucks fans in the outdoor beer garden at Fiserv Forum saluted the team's playoff victory over the Boston Celtics on Wednesday. Rick Romell, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

Tailgaters, move over. There's a new party place in town.

Thousands of basketball-loving fans — and folks who just like a good time — have been pouring into what may soon become Milwaukee's de facto town square, the bar- and restaurant-lined plaza outside Fiserv Forum.

With the Milwaukee Bucks rolling through their deepest playoff run in 18 years, and advancing Wednesday to the Eastern Conference finals by finishing off the Boston Celtics, Milwaukeeans are flocking to the plaza to whoop, clap, watch screens the size of garage doors and — surprise — eat and drink.

Wednesday's weather — a stiff breeze off Lake Michigan put the game-time wind chill at 39 degrees — may have held down the outside-the-arena crowd a bit before the game.

But as the Bucks pushed in the fourth quarter toward eliminating the Celtics, 116-91, thousands of fans began refilling the plaza despite a sometimes pouring rain. They wanted to take it all in, cloudbursts and all.

"It's come together exactly how we hoped it would," Michael Belot, senior vice president of Bucks Ventures and Development, said earlier in the day Wednesday of the space the organization views as a critical complement to the $524 million arena next door.

He couldn't have asked for a more favorable planetary alignment. Fiserv Forum, built with funds including $250 million from taxpayers, has drawn sellout crowds and rave reviews. The Bucks finished the regular season with the best record in the NBA. And the team is led by a magnetic star who may be Greece's greatest export since democracy and the gyro.

"It really was a perfect storm," said David Dupee, co-owner of Good City Brewing, which opened a brewery and taproom on the plaza in January.

That storm has led to near-capacity crowds at Punch Bowl Social — which can accommodate up to 1,200 — and lines out the door at the Bucks-operated Mecca Sports Bar & Grill, with its 38-foot (measured diagonally) TV monitor and ear-thumping sound system meant to mimic the arena experience.

"You want to see crazy — it gets a little crazy my friend," said Punch Bowl Social General Manager Chris Hopkins, a Hard Rock Cafe veteran who was gearing up for a 14- to 15-hour shift Wednesday with the Bucks at home and trying to beat the Boston Celtics and advance to the Eastern Conference finals.

How crazy? Well, Hopkins figured to have about a dozen cooks working the line in the kitchen, kicking out as many as 400 meals an hour. Six dishwashers were scheduled, along with 25 servers.

Buy Photo David St. Pierre with the Bucks shows Lincoln Drobac, 5, how to spin a ball on his finger as crowds gather on the plaza before the Milwaukee Bucks vs. Boston Celtics NBA playoff game Wednesday. (Photo: Rick Wood / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

And 22 bartenders. When you figure to move 100 cases of beer and drain more than 15 kegs (that comes to more than 4,000 12-ounce servings), you'll need them.

"It's a hustle here for sure," Hopkins said. "It's good."

So good that Punch Bowl, which opened March 9 as the 16th location for a Denver-based chain that features such amusements as bowling, billiards and karaoke rooms (two of the rooms here honor hometown boys Liberace and Steve Miller), has been among the firm's top-performing spots.

One door down, at Mecca, nearly all of the 105 employees were to be on duty Wednesday.

"It’s a heavy staff but we need it for the amount of business we do in the time that we do it,” said Justin Green, the Bucks' senior vice president of hospitality.

As many as 750 people can fit inside the two-level Mecca, which opens at 4 p.m.

"We had a line of about 40 people ... at 3:15 for our last game and we were at capacity by about 4:30," Green said.

Wednesday brought more of the same. About 100 fans were queued up shortly before the place opened.

Buy Photo Fans stand in line at the Mecca Sports Bar and Grill before the Bucks vs. Celtics game Wednesday. (Photo: Rick Wood / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Some of them were being interviewed by Panos Satzoglou for his digital news site dedicated to all things Greek-American. Wednesday's subject: Giannis Antetokounmpo, whose colossal-sized image — his head is nearly 25 feet tall — faced the crowd from Fiserv Forum's east wall.

"I love basketball," Satzoglou said. "...Just NBA. NBA for me is civilization."

Also roaming the plaza was Antonis Kalkavouras, head of the basketball department for the Greek sports website gazzetta.gr and in Milwaukee again to cover Antetokounmpo.

"There is a great Antetokounmpomania in Greece, for sure," Kalkavouras said.

"Giannis is my boy. I know him from the age of 16. ... He's a great kid — great character and mindset."

It was a fine spring day in Milwaukee — for, say, March. The plaza was peppered with down jackets, hoodies and stocking caps.

Avery and Sherelle Harris of Milwaukee staked out the equivalent of mid-court seats and set up their polka-dot camping chairs in front of the 28-foot screen at the Beer Garden outside Fiserv Forum on Wednesday. (Photo: Rick Romell / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

At what was essentially mid-court in front of the 28-foot TV screen at the outdoor beer garden, Sherelle and Avery Harris were hunkered down in the polka-dot camping chairs they'd set up two hours before tip-off.

"Every time we come down, same spot," said Sherelle, 51, whose Bucks devotion began at age 7 when she used to read 10 books a week at the Milwaukee Public Library to get free tickets to games at the old arena.

On Wednesday, she was bundled in two T-shirts, a fleece jacket, knit gloves and a big blanket.

"Actually, it's an electric blanket, but I don't have cords. Otherwise, I'd plug it in," she said.

Wednesday marked the couple's fourth Bucks-watching visit to the beer garden, giving Sherelle enough big-screen observation time to have a firm — to her — grasp on the team's chances.

"We're going to win," she said "I have no doubts. We're going all the way."

Several hundred fans were on hand at the Beer Garden, which, sandwiched between buildings, was the warmest outdoor spot. Lines continued outside Mecca and the Punch Bowl, but Good City had some open space in its large upstairs room.

Between Summerfest, the string of lakefront ethnic festivals, Bastille Days and the parking-lot grilling and beer-drinking scene before most Brewers' games, Milwaukee has long had plenty of places to party. But Dupee said the plaza provides a downtown gathering spot the city hasn't had until now.

"Milwaukee has Cathedral Square and Jazz in the Park and some other pockets, but I think this is the type of experience that Milwaukee’s been lacking,” he said.

Anthony Thomas likely would agree. A 59-year-old construction laborer and cement finisher, he helped build Fiserv Forum.

"Proud of it," Thomas said.

He was thinking about going to Wednesday night's game, but found the price for a standing-room ticket, well over $100, a little steep. No big deal. Thomas quickly opted for the next best thing:

Head to the plaza, stake out some ground at an outdoor viewing area and join thousands of other Bucks fans — at the newest spot bringing Milwaukeeans together.

With the way the Bucks are rolling, Thomas and the rest of us are going to have more opportunities to do just that.

Contact Rick Romell at (414) 224-2130 or rick.romell@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter at @RickRomell

Our subscribers make this coverage possible. Please consider supporting local journalism by subscribing to the Journal Sentinel at jsonline.com/deal.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/money/business/2019/05/08/thousands-swarm-fiserv-forum-plaza-milwaukee-bucks-playoff-run/1142999001/