U.S. Senate candidate Leah Vukmir wrote letter on behalf of lawmaker convicted of sex assault
CLOSE Mary Spicuzza answers a viewer’s question on if accusers in sexual assault claims should be identified and why the Legislature has said it won't identify them.

Buy Photo State Sen. Leah Vukmir. (Photo: Mark Hoffman / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

MADISON – U.S. Senate candidate Leah Vukmir wrote a character reference letter for a fellow state lawmaker just after he was convicted of sexual assault in 2014, court records show.

A month after a Waukesha County judge convicted then-Rep. Bill Kramer of two counts of fourth-degree sexual assault, Vukmir sent the judge a letter calling Kramer a friend who had changed his ways by getting sober in recent months.

Her short letter focused on his decision to quit drinking in 2014 and did not mention that he had shoved a woman against a car, forcibly kissed her, put his hands up her shirt and grabbed her groin.

The letter also did not mention a police officer had said Kramer mocked the breasts of his victim when he was questioned about the incident.

Vukmir, a state senator from Brookfield, is running in the GOP primary to challenge Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin next year. Also running in the Republican primary is Delafield businessman Kevin Nicholson.

The Senate race is getting underway amid a national debate about sexual harassment and sexual assault after political, entertainment and media figures have faced scrutiny — and in some cases lost their jobs — because of their treatment of women.

“Being sober has had a profound impact on Bill for the better,” Vukmir wrote in her November 2014 letter to the court. “I also think it is important to recognize that Bill became sober under his own volition. Bill became sober to improve his life, not because he was sent to a court-mandated program.

“I believe this change has improved Bill’s life considerably.”

Vukmir campaign manager Jess Ward said in a statement that letters like Vukmir's help give judges a better understanding of an accused person's character.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"As a mother and a nurse, no one takes sexual assault more seriously than Leah Vukmir," Ward said in her statement. "Leah’s brief character letter on behalf of a colleague who was convicted of an extremely serious crime does not diminish, nor excuse, his criminal behavior in any way."

Campaign spokesmen for Baldwin and Nicholson did not provide comment on Vukmir's letter.

Vukmir was one of two lawmakers to provide the court with character letters for Kramer. The other was Paul Farrow, a Republican from Pewaukee who was elected a few months later as Waukesha County executive.

Kramer’s conviction stemmed from a 2011 incident outside a Republican Party event at a Muskego tavern. The victim told the court she feared Kramer might rape her after she resisted his advances.

The victim did not report it at the time but came forward after Kramer allegedly groped a legislative aide’s breasts and bragged about his sexual prowess to a female lobbyist at a February 2014 fundraiser in Washington, D.C.

Vukmir sent her letter in October 2014, a month after Kramer pleaded no contest and was found guilty of the two misdemeanors. Just after Vukmir, Farrow and other supporters sent their letters, Kramer was sentenced to three years of probation that included five months in jail with work-release privileges.

Kramer, 52, was stripped of his position as majority leader in March 2014. He did not seek re-election that fall and left the Assembly in January 2015 when his term expired.

RELATED: Wisconsin Sen. Kathleen Vinehout wrote reference letter for man charged with child porn possession

According to the criminal complaint, Kramer gave conflicting reports to a police officer about whether he had touched the breasts and groin of his 2011 victim. The officer said Kramer had told him that the victim had “very nice doctor-enhanced breasts. I am not a big fan of those. I like real ones.”

The legislative aide who was allegedly groped in 2014 filed a personnel complaint against Kramer. Legislative officials have declined to release the complaint and investigation, saying they always keep such matters private.

Vukmir supports the policy of keeping sexual harassment complaints against lawmakers and their staff from the public because "victims need to feel safe to come forward without fear their traumatic experience will be made public without consent," Ward said in her statement.

Leaders from both parties have embraced the policy, saying it protects victims. Many victim advocates say the public should be able to learn about the findings of investigations if victim names are kept private.

Vukmir isn’t the only Wisconsin politician seeking higher office to vouch for someone facing legal trouble.

State Sen. Kathleen Vinehout (D-Alma) — who is now running for governor — in 2015 wrote a character reference letter for a legislative attorney who was charged with possessing child pornography. The attorney, David Lovell, was convicted this summer of five felonies and sentenced to three years in prison and three years of extended supervision.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2nmq7pE