Tony Evers to seek unprecedented $600 million more in special education funding
Buy Photo State Superintendent Tony Evers. (Photo: Rick Wood, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

Superintendent of Public Instruction Tony Evers will seek an unprecedented increase in school funding for students with disabilities in the 2019-'21 state budget, the latest in a series of announcements by Gov. Scott Walker and his top Democratic challenger as they position themselves as the most education-friendly in advance of the November election.

Evers announced Monday that he will seek $969 million in special education funding in the next biennial budget, up 163% from the current $369 million, which has remained flat for the last decade.

The move, he said, would more than double the state reimbursement rate for school districts' special education costs, from 27% to 60%, and free up funding at the district level to benefit all students.

"It's time that we put this issue front and center," said Evers, the Democratic frontrunner going into the August primary, who was leading Walker, 54% to 41%, in an NBC News/Marist College poll last week.

RELATED: NBC News/Marist Poll: Tony Evers, Tammy Baldwin lead in Wisconsin races

"School districts have a legal obligation to kids with disabilities, and they are required to provide those services," Evers said. "That, in turn, puts pressure on the rest of the school budget. It's time to change that momentum."

Walker's office referred questions to his campaign, where spokesman Austin Altenburg said the governor is proud of his investment in education. He said Walker has funded in full, at $6.1 million and $1.5 million, Evers' previous requests for specific types of special education grants and that before he was a candidate Evers described the governor's budget as "kid-friendly."

Education has emerged as a central issue in the campaign for governor, and voters appear open to increasing funding for education. According to a June Marquette University poll, 59% of respondents said that, if given the choice, they would rather increase spending on public schools than cut taxes.

Evers' announcement on special education funding comes a week after he said he would be seeking an additional $60 million for mental health services in schools.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

RELATED: DPI calls for more than $60 million boost for school mental health services

Walker, for his part, has been touting himself as the "education governor" in ads and campaign stops. He points to, among other things, an increase in per-pupil funding and aid for rural schools; expansion of the state's private school voucher programs; a freeze on University of Wisconsin campuses' tuition; and his signature 2011 legislation, Act 10, that eliminated most collective bargaining for teachers and other public employees — a move proponents say saved schools money and gave them more flexibility to fire poorly performing teachers.

Evers' announcement was welcomed by disability-rights advocates.

"This is just such a welcome investment in our most vulnerable students, and it's long overdue," said Joanne Juhnke, policy director for Wisconsin Family Ties, which advocates for children with special needs and their families.

"We applaud any effort to champion a meaningful increase in special education funding in our state," Lisa Pugh of the Survival Coalition of Disability Organizations in Wisconsin said in a statement. "The state investment in special education has been flat-funded for a decade, forcing local districts to make up the difference and harming students with disabilities."

The coalition, which represents 30 organizations, issued a report earlier this year on the quality of special education services in Wisconsin. It found that 58% of families surveyed said they were concerned for their child’s future due to lack of funding, and nearly 40% said their child had experienced a reduction in support.

Special education funding is complex, and states use different methods to allocate those funds. Wisconsin is one of five that reimburse schools for the costs incurred for educating special-needs students. It is considered "categorical aid" outside of the regular funding formula.

Educators and advocates have argued for years that state funding has not kept pace with expenses, as the number of children diagnosed with disabilities — and the cost of serving them — has soared and federal funding has declined.

Between 1980 and 2016, the number of special education students in Wisconsin's public schools rose from almost 70,000, or 10% of all students, to more than 118,000, or 14%.

At the same time, the cost of educating those students soared from almost $161 million to $1.4 billion. And the state's rate of reimbursement fell from about 66% to just under 27%.

RELATED: Wisconsin voucher program for special needs students expected to triple next year

RELATED: Special needs vouchers cost Wisconsin public schools $5.6 million in first two years

Evers is expected to present the Department of Public Instruction's full budget proposal in September.

His latest announcement comes as a 2-year-old program that allows children with special needs to attend private schools on taxpayer-funded vouchers is expected to triple in size, to 84 schools, in the fall.

Under that program, private schools receive about $12,000 annually to educate a disabled student. Beginning this year, taxpayers would be required to cover up to 90% of the actual costs if the school can justify those expenses, though no schools have yet to request that.

Evers said that disparity was a factor in his decision to boost the reimbursement rate for public schools.

"It's clear that the advocates for kids with disabilities in public schools feel that if it's good enough for kids on special needs vouchers, it's good enough for them," Evers said. "We hope to a 90% reimbursement rate, that's our overall goal. But we're looking right now at 60% and that sets us on the right trajectory."

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2Lz0GwY