Historical trends in play this election

Hillary Clinton (left) and Donald Trump (Photo: Associated Press)

Wisconsin Democrat Russ Feingold is trying to defeat the man who cost him his U.S. Senate seat six years ago.

The last time someone pulled that off was 1934.

Incumbent Ron Johnson is trying to win a Senate election in a presidential year.

No Wisconsin Republican has done that in 36 years.

Some long-standing historical patterns are at play in this battleground state on Tuesday.

Take the presidential election.

Republicans have a chance to end a 32-year losing streak in Wisconsin should Donald Trump prevail over Hillary Clinton.

The GOP hasn’t carried Wisconsin for president since Ronald Reagan did it in 1984.

Only two Republicans in the past 56 years have won this state’s presidential vote: Reagan (in 1980 and 1984), and Richard Nixon (in 1960, 1968 and 1972).

Wisconsin has a longer streak of voting Democratic than Vermont, Illinois, Maryland, New Jersey, Connecticut or California – all states that voted for the first President Bush in 1988 but have become so blue since then they are no longer contested.

Then there’s the Senate race.

Feingold is trying to win a rare Senate rematch with the person who unseated him, which hasn’t happened anywhere in the U.S. in 82 years.

SPECIAL SECTION: Election coverage from the Journal Sentinel and WisconsinEYE

A victory also would make Feingold the first Wisconsinite to serve non-consecutive Senate terms since Republican John Coit Spooner in 1897.

Johnson is trying to overcome a major modern-day hurdle for Republicans: the party’s struggles with the bigger, broader presidential turnouts that typically produce an electorate friendlier to Democrats.

The last Wisconsin Republican to win a Senate race in a presidential year was Bob Kasten in 1980. The last one before that was Alexander Wiley in 1956.

A Johnson loss would be notable for other reasons.

It would make the Oshkosh Republican the first one-term U.S. senator from Wisconsin since Democrat F. Ryan Duffy in 1938.

If Johnson wins and Trump loses (or if Trump wins and Johnson loses), it would be the first time since 1968 that Wisconsin split its vote for president and Senate, voting Republican for one office and Democratic for the other. That year, Democrat Gaylord Nelson was re-elected to the U.S. Senate, and Republican Nixon carried the state by 4 points over Minnesota’s Hubert Humphrey for president.

No matter what happens in Tuesday’s presidential race, Wisconsin has already broken one historical pattern.

Before this year, Wisconsin primary voters had “picked” the eventual nominees in both parties in every election but one since 1968, the best track record in the country on this measure.

But last April, Trump and Clinton both suffered double-digit primary defeats in Wisconsin.

So whatever happens, our next president will be first one in more than 50 years who failed to win the Wisconsin primary.

Read or Share this story: http://on.jsonl.in/2fagpku