Bice: Democratic candidate Mahlon Mitchell comes under criticism for 19% hike in pay, expenses
Mahlon Mitchell is ready to debate Thursday, July 12, 2018, at the UW-Milwaukee MainStage Theatre. (Photo: Michael Sears / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Mahlon Mitchell, head of the state firefighters lobby, says he doesn't mind being called a "union boss."

That's good — because it looks like the Democratic gubernatorial candidate is paid like one.

A new U.S. Labor Department filing says Mitchell received wages and expenses from the Professional Fire Fighters of Wisconsin totalling $115,080 in 2017, a 19% increase from the previous year.

When combined with his pay from the Madison Fire Department, his total take jumps to $220,501 for 2017, some 10.6% higher than the previous year.

If he would win the governor's seat in November, he would take a significant pay cut. Gov. Scott Walker, a Republican, earns $144,423 annually.

Mitchell's campaign referred questions about his pay to the union, noting he does not set his own pay. The union boss, who is squaring off against seven other Democratic candidates, is currently attending his international union's convention in Seattle with the election less than a week away.

Steve Wilding, secretary/treasurer for the firefighters union, noted that Mitchell's base salary dropped from some $90,000 in 2016 to $70,000 in 2017. Wilding said top union officials are paid a small salary and a payment for services performed for the organization on a day-by-day basis.

"The number of days that our principal officers work providing services to the organization can vary greatly from year to year," Wilding wrote. He said those officers got a raise tied to the inflation rate.

Mitchell's sharp increase in expenses, Wilding said, was due to activities he did in his role as union president, such as traveling. Federal labor officials also urged the union to make changes in its accounting practices in recent years.

"It is misleading to characterize them as personal income to him," Wilding said.

Republican officials aren't buying it. They have been accusing Mitchell of using his union to benefit him and his campaign. The union has reported giving $40,444 to his campaign, and its parent political action committee has donated $86,000.

"With yet more money and still more unanswered questions, this is further proof that union boss Mahlon Mitchell is misusing union funds to benefit himself on the backs of hard-working firefighters,” said Alec Zimmerman, spokesman for the state GOP.

RELATED: Bice: Firefighter leader Mahlon Mitchell would take pay cut if elected governor

RELATED: Democratic candidate Mahlon Mitchell confronts GOP tracker, sending him away

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

RELATED: Bice: Dem candidate Mahlon Mitchell in joke stops just short of using racial slur on campaign swing

RELATED: Mahlon Mitchell compares himself to movie character with disabilities, drawing criticism from advocates

Republican officials are also raising questions about a $38,000 payment for a "lawsuit settlement" paid out by the state firefighters union to a staffer in March 2015, according to the union's federal records. The union was then reimbursed for the expense by an insurance firm, ULLICO Casualty Group Inc.

Mitchell became president of the PFFW in 2011, a year before he ran unsuccessfully for lieutenant governor.

Federal records show the settlement money went to Adrienne Belton, who was listed on her personal LinkedIn page as the "office manager/executive assistant to the president, board of directors" for the union from 2007 to 2014. Reviews of city and state records turn up no litigation or claims by Belton.

Mitchell's campaign referred questions about the matter to the union.

Wilding said the dispute did not involve Mitchell.

"Belton was the administrative assistant for the Professional Fire Fighters of Wisconsin, not Mahlon's former assistant," Wilding said earlier this year. "Mahlon was not involved in the matter at all. The PFFW will not comment further on personnel matters within the organization."

During Belton's time as an administrative assistant, the union's leadership was caught filing fraudulent expense reports so they could be reimbursed for donations they made to the union's federal political action committee.

As the Journal Sentinel reported at the time, 11 board members submitted expense vouchers for fictional meetings between 2002 and 2008, collecting more than $17,000 in mileage and per diems as a result. The Federal Elections Commission fined the union $58,000.

Eventually, the union cleaned house, and Mitchell was appointed in 2011 to lead the troubled labor organization. Belton made the transition from the old to the new guard.

Interviewed earlier this year, Belton said there was nothing newsworthy about her case. She said that the payment was mostly to cover unused paid time off and office equipment, declining to elaborate on why that amount would have been so large.

"That's mostly what this was," Belton said.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2OTo4Du