Milwaukee may implement a pilot program for doulas to address infant mortality in 53206
CLOSE

Buy Photo Women role play on how to comfort expectant mothers through touch during a doula workshop in Milwaukee in 2014. The doula training was aimed at creating culturally competent doulas to serve African-American and low-income women through childbirth. (Photo: Angela Peterson / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

A new program aimed at helping expectant mothers deliver and nurture healthy babies in one of Milwaukee's most distressed neighborhoods will go before the Common Council this month.

Under the proposal passed by the council's Public Safety and Health Committee last week, the Milwaukee Health Department would compensate 100 doulas to help expectant mothers in the 53206 ZIP code. The program would be funded with $52,000 from Milwaukee County, and Ald. Khalif Rainey said he would seek an additional $52,000 from the city.

"The services of the birth doula not only speak to the mother, but to the whole family unit," said Rainey, who sponsored the proposal. "I don't see anywhere in our community where that's not a value."

Rainey worked with Milwaukee County Supervisor Marina Dimitrijevic to develop the pilot program, which would be carried out by the Health Department. It comes on the heels of Gov. Tony Evers’ pledge to spend $618,000 in his 2019-'21 budget to fund doula training.

According to Health Commissioner Jeanette Kowalik and doula Monique Lipson, doulas are certified professionals trained to support expectant mothers’ nutritional, physical and mental health. Nearly all of them emphasize prenatal nutrition, breastfeeding, safe sleeping habits and stress reduction techniques. Many have additional specialties, such as massage, hydrotherapy, lactation consultations, yoga, aroma therapy and organizational skills.

“A doula is pretty much like a wing-woman,” Kowalik said.

Kowalik worked with programs such as Black Mamas Matter and Health Connect One in Washington, D.C., where the importance of doulas was constantly reinforced.

Kowalik said that within a year of the proposed program's implementation, she plans to measure how well it reduces rates of infant and mother mortality in 53206.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The ZIP code tends to have some of the highest mortality rates in the city, Kowalik noted.

In 2016, the infant mortality rate in 53206 was 15.1 per 1,000 live births, compared with 9.2 in the city as a whole and 6.2 in the state, according to the Wisconsin Department of Health Services.

An earlier city Health Department study also demonstrated a particularly wide racial gap, where black babies in Milwaukee died at nearly three times the rate of white babies.

RELATED: Milwaukee's infant mortality numbers improve but the racial disparity is still wide

As someone born and raised in 53206, Rainey said improving maternal and infant welfare holds special significance for him.

“Parenting is a challenge no matter what ZIP code you live in, right?” he said. “Then when you think of people that live in poverty and have other challenges — this will give mothers having a child a chance to have some structure.”

The program is also personal for Dimitrijevic, who was helping to develop the program through her own pregnancy.

The mother of two used a doula with both of her pregnancies, which she said made a compelling difference in the postpartum phase.

“When you have birth support – which is prenatal, during labor and then postpartum – you see all kind of amazing things increase and decrease,” she said, pointing to how increasing breastfeeding, for example, often decreases sudden infant death syndrome.

Dimitrijevic found that many women of color want a doula, but don't have access to one.

Lipson explained that cost is the most common barrier.

Doulas "are often seen as an additional expense to the hospital birth, so if they don’t have the money or are on Medicaid, they cannot get the kind of care that they need,” she said.

That's why Lipson said the program would be a worthwhile investment.

“They are able to help healthy birth outcomes in the city, but (it's) also an entrepreneurial effort for black women,” she said.

Lipson became a doula after attending training in Chicago seven years ago. She said that was one of the first times she felt that her cultural experiences were treated as an asset instead of a liability.

“I think it’s vital that we think about doulas as caretakers of culture and community,” she explained.

RELATED: African-American traditions reborn in doula training program

Venice Williams, is the director of Alice’s Garden, an urban farm where food and agriculture are used to nurture the community.

In 2014, Williams hosted a space for the first training of 15 African-American and Latina doulas after Lipson came to her with the idea.

“It was really important that we get women trained in opportunities to work with other women who looked like them, who understood the culture they came from,” she said, adding, “it opened up the floodgates.”

Rainey and Dimitrijevic celebrated the resolution’s passage in the committee stage, which Rainey described as an example of “great interagency relationship.”

“This is about empowering women over their own health and having the healthiest women and babies in Wisconsin,” said Dimitrijevic, who is hopeful, despite the opposition it may face in the legislature.

“I hope it goes through, but it has a long road," she admitted. "Especially with this Legislature.”

The program will go before the full Common Council at 9 a.m. March 26.

Contact Talis Shelbourne at (414) 223-5261 or tshelbourn@jrn.com. Follow her on Twitter at @talisseer Facebook at @talisseer.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/local/milwaukee/2019/03/10/pilot-program-doulas-improve-infant-mortality-passes-committee/3109306002/