U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin visits Tomah VA with parents of Marine veteran Jason Simcakoski
Jason "Jake" Simcakoski died in the Tomah VA psychiatric center. (Photo: Darren Hauck/ Center for Investigative Reporting)

TOMAH - Nearly three years after their son's death, Linda and Marvin Simcakoski remain on the front lines of improving health care for America's veterans.

The Simcakoskis joined U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin (D-Wis.) Saturday at the Tomah Veterans Affairs Medical Center, where they were briefed on progress the facility is making in treating patient pain and combating prescription abuse.

The visit came a year after the Baldwin-co-sponsored Jason Simcakoski Memorial Opioid Safety Act was signed into law.

In August 2014, Jason Simcakoski, a 35-year-old U.S. Marine veteran, died as a result of "mixed drug toxicity" while being treated by doctors at the Tomah facility.

"My hope is the impact of the bill will be families like ours are not going to lose sons, not going to lose daughters, spouses, loved ones," Linda Simcakoski said.

"We want a veteran to have a normal life, not a life dependent on a drug," Marvin Simcakoski said.

U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin (left) discusses a visit to the Tomah VA Medical Center with Marvin Simcakoski and his wife Linda. (Photo: Bill Glauber / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

The law toughens opioid prescription guidelines, pushes education for VA providers and encourages better communication among health care professionals, patients and families on pain management.

Jason Simcakoski's death was at the center of a probe of the Tomah VA Medical Center. The top leadership was ousted and a new director, Victoria Brahm, was installed to enact reforms.

Baldwin said the issues that affected Tomah were part of systemic problems within the VA system and a wider opioid crisis.

"The idea that the VA was vastly over-relying on powerfully addictive narcotics and in so doing contributing to this larger epidemic was deeply disturbing," Baldwin said.

Baldwin said the Simcakoskis have tried to turn the tragedy of their son's death "into hope for others."

"Let's turn the VA into a leader on how to treat pain. Let's turn the VA into the model for reducing reliance on opioids to treat pain," she said. "If they (the VA) can be the model, others will benefit beyond the veteran community."

The Simcakoskis serve on the facility's veterans experience council and have monthly meetings at the Tomah VA.

Linda Simcakoski said she has seen "positive changes at Tomah" within the last year, especially in providing alternative pain treatments.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"I think the atmosphere at the VA in Tomah has been improved tremendously," Marvin Simcakoski said. "People aren't scared anymore. They are working together as a team instead of being told by an individual what to do. Now it's a group. They have meetings, work on ideas, solutions."

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2wa0fwV