Milwaukee residents rip mayor and county officials for ignoring input on juvenile facility
CLOSE

Milwaukee and Glendale residents line up to ask questions. (Photo: Talis Shelbourne)

Despite vehement disapproval from members of Milwaukee's north side, building the Lincoln Hills juvenile prison's replacement on North Teutonia Avenue and West Mill Road is pretty much "a done deal," according to state officials.

Kevin Carr, the secretary for the state Department of Corrections; Mary Jo Meyers, director of the county Department of Health and Human Services; and Mayor Tom Barrett faced a frustrated crowd of about 100 Milwaukee and Glendale residents at Faith and Hope International Ministry, 6737 N. Teutonia Ave., Thursday night.

That frustration spilled over into boos and jeers when Carr announced in no uncertain terms, "The site has been selected."

The state plans to hold 32 serious-level juvenile offenders at the 17-acre site, according to Carr.

But Milwaukee Ald. Ashanti Hamilton said he was not consulted about the decision even though the facility would be in his district.

In response, he pulled the community meeting together and acted as a moderator for many homeowners and other local government officials who said they felt like they were excluded from the decision-making process.

JoAnn Shaw, Glendale's 6th district alderwoman, said it wasn't fair for the state to make an announcement before consulting the residents who would be affected, either in Milwaukee or border communities like Glendale.

"We're always talking about transparency in government, but now you're saying it's a done deal," she said. "So why didn't you talk to elected officials in Milwaukee and Glendale?

"We should at least get input from people within a five-mile radius," she added.

Why Teutonia?

Carr said the location was chosen, in part, with the "Closer to Home" justice initiative in mind. The initiative is designed to keep juveniles closer to their neighborhoods and, ostensibly, familiar support systems.

In addition, it's near Milwaukee's police academy.

Not in my backyard

"Whether you like it or not, those kids are coming home," Barrett said.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Jazmine McCullom doesn't like it.

"I came back to Milwaukee for the kids," she said. "We were not included in this situation."

As an educator for six years who is currently employed at Milwaukee Excellence Charter School, she said moving juveniles back into an environment where they first experienced trauma or crime will lead to recidivism.

"We can't even get a high school or a middle school for our kids," she said. "We've got 395 kids in an elementary school, but they want to build a detention center? It's not fair."

McCullom, the mother of a 10-year-old boy and 12-year-old girl, said 53209 ZIP code area has had enough issues without adding a criminal justice facility to the neighborhood.

She also voiced fears that children labeled difficult would be sent to the facility.

"He ain't going to put it in Story Hill, where he lives; they got a lot of land out there," she said, referring to Barrett.

Offering alternative sites was a large part of the night, with some suggesting the replacement be located in Glendale, Wauwatosa, Racine and other parts of the state.

RELATED: Milwaukee wants its juvenile offenders closer to home, but finding alternatives to Lincoln Hills proves tough

"People want to know ... why this area and not another area? That's a legitimate concern," Hamilton said.

Site-selection history

The county originally proposed two locations in Ald. Chantia Lewis' district, while a state facility was proposed for 7301 W. Mill Road. Lewis raised concerns about the sites proposed in her district, suggesting juvenile facilities might be unsecured, drive down property values and hurt local business.

However, state Sen. Lena Taylor said Lewis intentionally misled people to keep the facility out of her district.

"Fearmongering," she called it, adding there was no evidence a juvenile facility would drive down property values and pointed to Waupun and Green Bay correctional facilities as evidence that building there wouldn't negatively affect the community.

Still, businesses such as Direct Supply fought hard against the original site proposed by the county on Mill Road. Subsequently, a new site on Teutonia Avenue was announced by the governor Tuesday.

Barrett, who had expressed concerns about the Mill Road location, has been much more partial to relocating the juveniles to the site on Teutonia Avenue.

"I like the site," he said, adding that it was a good plot of land, farther from homes and schools and on a bus line.

RELATED: Lincoln Hills' replacements to be built in Milwaukee and Outagamie County

Hamilton, who has filed paperwork to run for mayor in the 2020 election, disagreed. He said although the mayor was happy, he should have taken time to hear from the residents.

"The mayor has not talked to a single resident in this area about whether or not that was a good idea. So I would ask the mayor to follow my lead on how to involve the community in the decision-making process."

Taylor went further, saying Barrett didn't speak for Milwaukee residents.

"The mayor who didn't want the children here in the first place, who has never been to a juvenile facility, who didn't want it to be done, should not be the voice at all. The governor needs to listen to the people of the 4th," she said, referring to the 4th District.

Taylor noted that a 25-member committee that reviewed locations unanimously voted for the 7301 W. Mill Road site, "but the mayor worked with the governor."

Carr said the governor wants to help juvenile offenders, noting that he "wholeheartedly cares for the kids."

In response, Glendale Ald. Tomika Vukovic remarked, "It seems like Direct Supply was more important than the kids."

Carr noted the sale of the property has not yet gone through.

He also apologized for not having had the meeting before the announcement but reiterated the potential success of moving juveniles “closer to home.”

But Hamilton said being excluded from the decision to relocate Lincoln Hills and Copper Lake juvenile offenders to Teutonia was an issue equal to the site location itself. Lincoln Hills houses boys and Copper Lake houses girls at the juvenile prison complex north of Wausau that has been the subject of a criminal investigation for four years.

"I think it's less about people being happy because we don't want to turn this into a not-in-my-backyard or NIMB conversation," he said. "But the way they're doing this turns it into that."

Meyers said the county looked at 72 sites, several of which were ruled out for toxicity, limited acreage and a lack of bus access.

She also mentioned the purpose of the meeting underwent a last-minute change — from information session to more town-hall style — and said she hoped she would be able to offer more community engagement sessions in the future.

As of now, there are few signs the state will change directions.

Where do you think Lincoln Hill's replacement should go? Contact Talis Shelbourne at (414) 223-5261 or tshelbourn@jrn.com. Follow her on Twitter at @talisseer and Facebook at @talisseer.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/local/milwaukee/2019/03/14/milwaukee-residents-angry-being-ignored-lincoln-hill-replacement/3167045002/