Tim Burns hopes to join state Supreme Court but has only had one case in Wisconsin court
CLOSE WisconsinEye Senior Producer Steve Walters talked with Tim Burns, candidate for Wisconsin Supreme Court Justice.

Madison attorney Tim Burns. (Photo: Scott Bauer, Associated Press)

MADISON - Tim Burns wants to sit on the state’s highest court, but he hasn’t spent much time in a Wisconsin courtroom.

Burns, an attorney in the Madison office of the national law firm Perkins Coie, has had one case in state court in Wisconsin and six in federal court in the state, according to records.

He has had dozens of other cases around the country, but much of his insurance law practice is done outside the courtroom.

Burns' opponents are circuit court judges and they contend Burns’ lack of time in Wisconsin courtrooms means he shouldn’t sit on the state Supreme Court. Burns disagrees.

“We have a broken court system and if you want to fix a broken court system, you probably don’t want to choose (as) the next justice (someone) who’s currently a cog in the broken machine,” Burns said. “You want someone who has looked at machines all over the country and different parts of the world and has an idea of how the court system could run better.”

RELATED: Wisconsin Supreme Court candidate was blistered for ruling in 'standing while black' case

RELATED: Rebecca Dallet out-fundraises opponents in Wisconsin Supreme Court race

Running against Burns are Milwaukee County Circuit Judge Rebecca Dallet and Sauk County Circuit Judge Michael Screnock. Burns is running as a liberal and Screnock as a conservative, while Dallet is vying for liberal and moderate votes.

The Feb. 20 primary will narrow the field to two for the April 3 general election.

In a statement, Dallet said Burns' lack of time in Wisconsin courtrooms is a "huge problem," noting she has prosecuted thousands of cases and heard more than 10,000 cases as a judge.

"I’ve seen every kind of case, every kind of litigant," she said in her statement. "I’ve made the tough decision to send someone to jail for life, and I’ve made the tough decision to give someone a second chance."

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Dallet, who spent 11 years as a prosecutor before being elected a judge in 2008, also argued her experience surpasses that of Screnock, who was appointed to the bench in 2015 by Gov. Scott Walker.

Screnock said Burns' lack of time in Wisconsin courtrooms was a concern and argued he had a better background than both of his opponents. That's in part because of cases he handled as a private attorney that went before the state Appeals Court and Supreme Court, he said.

“I’ve got the biggest breadth of experience when you look at the three of us,” he said.

Before he was a judge, Screnock worked at Michael Best & Friedrich, where he helped defend Act 10, the 2011 law Walker signed that weakened unions who represent teachers and other public workers. Act 10 was upheld by the state Supreme Court and a federal appeals court.

RELATED: Wisconsin Supreme Court candidate Tim Burns emphasizes he's a Democrat in TV ad

RELATED: Rebecca Dallet kicks off Supreme Court ad with criticism of Trump

Burns' practice focuses on suing insurers.

In his one state case, Burns played a small role as an attorney for a Viroqua man who was sued last year by State Farm Fire and Casualty Co. in Vernon County. The case was settled within months, online court records show.

The six cases Burns has had in federal court in Wisconsin consisted of an insurance complaint, a marriage dispute involving a recent immigrant and four instances in which Burns assisted prisoners alleging their civil rights were violated.

The bulk of his work occurred elsewhere and focused on claims against insurers. His clients include hedge funds that lost money in the Bernie Madoff investment scandal; a mining company that couldn’t get an insurance payout when a Colorado quarry collapsed; and life insurance policyholders who contended insurers had misrepresented their financial stability.

Among his clients was Stryker Corp., which was alleged to have made defective knee replacements. He represented the firm when it sued its insurer.

“I wasn’t representing the client against the little guy,” he said. “I was representing the client against the big insurance company. … What I’m trying to do is to get the insurance company to pay for the problem because insurance companies have promised to pay for problems.”

He said his legal work helped average people, even in cases where he was representing corporations.

“In every case I’ve had, in every situation I’m involved in in the law, I am an advocate for consumer rights,” he said. “And if consumer rights are expanded, it helps both the big company and the little guy. It isn’t an either-or.”

Burns said much of his legal work is handled through arbitration, in state court in other states or is resolved before a lawsuit is filed.

“I’m no stranger to the courtroom but in my practice the more senior you become, often your time is more valuable to your clients outside of the courtroom in negotiations with the other side and coming up with legal theories that will help,” Burns said.

Burns has limited experience with criminal cases. He has worked as a prosecutor once, when he was appointed a special assistant district attorney in New York for the appeal of a burglary case. He’s also served as a defense attorney in a handful of cases, including one capital murder case in Chicago in which his client pleaded to a lesser charge of second-degree homicide.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2nKUHqL