Wisconsin DNR resurrects bike trail and bridge backed by Elizabeth Uihlein, a key supporter of Scott Walker
Bicyclists pedal along a trail in Northern Highland-American Legion State Forest. (Photo: TravelWisconsin.com)

A nonprofit group that has received financial support from a major contributor of Gov. Scott Walker will donate $1.15 million to the Department of Natural Resources this week for a controversial bike trail in the Northern Highland-American Legion State Forest.

The DNR suspended plans for the trail and a 182-foot-long bridge over the Manitowish River in Vilas County in October 2016 when authorities encountered local opposition.

But the agency is once again moving ahead with planning for the trail and construction of the bridge in a now undeveloped part of the state forest. The loop would allow cyclists and walkers to start and end in the village and cross the river during the ride.

DNR officials are recommending the seven-member Natural Resources Board accept the money at a meeting in Madison on Wednesday.

The 5.5-mile looped trail and bridge have the support of Elizabeth Uihlein, president of Pleasant Prairie-based Uline Corp. and a part-time resident of the Town of Manitowish Waters.

A walking and bicycling enthusiast, Uihlein and her husband, Richard, are influential supporters of Walker and have substantial investments in the village, including a hotel and restaurant.

The citizen-led resources board will be asked to accept the donation from Manitowish Waters Bike Trail Inc. The gift is “valued at $1.15 million,” according to DNR documents.

Manitowish Waters Town Chairman John Hanson, a supporter of the trail and bridge, said that it is his understanding that the Uihleins would provide most of the funding for the project.

Attempts to reach a representative of Elizabeth Uihlein for an interview were not successful. A representative of the company is scheduled to speak on the donation at the board meeting this week, according to the DNR.

Richard and Elizabeth Uihlein donated $319,500 to Walker’s campaign between January 2009 and June 2017, according to the Wisconsin Democracy Campaign. That ranked as the third highest during that period.

In a statement, Walker spokeswoman Amy Hasenberg said the money from the nonprofit is a donation in time and materials. She said the group and the township are "pursuing this bridge because it would open the door for economic development" in the region.

Ben Bergey, director of state parks, said a decision to build the bridge and a loop through the forest has not yet been made.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

RELATED: Northern Wisconsin forest to see ATVs, off-road motorcycles for first time under plan approved by DNR board

But what has changed since the project was put on hold is state approval of an updated master plan for the forest — Wisconsin’s largest state forest — that included the loop and trail in a list of future projects, Bergey said. The public had an opportunity to comment on the changes at that time, he said.

The DNR board approved the new master plan in October 2017.

Some of the $1.15 million would be used to connect a bike trail in the Town of Mercer to the north with a trail in Manitowish Waters that is part of the popular Heart of Vilas County bike trail system.

The Uihleins donated a total of $986,488 in 2012 and 2013 to the bike group through a charitable foundation, records show.

CLOSE Reporter Lee Bergquist details the story of how the people who are donating over $1 million to the DNR have strong ties to Gov. Scott Walker. Video by Bill Schulz

The next step in the DNR’s planning for the 10-foot-wide bridge is a public hearing Jan. 29 in Manitowish Waters. The agency has also indicated in documents that it has made a preliminary determination to issue a permit to build the structure.

Also, DNR documents indicate that “the bridge is an integral part of the new trail system that will create a loop around the town (of Manitowish Waters) and display the true beauty of the North Woods to all trail participants.”

As the DNR moves ahead, some local property owners have expressed objections.

“Why do we need to have this go through a remote part of the river?” asked Carole Radeztsky, a resident of Marshfield who owns 30 acres about a half-mile away from the bridge.

Radeztsky and others questioned the need for the loop, since it does not link Mercer with the existing trail system.

Another nearby property owner, Paul Frautschi of Madison, said he is not opposed to money being spent for the trail system linking Mercer to Manitowish Waters.

His concern is the impact of the trail and bridge on the river and Indian artifacts in the area. “This needs a lot more study,” he said.

Hanson, the town chairman, said the bridge will span the river and not come into direct contact with it.

“Here is a beautiful part of the river and the only people who can see it now are canoers and the kayakers,” Hanson said. “Now, you will have thousands of people who can see that segment of the river. To me, that’s a big plus.”

Hanson said Elizabeth Uihlein supports the project, but is not actively involved in details — and instead is letting local supporters advance its cause.

In September 2016, shortly before the DNR put the project on hold, Elizabeth Uihlein sent an email to three members of the town board who had raised questions about the project.

"The new bike trail loop and bridge is a win for everyone," Uihlein wrote. "So why are you stirring up trouble that will only end up delaying the inevitable — an addition to our already great trail system that brings droves of tourists to Manitowish Waters and the surrounding communities?”

RELATED: Facing criticism, DNR delays review of bike path

Hanson said two town board members who opposed the project were defeated for re-election last year. After the election, the board voted April 18 to endorse the project. "We didn't want to waste time," Hanson said.

CLOSE The trail travels through three Wisconsin counties — Fond du Lac, Green Lake and Winnebago — and its western section has been made more bike-friendly in recent years. Chelsey Lewis

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2DzTz2t