Paul Ryan targeted by ad from gun safety group founded by former U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords
Buy Photo House Speaker Paul Ryan. (Photo: Rick Wood, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

The gun safety group co-founded by former U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords is launching its first ad targeting House Speaker Paul Ryan.

The new online ad, which is set to go online Tuesday, accuses the Janesville Republican of blocking attempts to strengthen the country's gun laws and failing to protect people from gun violence. And it criticizes Ryan for being a top recipient of campaign contributions from the gun lobby.

Giffords' ad also features President Donald Trump saying, "Some of you people are petrified of the NRA."

It ends with the words, "If Paul Ryan won't keep us safe, it's time to elect a Congress that will."

Giffords, an anti-gun violence group, was founded by Gabrielle Giffords, who was gravely wounded in a 2011 assassination attempt, and her husband, Navy Captain Mark Kelly.

The ad is part of an effort by Giffords and other groups to influence the 2018 elections.

"Paul Ryan is singularly responsible for the fact that the House has not voted on a single piece of gun safety legislation the entire time that he's been speaker," the group's political director, Isabelle James, said. "I believe he's held 26 moments of silence and zero floor debates on any bills that would strengthen our gun laws."

Critics have slammed Ryan over his recent comments warning against a "knee-jerk reaction" to last month's shooting at a Florida school that left 17 people dead, with some pointing out parallels to similar comments he made following other mass shootings.

Ryan aides have pointed to measures passed by the House, such as legislation aimed at addressing mental health, closing loopholes in the National Instant Criminal Background Check System, and directing ATF to review "bump stocks."

But James said Ryan has only taken "baby steps" on the issue and refuses to take up bills that have widespread public support.

"We were moved to do this because his level of action has really just become inexcusable," she said.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2tLeuMm