Leah Vukmir stands by news release picturing Tammy Baldwin as member of 'Team Terrorists'
CLOSE

In a Wednesday news release, the campaign for Republican U.S. Senate candidate Leah Vukmir released an image portraying Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin as a member of "Team Terrorists." (Photo: Leah Vukmir campaign)

Leah Vukmir isn't backing down from a news release issued this week by her campaign that labeled Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin as a member of "Team Terrorists."

The news release included pictures of Vukmir and CIA director nominee Gina Haspel as members of "Team America" while Baldwin was labeled a member of "Team Terrorists." Baldwin's photo was paired with an image of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, principal architect of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

Vukmir, running for the Republican nomination for U.S. Senate, supports the Haspel nomination. Mohammed had asked for permission to share information about Haspel with the Senate Intelligence Committee.

In a statement Thursday to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, Vukmir said: “When the 9/11 mastermind — Khalid Sheikh Mohammed — attacks Gina Haspel, an eminently qualified woman who would be an excellent and historic choice to lead our CIA, Senator Baldwin is nowhere to be found.

"If this is what it takes to get people talking about Tammy Baldwin’s liberal record and her tendency to disappear and not represent us then so be it."

State Democratic Party spokesman Brad Bainum dismissed the categorization of Baldwin.

"This is nonsense," he said. "This is what people hate about politics."

The conservative outlet "Right Wisconsin" harshly criticized the image, calling the attack "an irresponsible campaign blunder."

Vukmir and Delafield businessman Kevin Nicholson are bidding to win a key endorsement from delegates at Saturday's Republican Party Convention in Milwaukee. Both have vowed to press on to the Aug. 14 primary with the winner to take on Baldwin in November.

Republican U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson counseled both campaigns to keep the eye on the prize — beating Baldwin.

Johnson told the Journal Sentinel that if it became "'pretty obvious" that one of the candidates is "the clear choice and will probably win the primary," he hoped that the other candidate "would have the integrity to step aside so the other person would have a much better chance to win."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Factors Vukmir and Nicholson should weigh, he said, include fundraising, cash on hand and whether either candidate gains 60% support of the convention delegates this weekend.

"If it becomes kind of apparent that one candidate has the far better chance, I'm just hoping that the other candidate will understand this isn't about an individual, this is about Wisconsin having another Republican senator," he said.

Johnson, who gained the party endorsement in 2010, said, "Is there a history of us winning after a knock-down drag-out primary? Probably not."

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2rAzAIX