Josh Kaul would conduct 'legal analysis' before deciding to defend state abortion ban
CLOSE

Attorney General candidates Brad Schimel (left) and Josh Kaul. (Photo: Milwaukee Journal Sentinel files)

MADISON - Attorney General Brad Schimel's Democratic challenger on Thursday called Wisconsin's ban on abortions "unsafe and not in the interests of Wisconsinites," but stopped short of saying he wouldn't defend law if elected.

Josh Kaul, a former federal prosecutor, said he would conduct a legal analysis to determine whether the state's ban on abortions is defensible. He said he would wait to see how the law fares in courts, before he could say whether he would defend the law if Roe v. Wade were overturned by the U.S. Supreme Court.

"There is a very real threat that Roe v. Wade would be overturned if Judge (Brett) Kavanaugh is confirmed," Kaul told reporters Thursday. "First and foremost, I think we need to have the Legislature take action to repeal that bill now before we get to a point where that's at issue."

But the Wisconsin Legislature is controlled by Republicans, many of whom oppose abortion, leaving the chances of a repeal small.

Kaul said the attorney general's job "is to defend Wisconsin laws as long as there is a reasonable basis for doing so," and therefore would need the review before making his decision.

RELATED: Scott Walker says he doubts Donald Trump's Supreme Court pick would overturn abortion ruling

RELATED: The sides in Wisconsin abortion debate see trouble or hope in Brett Kavanaugh's Supreme Court nomination

The decades-long debate over whether abortion should remain legal in the U.S. has come under new scrutiny with the nomination by President Donald Trump of Kavanaugh, a federal appellate judge, to the Supreme Court, putting the landmark 1973 decision legalizing abortion in jeopardy with a more conservative-leaning court.

Schimel said earlier this week he didn't know if Roe v. Wade would be overturned, but said if it was, and the state's abortion ban took effect, he would defend the law if there's a "constitutionally colorable argument to make to defend it."

"There have been laws that I've liked that I've defended and there have been laws that I haven't liked that I've defended," he said.

Kaul’s comments came as Democratic candidate for governor Kelda Roys unveiled a TV ad — her first of the campaign — focused on preserving abortion rights.

The ad shows an image of Trump nominating Kavanaugh as Roys notes Wisconsin has a ban on abortion on the books that could be enforced if the nation’s high court reverses past abortion rulings.

“I can't believe that I’m having to fight the same fights that my grandmother fought,” says Roys, a former state representative from Madison and former director of the Wisconsin arm of the abortion-rights group NARAL.

The ad, which also shows Roys with her husband and their young daughters, is to begin airing Friday in Madison and Milwaukee. It will go up in Green Bay next week and eventually will run on cable, according to Roys’ campaign.

Her ad will begin airing the same day former state Democratic Party chairman Matt Flynn will start broadcasting his TV ad, which focuses on stopping Gov. Scott Walker’s $4 billion incentive package to build a Foxconn Technology Group plant in Mount Pleasant. Flynn announced plans for his ad on Wednesday.

None of the other six Democrats running in the Aug. 14 primary has announced advertising plans.

Also running are state Schools Superintendent Tony Evers; liberal activist Mike McCabe; firefighters union president Mahlon Mitchell; lawyer Josh Pade; Madison Mayor Paul Soglin; and state Sen. Kathleen Vinehout of Alma.

Ashley Luthern of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel contributed to this report from Milwaukee.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2uA0anY