Milwaukee Common Council approves $1.5 billion budget for 2019 with focus on lead crisis
Buy Photo For file if needed - An aerial view of Milwaukee City Hall, Milwaukee Bucks Fiserv Forum in Milwaukee on Tuesday, September 18, 2018. skyline development - Photo by Mike De Sisti / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Photo: Mike De Sisti, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

The Milwaukee Common Council on Tuesday approved a $1.5 billion budget for 2019 with a focus on combating the city's lead crisis.

The city's spending plan for next year would increase taxes and fees by $51.88 for the owner of a $109,000 home.

The budget passed on a 13-2 vote, with both Aldermen Bob Donovan and Mark Borkowski voting against it.

The budget includes about $20 million devoted to addressing Milwaukee's lead crisis. The money will be used to remove lead paint and other poisoning hazards from Milwaukee homes, replace lead water pipes and create a special team to focus on homes with lead-poisoned children living in them.

RELATED: Milwaukee Health Department under criminal investigation, Common Council president says

RELATED: Milwaukee health officials privately worried that problems in 'messed up' lead program would become public

Mayor Tom Barrett has it a "historic investment to address the issue," and the money would be used in part to help turn around the troubled Milwaukee Health Department, which has been under fire for months over its failure to manage city programs aimed at preventing lead hazards. The crisis led to the resignation of former longtime Health Commissioner Bevan Baker in January.

Some amendments further boosted spending on the Health Department.

Barrett has until the close of business on Nov. 26 to sign the budget. He signaled after Tuesday's vote that vetoes were coming.

"I was surprised by the increased borrowing," Barrett said in an interview with the Journal Sentinel. "I'm expecting that there will be some vetoes."

The mayor added he was concerned not just about next year's budget, but 2020's as well.

No Fire Department cuts

The budget includes no cuts to the city’s Fire Department. That’s in stark contrast to last year’s budget, which included cuts to the Fire Department that forced the closure of six fire stations.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

This year's budget process has been noticeably less contentious than last year when aldermen clashed with Barrett about cuts to public safety spending.

RELATED: Six Milwaukee fire stations set to close under Mayor Tom Barrett's 2018 budget

Some council members, including Aldermen Milele Coggs and Nik Kovac, instead pushed for reducing spending on police to fund programs focused on public health and prevention.

Coggs pointed out that about $299 million of the city's $1.5 billion budget is already spent on Milwaukee police.

"I think there has to be just as much effort given toward prevention, given toward peace," Coggs said.

Barrett's plan would have increased police sworn strength from 1,861 to 1,871.

But council members' amendments chipped away at that increase.

Ald. Mark Borkowski warned fellow aldermen that more police could retire than anticipated.

"I just don't want to be caught short," he said.

One amendment approved by council members Tuesday eliminated $375,000 of new borrowing for the police auto license plate recognition capital project and instead used the money to try to establish four "COP" houses. That program, created in the Department of City Development, would involve rehabilitating four city-owned homes in higher crime "Promise Zone" areas to be used by the police department and other organizations already involved in the Promise Zone initiative.

Ald. Tony Zielinski pushed for a second "COP" house initiative that would add four new police recruits to staff two COP houses. That amendment failed.

Addressing lead problems

The budget includes $7.6 million for the Milwaukee Health Department specifically for addressing lead. Most of that money would be used to remove lead paint and other lead hazards from homes, while some would be used to create a team focused on meeting the lead cleanup requirements laid out by federal officials with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Another $12.4 million would be used to address the risks of lead in water. Some of that money would be used to fund the replacement of 1,000 lead pipes, or lead service lines, and to buy water filters to be distributed to city residents. The lead pipes of about 100 child care centers and 450 properties that have had emergencies such as leaks could be replaced next year under the plan.

The budget also includes plans to hire new Water Works employees. That includes adding city staffers who will work to replace publicly owned lead laterals, which would reduce the need to outsource the work to contractors.

That move comes after one company, American Sewer Services, lost two city contracts over the behavior of employees elected officials considered offensive and racist. In those incidents, some employees brought guns to at least one city work site and one displayed a Ku Klux Klan sticker at another site.

The projected $51.88 tax and fee increase for the owner of a $109,000 home includes an additional $39.30 in taxes and $12.58 in fees. The tax rate would be $10.57 per $1,000 of assessed property value.

'Stop and frisk' settlement

The city's 2019 budget also includes:

Devoting $300,000 of the Police Department budget to addressing requirements of the American Civil Liberties Union of Wisconsin settlement following its lawsuit over "stop and frisk practices."

Adding two additional Fire Department staffers hired to help frequent 911 callers in an effort to reduce emergency calls.

Completing 25 miles of road improvements and 23 miles of sewer replacements.

Pay increases for most city workers

Amendments approved by the Common Council include:

Establishing an Inspector General position to act as a watchdog for city agencies, including the Health Department.

Creating a $25,000 neighborhood vacant property monitoring account to engage residents in efforts to monitor vacant buildings.

Creating an $8,000 fund to install baby-changing stations in nine restrooms in city buildings accessible to the public.

Developing a pilot plan for a City of Milwaukee retail outlet.

Creating a special fund in the Health Department aimed at setting up a trial program focused on reducing stress in the lives of the most at-risk women in an effort to combat premature births and infant mortality.

Adding $50,000 to the Health Department to establish a public education campaign to reduce rates of sexually transmitted infections in Milwaukee.

Increasing funding for the city's blight elimination efforts by $1.5 million for a total of $2.5 million. The increase would be funded through general obligation borrowing.

Adding $1 million of new borrowing to the local street reconstruction program.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/2018/11/13/milwaukee-common-council-oks-1-5-billion-budget-focus-lead-crisis/1987039002/