Democrats running for governor call for slashing prison population
CLOSE

Democratic candidates for Wisconsin governor: (Top row, left to right) Tony Evers, Paul Soglin, Josh Pade and Kathleen Vinehout. (Bottom row, left to right) Kelda Roys, Mike McCabe, Mahlon Mitchell and Matt Flynn. (Photo: handouts from candidates)

MADISON - Democrats running for governor are campaigning on prison reform, with many of them calling for cutting the inmate population in half.

For his part, GOP Gov. Scott Walker isn’t saying whether he backs building a new prison, even as a task force run by his administration studies the issue. Walker also won’t say if he supports housing inmates in private prisons to address the rising inmate population — an idea opposed by Democrats.

Running Wisconsin’s prisons costs state taxpayers more than $1 billion a year. The facilities in recent weeks have held more than 23,600 adult inmates, putting the prison system at a record high.

RELATED: Democratic candidates for governor lay out plans at forum in Milwaukee

The eight Democrats seeking to challenge Walker say they want to lower costs by scaling back the number of inmates. Many of them are calling for legalizing marijuana, releasing some inmates early, closing one or more prisons and ending parole and probation revocations for violating supervision rules.

“By bringing the population of incarcerated people in line with what is needed to ensure public safety and just punishment, we can save hundreds of millions of dollars and close facilities that are old, poorly maintained or pose a safety risk to staff or inmates,” former state Rep. Kelda Roys of Madison said in a statement.

The Aug. 14 primary will determine which Democrat will face Walker in the fall, but whoever it is appears likely to have a much different stance on corrections than the governor.

As a state representative in the 1990s, Walker was the lead author of the state’s “truth-in-sentencing” law, which ended parole. Many of the Democrats challenging him now want to scale back that law.

Walker spokesman Austin Altenburg said Walker is “focused on keeping our communities safe.”

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"While the Democrat field for governor is defined by far-left, reckless policies, Scott Walker is committed to tackling serious issues for the people of Wisconsin,” he said by email.

Republicans who control the Legislature included a provision in the state budget forming a task force led by Walker's administration to develop a plan for the state’s correctional needs at a time when prisons are running out of room. Building a new prison would cost about $300 million, and staffing one would cost millions of dollars a year on top of that.

RELATED: Speaker Robin Vos keeps Assembly Democrats off Wisconsin prison planning task force

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker. (Photo: Scott Bauer / Associated Press)

The state for years held some inmates in private, out-of-state prisons but ended the practice under former Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle. Democrats running for governor now said they opposed reviving that strategy and Walker’s campaign spokesman would not say if Walker backed such a plan.

Roys said she would cut the prison population in half over four years. She said she could achieve that reduction of nearly 12,000 inmates by granting more paroles; releasing ill and aging inmates; expanding diversion programs, drug courts and other alternatives to incarceration; legalizing marijuana; pardoning low-level drug offenders; and overhauling the truth-in-sentencing law.

She also said she wanted to dramatically scale back revoking probation and parole for felons who violate the rules of their supervision but who did not commit new crimes.

She said she opposed building a new prison and opposed using private prisons to house Wisconsin inmates. She said she wanted to close the Milwaukee Secure Detention Facility, which is primarily used to house people on probation or parole violations.

State Schools Superintendent Tony Evers said Wisconsin needs to follow the example of states like Texas that have cut parole revocations and expanded drug courts. He said he would consider releasing some inmates early; providing more drug treatment behind bars; treating 17-year-olds as juveniles instead of adults for criminal charges; and overhauling truth-in-sentencing so prisoners could be released for good behavior.

“The fact that we as a state spend more on corrections than (the University of Wisconsin) System tells me the last thing we need is to build a brand-new prison,” he said in an emailed statement.

He said he opposes holding inmates in private prisons and supports closing the Milwaukee Secure Detention Facility “as soon as possible.” The state is being “dumb on crime” by revoking parole or probation for felons when they have violated rules but not committed new crimes, he said.

Former state Democratic Party Chairman Matt Flynn said he would pardon anyone convicted of nonviolent marijuana offenses and would review pardoning other nonviolent offenders.

“Drug-related offenses make up an enormous part of our prison population. We need to treat addiction as a disease rather than a crime,” he said in an emailed statement.

He opposes building a new prison and using private prisons and would like to close the Milwaukee Secure Detention Facility, Green Bay Correctional Institution, or both.

Liberal activist Mike McCabe called for cutting the prison population in half, though he did not say he wanted to do it within four years, as Roys did.

McCabe said Wisconsin should follow the approach of Minnesota, which holds about half as many people in its prisons. Wisconsin should focus on mental health and drug treatment, McCabe said.

“Our state spends way more to get the same crime rate as Minnesota," McCabe said by email.

He called for legalizing marijuana, closing the Milwaukee Secure Detention Facility and ending parole revocations when new crimes have not been committed. He also criticized Walker’s decision not to grant any pardons, saying he supported pardoning some nonviolent offenders.

RELATED: Bice: Wisconsin Democratic governor candidates make blunt appeal to marijuana advocates

Mahlon Mitchell, the president of the statewide firefighters union, called for legalizing marijuana, giving judges more sentencing discretion and overturning the truth-in-sentencing law. He opposes private prisons and supports closing the Milwaukee Secure Detention Facility.

“True reform will end many of the problems plaguing our corrections system,” he said in a statement.

Madison Mayor Paul Soglin called the state’s criminal justice system a “disaster.” He opposes building a new prison unless it will replace an outdated facility and supports releasing inmates early for good behavior. He opposes private prisons and said he would need to study whether to close the Milwaukee Secure Detention Facility.

State Sen. Kathleen Vinehout of Alma said she would boost funding for mental health and drug treatment to provide alternatives to incarceration. She showed support for releasing inmates early for exhibiting good behavior and for health reasons.

At a June candidate forum, she suggested cutting the inmate population in half was an “absolutely doable statistic.”

She opposes private prisons. She said the Milwaukee Secure Detention Facility and Green Bay Correctional Institution suffer from severe problems and said she expected the state task force to turn up ideas on how to address them.

Kenosha lawyer Josh Pade did not respond to questions for this article.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2u2yfvC