Mark Pocan push to abolish ICE reverberates in Wisconsin U.S. Senate race
CLOSE

U.S. Rep. Mark Pocan talks with reporters Monday in Madison. (Photo: Bill Glauber / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

MADISON - U.S. Rep. Mark Pocan said Monday that ICE's "brand has been broken" by President Donald Trump's directives and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement should be abolished.

This week, the Madison-area Democrat will make his legislative push. introducing a bill in the House of Representatives to end ICE and set up a commission to parcel out essential enforcement duties to other agencies.

Some liberals back him while more moderate Democrats talk about reforming ICE. Meanwhile, Republicans, led by the president, appear delighted to defend immigration enforcement.

"Whether people are saying reform it, or they're saying abolish it, what we're all saying right now is that ICE is being misused by the president in a way that makes it unable to function as it needs to," Pocan said during a meeting with reporters.

Pocan said critics are falsely accusing Democrats of being for open borders.

"Were not saying we want open borders," he said. "ICE does not patrol the borders. It protects the interior, addresses domestic terrorism, human trafficking."

He criticized ICE for "going after people with parking violations."

RELATED: Abolish ICE, transfer critical functions: Rep. Mark Pocan

It's no surprise that Pocan's proposal has become an issue in the U.S. Senate race, where Republicans Leah Vukmir and Kevin Nicholson are seeking to challenge Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin.

"We should not abolish ICE, but we need to make sure they’re focusing on their highest priority — targeting violent criminals and drug traffickers, not families and refugees," Baldwin said in a statement. "This is yet another example of why we need comprehensive immigration reform to fix our broken system."

Baldwin's GOP rivals were unimpressed with her stance.

"Tammy Baldwin has no problem accepting cash from senators who want to eliminate ICE, like Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders," said Vukmir campaign manager, Jess Ward.

"Let's be clear, if this wasn't an election year, everyone knows where Senator Baldwin would stand on eliminating border enforcement. Attempts by Democrats to gut border enforcement and call it reform is dishonest and dangerous," Ward added.

Nicholson campaign spokesperson Ronica Cleary said: "Activities to smuggle humans across the border and endanger lives would no doubt increase under the politics and policies pushed by extremists like Mark Pocan and Tammy Baldwin. ICE officers should be lauded and praised for their brave efforts to keep our borders safe, not derided by extremist politicians like Pocan and Baldwin."

RELATED: Cathy Myers, Randy Bryce face off in first Democratic primary debate in bid for Paul Ryan's seat

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Also Monday, Pocan reaffirmed his support for iron worker Randy Bryce, despite a recent report on Bryce's past legal troubles, including a DUI from some 20 years ago.

"I think he has been very upfront about saying, 'Look, I was much younger when I did this, it was wrong, and it's not the person who I am today,' " Pocan said.

Bryce and Janesville School Board member Cathy Myers are competing in the Democratic primary and are seeking the congressional seat held by House Speaker Paul Ryan, who is stepping down at the end of this term.

Pocan also weighed in on the crowded Democratic primary for governor, including the candidate he beat in a 2012 Democratic primary for Congress, Kelda Roys.

Pocan was asked about a claim made by the Republican Party of Wisconsin that Roys was "pretending to be gay," because of remarks she made at the Capitol pride parade in 2011. The issue was raised again in a PolitiFact Wisconsin column.

PolitiFact Wisconsin: 'Pretending to be gay'

Pocan, who is openly gay, said he was at the speech in which Roys described how she and her partner were married in Iowa, where same-sex marriage was legal. Roys told PolitiFact that she was not pretending to be gay and often refers to her husband as her partner.

'It was a bad political calculation she made," Pocan said. "She made several during the campaign, like saying I was in the pocket of the Koch brothers and a few other things. But I think that's a mistake that, you know, you've got to be honest and authentic."

He added, "I'm sure she's had six years to think about those things and probably regrets it."

Since then, he said that Roys has been to his fundraisers.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2J4VBGF