AG Brad Schimel: Democratic candidates' plans to cut prison population are 'deceiving the public'
CLOSE

Buy Photo Wisconsin Attorney General Brad Schimel testifies at an April 2016 panel in Pewaukee about the heroin epidemic. The Waukesha County Drug Treatment Court, which Schimel helped create, recently received some federal grant money. (Photo: Michael Sears, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

MADISON - Democrats running for governor are deceiving the public into believing prisons are full of marijuana users, Attorney General Brad Schimel said Monday.

Schimel ripped the candidates in a call with reporters, saying their plans to significantly cut the number of inmates in state prisons shows either a lack of knowledge on the candidates' part of how the state's criminal justice system works, or an intent to mislead the public about the kind of offenders prisons house.

"I'm stunned at the irresponsible proposals being made," Schimel said on the call organized by the Republican Party of Wisconsin.

Related: Democrats running for governor call for slashing prison population

Related: A Wisconsin worker nearly tripled his pay last year by working 95 hours a week and others cashed in, as well

Schimel said the state's current approach on addressing recidivism is appropriate, and he supports building a new prison to reduce crowding in existing facilities to ensure safety for correctional officers and that rehabilitation programs are effective.

He also indicated he was open to transferring inmates out of state, if needed, and to using privately operated prisons.

"There’s no reason why a privately operated prison couldn’t be a safe place to house and rehabilitate offenders," Schimel said, noting the decision would be up to the Department of Corrections.

Schimel's comments come after the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported last week that many of the candidates seeking to challenge Gov. Scott Walker want to cut the state's prison population in half.

Running Wisconsin’s prisons costs state taxpayers more than $1 billion a year. The facilities in recent weeks have held more than 23,600 adult inmates, putting the prison system at a record high.

The eight Democrats seeking to challenge Walker say they want to lower costs by reducing the number of inmates. Many of them are calling for legalizing marijuana, releasing some inmates early, closing one or more prisons and ending parole and probation revocations for violating supervision rules.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The state for years held some inmates in private, out-of-state prisons but ended the practice under former Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle. Democrats running for governor now said they opposed reviving that strategy, and Walker’s campaign spokesman would not say if Walker backed such a plan.

Schimel called on the candidates to identify which kind of offenders would be released under their plans to cut prison populations.

Former state Rep. Kelda Roys of Madison, for example, said she would cut the prison population in half over four years. She said she could achieve that reduction of nearly 12,000 inmates by granting more paroles; releasing ill and aging inmates; expanding diversion programs, drug courts and other alternatives to incarceration; legalizing marijuana; pardoning low-level drug offenders; and overhauling the truth-in-sentencing law.

Roys said Schimel should "spend less time printing commemorative coins with our tax dollars and more time fighting for survivors of sexual assault," referring to the rate at which the Department of Justice is testing sexual assault evidence kits, and Schimel's purchase of commemorative coins with the slogan "Kick Ass Every Day" engraved for law enforcement officers and DOJ staff.

"Responsibly reducing Wisconsin's prison population will improve public safety — which is why Republicans and Democrats all over the country are getting smarter on criminal justice reform," Roys said.

Schimel said releasing inmates would be unsafe to the public because about 67% of inmates in state prisons have committed at least one violent offense.

"Individuals are given opportunities time and time again in many cases to avoid ending up in the prison system," he said, adding that judges take seriously decisions to send offenders to prisons because at that point the state doesn't know "what else to do with them to stop their behavior, or they've done something so shocking that we have no alternative."

Former federal prosecutor Josh Kaul, a Democrat who is challenging Schimel this fall, said Schimel's "partisan attacks don’t change the reality that he has allowed justice to be delayed and has failed to effectively fight crime," referring to untested sexual assault evidence kits, and increased meth use across Wisconsin.

Meanwhile, Roys on Monday held a press conference in Green Bay to release the three priorities of her campaign agenda, which include education, health care and economic development.

Roys received the endorsement of Outagamie County Executive Thomas Nelson, also a Democrat, at the event. Roys said she would seek to provide free early childhood education to all Wisconsin parents, accept federal funding to expand Medicaid and increase the minimum wage to $15 per hour, among other proposals.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2uiN4KK