Gov. Tony Evers seeks to raise gas tax by 8 cents a gallon while reducing the overall price at the pump
CLOSE Wisconsin Governor Tony Evers talks about the budget Dan Powers, Dan Powers

MADISON - In his first budget address Thursday, Gov. Tony Evers called for raising the gas tax by 8 cents a gallon but said he would save drivers money by eliminating a Depression-era law that sets fuel prices.

The Democratic governor's two-year, $83 billion spending plan would raise taxes by more than $1 billion over two years, repeal the state’s right-to-work law, raise the minimum wage and expand the BadgerCare Plus health care program through Obamacare.

Republicans who control the Legislature immediately said they would scrap Evers' entire budget.

"Our budget is about putting people first," Evers told lawmakers in a 40-minute address in the Assembly chamber. "Believe it or not, this isn’t the Tony Evers budget, it's not the Democratic budget, the speaker’s budget or the Republican budget. This is the people’s budget."

But Republicans bristled at a range of provisions, especially ones that would increase taxes and end drug screening and work requirements in public benefits programs.

There's also sure to be little support in their caucuses for Evers' plans to establish automatic voter registration and allow undocumented immigrants to qualify for driving permits.

"I don’t think we have a choice," Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald of Juneau said of tossing Evers' budget aside.

"To me it's a 1,000-page press release, not a budget. A lot of the items that the governor ticked off, I think, are kind of the best hits of the Democrat Party."

While many of Evers' ideas face a dim future in the Legislature, it's unclear how lawmakers will respond to his transportation plan. Republicans have been split on road funding for years.

RELATED: Tony Evers seeks to overhaul the state's school funding formula to account for poverty

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

RELATED: How much of Democratic Gov. Tony Evers' budget will survive the GOP Legislature? (Spoiler: Not much)

Evers’ plan would end the state’s minimum markup law that requires retailers in most cases to mark up the price of gas 9.18 percent above the average wholesale price. Gas stations are allowed to set prices below that level to meet competitors' prices.

The Evers administration estimates the change would cut gas prices by 14 cents a gallon. Coupled with Evers' increase in the gas tax, prices would drop by 6 cents a gallon, the administration contends.

Republican lawmakers floated a similar plan in 2017 that would have raised the gas tax while curbing the minimum markup law, but the idea flopped when then-Gov. Scott Walker said he would not back it. Whether GOP lawmakers could get behind the new plan is unclear.

Evers said the minimum markup law he wants to get rid of results in a "hidden tax."

"That means our plan actually makes it possible for you to pay less at the pump than you do right now," Evers said.

But Fitzgerald signaled Republicans in his caucus wouldn't support the measure — calling it a "shell game."

"Governor's willing to raise taxes 8 cents and then he's trying to convince everybody in the state that suddenly repealing minimum markup will put more money in their pocket? I just don't see it right now," he said. "The idea that he linked the two together is a little bit disingenuous."

Under Evers' plan, the state’s transportation system would take in an additional $520 million over two years from the increased gas tax and higher transportation fees. Evers would use the infusion of cash to keep road borrowing to $224 million, the lowest level in more than 20 years.

"For years, we’ve kicked the can down the road on this issue and we can’t afford to do it again," Evers said.

His plan would bump the state’s gas tax from 32.9 cents per gallon to 40.9 cents. Starting in April 2020, the gas tax would automatically go up by an inflationary amount every year — reinstating a policy known as indexing that lawmakers eliminated in 2005.

Evers would also increase title fees for all vehicles and registration fees for heavy trucks. The annual registration fee for passenger vehicles — now $75 — would not go up.

The boost in road funds would allow the state to keep projects on track and begin work on expanding I-43 in Milwaukee and Ozaukee counties from two to three lanes in each direction. Under his plan, the Zoo Interchange in Milwaukee would be completed within the next two years.

Republicans to overhaul budget

GOP legislative leaders are to complete their work by June 30, and Evers can then reshape the GOP version of the budget using his line-item veto powers.

Under Evers' plan, the state would stop punishing people for buying and selling small amounts of marijuana, freeze enrollment of taxpayer-funded students at private voucher schools and end gerrymandering by establishing a nonpartisan commission to draw election maps.

Republicans oppose those ideas, too.

CLOSE Democratic governor Tony Evers' budget plan will face opposition in the Republican controlled legislature. WisconsinEye

Evers will spend Friday traveling the state to promote his budget. He's planning stops in Madison, Sturtevant, Appleton and La Crosse.

Evers in recent weeks previewed some of his plans, such as those for education and the state's juvenile prison, but surprised legislators with other ideas — all to the delight of legislative Democrats whose policy ideas have been ignored since Republicans took control of state government in 2011.

"I heard a governor for the first time in eight years say things that I hear from people every day that need to be addressed and gave us a road map that we can have as a starting point," said Assembly Minority Leader Gordon Hintz, D-Oshkosh.

Driving permits. Undocumented immigrants would be able to qualify for driver's permits under one budget provision. Republicans have opposed similar plans in the past.

Automatic voter registration. People would be automatically registered to vote when they got driver's licenses or did other business at Division of Motor Vehicles stations, unless they requested to not be put on the voter rolls.

Voter ID. College IDs could be used to vote under the state's voter ID law without having to provide proof of enrollment under another budget provision. Now, students must provide enrollment paperwork along with their student ID if they want to use that form of ID to vote.

Public benefits. Evers would end policies enacted in recent years that require some people to have jobs or take drug tests to secure food stamps or other benefits.

Lame-duck laws. The budget would repeal most of the lame-duck laws Republican lawmakers approved in December that curbed the powers of Evers and Democratic Attorney General Josh Kaul.

Right-to-work law. Evers' budget would repeal the state's right-to-work law, which bars labor contracts that require all employees in a work unit to pay union fees. The budget would also reinstate Wisconsin's prevailing wage laws that until recently set minimum pay levels for those working on roads and other publicly funded construction projects.

Minimum wage. The budget would raise the minimum wage, now $7.25 an hour, to $10.50 an hour by 2023. A task force would develop a plan to eventually raise it to $15 an hour.

Health care. BadgerCare Plus would be expanded to 82,000 more people using funds available through the Affordable Care Act, widely known as Obamacare.

RELATED: Evers proposes expanding Medicaid program to threshold that would bring state $320 million in additional federal dollars over two years

His plan would raise the income threshold for qualifying for the program from 100 percent of the poverty level to 138 percent of the poverty level.

The measure would free up $320 million in state funds that could be used for other purposes, according to the Evers administration — more than past estimates.

Republicans have said they will stop the proposal because they believe it will increase costs for people who buy insurance through the private market.

Evers also plans to seek $28 million in new funding for women's health care and for measures to reduce infant mortality.

Climate change. Evers would set a goal of making all electricity produced in Wisconsin carbon-free by 2050 and would promote and fund renewable and clean energy projects.

DNR scientists. Evers would re-establish a science bureau at the Department of Natural Resources after the Walker administration eliminated the unit.

Marijuana. People would be allowed to buy, sell or use up to 25 grams of marijuana without punishment under Evers' budget. In addition, he would legalize marijuana for medical purposes.

Republicans oppose decriminalizing recreational marijuana and are split on legalizing medical marijuana.

Election maps. Evers wants to establish a nonpartisan commission to oversee drawing legislative and congressional districts every 10 years in an effort to end gerrymandering.

Juvenile justice. Evers proposed raising the age at which one could be charged with a crime as an adult from 17 to 18. His plan would put $194 million more toward new teen lockups to replace the state's troubled juvenile prison, Lincoln Hills School for Boys.

Lincoln Hills is set to close by 2021, but Evers would delay the closure indefinitely, shuttering it only when new facilities are available to house all teen inmates.

UW System. Evers would maintain a tuition freeze at University of Wisconsin System campuses and fund it through an increase of $150 million in state funds. Evers also proposed increasing funding for building improvements by $65 million over two years.

Lee Bergquist of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/2019/03/01/tony-evers-seeks-hike-gas-tax-cut-overall-price-pump/3018880002/