Assembly speaker says there is little chance lawmakers will accept plans for medical, recreational pot
A homeowner in the 2500 block of S. Delaware Ave. in Milwaukee displays a political yard sign in support of legalizing medical marijuana. Sixteen counties and two cities placed advisory referendums on medical and recreational use of marijuana on Tuesday's general election ballots. (Photo: Don Behm/Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

MADISON - Assembly Speaker Robin Vos on Thursday ruled out the possibility of accepting Gov. Tony Evers' plan to decriminalize marijuana and cast severe doubts on legalizing medical marijuana.

The Rochester Republican is open to medical marijuana but said the Democratic governor's plan goes so much further that it has almost no chance of getting through the GOP-controlled Legislature.

"There’s no chance Republicans are going to go for recreational marijuana," Vos said at a luncheon hosted by WisPolitics.com. "We’re not going to decriminalize it so people can carry around baggies of weed all over the state.

"That is so far out of the mainstream it made the entire proposal not serious."

RELATED: Decriminalizing marijuana aimed at reducing black incarceration rate, Gov. Tony Evers says

RELATED: Gov. Tony Evers calls for decriminalization of recreational marijuana use

Vos made his comments on pot during an hourlong discussion in which he threw jabs at Evers, saying the governor needed "on-the-job training" and complaining the two had a "non-existent" relationship.

Buy Photo Assembly Speaker Robin Vos listens to Gov. Tony Evers deliver his State of the State address at the Capitol. (Photo: Mark Hoffman / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Vos said he thought medical marijuana had about a 10 percent chance of passing the Legislature. Evers' overall plan on marijuana won't stay in the state budget Evers plans to introduce next month, Vos said.

"There’s no chance," Vos said.

Under Evers plan, the state's agriculture and health departments would regulate medical marijuana and users, and manufacturers and distributors of medical marijuana would not be charged with crimes if they handled up to 25 grams of the drug.

RELATED: Pro pot: Voters support all marijuana advisory referendums on Tuesday's ballots

RELATED: Legalizing marijuana: No quick action likely in Wisconsin despite overwhelming support at polls

During his talk Thursday, Vos said his relationship with Evers and his administration was "nonexistent," "underwhelming" and "disappointing."

Lt. Gov. Mandela Barnes scoffed at Vos' sentiment, writing on Twitter that Vos' approach "reeks of extreme entitlement."

"Getting all sassy is no way to build a working relationship," Barnes tweeted.

This reeks of extreme entitlement. Getting all sassy is no way to build a working relationship.



Vos says no when the people say yes on:

-Healthcare

-Working class tax relief

-Marijuana



Why should his personal agenda come before the rest of the state? He already got Foxconn. https://t.co/IwEL6WU8K6 — Mandela Barnes (@TheOtherMandela) February 21, 2019

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/2019/02/21/marijuana-laws-wisconsin-gop-leader-says-tony-evers-plan-wont-pass/2941798002/