Lincoln Hills' replacements to be built in Milwaukee and Outagamie County
Buy Photo Lincoln Hills School for Boys and Copper Lake School for Girls in Irma are going to be closed and replaced with regional facilities for youth offenders. MARK HOFFMAN/MHOFFMAN@JOURNALSENTINEL.COM (Photo: Mark Hoffman, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

MADISON - Lockups for teenage offenders would be built in Milwaukee and Outagamie County to replace the state's embattled juvenile prison, according to plans Gov. Tony Evers announced Tuesday.

The Milwaukee facility would be built on city-owned land at North Teutonia Avenue and West Mill Road, just south of the city's Safety Academy, according to city and state officials. The second facility would be built northwest of Appleton in Hortonia.

The pair of lockups would be among those replacing Lincoln Hills School for Boys and Copper Lake School for Girls, the juvenile prison complex north of Wausau that has been the subject of a criminal investigation for four years.

The Democratic governor's plans faced opposition from local officials in both municipalities, with the Milwaukee site getting mixed reactions from the city's leaders. The plans would need approval from the Republican-led Legislature's budget committee.

RELATED: Lincoln Hills: Scott Walker to close troubled teen prison and open five regional centers for juvenile offenders

Legislators voted last year to close Lincoln Hills and Copper Lake and replace them with smaller, regional lockups that would keep young offenders closer to where they live.

The new Milwaukee and Hortonia lockups would be run by the state. Others would be run by counties, but locations for those facilities have not yet been made.

Evers has left open the possibility of building a third state-run lockup but has not said where that would be.

The state is under a deadline to shut Lincoln Hills by 2021, but Evers wants to delay its closure. Legislators have said they want to keep a hard deadline but have been open to extending it by six to nine months.

"We are committed to getting kids out of Lincoln Hills and closer to home as soon as we safely and responsibly can," Evers said in a statement. "Today’s announcements show significant action towards our shared goal of ensuring kids get the education, programming and mental health treatment they need in supportive settings that are closer to their families and communities."

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

RELATED: Gov. Evers seeks to raise the age for charging teens as adults and delay closure of Lincoln Hills

RELATED: Milwaukee wants its juvenile offenders closer to home, but finding alternatives to Lincoln Hills proves tough

Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett praised the plans, saying the Teutonia Avenue site was better than one at 7301 W. Mill Road that had also been considered.

"It's very important to me and it's very important to the community that Lincoln Hills be closed," Barrett said. "It's very important that the juveniles be brought closer to home. And it's very, very important to make sure that you've got rehabilitation and programming that suits their needs, and we think that all can be achieved here in Milwaukee."

But Common Council President Ashanti Hamilton met the proposal with skepticism. The site Evers picked is in his district.

"This decision was made without input from my office, the community or Milwaukee County and no further details have been provided about this facility," Hamilton said in a statement. "It is hard to imagine that a decision made without community input can bring about the results that the community wants."

The Hortonia location, near state Highway 15 and U.S. 45, also got a chilly response.

"We’re just really taken aback by the announcement," Town Clerk Lyn Neuenfeldt said. "We just heard about it literally when the governor was making the announcement, which to me seems really inappropriate or shocking."

Lawmakers agreed to close Lincoln Hills and Copper Lake last year, just after the state agreed to pay nearly $19 million to a former Copper Lake inmate who was severely brain damaged in a suicide.

In another case, a judge ordered prison officials to reduce their use of pepper spray and solitary confinement. Meanwhile, federal prosecutors are investigating allegations of child neglect and prisoner abuse.

Republican legislators expressed frustration they weren't given advance notice of Evers' plans.

"Surprises are not good," said state Sen. Rob Cowles, an Allouez Republican whose district includes Hortonia.

GOP state Sen. Van Wanggaard of Racine, who sat on a committee that reviewed locations for new juvenile correctional centers, said Evers' announcement was "unexpected but reflective of the decisions" made by that committee.

The Hortonia site was one of the top picks for that committee. For the Milwaukee area, the committee recommended the location at 7301 W. Mill Road — a different site from the one that Evers chose.

"I hope the governor does a better job of being proactive and inclusive to committee members and communities around the state as we work to close Lincoln Hill in 2021," Wanggaard said in a statement.

Evers made his announcement as he seeks an additional $194 million from the Legislature to establish the new state- and county-run teen lockups and expand a mental health facility for young offenders.

In all, he wants to spend $274 million for facilities around the state, up from $80 million that has already been approved.

"He asked for way more than what he needed," said Rep. Michael Schraa, a Republican from Oshkosh who has worked closely on the plans to shutter Lincoln Hills.

Schraa and other lawmakers have strongly resisted Evers' proposal to indefinitely put off the closing of Lincoln Hills.

Evers says he wants to shut the facility as soon as feasible without setting a hard deadline. Legislators have said they want to ensure the facility is shuttered by the summer or fall of 2021.

Also Tuesday, Evers announced he was appointing Democratic Rep. David Crowley of Milwaukee to a committee that will consider grants for counties that want to build juvenile lockups.

He also appointed to the committee Sharlen Moore of the group Youth Justice Milwaukee, which has advocated for immediately closing Lincoln Hills.

Sophie Carson of the USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin contributed to this report.

Contact Patrick Marley at patrick.marley@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter at @patrickdmarley.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/2019/03/12/lincoln-hills-replacements-built-milwaukee-outagamie-county/3139129002/