Leah Vukmir enters Republican U.S. Senate race in bid to unseat Democrat Tammy Baldwin
Buy Photo Republican U.S. Senate candidate Leah Vukmir, a state senator from Brookfield. (Photo: Michael Sears / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

Vowing to bring the "Wisconsin Way" to the U.S. Senate, state Sen. Leah Vukmir of Brookfield entered the race for the Republican nomination to take on Democratic incumbent Tammy Baldwin next year.

In a campaign video and announcement that was released Thursday morning, Vukmir cast herself as a "consistent conservative" who during tough political battles stood side by side with Republican Gov. Scott Walker.

"I will be the person who will stand up for Wisconsin values and the person who will be able to take on Tammy Baldwin," Vukmir said in an interview with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.

Asked why she would better represent Wisconsin than Baldwin, Vukmir said: "Tammy Baldwin hasn't done anything in the U.S. Senate. That's the consistent message I get from people across the state of Wisconsin. She doesn't represent the people of the state of Wisconsin. She stands with the extreme wing of the (Democratic) party and that's not what the people in Wisconsin want."

"They want somebody who is going to say what they're going to do and who is going to follow through and do it," Vukmir added. "And everyone knows that's what you're going to get with me."

By emphasizing her deep roots among Wisconsin Republicans, Vukmir, 59, is seeking to offer a vivid contrast with the only other candidate in race, Delafield businessman and U.S. Marine veteran Kevin Nicholson.

Before becoming a Republican, Nicholson, 39, was president of the College Democrats of America and spoke at the 2000 Democratic National Convention.

Madison businessman Eric Hovde, runner-up to former Gov. Tommy Thompson in the 2012 GOP Senate primary, has said he'll make a decision on the race in early October.

"I think that what we need in Washington right now is somebody who is going to be able to hit the ground running and that's exactly what I'll be able to do," Vukmir said. "When I look at the issues that are facing our country right now and when I look at the razor-thin margin of votes in the U.S. Senate it would be great to have somebody in there who you know right away on day one, will be able to stand up for the conservative principles that will make a difference."

"There's no question with what you get with me," she added.

A Vukmir-Nicholson political battle has already brought in two of the biggest contributors to the GOP.

RELATED: GOP Senate candidates Kevin Nicholson, Leah Vukmir meet with conservative activists

POLTIFACT WISCONSIN: Leah Vukmir's file

Beloit billionaire Diane Hendricks, owner of ABC Supply, will serve as Vukmir's finance co-chair.

Richard Uihlein, who lives in Lake Forest, Il., and is co-owner of Pleasant Prairie-based Uline Corp., has already poured in $3.5 million into a super PAC that backs Nicholson.

In her campaign video, Vukmir traced her history as a mother and nurse who entered the public arena as a strong proponent of school reform and joined the conservative wing of the Republican Party.

She was first elected to the state Assembly in 2002 and joined the state Senate in 2011, just as the battle over Act 10 erupted in Madison. Walker and the GOP successfully pushed through legislation to curtail collective bargaining for public sector unions.

“I stood with Gov. Walker and real conservatives to enact successful reforms that keep jobs here in Wisconsin, keep more of your hard earned money in your pocket, and make our communities better places to raise a family," Vukmir said in a statement.

“And, in the face of liberal intimidation tactics, I’ve kept up that fight to make our state a better, safer, and more prosperous place for my children and yours," she said.

Democratic Party of Wisconsin Chair Martha Laning criticized Vukmir for "putting her extreme agenda ahead of the needs of Wisconsin families," and for her association with the business-backed American Legislative Exchange Council.

"She prioritizes tax breaks for billionaires and corporations over working people," Laning said. "She cuts education and health care to pay for massive tax breaks for the super wealthy. And what's worse, Leah Vukmir's extreme policies haven't done anything to address rising costs for Wisconsin families.”

While welcoming Vukmir to the race, Nicholson's campaign focused on its candidate's conservative credentials.

"Wisconsin Republicans know it will take a conservative outsider like Kevin Nicholson to take back Washington from career politicians like Senator Baldwin, and to put an end to her disastrous record," Nicholson campaign spokesman Michael Antonpolous said. "That’s why so many conservatives are already supporting Kevin's campaign — and his momentum continues to grow. Kevin is a highly decorated former Captain in the Marine Corps who will take the fight to Washington.”

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2xROJbg