Wisconsin gas tax to go up by nearly a dime a gallon under Gov. Tony Evers plan
Buy Photo Traffic is backed up in the snow on I-43 southbound near East Locust Street in Milwaukee. (Photo: Mike De Sisti, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

MADISON – The gas tax would go up by nearly a dime a gallon by early 2021 under Gov. Tony Evers’ budget — about 2 cents more than the Democratic governor has talked about as he’s promoted his two-year spending plan.

Under his plan, the state would begin to put $500 million toward expanding Interstate 43 north of Milwaukee and keep other large projects on schedule, according to a detailed analysis released Tuesday by the nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau.

Evers’ transportation plan — like his overall budget — faces an uncertain future in a Legislature dominated by Republicans. GOP lawmakers have been split for years on road funding, with some wanting to find more money for highways and others wanting to hold the line on spending.

To put more money toward roads, Evers would raise the gas tax by 8 cents a gallon initially and another 1.6 cents by early 2021. In all, the gas tax would go up 9.6 cents by then, from 32.9 cents to 42.5 cents.

In an attempt to keep gas prices down, Evers is also proposing eliminating the state's minimum markup law on gasoline. That law requires retailers to increase the price of gas in most cases by 9.18 percent above the average wholesale price.

Evers contends that change would lower gas prices by 14 cents a gallon — meaning overall gas prices would fall even with his proposed increases in the gas tax. How the situation would actually play out remains unclear because retailers don't have to raise their prices if they are matching competitors' prices.

CLOSE Highlights from Gov. Tony Evers budget Lou Saldivar, Wisconsin Eye

Indexing returns

Evers' plan would restore what’s known as indexing — a system designed to automatically increase the gas tax by an inflationary amount every April. The state had such a program for 20 years but ended it in 2006 under a bipartisan deal.

Evers has talked about raising the gas tax and restoring indexing, but Tuesday's report was the first time a figure had been put on restarting the program. Indexing would cause gas taxes to rise by 0.8 cents a gallon in April 2020 and the same amount in April 2021, the fiscal bureau found.

After that, the gas tax would continue to rise each April by a similar amount, depending on the inflation rate.

Evers’ plan would bring in an additional $608 million for transportation over two years. Most of that amount — $527 million — would come from the higher gas tax, with the rest coming from fees on heavy trucks, hybrid vehicles and vehicle titles.

Fees on heavy trucks would go up by 27 percent — an increase of $42 to $692 per truck, depending on its weight. Evers wrote the budget in a way that would also apply the higher taxes to light trucks, but his administration has said that was a mistake and would be dropped with an addendum to the budget, according to the fiscal bureau.

Lawmakers two years ago established fees of $100 for electric vehicles and $75 for hybrid vehicles, but the Department of Transportation wasn't able to impose the fee on hybrid vehicles because lawmakers wrote the measure in a way that made it difficult to identify which vehicles owed the higher fee. Evers is proposing tweaking the phrasing of the measure so the department can start collecting those fees.

Evers wants to raise vehicle title fees by $10, from $69.50 to $79.50.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

GOP lawmakers have suggested they might not go along with Evers' plans. If they don't, they would need to find other sources of funding, delay projects or ramp up borrowing.

Projects to stay on schedule

The report also noted Evers' plans to widen I-43 from Silver Spring Drive in Glendale to Highway 60 in Grafton would cost about $500 million. Evers wants to spend $56 million over the next two years to get the project started.

State Department of Transportation officials had declined before Tuesday to provide an estimate of the cost of the project.

The influx of cash Evers included in his budget would allow other large projects to stay on their current schedules — including the north leg of the Zoo Interchange in Milwaukee, which is to be finished in 2023.

Under his plan, state Highway 441 in the Fox Valley would be completed by 2020, Highway 15 in Outagamie County would be completed in 2021, Highway 23 in Sheboygan and Fond du Lac counties would be completed in 2023 and Highway 50 in Kenosha County would be completed in 2023.

The bulk of the expansion of Interstate 39 between the Illinois state line and Madison is to be completed by 2021, but the DOT has not settled on a final plan for the project where it connects to Madison's Beltline. That raises the possibility that part of the project could be delayed, the fiscal bureau noted.

RELATED: Republicans reject Tony Evers' $2.5 billion plan for building projects

RELATED: Agencies ask Wisconsin lawmakers to approve measures in Tony Evers' budget to clean up drinking water

In addition, Evers is recommending giving local governments a 10 percent increase in aid to help them fill potholes and fix roads in their communities. The increase would cost $66 million.

He wants to give transit systems a 10 percent increase in state aid at a cost of nearly $14 million.

Contact Patrick Marley at patrick.marley@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter at @patrickdmarley.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/2019/03/26/tony-evers-plan-would-raise-gas-tax-nearly-dime/3277517002/