With three tweets, Donald Trump endorses Leah Vukmir, Bryan Steil and Scott Walker
CLOSE

President Donald Trump (Photo: Evan Vucci, Associated Press)

President Donald Trump stayed out of the bitter Republican primary battle for U.S. Senate.

But on Wednesday, with a tweet, he went all in on the winner, Leah Vukmir, who faces Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin in November.

Congratulations to Leah Vukmir of Wisconsin on your great win last night. You beat a very tough and good competitor and will make a fantastic Senator after winning in November against someone who has done very little. You have my complete and total Endorsement! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 15, 2018

Trump also tweeted support for Republican Bryan Steil, bidding to succeed House Speaker Paul Ryan in the 1st Congressional District. Steil will take on Democrat Randy Bryce in the fall.

Congratulations to Bryan Steil on a wonderful win last night. Your will be replacing a great guy in Paul Ryan, and your win in November will make the entire State of Wisconsin very proud. You have my complete and total Endorsement! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 15, 2018

ELECTION RESULTS: Wisconsin and Milwaukee-area fall primary election

FULL COVERAGE: 2018 Wisconsin Elections

RELATED: Leah Vukmir defeats Kevin Nicholson for GOP nomination for U.S. Senate and will meet Tammy Baldwin in November

RELATED: Randy Bryce wins Democratic primary for Paul Ryan's seat and will face off against Republican Bryan Steil

And, Trump reaffirmed his support for Republican Gov. Scott Walker, who faces Democrat Tony Evers.

Scott Walker is very special and will have another great win in November. He has done a fantastic job as Governor of Wisconsin and will always have my full support and Endorsement! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 15, 2018

Trump won Wisconsin during the 2016 presidential election and has frequently visited the state since. He was last here to celebrate the official groundbreaking of the Foxconn Technology Group site in Pleasant Prairie.

For complete election coverage, subscribe to the Journal Sentinel at jsonline.com/deal.

Support local journalism SUBSCRIBE ×

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2OH1SM3