With Scott Walker hitting him on taxes, Tony Evers floats cut for 860,000 working families
Buy Photo Democratic governor candidate Tony Evers speaks at a joint Milwaukee Press Club, Rotary Club of Milwaukee event at the Milwaukee County War Memorial. (Photo: Angela Peterson/Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

Without offering many specifics, Democrat Tony Evers declared Tuesday that he wants "fair taxes" and that 860,000 working families who are struggling to make ends meet "should get a tax cut."

"That is my policy," Evers told reporters after speaking at a joint program organized by the Rotary Club of Milwaukee and Milwaukee Press Club.

Taxes have moved front and center in the race between Evers and Republican Gov. Scott Walker.

Last week, Evers said he was considering a range of tax changes and was contemplating eliminating a tax break for manufacturers and farmers, increasing income taxes on the wealthy and cutting income taxes for others.

That brought a tough response from Republicans. On Tuesday, Walker's campaign launched an ad that said Evers will raise property, income and gas taxes.

Evers denied the claim, calling Walker "a typical politician. He wants to avoid any type of review of his own failed policies."

In discussing a tax cut, Evers referenced a recent United Way of Wisconsin report that showed more than a third of the state's households struggle to afford basic needs like housing, health care, food and transportation.

Asked where he would find the money for a tax cut plus his proposal to boost school funding by $1.4 billion over two years, Evers said, "It's all about priorities, it always has been.

"That's the way it has worked for Republicans and Democrats over time," he added. "You go to the budget, you get the best you can and you try to do it without any taxes and it happens, it happens every single time."

RELATED: Tony Evers considers a range of tax hikes and cuts as he calls Scott Walker's priorities 'out of whack'

POLITIFACT:Fact-checking the candidates for Wisconsin governor

In a pair of tweets, Walker defended his reforms that "help taxpayers' dollars go further on state and local road projects," and added that Evers wanted to undo those reforms and increase costs.

"When Tony Evers talks about 'fairer' taxes it's fair to believe your taxes are going up," Walker said.

When Tony Evers talks about “fairer” taxes it’s fair to believe that your taxes are going up. — Scott Walker (@ScottWalker) September 25, 2018

Earlier Tuesday, Evers appeared at the Wisconsin AFL-CIO convention and said that laws on right-to-work and prevailing wage can be reversed. But he stopped short of saying that Act 10 can be reversed.

"I think over time we may be able to do that," he said of reversing Act 10, which curtailed collective bargaining for most public-sector workers.

Under Walker, Republicans passed right-to-work, which bars unions and employers from having contracts that require all workers to pay union fees. Republicans also dialed back the state's prevailing wage laws that set union-level salary minimums for those who build roads and other publicly funded projects.

"I think there is momentum to reverse prevailing wages, yes I do," Evers said. "Both employers and employees opposed those when they were initiating those changes. We believe there's enough momentum there to reverse those."

RELATED: Scott Walker accuses Tony Evers of being 'bought and paid for' by unions

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2xQ2WX1