Tony Evers considers a range of tax hikes and cuts as he calls Scott Walker's priorities 'out of whack'
CLOSE

Tony Evers (Photo: Evers Campaign)

MADISON - Democrat Tony Evers said Thursday he is considering a broad range of changes to Wisconsin’s taxes if he beats GOP Gov. Scott Walker this fall.

Evers, the state schools superintendent, told reporters after delivering his “state of education” speech that he was contemplating eliminating a tax break for manufacturers and farmers, increasing income taxes on the wealthy and cutting income taxes for others.

“I think we need to prioritize the working men and women of Wisconsin,” he said.

He added: “There’s no definite plans at this time.”

He made his comments shortly after Republicans contended Evers would boost property taxes and income taxes if elected and could raise the gas tax by as much as $1 a gallon.

Evers said he is considering increasing the gas tax of 32.9 cents per gallon to pay for roads, but not by as much as Republicans claimed.

“It’s ridiculous,” he said of the notion of quadrupling the gas tax. “Who the hell would, frankly?”

But he refused to say how much of an increase he would accept. He said he wanted to work with Democratic and Republican lawmakers on the best way to fix roads and would consider imposing higher taxes or implementing tolls to do so.

Ahead of Evers' speech and news conference, Republicans on the Legislature's budget committee said Evers’ plans would result in big tax increases.

"Tony Evers could destroy all that we’ve accomplished with his reckless spending and massive tax increases that would be needed to support that spending," said Rep. Mark Born (R-Beaver Dam).

In his education address, Evers called for increasing school payments by $1.4 billion over two years and targeting funds to those who are poor, have special needs or are learning English.

“Right now, Wisconsin priorities are out of whack,” Evers said in his speech.

"Today in Wisconsin we’re spending less on our public schools than we did eight years ago — putting us below the national average. And these choices have consequences.”

RELATED: Tony Evers seeks $1.4 billion increase for Wisconsin schools

RELATED: Marquette poll: Tony Evers leads Scott Walker 49 percent to 44 percent in governor's race

Evers said voters already have shown a willingness to accept higher taxes to improve schools. A Marquette University Law School poll this week found 57 percent of voters had that view and Evers noted communities across the state have voted in recent years to raise their property taxes to fund schools.

“State leaders in Madison aren’t getting the job done, so people of Wisconsin are doing it themselves,” he said in his speech.

“Folks, the pendulum is swinging — back to a time when we value an investment in our kids’ futures and we demand our leaders do the same. Where we value working together to build up schools and communities instead of adopting policies and politics that tear each other down.”

Evers released a two-year school plan this week that includes more than $600 million over two years for special education, or about $4,000 per child with disabilities. He would also devote $63 million to mental health services, fund all-day kindergarten for 4-year-olds and provide state support for after-school programs.

RELATED: Scott Walker touts tax breaks as he and Tony Evers joust over road funding

RELATED: Gas tax: Gov. Scott Walker opposes increasing it, Democratic candidates would hike it to avoid construction delays

POLITIFACT: Fact checking the candidates for Wisconsin governor

In all, his plan would bring state support for schools to $15.4 billion over two years, an increase of $1.4 billion, or 10 percent. Under his plan, the state would cover two-thirds of education costs — a level set by former Gov. Tommy Thompson that has not been met for years.

Evers said his education plan would not increase property taxes statewide, but Republicans contended individual districts could see increases.

Walker has not said how much money he would put toward schools if he wins re-election.

Born and Sen. Tom Tiffany (R-Hazelhurst), who both sit on the Legislature's budget-writing Joint Finance Committee, said it was too soon to say how much the state could put toward schools, but that Evers' $1.4 billion was far too much when taking into account the state's other needs.

"I would swear Christmas is around the corner after listening to Tony Evers and that the stockings are going to be stuffed full," Tiffany said. "But we all know that those bills have to be paid."

"Are we going to go back to the dark Doyle days?" he asked, referring to Walker's Democratic predecessor, Gov. Jim Doyle.

At a stop in Appleton, Walker argued Evers would raise a host of taxes, including on farmers.

"Farmers are already devastated," he said. "The last thing they need is a tax increase."

In his news conference, Evers said he wants to dissolve the Wisconsin Economic Development Corp. and reconstitute the state Department of Commerce to oversee efforts to create jobs and draw businesses to Wisconsin.

Walker replaced the public Department of Commerce with the partly private WEDC in 2011. Evers has previously said he wanted to get rid of the WEDC, but until Thursday had not said specifically that he wanted to reinstate the Department of Commerce.

“It’s all public money," Evers said. "We need to make sure … we have accountability to the public.”

RELATED: Tony Evers proposes boost in funding for all-day kindergarten for 4-year-olds

RELATED: Tony Evers vows to restore state commitment to fund two-thirds of schools in 2019-'21 budget

In an ad released Thursday, Walker — who this year dubbed himself "the education governor" — touted his cuts to property taxes and the quality of the state’s schools.

“Tony Evers, well, he’ll raise property taxes, raise income taxes and raise gas taxes by as much as a dollar a gallon,” Walker said. “And that would put our jobs at risk. Wisconsin is working. We can’t afford to turn back now.”

Evers has previously said he wants to eliminate a tax break that allows manufacturers and farmers to avoid paying most income taxes for their businesses.

On Thursday, he expanded on his thoughts on taxes by saying he wanted to protect small businesses and small farms and was contemplating raising income taxes on the wealthy while cutting them for others — particularly those who are scraping by.

“They need a tax break, too," Evers said. "So we’re going to find ways to look at the tax structure of this state to make sure that a) we’re advantaging the people who need it the most and b) making sure that we continue to have economic development in this state that advantages local, Wisconsin businesses.”

In a second ad Thursday, Walker described his plan to give parents a tax credit to cover 20 percent to 35 percent of child care expenses, depending on their incomes. The average claimant would save about $500 a year, according to Walker's office.

In his first ad, Walker took note of "all the attack ads these days."

Democrats called that complaint ironic because Walker and his backers have been blanketing the airwaves with spots accusing Evers of not doing enough to revoke teaching licenses, including one for a teacher who looked at porn in the classroom. Democrats, meanwhile, have gone after Walker as someone who is focused on his political career instead of the needs of voters.

"Another ad, another desperate attempt from typical politician Scott Walker to lie about Tony's record while trying to rewrite his own," Evers spokesman Sam Lau said in a statement.

Mica Soellner of the USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin contributed to this report from Appleton.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2DiTvFD