Tammy Baldwin announces backing from more than 100 business leaders
CLOSE

Tammy Baldwin (second from left) announces support from more than 100 business leaders during a news conference Friday at MillerCoors. (Photo: Bill Glauber / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin announced Friday support from more than 100 business leaders, including Milwaukee philanthropists Sheldon and Marianne Lubar and Alex Lasry, an executive vice president with the Milwaukee Bucks.

Baldwin also received backing from MillerCoors for her Senate work on behalf of the beer industry.

"We're bipartisan," Kelly Grebe, MillerCoors chief legal officer, said during a news conference at the brewery's Fred's Pub.

"We support those who support us. Just like we support Governor (Scott) Walker," Grebe said. "Senator Baldwin has been very supportive. Generally, what you find is the incumbents work quite well for us. And we're going to support those elected officials who are supportive of MillerCoors and MillerCoors issues."

Earlier Friday, Baldwin was in Marinette, where she was joined by Jan Allman, president, chief executive officer and general manager of Fincantieri Marinette Marine. Baldwin has advocated for the U.S. Navy Littoral Combat Ship, which is built there.

POLITIFACT: Fact checking Tammy Baldwin and Leah Vukmir, the U.S. Senate candidates

RELATED: Leah Vukmir took contributions from ALEC allied businesses ... and so did Tammy Baldwin

RELATED: Marquette poll: Tammy Baldwin, Leah Vukmir tied in Wisconsin U.S. Senate race

In her race against Republican Leah Vukmir, Baldwin is seeking to stress bipartisan issues and pushing her Buy America proposal to use U.S.-made iron and steel in water infrastructure projects.

Vukmir has opposed Baldwin's initiative.

"Her attack on my Buy America measure is bad for business," Baldwin said.

Baldwin said she supports tariffs that are targeted and measured, but added President Donald Trump's tariff policy has been haphazard and is hurting the state's dairy farmers and sectors of the manufacturing economy.

Vukmir campaign manager Jess Ward criticized Baldwin for her opposition to Republican tax cuts that were signed into law by Trump and said "it's the height of hypocrisy for Baldwin to pretend she's a friend to Wisconsin job creators and workers."

"Standing with elites instead of Wisconsinites, Baldwin opposed giving $1,600 in tax relief for middle-class families and helping more than 30 local companies to give raises and bonuses to their workers," Ward said.

Baldwin defended her vote against the tax bill and said she was focused on tax breaks for middle-income people and small- to medium-size businesses. She said the top 1 percent and large multinational corporations garnered most of the benefits of the bill.

She added the bill "left a trillion-dollar hole in our budget," and expressed concern that many Republicans are now looking to cut Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid.

"We were promised trickle down and we were promised by the sponsors of this legislation that workers would see their wages go up, companies would reinvest in their factories, improve conditions and train workers to deal with the skills gap. We are seeing very little of that activity," she said.

Baldwin was asked about the fallout from the conviction of former Trump campaign chairman Paul Manafort and guilty plea from former Trump lawyer Michael Cohen.

Baldwin said special counsel Robert Mueller's probe into Russian interference in the 2016 election must "continue unfettered."

"That has to be the bottom line and I call on my Republican colleagues to be as vehement about that as I feel," she said.

Baldwin spoke with emotion about U.S. Sen. John McCain (R-Arizona), whose family announced Friday that he will discontinue medical treatment for an aggressive form of brain cancer.

She said she has been reading McCain's new political memoir, "The Restless Wave," and is "thinking what a hero and a treasure he is to our country."

"This is a time when I'm praying for him and his family and thinking of his courage," she said.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2o8eWyw