Tony Evers calls Scott Walker a liar after ad says Evers would release rapists
State Superintendent Tony Evers and his running mate, former state Rep. Mandela Barnes, made their stop at Milwaukee co-working space Ward4 as Walker tried to get a stalled incentive package for Kimberly-Clark Corp. through the state Senate. (Photo: Bill Glauber / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

GOP Gov. Scott Walker accused Democrat Tony Evers on Wednesday of planning to release robbers and rapists if elected. Evers called Walker a liar who is taking the race on a low road.

Also Wednesday, Walker said he was trying to get an incentive package through the state Senate to keep a Kimberly-Clark Corp. plant open but acknowledged he would have trouble getting it done by the company's Sept. 30 deadline.

Evers, who is the state schools superintendent, said he hadn't decided if he could back the deal because Republicans haven't released full details of it.

RELATED: Democrats running for governor call for slashing prison population

RELATED: Scott Walker says Democrats would make Wisconsin more dangerous

In a new TV ad, Walker blistered Evers over his support for cutting the prison population in half, which the ad called "a dangerous plan" that could result in the release of "felons who’ve committed rape, assault, robbery and even kidnapping."

"That’s a lie. I never said that," Evers told reporters at a stop at Milwaukee co-working space Ward4. "We will not release violent criminals."

"We’re not going to get in the gutter with Scott Walker," Evers said.

The spot follows a series of graphic ads by Walker and his backers about Evers not revoking the licenses of a teacher who viewed pornographic images at school. Evers has contended state law at the time didn't allow him to take the teacher's license because students hadn't seen the material.

Walker's ad comes as former Gov. Tommy Thompson and some other Republicans have called for prison reform. Thompson, who portrayed himself a tough-on-crime governor when he was in office, last week said he regretted to succumbing to "hysteria" on prison policies at the time.

Gov. Scott Walker (left) and state schools Superintendent Tony Evers. (Photo: Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Evers has said he supports eventually reducing the state's prison population of about 23,500 and would consider allowing the release of inmates for good behavior, creating or expanding court diversion programs and treating 17-year-old offenders as juveniles instead of adults.

Evers has not put a time frame on reaching that goal and has said that he would not release violent offenders, as Walker's ad claims.

Republicans contend Evers has committed to halving the prison population in four years because of an answer he gave at a candidate forum about a plan by the religious group MICAH that would do that.

At the forum, the questioner noted the plan would cut the population in half but did not give the time frame. Evers said he "absolutely" supported the idea but also called it a "goal." At other times during the Democratic primary, Evers said he didn't have a timeline for reducing the population.

Walker has seized on the issue, saying he's committed to keeping offenders behind bars. His new ad contends Evers is "putting everyone at risk."

When he was in the Assembly in the 1990s, Walker was the lead sponsor of the “truth-in-sentencing” law that ended parole — a law Thompson signed and that Evers has said he would consider repealing.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

As governor, Walker has never visited a prison and said last month he saw "no value" in doing so.

RELATED: Gov. Scott Walker says he sees 'no value' in visiting state prisons as he hits Democrats' promises to slash the number of inmates

Wisconsin’s prisons are running out of room and Walker’s administration is studying whether to build a new prison, which would cost about $300 million to construct and millions of dollars more a year to operate.

Evers came out with his own ad Wednesday, in which he said he would lower health care costs, rebuild roads and put more money toward schools.

Kimberly-Clark deal

At his stop in Milwaukee, Evers said he didn't know what to make of the Kimberly-Clark package Walker is working on. The maker of paper and personal care products plans to close 10 plants worldwide and shed 5,000 workers.

"The bottom line is we have to wait to see what the deal is," he told reporters. "It’s hard to get behind any deal one way or the other until we know what it is."

Evers' running mate, former state Rep. Mandela Barnes, took a harder line, saying more companies will seek handouts from the state after Walker agreed last year to a package for Foxconn Technology Group that will give the Taiwanese company up to $4 billion in state and local incentives.

"We never should have opened the floodgates with the awful Foxconn deal," Barnes said.

A Kimberly-Clark spokeswoman this week said the company wants a vote on the deal by Sept. 30. Walker told The Associated Press he is working to get the deal through the Senate, but it would be easier to do if he had until after the Nov. 6 election.

CLOSE WisconsinEye Senior Producer Steve Walters and WisPolitics.com Editor JR Ross outline how seven issues will play out in the race for governor. WisconsinEye

RELATED: Kimberly-Clark wants Wisconsin to decide on incentives by Sept. 30 to keep plant open

Republicans control the Senate 18-15, but Walker said he would need Democratic votes to get the measure through the chamber. No Democrats have publicly supported the measure, in part because Republicans have not spelled out the details of their plans.

Walker said he had been talking to leaders from both parties, but a spokeswoman for Senate Minority Leader Jennifer Shilling (D-La Crosse) said Walker had not talked to Shilling for months.

The package is aimed at keeping the company's Cold Spring plant in Fox Crossing open. It is modeled on one passed by the GOP-controlled Assembly in February.

Under it, Kimberly-Clark would get cash payments from the state to continue to operate in Wisconsin.

The state has eliminated most income taxes on manufacturers, and Kimberly-Clark had no income tax liability from 2013 to 2015 and owed just $1 in 2016, records show.

The Cold Spring plant employs about 500 people. The company's nonwoven plant in Neenah, which employs about 110 people, will close no matter what the state does, said Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau).

CLOSE Political ads in Wisconsin's gubernatorial race center on a teacher who watched porn at school Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2x5nXMW