Scott Walker says Tony Evers wants to help 'illegals,' brings immigration into the governor's race
State schools Superintendent Tony Evers (left) shakes hands with Gov. Scott Walker before their first debate. (Photo: Molly Beck / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

MADISON – Gov. Scott Walker accused his opponent Tuesday of offering special assistance to "illegals," using a term for undocumented immigrants that many Hispanics find offensive.

A new ad highlights Democrat Tony Evers' support for giving illegal immigrants the ability to qualify for driver's permits and in-state tuition. It ends with the tagline, "Tony Evers: Special treatment for illegals, higher taxes for you."

RELATED: Scott Walker and Tony Evers spar over immigration, taxes, health care in first debate

RELATED: Scott Walker says Wisconsin needs a break from 'massive new interchanges in Milwaukee'

The spot comes as Walker prepares to join a rally Wednesday in Mosinee with President Donald Trump, who of late has put a renewed focus on illegal immigration. The race between Walker and Evers, the state's schools superintendent, has been neck and neck, according to recent polling.

Evers' running mate, Mandela Barnes, said Walker was trying to stoke racial division just days after Trump called himself a nationalist at a Texas rally.

"It's following the path of the president," Barnes said. "He declared himself a nationalist. It's the same thing."

In a debate Friday, Evers said providing driving permits to illegal immigrants would be good for workers and businesses and make Wisconsin's roads safer. The Wisconsin Farm Bureau shares Evers' view on that issue, but the group has endorsed Walker.

Evers also called for allowing illegal immigrants who graduate from Wisconsin high schools to pay in-state tuition. The measure is aimed at helping those known as Dreamers who were brought to the United States illegally as children.

Walker revoked a similar policy on in-state tuition in 2011.

Much of Walker's ad consists of footage of Evers talking during the debate about those issues.

"This is the kind of desperate, divide-and-conquer ad a career politician like Walker puts out because he's afraid he's going to lose," said Rep. JoCasta Zamarripa (D-Milwaukee).

RELATED: Lessons learned from presidential bid launched Scott Walker on quest for third term

RELATED: Tony Evers seeks a new life a decade after nearly losing his own to cancer

Christine Neumann-Ortiz, executive director of the immigrant rights group Voces de la Frontera, called Walker's ad offensive but predicted it would backfire.

"Gov. Walker is trying to scapegoat young people who are working very, very hard to achieve their educational goals, to fulfill the dreams of their parents and teachers and friends to give back, often to Wisconsin," she said.

"What Gov. Walker is doing, it's very much like Trump," she said. "He's acting like a bully. He's picking on young people."

She called the term "illegals" a "very derogatory, offensive term because it doesn't treat immigrants as people."

Her group is backing Evers with ads that tout his support for driver's permits and in-state tuition. She said she believed the public is on her group's side on those issues and Walker's ad strategy would not work.

Walker's changing positions

Walker has zigzagged on the issue of immigration over the years. As a lawmaker in 2001, he voted for a state budget that included allowing illegal immigrants to pay in-state tuition, though at an earlier stage he voted to remove the provision.

As Milwaukee County executive, Walker in 2002 signed a resolution calling for providing legal residency to illegal immigrants. But when he briefly ran for president in 2015, he took a tough stance against immigration, saying he opposed "amnesty" and stressing the need for border security.

Now, Walker opposes allowing driver's permits and in-state tuition for illegal immigrants. This week, he invoked a caravan of migrants in Central America in disparaging Evers' policies.

“Think about all the people who are marching towards this nation’s border," Walker said Monday. "Tony Evers would say, 'I’ll give you free driver's licenses. I’ll give you licenses to come and work and operate vehicles here in the state of Wisconsin.' ”

Evers has not said the driver's permits would be free, as Walker claimed. People would have to pass driving tests and pay a fee to get them.

In the debate, Walker said that allowing illegal immigrants who graduate from Wisconsin high schools to pay in-state tuition would violate federal laws. Twenty states allow illegal immigrants to pay in-state tuition, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.

Federal law says states cannot offer benefits to illegal immigrants based on residency. The states that allow illegal immigrants to pay in-state tuition contend they're not violating that law because their policies are based on graduating from a high school in their states, not residency.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/elections/2018/10/23/wisconsin-governors-race-walker-says-evers-wants-help-illegals/1739967002/