Tony Evers will veto 'born alive' abortion bill advanced by GOP lawmakers
CLOSE

Abortions in Texas plummeted about 15 percent during the first year after approval of tough restrictions that the U.S. Supreme Court has since struck down a decline that activists say shows how hard it had become to get an abortion in America's second-largest state. (Photo: Associated Press)

MADISON – Doctors who do not provide medical care to babies who are born alive after a failed abortion attempt could face life in prison under a Republican bill headed straight toward Gov. Tony Evers' veto pen.

The legislation came the same week North Carolina's Democratic governor vetoed a similar proposal and as Republican lawmakers nationwide are sending their liberal-leaning governors similar bills that could energize conservative voters — especially heading into 2020 in swing states like Wisconsin.

"We wanted to reaffirm the fact that babies that survive abortions have the right to anything any other living, breathing individual in the state does," Assembly Majority Leader Jim Steineke, R-Kaukauna, said. "And doctors have the responsibility to care for that child as they would for any other person who was living and breathing."

Some abortion-rights advocates and doctors say the legislation leaves a false impression that the extremely rare scenario is common, but anti-abortion advocates say one time is too many.

The bill, co-authored and sponsored by Republican leaders of both houses, requires health care providers present during a failed abortion attempt "to exercise the same degree of professional skill, care, and diligence to preserve the life and health of the child as a reasonably diligent and conscientious health care provider would render to any other child born alive."

If a doctor or nurse fail to do so, and fail to admit the infant to a hospital, he or she could face felony charges and up to $10,000 in fines. Health care providers "intentionally causing the death of a child born alive" as a result of a failed abortion, could face life in prison.

Evers said he will not sign the bill because of existing protections and criminal penalties in state law.

"I think those protections already exist," Evers said in an interview Monday. "We have all sorts of issues to deal with in the state of Wisconsin and to pass a bill that is redundant seems to be not a productive use of time. And clearly I ran on the belief — and I still believe — that women should be able to make choices about their health care. But this deals with a specific issue that's already been resolved."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Senate President Roger Roth, the bill's co-author, said Evers' decision not to sign the bill before a public hearing shows "he has gone farther to the extreme than I imagined."

"My bill simply removes any ambiguity that a health care provider must care for the life and health of a baby. How could anyone be against that?" he said.

Evers said the lawmakers' decision to introduce such bills was made "to create division."

RELATED: Planned Parenthood sues to overturn some Wisconsin abortion restrictions

RELATED: Anti-abortion group to set up display near three Milwaukee colleges

Mirrors blocked federal legislation

The GOP legislation mirrors a federal bill Democrats in the U.S. Senate blocked in February — a move prompting President Donald Trump to characterize the Democrats' position on abortion as not minding 'executing babies.'"

Senate Democrats just voted against legislation to prevent the killing of newborn infant children. The Democrat position on abortion is now so extreme that they don’t mind executing babies AFTER birth.... — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 26, 2019

And it comes two months after Virginia Gov. Ralph Northam set off a firestorm when he commented on such scenarios.

Some legal experts say the legislation mirrors constitutional protections already set in law for anyone who is born alive, namely the Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of 2002 — reasoning North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper used Thursday to veto a similar bill from his state Legislature.

"Bills such as these are pure inflammatory rhetoric," said Alta Charo, a University of Wisconsin-Madison professor of law and bioethics who supports broad access to abortion. "Any baby born alive is granted equal protection of the law from the moment of birth, and thus is covered by child abuse statutes, homicide statutes and any other law that guards children from harm.

"These bills (are offered) merely to create the false impression that abortion providers practice infanticide," Charo said.

Retired UW-Madison political science professor Donald Downs, who specializes in constitutional issues, said he didn't know whether the proposal includes protections already in state law but said once a baby is born, the state has an interest in providing them.

"Clearly, if you have a baby outside of the womb, that would seem to be a clear case the state has an interest in protecting the rights of the baby," Downs said. "If indeed this is redundant, then there’s no need for it, but I don't know what the previous protection is.

"The law protects you when you're born — you're a person," he added.

Heather Weininger, executive director of Wisconsin Right to Life, said anti-abortion advocates want to see language in state law that specifically outlines criminal penalties for failing to transport a baby to a hospital after a failed abortion attempt — making requirements clear to abortion providers.

"This bill just really clarifies that (the) child would need to be transported to a hospital if they are in an abortion facility," Weininger said.

Jennifer Conti, an obstetrician-gynecologist and professor of obstetrics and gynecology at Stanford University who supports access to abortions, said the scenario "essentially never happens."

"They are trying to essentially pull at people's heartstrings," Conti said. "(To) envision this scenario that never really happens, where there is a viable fetus that is born and essentially the parents or physician are making a decision."

Weininger said, "to say that this isn’t happening is also a false statement."

"I work closely with people who have been born alive after failed abortion attempts," she said. "To say it hasn’t happened simply isn’t true."

Roth, who co-authored the bill, said the proposal sends a message.

"I am introducing the Born-Alive Protection Act because, unfortunately, some people including the Governor of Virginia, are unclear on this, so we need to reaffirm these protections," he said in a statement. "We are providing explicit outlines to health care practitioners that babies who survive an abortion need to be given the same, equal rights as any other person."

Sara Horvath, a medical doctor and a spokeswoman for the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, said such bills are "an insult to suggest that clinicians who provide abortion care to their patients are anything less than exceedingly professional, expert, and accurate in their approach to delivery of care."

Evers was elected governor in November after pledging to block legislation that places more restrictions on abortions in Wisconsin and puts lawmakers in control of women's medical decisions.

Wisconsin is 1 of 4 states that has a criminal abortion ban on the books. Government shouldn’t be making personal health decisions for women and we shouldn’t be treating physicians like criminals. Women’s lives will be jeopardized. We must remove this ban from our statutes. https://t.co/WMohTay8S0 — Tony Evers (@Tony4WI) June 30, 2018

But Republican lawmakers are still introducing legislation to do just that, including five last week. One would ban women from seeking an abortion because of a fetus' race or disability as long as the disability is considered compatible with life.

Bill authors Sen. Patrick Testin, R-Stevens Point, and Rep. Barbara Dittrich, R-Oconomowoc, said the bill protects unborn children from discrimination.

"No unborn child should be deprived of life due to any quality that they have inherited during any point during their development," the authors' memo seeking co-sponsorship said. "This legislation corrects that and adds legal protections for the unborn against a selective abortion stemming from discrimination."

Horvath said "the circumstances that lead patients to seek abortion counseling and care are complex and nuanced."

"Each situation is unique and individual patients take a considered and deliberate approach to thinking about their pregnancies, with guidance from trusted medical experts and family," Horvath said. "Legislation of this type reflects a profound lack of understanding and knowledge about health care. If enacted, these bills will make exceedingly complex clinical scenarios even more complicated for health care providers and patients."

Weininger said regardless of the complexities of the situation the legislation seeks to address, "we believe we need to protect those unborn children in any way possible."

Statement legislation

Without any hope of seeing the bills become law, what's the point of introducing the legislation?

"We were still elected to continue to govern like we have been in the past," Steineke said. "We’ve introduced things related to (pro-life policies) in the past and we will continue to do so regardless of who is in the executive office."

Steineke noted Evers has put forward proposals Republicans in the state Legislature won't ever sign off on, too.

"He’s said he has a responsibility to the people who elected him and we do to ours," Steineke said.

Evers' spokeswoman Melissa Baldauff said the bills are "a transparent attempt to distract from The People's Budget because Republicans know that Wisconsinites agree with the governor when it comes to health care."

Sarah Finger, executive director of the Wisconsin Alliance for Women's Health, said if lawmakers "truly wanted to support the health and well-being of Wisconsin women and babies," they should support accepting more federal aid under the Affordable Care Act and proposals in Evers' budget that would devote $28 million for expanding access to health care for women. Those include creating a home visiting program managed by the Department of Children and Families targeting mothers at a high risk for a poor birth outcome.

The proposal included in Evers' 2019-21 budget proposal includes a provision that would reinstate Planned Parenthood's eligibility for federal funding Republican lawmakers have passed laws to block.

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, in February cast doubt on the proposal because of the provision, saying the GOP-controlled Legislature is "not going to put one more nickel into Planned Parenthood than we do right now."

Introducing legislation even if it has no hope of becoming law under Evers also could provide Republicans the benefit of appealing to conservative voters, who favor restrictions on abortion access, according to recent polling by the Marquette University Law School.

Charles Franklin, Marquette Law School poll director, said 60% of Republicans in a 2018 poll said abortion should be illegal in most or all circumstances.

Meanwhile, Evers' opposition to adding restrictions to abortion access provides him a political advantage, too. Eighty-four percent of Democrats polled in 2018 said they support abortion being legal in most or all cases.

Contact Molly Beck in the Capitol bureau at (608) 258-2263 or at molly.beck@jrn.com. Follow her on Twitter at @MollyBeck.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/elections/2019/04/23/tony-evers-veto-born-alive-abortion-bill/3495471002/