Smith: Bill to restore baiting and feeding a threat to deer herd
CLOSE

A bill introduced in the Legislature would allow baiting and feeding to resume in areas where CWD has been found in deer. (Photo: Journal Sentinel files)

MADISON - A bill on one of the most controversial issues - baiting and feeding - related to one of Wisconsin's favorite subjects - white-tailed deer - had a hearing Wednesday at the capitol.

Before advocates of science-based wildlife management and ethical hunting get their hopes up, no, this proposal did not seek to prohibit deer baiting and feeding statewide.

Instead, Assembly Bill 61 defies the consensus of knowledge on disease transmission and would allow increased placement of artificial food in Wisconsin.

Specifically, the bill would limit the time during which baiting and feeding of deer may be prohibited following a positive test for chronic wasting disease and bovine tuberculosis.

Current state law requires the Department of Natural Resources to promulgate rules that prohibit feeding deer for hunting or viewing purposes in certain counties, including counties in which a positive test has been confirmed in any captive or free-roaming domestic or wild animal.

The prohibition also applies to any county within a 10-mile radius of the known location of CWD-positive animal.

The law draws on widely-supported science and was designed to help prevent disease transmission. Since it was first detected in 2002 in Wisconsin, the fatal deer disease has spread geographically and increased in prevalence. The DNR now considers 43 counties "CWD affected."

RELATED:DNR to change carcass tags in 2017

RELATED:Smith: Shed antler hunting time is here

RELATED:Deer, CWD and predator study underway in SW Wisconsin

The proposed legislation would lift the baiting and feeding restriction in 36 months if another CWD or bovine tuberculosis animal was not found in the county (and in 24 months in neighboring counties).



The bill had a hearing in the Senate on March 9.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

On Wednesday it was heard by the Assembly Natural Resources Committee, chaired by Joel Kleefisch (R-Oconomowoc). The hearing was scheduled with just 48 hours notice.

The Assembly version of the bill is was introduced by 13 representatives, including Adam Jarchow (R-Balsam Lake) and Kleefisch.

The Senate version (SB68) was introduced by Senators David Craig (R-West Bend), Shiela Harsdorf (R-River Falls) and Terry Moulton (R-Chippewa Falls).

"This bill seeks to provide an off-ramp for a never-ending ban," Jarchow said. "This issue has been near and dear to my heart since 2011."

In 2011, a sick deer was found and euthanized near Shell Lake in Washburn County. Testing determined the 3-year-old doe had CWD.

No other CWD-positive deer has been found in Washburn County in the six years since.

But that doesn't mean the area is free of the disease. Far from it. The CWD prion has been proven to persist in the environment for years.

"I consider that area still to be contaminated," said Tom Hauge, retired DNR wildlife director. “To me, resuming baiting and feeding in these counties would be akin to pouring gasoline around the edges of a burning fire. It just makes it easier for the sparks to find fertile ground to catch fire.”

The bill was also opposed by the Wisconsin Wildife Federation, the Wisconsin League of Conservation Voters and Wisconsin Conservation Congress.

By all indications, the majority of the Wisconsin public is against AB61, too.

In January, the County Deer Advisory Councils met in each of the state’s 72 counties. The public was asked its opinion on more than 60 issues related to chronic wasting disease management.

A majority of voters supported a statewide ban on baiting and feeding in all counties, said Al Shook, vice-chair of the Wisconsin Conservation Congress.

Notably, in counties where CWD is found in wild deer (and baiting and feeding is prohibited), 74% of voters supported the ban, 23% were opposed and 3% were undecided.

The CWD plan review committee, which recently completed its work, was led by the DNR, Wisconsin Conservation Congress, and Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection, and included about 20 representatives of a wide range of organizations. The committee did not support rescinding the baiting and feeding ban.

Assembly Bill 61 would disregard the thousands of volunteer hours citizens across this state spent engaged in the recent CWD process, Shook said.

“These groups worked diligently to gather public input and get various perspectives on CWD issues, including baiting and feeding, Shook said. “Dismissing their hard work and input could be damaging for future efforts to engage the public."

In what has become a sad legacy of the DNR under Gov. Scott Walker and Secretary Cathy Stepp, no agency representative gave testimony on the bill.

It's unconscionable for the DNR to fail to present its scientific view of a bill that could impact the health of the state's marquee wildlife species.

The only perspective was given from Hauge, who retired last September after 25 years as DNR director of wildlife.

"This bill is the wrong medicine for our deer herd and deer hunting heritage," Hauge said.

If they could speak, I'm sure every wildlife biologist currently on the DNR's staff would agree.

The committee did not take action on the bill on Wednesday. Kleefisch said no timeline has been set for a vote.