Burka Clad Woman Runs Over Baby, Gets Away With Crime For 1 Stunning Reason
A woman in Columbus, Ohio, was arrested, charged and convicted after she hit and killed a 7-month-old baby with her car.

Muhuba Mohamed was found guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide after she struck a man who was pushing an infant in a stroller along the side of the road. Mohamed then crashed into a house.

The man pushing the stroller was identified as 23-year-old Kenan Ferebee, and the child was his 7-month-old son, Micah.

The baby was pronounced dead at an area hospital. The child’s father was taken to a different hospital in critical condition, WBNS reported.

A witness said Mohamed had a phone in her hand at the time of the crash, but there was no evidence of any texts or calls being received at the time. Four days earlier, the woman was in an accident in which she crashed into a median, The Columbus Dispatch reported. In both cases, she was driving on a temporary permit without an accompanying licensed driver.

“Not one of those single things amounts to recklessness,” Judge Laurel Beatty Blunt said. “But when you look at the totality of the circumstances, the court does rule that it does amount to reckless conduct.”

Mohamed, a native of Somalia, reportedly faced a prison sentence if convicted, but was allowed to remain free until her sentencing.

“If an American did the same thing they would be in jail for a long time,” one Mad World News reader commented on the site’s Facebook page. “She should get the same or more being the 2nd accident in 4 days. Going off the side of the road and running over 2 innocent people killing a helpless baby. Come on people. Give her life in prison. She deserves more than that but I’m sure she won’t get the death penalty. What in the hell kind of Justice system do we have now.”

“Define for me the difference between reckless conduct and recklessness,” another wrote. “Maybe in OHIO they speak different English than I do, after all I am from a rural state and may not understand the high English as interpreted by more citified judges. Where is justice? If a Caucasian teenager did this… You finish the sentence.”