Dan Sebring for Congress
Candidacy Statement

I am giving you a clear alternative in November. You have a choice of whether you would like to embrace my opponent’s collectivist vision that “it takes a village” and you need government assistance in order to succeed, or my vision that you, the individual should be making decisions that determine your own destiny, without government interference. While my opponent and the Democratic Party view you the people as members of a particular group, playing identity politics and pandering to those groups. I view you as an individual American citizen with your own unique gifts, talents, and skills that you can put to good use when we get the economy going. The Democratic Party may want young Americans to grow up to be public sector employees, but I want you to be free, to have dreams and goals and to accomplish them. While my Democratic opponent thinks she knows what is best for you and that you need government to save you from decisions made of your own free will, I just want you to be free to choose for yourself.

If you vote for me, I assure you that your voice will be heard. You can count on me not to be a divisive partisan, but to work with Democrats to repeal laws that you feel make you less free. I promise to work with Democrats to repeal laws that restrict your liberty, in order to expand freedom for every American. I will work in a bipartisan manner to ensure that this is the case, and push for supply-side economic alternatives that will lead to a more vibrant private sector in our district. With a strong private sector, the public sector will flourish.

Qualifications

55 years old

24 year resident of Wisconsin’s 4th Congressional district

Current 1st Vice Chairman, Republican Party of Milwaukee County – South Branch

Current member of the Republican Liberty Caucus

Can trace family tree to the Mayflower

Brother in good standing at George Washington 1776 #337 Masonic Lodge in Whitefish Bay, WI

Small Business owner in Milwaukee since 1993

Former volunteer firefighter in the City of New Berlin

U.S. Navy veteran served on the Chief of Naval Operations Intelligence staff at the Pentagon

2008 Write in Candidate for U.S. House of Representatives in Wisconsin’s 4th District

Won 2010 Republican Primary election and received 30% of the vote in the general election for U.S. House of Representatives in Wisconsin’s 4th District

2012 Republican candidate for U.S. House of Representatives in Wisconsin’s 4th District

Endorsements

Statement of Principles

Abortion.

As your representative, I pledge to protect the sanctity of innocent life. Speaking as a former fetus, I am 100% Pro-Life. It has been my misfortune to have suffered the anguish of having fatherhood torn from me when the life of my child was extinguished without my knowledge or consent on three separate occasions in the name of a woman’s “right to choose”. What about the rights of the father? There is no question in my mind that life begins at conception. There is no circumstance under which the intentional taking of innocent life becomes acceptable.

Less Government

The Federal Government has three main purposes: protect the people, defend the nation, and provide a sound infrastructure. As your representative I pledge to adhere to the limitations of the Federal Government as it is spelled out in the United States Constitution.

The Public’s Interest.

To quote Joel Hyatt, “Somewhere along the way a great idea got lost.” The idea that members of the U.S. House of Representatives would take the ideas, opinions, and concerns of their constituents to Washington, D.C. and tell the other members of Congress, “This is what the people want!” The incumbent Democrat in Wisconsin’s 4th Congressional District has earned the reputation of coming back from Washington, D.C. to tell the people “This is what your government wants for you!”

Open Office Policy

As your Representative I will institute an “Open Office” policy.

By incorporating traditional town hall meetings, on line surveys, and the feedback of specialists in different fields and interests, our office will be far more efficient with better ideas than previous representatives of Wisconsin’s 4th Congressional District. People working outside of my office will be working voluntarily on issues that have the highest priority for them, empowering the individual citizen.

Empowering citizens to public discourse and enabling open, visible criticism and dissent of my actions makes me more accountable to the people.

Campaign Pledges