Public satisfaction with the NHS in 2016
The survey also includes a set of questions that explore the public’s views on specific health and social care services. When interpreting this data, it is important to remember that this is a summary of the views of the public rather than of patients, and many respondents will not have recently used the particular service they have been asked to comment on. Because of this, the survey asks respondents to draw on ‘your own experience, or from what you have heard’, so the experiences of family and friends and information from other sources, such as newspapers, are likely to influence their responses.

Many of the survey respondents will have visited their general practice in the past year, either for themselves or with a family member. The public’s familiarity with this service, and the ongoing and (often) more personal nature of their relationship with their GP (compared with, for example, their relationship with the outpatient department of their local hospital) may be part of the reason why GP services consistently receive higher satisfaction ratings than other NHS services. In 2016, public satisfaction with GP services was 72 per cent. The change from 2015 (when satisfaction was 69 per cent) was not statistically significant.

Figure 4 shows that, for one year at least, this ends the downward trend in GP satisfaction ratings that has been evident in the survey since 2010.

NHS England’s national GP patient survey includes a similar question that provides a useful comparator for these results (‘Overall, how would you describe your experience of your GP surgery?’). For this measure, the trend over the past two years is similar to the BSA survey: the proportion of (English) respondents who rated their GP experience as ‘fairly’ or ‘very’ good remained steady throughout 2015 and 2016 at around 85 per cent.

NHS dentistry was the only service to see a statistically significant increase in levels of public satisfaction this year; at 61 per cent it was up 7 percentage points from 2015. This is one of the highest levels of public satisfaction with NHS dentistry services since the early 1990s. Figure 4 shows that there was a steep decline in public satisfaction with NHS dentistry services between 2000 (when satisfaction was 62 per cent) and 2004 (when satisfaction fell to 42 per cent). This may in part reflect difficulties people had in accessing services during that time, as changes to NHS payment rates led dentists to increase the amount of private work they undertook and decrease the amount of NHS work. Over the past decade, developments, including a focus by commissioners on increasing capacity, have led to significant improvements in access, and satisfaction has steadily increased.

The BSA survey defines social care services as personal support services provided by local authorities for people who cannot look after themselves because of illness, disability or age. In 2016, 26 per cent of respondents were satisfied with social care services, unchanged from 2015. For the past five years, public satisfaction with social care services has been considerably lower than it was a decade ago, when the question asked did not mention local authorities.

Compared to questions on NHS services, there is a higher proportion of ‘don’t know’ responses to the social care satisfaction question (12 per cent compared to 4 per cent for GP services). This may be because people are less familiar with social care services and are less likely to have had experience, either personal or through relatives or friends, of using them.

The BSA survey also asks respondents for their views on hospital-based services.

Public satisfaction with outpatient services was 68 per cent in 2016, and remains high by historic standards. The increase in satisfaction since 2015 (when 66 per cent were satisfied) was not statistically significant.

Satisfaction with inpatient services was 60 per cent in 2016, and there has been no statistically significant change for the past four years.

As with all other NHS hospital services in 2016, the change in public satisfaction with accident and emergency (A&E) services (54 per cent in 2016 compared to 53 per cent in 2015) was not statistically significant.

These steady trends over the past two years suggest public views of hospital-based services have not been negatively affected by the junior doctors’ strikes or media stories about NHS and social care funding and the pressures on services.

Figure 6 brings together public satisfaction data for health and social care services and the NHS overall in 2016. As in previous years, satisfaction with the social care services provided by local authorities was far lower than satisfaction with health care services. Social care was also the only service to have a negative net satisfaction score (calculated as satisfaction minus dissatisfaction) (Figure 7).