31 U.S. Code § 3730 - Civil actions for false claims
In the section, the words “civil action” are substituted for “suit” for consistency in the revised title and with other titles of the United States Code.

In subsection (a), the words “Attorney General” are substituted for “several district attorneys of the United States [subsequently changed to ‘United States attorneys’ because of section 1 of the Act of June 25, 1948 (ch. 646, 62 Stat. 909)] for the respective districts, for the District of Columbia, and for the several Territories” because of 28:509. The words “by persons liable to such suit” are omitted as surplus. The words “and found within their respective districts or Territories” are omitted because of the restatement. The words “If the Attorney General finds that a person has violated or is violating section 3729, the Attorney General may bring a civil action under this section against the person” are substituted for “and to cause them to be proceeded against in due form of law for the recovery of such forfeiture and damages” for clarity and consistency. The words “as the district judge may order” are omitted as surplus. The words “of the Attorney General” are substituted for “the person bringing the suit” for consistency in the section.

In subsection (b)(1), the words “Except as hereinafter provided” are omitted as unnecessary. The words “for a violation of section 3729 of this title” are added because of the restatement. The words “and carried on”, “several” and “full power and” are omitted as surplus. The words “of the action” are substituted for “to hear, try, and determine such suit” to eliminate unnecessary words. The words “Trial is in the judicial district within whose jurisdictional limits the person charged with a violation is found or the violation occurs” are substituted for “within whose jurisdictional limits the person doing or committing such act shall be found, shall wheresoever such act may have been done or committed” for consistency in the revised title and with other titles of the Code. The words “withdrawn or” and “judge of the” are omitted as surplus. The words “Attorney General” are substituted for “district attorney [subsequently changed to ‘United States attorneys’ because of section 1 of the Act of June 25, 1948 (ch. 646, 62 Stat. 909)], first filed in the case” because of 28:509.

In subsection (b)(2), before clause (A), the words “bill of”, “Whenever any such suit shall be brought by any person under clause (B) of this section” and “to the effective prosecution of such suit or” are omitted as surplus. The words “served on the Government under rule 4 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (28 App. U.S.C.)” are substituted for “notice . . . shall be given to the United States by serving upon the United States Attorney for the district in which such suit shall have been brought . . . and by sending, by registered mail, or by certified mail, to the Attorney General of the United States at Washington, District of Columbia” because of 28:509 and to eliminate unnecessary words. The words “proceed with the action” are added for clarity. Clause (A) is substituted for “shall fail, or decline in writing to the court, during said period of sixty days to enter any such suit” for clarity and consistency. In clause (B), the words “a period of” and “therein” are omitted as surplus.

In subsection (b)(3), the words “within said period” are omitted as surplus. The words “proceeds with the action” are substituted for “shall enter appearance in such suit” for consistency. The words “In carrying on such suit” and “and may proceed in all respects as if it were instituting the suit” are omitted as surplus.

In subsection (b)(4), the words “Unless the Government proceeds with the action” are added because of the restatement. The words “shall dismiss an action brought by the person on discovering” are substituted for “shall have no jurisdiction to proceed with any such suit . . . or pending suit . . . whenever it shall be made to appear that” to eliminate unnecessary words. The words “or any agency, officer, or employee thereof” are omitted as unnecessary. The text of 31:232(C)(last sentence proviso) and (D) is omitted as executed.

In subsection (c), the words “herein provided”, “fair and . . . compensation to such person”, and “involved therein, which shall be collected” are omitted as surplus.

In subsection (c)(2), the words “whether heretofore or hereafter brought” are omitted as unnecessary. The words “bringing the action or settling the claim” are substituted for “who brought such suit and prosecuted it to final judgment, or to settlement” for clarity and consistency. The words “as provided in clause (B) of this section” are omitted as unnecessary. The words “the civil penalty” are substituted for “forfeiture” for clarity and consistency. The words “to his own use”, “the court may”, and “to be allowed and taxed according to any provision of law or rule of court in force, or that shall be in force in suits between private parties in said court” are omitted as surplus.

Subsection (d) is substituted for 31:232(B)(words between 3d and 4th commas) and (E)(2)(proviso) to eliminate unnecessary words.