LII / Legal Information Institute
Amendment of Subsection (a)(15)(H)(i) For termination of amendment by section 107(c) of Pub. L. 108–77, see Effective and Termination Dates of 2003 Amendment note below.

Codification , referred to in the concluding provisions of subsec. (a)(43), was in the original “the date of enactment of this paragraph”, which was translated as meaning the date of enactment of section 321(b) of Pub. L. 104–208, which inserted that language, to reflect the probable intent of Congress.

Effective Date of 1999 Amendment Amendment by Pub. L. 106–95 applicable to classification petitions filed for nonimmigrant status only beginning on the date that interim or final regulations are first promulgated and ending on the date 3 years after , see section 2(e) of Pub. L. 106–95, as amended, set out as a note under section 1182 of this title.

Effective Date of 1998 Amendment Amendment by section 2(e)(2) of Pub. L. 105–319 effective , see section 2(e)(2) of Pub. L. 105–319, formerly set out in an Irish Peace Process Cultural and Training Program note below.

Effective Date of 1981 Amendment Pub. L. 97–116, § 21, , 95 Stat. 1622, provided that: “(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) and in section 5(c) [set out as a note under section 1182 of this title ], the amendments made by this Act [see Short Title of 1981 Amendment note below] shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act [ ]. “(b) (1) The amendments made by section 2(a) [amending this section] shall apply on and after the first day of the sixth month beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act [ ]. “(2) The amendment made by section 16 [amending section 1455 of this title ] shall apply to fiscal years beginning on or after .”

Short Title of 2018 Amendment Pub. L. 115–226, § 1, , 132 Stat. 1625, provided that: “This Act [enacting provisions set out as a note under this section] may be cited as the ‘Knowledgeable Innovators and Worthy Investors Act’ or the ‘KIWI Act’.”

Short Title Act June 27, 1952, ch. 477, § 1, 66 Stat. 163, provided that such act, enacting this chapter, section 1429 of Title 18, Crimes and Criminal Procedure, amending sections 1353a, 1353d, 1552 of this title, sections 342b, 342c, 342e of former Title 5, Executive Departments and Government Officers and Employees, sections 1114, 1546 of Title 18, sections 618, 1446 of Title 22, Foreign Relations and Intercourse, sections 1, 177 of former Title 49, Transportation, sections 1952 to 1955 and 1961 of the former Appendix to Title 50, War and National Defense, repealing section 530 of former Title 31, Money and Finance, enacting provisions set out as notes under this section and amending provisions set out as notes under sections 1435 and 1440 of this title, may be cited as the “Immigration and Nationality Act”.

Repeals Act June 27, 1952, ch. 477, title IV, § 403(b), 66 Stat. 280, provided that: “Except as otherwise provided in section 405 [set out below], all other laws, or parts of laws, in conflict or inconsistent with this Act [this chapter] are, to the extent of such conflict or inconsistency, repealed.”

Separability Pub. L. 106–313, title I, § 116, , 114 Stat. 1262, provided that: “If any provision of this title [see Short Title of 2000 Amendments note above] (or any amendment made by this title) or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the title (and the amendments made by this title) and the application of such provision to any other person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby. This section be enacted [sic] 2 days after effective date.” Pub. L. 104–208, div. C, § 1(e), , 110 Stat. 3009–553, provided that: “If any provision of this division [see Tables for classification] or the application of such provision to any person or circumstances is held to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this division and the application of the provisions of this division to any person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby.” Act June 27, 1952, ch. 477, title IV, § 406, 66 Stat. 281, provided that: “If any particular provision of this Act [this chapter], or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of the Act [this chapter] and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.”

Transfer of Functions United States Information Agency (other than Broadcasting Board of Governors and International Broadcasting Bureau) abolished and functions transferred to Secretary of State, see sections 6531 and 6532 of Title 22, Foreign Relations and Intercourse.

Abolition of Immigration and Naturalization Service and Transfer of Functions For abolition of Immigration and Naturalization Service, transfer of functions, and treatment of related references, see note set out under section 1551 of this title.

Philippine Traders as Nonimmigrants Philippine traders classifiable as nonimmigrants under subsec. (a)(15)(E) of this section, see section 1184a of this title.

Notification to Public and Program Recipients of Changes Regarding Eligibility for Programs Pub. L. 104–208, div. C, title V, § 593, , 110 Stat. 3009–688, provided that: “(a) In General.— Each agency of the Federal Government or a State or political subdivision that administers a program affected by the provisions of this title [see Effective Date of 1996 Amendment note above], shall, directly or through the States , provide general notification to the public and to program recipients of the changes regarding eligibility for any such program pursuant to this title. “(b) Failure To Give Notice.— Nothing in this section shall be construed to require or authorize continuation of eligibility if the notice under this section is not provided.”

Report on Aliens Granted Refugee Status or Asylum Due to Persecution for Resistance to Coercive Population Control Methods Pub. L. 104–208, div. C, title VI, § 601(a)(2), , 110 Stat. 3009–689, provided that: House of Representatives and the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate describing the number and countries of origin of “Not later than 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the Attorney General shall submit a report to the Committee on the Judiciary of theand the Committee on the Judiciary of thedescribing the number and countries of origin of aliens granted refugee status or asylum under determinations pursuant to the amendment made by paragraph (1) [amending this section]. Each such report shall also contain projections regarding the number and countries of origin of aliens that are likely to be granted refugee status or asylum for the subsequent 2 fiscal years.”

Sense of Congress Regarding American-Made Products; Requirements for Notice Pub. L. 104–208, div. C, title VI, § 648, , 110 Stat. 3009–711, provided that: “(a) Purchase of American-Made Equipment and Products.— It is the sense of the Congress that, to the greatest extent practicable, all equipment and products purchased with funds made available under this division [see Tables for classification] should be American-made. “(b) Notice to Recipients of Grants.— Congress .” In providing grants under this division, the Attorney General , to the greatest extent practicable, shall provide to each recipient of a grant a notice describing the statement made in subsection (a) by the.”

Improving Border Controls Pub. L. 103–322, title XIII, § 130006, , 108 Stat. 2028, provided that: “(a) Authorization of Appropriations.— There are authorized to be appropriated for the Immigration and Naturalization Service to increase the resources for the Border Patrol, the Inspections Program, and the Deportation Branch to apprehend illegal aliens who attempt clandestine entry into the United States or entry into the United States with fraudulent documents or who remain in the country after their nonimmigrant visas expire— “(1) $228,000,000 for fiscal year 1995; “(2) $185,000,000 for fiscal year 1996; “(3) $204,000,000 for fiscal year 1997; and “(4) $58,000,000 for fiscal year 1998. “Of the sums authorized in this section, all necessary funds shall, subject to the availability of appropriations, be allocated to increase the number of agent positions (and necessary support personnel positions) in the Border Patrol by not less than 1,000 full-time equivalent positions in each of fiscal years 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998 beyond the number funded as of . “(b) Report.— Congress on the programs described in this section. The report shall include an evaluation of the programs, an outcome-based measurement of performance, and an analysis of the cost effectiveness of the additional resources provided under this Act [see Tables for classification].” By and , the Attorney General shall report to theon the programs described in this section. The report shall include an evaluation of the programs, an outcome-based measurement of performance, and an analysis of the cost effectiveness of the additional resources provided under this Act [see Tables for classification].”

Report on Admission of Certain Nonimmigrants Pub. L. 102–232, title II, § 202(b), , 105 Stat. 1737, directed Comptroller General, by not later than , to submit to Committees on the Judiciary of Senate and of House of Representatives a report containing information relating to the admission of artists, entertainers, athletes, and related support personnel as nonimmigrants under 8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(O), (P), and information on the laws, regulations, and practices in effect in other countries that affect United States citizens and permanent resident aliens in the arts, entertainment, and athletics, in order to evaluate the impact of such admissions, laws, regulations, and practices on such citizens and aliens, directed Chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary of Senate to make the report available to interested parties and to hold a hearing respecting the report and directed such Committee to report to Senate its findings and any legislation it deems appropriate.

Nonimmigrant Traders and Investors Under United States-Canada Free-Trade Agreement For provisions allowing Canadian citizens to be classifiable as nonimmigrants under subsec. (a)(15)(E) of this section upon a basis of reciprocity secured by the United States-Canada Free-Trade Agreement, see section 307(a) of Pub. L. 100–449, set out in a note under section 2112 of Title 19, Customs Duties.

Sense of Congress Respecting Consultation With Mexico Pub. L. 99–603, title IV, § 407, , 100 Stat. 3443, provided that: Congress that the President of the Congress that the President should report to the Congress any legislative or administrative changes that may be necessary as a result of the consultation and the enactment of this legislation.” “It is the sense of thethat the President of the United States should consult with the President of the Republic of Mexico within 90 days after enactment of this Act [ ] regarding the implementation of this Act [see Short Title of 1986 Amendments note above] and its possible effect on the United States or Mexico. After the consultation, it is the sense of thethat the President should report to theany legislative or administrative changes that may be necessary as a result of the consultation and the enactment of this legislation.”

Commission for the Study of International Migration and Cooperative Economic Development Pub. L. 99–603, title VI, § 601, , 100 Stat. 3444, as amended by Pub. L. 100–525, § 2(r), , 102 Stat. 2614, provided for establishment, membership, etc., of a Commission for the Study of International Migration and Cooperative Economic Development to examine, in consultation with governments of Mexico and other sending countries in Western Hemisphere, the conditions which contribute to unauthorized migration to United States and mutually beneficial reciprocal trade and investment programs to alleviate conditions leading to such unauthorized migration and to report to President and Congress, not later than 3 years after appointment of members of Commission, on results of Commission’s examination with recommendations on providing mutually beneficial reciprocal trade and investment programs to alleviate such unauthorized migration.

Study and Evaluation of Exchange Programs for Graduate Medical Education of Alien Graduates of Foreign Medical Schools; Report to Congress Not Later Than Pub. L. 97–116, § 5(e), , 95 Stat. 1614, directed Secretary of Health and Human Services, after consultation with Attorney General, Secretary of State, and Director of the International Communication Agency, to evaluate effectiveness and value to foreign nations and United States of exchange programs for graduate medical education or training of aliens who were graduates of foreign medical schools, and to report to Congress, not later than , on such evaluation, and include such recommendations for changes in legislation and regulations as appropriate.

Deterring Illegal Immigration Memorandum of President of the United States, , 60 F.R. 7885, provided: Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies It is a fundamental right and duty for a nation to protect the integrity of its borders and its laws. This Administration shall stand firm against illegal immigration and the continued abuse of our immigration laws. By closing the back door to illegal immigration, we will continue to open the front door to legal immigrants. My Administration has moved swiftly to reverse the course of a decade of failed immigration policies. Our initiatives have included increasing overall Border personnel by over 50 percent since 1993. We also are strengthening worksite enforcement and work authorization verification to deter employment of illegal aliens. Asylum rules have been reformed to end abuse by those falsely claiming asylum, while offering protection to those in genuine fear of persecution. We are cracking down on smugglers of illegal aliens and reforming criminal alien deportation for quicker removal. And we are the first Administration to obtain funding to reimburse States for a share of the costs of incarcerating criminal illegal aliens. While we already are doing more to stem the flow of illegal immigration than has any previous Administration, more remains to be done. In conjunction with the Administration’s unprecedented budget proposal to support immigration initiatives, this directive provides a blueprint of policies and priorities for this Administration’s continuing work to curtail illegal immigration. With its focus on strong border deterrence backed up by effective worksite enforcement, removal of criminal and other deportable aliens and assistance to states, this program protects the security of our borders, our jobs and our communities for all Americans—citizens and legal immigrants alike.

COMPREHENSIVE BORDER CONTROL STRATEGY A. Deterring Illegal Immigration At Our Borders I have directed the Attorney General to move expeditiously toward full implementation of our comprehensive border control strategy, including efforts at the southwest border. To support sustained long-term strengthening of our deterrence capacity, the Administration shall seek funding to add new Border Patrol agents to reach the goal of at least 7,000 agents protecting our borders by the year 2000. Flexible Border Response Capacity To further this strategy, the Department of Justice shall implement the capacity to respond to emerging situations anywhere along our national borders to deter buildups of illegal border crossers, smuggling operations, or other developing problems. Strategic Use of High Technology Through the strategic use of sensors, night scopes, helicopters, light planes, all-terrain vehicles, fingerprinting and automated recordkeeping, we have freed many Border Patrol agents from long hours of bureaucratic tasks and increased the effectiveness of these highly-trained personnel. Because these tools are essential for the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) to do its job, I direct the Attorney General to accelerate to the greatest extent possible their utilization and enhancement to support implementation of our deterrence strategy. Strong Enforcement Against Repeat Illegal Crossers The Department of Justice shall assess the effectiveness of efforts underway to deter repeat illegal crossers, such as fingerprinting and dedicating prosecution resources to enforce the new prosecution authority provided by the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 [Pub. L. 103–322, see Tables for classification]. The Department of Justice shall determine whether accelerated expansion of these techniques to additional border sectors is warranted. B. Deterring Alien Smuggling This Administration has had success deterring large ship-based smuggling directly to United States shores. In response, smugglers are testing new routes and tactics. Our goal: similar success in choking off these attempts by adjusting our anti-smuggling initiatives to anticipate shifting smuggling patterns. To meet new and continuing challenges posed along transport routes and in foreign locations by smuggling organizations, we will augment diplomatic and enforcement resources at overseas locations to work with host governments, and increase related intelligence gathering efforts. The Departments of State and Justice, in cooperation with other relevant agencies, will report to the National Security Council within 30 days on the structure of interagency coordination to achieve these objectives. Congressional action will be important to provide U.S. law enforcement agencies with needed authority to deal with international smuggling operations. I will propose that the Congress pass legislation providing wiretap authority for investigation of alien smuggling cases and providing authorization to seize the assets of groups engaged in trafficking in human cargo. In addition, I will propose legislation to give the Attorney General authority to implement procedures for expedited exclusion to deal with large flows of undocumented migrants, smuggling operations, and other extraordinary migration situations. C. Visa Overstay Deterrence Nearly half of this country’s illegal immigrants come into the country legally and then stay after they are required by law to depart, often using fraudulent documentation. No Administration has ever made a serious effort to identify and deport these individuals. This Administration is committed to curtailing this form of illegal immigration. Therefore, relevant departments and agencies are directed to review their policies and practices to identify necessary reforms to curtail visa overstayers and to enhance investigations and prosecution of those who fraudulently produce or misuse passports, visas, and other travel related documents. Recommendations for administrative initiatives and legislative reform shall be presented to the White House Interagency Working Group on Immigration by .

REDUCING THE MAGNET OF WORK OPPORTUNITIES, WORKSITE ENFORCEMENT, AND DETERRENCE Border deterrence cannot succeed if the lure of jobs in the United States remains. Therefore, a second major component of the Administration’s deterrence strategy is to toughen worksite enforcement and employer sanctions. Employers who hire illegal immigrants not only obtain unfair competitive advantage over law-abiding employers, their unlawful use of illegal immigrants suppresses wages and working conditions for our country’s legal workers. Our strategy, which targets enforcement efforts at employers and industries that historically have relied upon employment of illegal immigrants, will not only strengthen deterrence of illegal immigration, but better protect American workers and businesses that do not hire illegal immigrants. Central to this effort is an effective, nondiscriminatory means of verifying the employment authorization of all new employees. The Administration fully supports the recommendation of the Commission on Legal Immigration Reform to create pilot projects to test various techniques for improving workplace verification, including a computer database test to validate a new worker’s social security number for work authorization purposes. The Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) and Social Security Administration are directed to establish, implement, monitor, and review the pilots and provide me with an interim report on the progress of this program by . In addition, the INS is directed to finalize the Administration’s reduction of the number of authorized documents to support work verification for noncitizens. Concurrently, the Administration will seek further reduction legislatively in the number of documents that are acceptable for proving identity and work authorization. The Administration will improve the security of existing documents to be used for work authorization and seek increased penalties for immigration fraud, including fraudulent production and use of documents. The Department of Labor shall intensify its investigations in industries with patterns of labor law violations that promote illegal immigration. I also direct the Department of Labor, INS, and other relevant Federal agencies to expand their collaboration in cracking down on those who subvert fair competition by hiring illegal aliens. This may include increased Federal authority to confiscate assets that are the fruits of that unfair competition. The White House Interagency Working Group on Immigration shall further examine the link between immigration and employment, including illegal immigration, and recommend to me other appropriate measures.

DETENTION AND REMOVAL OF DEPORTABLE ILLEGAL ALIENS The Administration’s deterrence strategy includes strengthening the country’s detention and deportation capability. No longer will criminals and other high risk deportable aliens be released back into communities because of a shortage of detention space and ineffective deportation procedures. A. Comprehensive Deportation Process Reform The Department of Justice, in consultation with other relevant agencies, shall develop a streamlined, fair, and effective procedure to expedite removal of deportable aliens. As necessary, additional legislative authority will be sought in this area. In addition, the Department of Justice shall increase its capacity to staff deportation and exclusion hearings to support these objectives. B. National Detention and Removal Plan To address the shortage of local detention space for illegal aliens, the Administration shall devise a National Detention, Transportation, and Removal Policy that will permit use of detention space across the United States and improve the ability to remove individuals with orders of deportation. The Department of Justice, in consultation with other agencies as appropriate and working under the auspices of the White House Interagency Working Group on Immigration, shall finalize this plan by . The Administration will seek support and funding from the Congress for this plan and for our efforts to double the removal of illegal aliens with final orders of deportation. C. Identification and Removal of Criminal Aliens The Institutional Hearing Program is successfully expediting deportation of incarcerated criminal aliens after they serve their sentences. To further expedite removal of criminal aliens from this country and reduce costs to Federal and State governments, the Department of Justice is directed to develop an expanded program of verification of the immigration status of criminal aliens within our country’s prisons. In developing this program, the viability of expanding the work of the Law Enforcement Support Center should be assessed and all necessary steps taken to increase coordination and cooperative efforts with State, and local law enforcement officers in identification of criminal aliens.

TARGETED DETERRENCE AREAS Many of the Administration’s illegal immigration enforcement initiatives are mutually reinforcing. For example, strong interior enforcement supports border control. While there have been efforts over the years at piecemeal cooperation, this Administration will examine, develop, and test a more comprehensive coordinated package of deterrence strategies in selected metropolitan areas by multiple Federal, State, and local agencies. The White House Interagency Working Group on Immigration shall coordinate the development of this interagency and intergovernmental operation.

VERIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR BENEFITS The law denies most government benefits to illegal aliens. The government has a duty to assure that taxpayer-supported public assistance programs are not abused. As with work authorization, enforcement of eligibility requirements relies upon a credible system of verification. The INS, working with the White House Interagency Working Group on Immigration as appropriate, shall review means of improving the existing benefits verification program. In addition, we will seek new mechanisms—including increased penalties for false information used to qualify for benefits—to protect the integrity of public programs.

ANTI-DISCRIMINATION Our efforts to combat illegal immigration must not violate the privacy and civil rights of legal immigrants and U.S. citizens. Therefore, I direct the Attorney General, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Chair of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and other relevant Administration officials to vigorously protect our citizens and legal immigrants from immigration-related instances of discrimination and harassment. All illegal immigration enforcement measures shall be taken with due regard for the basic human rights of individuals and in accordance with our obligations under applicable international agreements.

ASSISTANCE TO STATES States today face significant costs for services provided to illegal immigrants as a result of failed policies of the past. Deterring illegal immigration is the best long-term solution to protect States from growing costs for illegal immigration. This is the first Administration to address this primary responsibility squarely. We are targeting most of our Federal dollars to those initiatives that address the root causes that lead to increased burdens on States. The Federal Government provides States with billions of dollars to provide for health care, education, and other services and benefits for immigrants. This Administration is proposing increases for immigration and immigration-related spending of 25 percent in 1996 compared to 1993 levels. In addition, this Administration is the first to obtain funding from the Congress to reimburse States for a share of the costs of incarcerated illegal aliens. This Administration will continue to work with States to obtain more Federal help for certain State costs and will oppose inappropriate cost-shifting to the States.