Robin Fretwell Wilson - Faculty
Robin Fretwell Wilson

Roger and Stephany Joslin Professor of Law

Director, Program in Family Law and Policy

Co-Director, Epstein Health Law and Policy Program

Professor, Department of Pathology in the College of Medicine

Robin Fretwell Wilson is the Roger and Stephany Joslin Professor of Law at the College of Law, where she directs the College of Law’s Family Law and Policy Program and co-directs the Epstein Health Law and Policy Program. She specializes in family law and health law, and her research and teaching interests also include biomedical ethics, law and religion, children and violence, and law and science.

Professor Wilson is the author of seven books, including Reconceiving the Family: Critical Reflections on the American Law Institute’s Principles of the Law of Family Dissolution (Cambridge University Press, 2006, ed.); The Handbook of Children, Culture & Violence (Sage Publications, 2006, with Nancy Dowd and Dorothy Singer, eds.); Same-Sex Marriage and Religious Liberty (Rowman & Littlefield, 2008, with Douglas Laycock and Anthony Picarello, eds.); Health Law and Bioethics: Cases in Context (Aspen, 2008, with Joan Krause, Sandra Johnson, and Richard Saver, eds.);Domestic Relations: Cases and Materials, 7th edition (Foundation Press, 2013, with Walter Wadlington and Raymond C. O’Brien); and Understanding Family Law, 4th edition (LexisNexis, 2013, with John DeWitt Gregory and Peter N. Swisher). Professor Wilson’s latest book, The Contested Place of Religion in Family Law, is under consideration with Cambridge University Press (edited collection). Her articles have appeared in the Boston College Law Review, Cornell Law Review, Emory Law Journal, North Carolina Law Review, San Diego Law Review, U.C. Davis Law Review, and Washington and Lee Law Review, as well as in numerous peer-reviewed journals.

Professor Wilson’s work has been featured in the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, National Public Radio's All Things Considered, Washington Post, Los Angeles Times, The Atlantic Monthly, U.S. News and World Report, ABA Journal, Chronicle of Higher Education, Chicago Tribune, CNN Headline News, Good Morning America, ABC News, CBS News, Philadelphia Inquirer, Essence Magazine, The American Prospect, People Magazine, The American Conservative, and Al Jazeera, among others. She has presented her research across the world, including the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, as well as in Peru, China, Israel, Qatar, the Netherlands, Italy, England, Wales, Poland, Spain, Serbia, Japan, Canada, Norway, Denmark, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Turkey, and France.

A member of the American Law Institute, Professor Wilson was elected in 2014 to the Executive Council of the International Society of Family Law. She is the chair-elect of the law and religion section of the Association of American Law Schools (AALS), and past chair of the AALS' Section on Family and Juvenile Law and the AALS' Section on Law, Medicine & Healthcare. In 2010 and again in 2016, Professor Wilson was ranked among the Top Ten Family Law Scholars in the United States for scholarly impact. Professor Wilson’s scholarship has been cited by the Fifth, Seventh and Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals, lower federal courts, and the Supreme Courts of Delaware, Illinois, Iowa, and Washington.

Professor Wilson directs the Fairness for All Initiative, which seeks to provide tangible support and advice to thought-leaders, stakeholders, policymakers, and state and local legislators who seek balanced approaches that respect both LGBT rights and religious freedom. The Fairness for All Initiative is made possible by the generous support of the Templeton Religion Trust and The John Templeton Foundation. Professor Wilson is also a co-investigator with faculty at the University of Illinois College of Agriculture, Consumer, and Environmental Sciences (ACES) on a new project supported by the National Science Foundation examining Family Court Decisions About Child Custody in the Context of Intimate Partner Violence.” With her colleagues at ACES, Professor Wilson received a Future Interdisciplinary Research Explorations Seed Grant from the University of Illinois College of ACES Office of Research to examine “The Impact of Access to Marriage on the Daily Lives of Same-Sex Couples.”

Professor Wilson has worked extensively on behalf of state law reform efforts, recently helping Utah state lawmakers to pass anti-discrimination legislation that balances religious liberty and LGBT rights. In 2007, she received the Citizen’s Legislative Award for her work on changing Virginia’s informed consent law.

Prior to Illinois, she was the Class of 1958 Law Alumni Professor of Law at Washington & Lee School of Law, where she was named Professor of the Year by the Women Law Students Organization. A graduate of the University of Virginia School of Law, Professor Wilson clerked for the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit and practiced at Fulbright & Jaworski, LLP and Mayor, Day, Caldwell & Keeton, LLP.

Download professor Wilson's articles

2015-16 Annual Report of Activities