Two women seek seat in Congress held by Pearce
Madeline Hildebrandt and Xochitl Torres Small (Photo: Provided by candidates)

LAS CRUCES - Madeline Hildebrandt said she expected to be running against Steve Pearce when she decided to get in the race for U.S. Congress, and thought her experience as a Coast Guard veteran would blunt one of his main campaign advantages.

Xochitl Torres Small waited until much later in the process. When none of the people who she had hoped might run had stepped forward, she decided that she would.

In a year when there will be a record number of female candidates running for Congress, a primary race that once included several men has now come down to Hildebrandt and Torres Small.

And, the winner will not be facing Pearce after all. His decision to run for governor has led to a four-person race between Monty Newman, Yvette Herrell, Gavin Clarkson and Clayburn Griffin in the Republican primary.

More: Pearce's decision opens door for four GOP candidates

Hildebrandt said she knew during the women’s march on the day after the inauguration that she would run for something. She decided it would be Congress after seeing a toddler in Walmart in tears worrying about her grandmother.

“I don’t know what happened to that family because I didn’t know them,” she said. “But I felt that I had a moral imperative to stand up for people who are being marginalized.”

Hildebrandt said her two years of serving in the Coast Guard, plus a lifetime of being married to a service member, give her a perspective other candidates don’t have. She has a PhD in history, and is teaching online college classes.

Torres Small helped campaign for Tom Udall when he ran for U.S. Senate the first time in 2008. When he won, she was hired as his first employee south of Albuquerque, setting up his southern New Mexico field office.

Then she left politics for law, clerking for judges James Wexler and Robert C. Brack before going into private practice as a water attorney.

“I never thought that at 33 I’d be running for Congress,” she said. “I knew that this was going to be a new situation. No matter who gets elected, we have a new representative, something we haven’t had in a decade. And so, we have to be really careful about figuring out who that person should be.

“Also, we need someone who reflects the values and needs of our community and will vote from them in Washington. I feel like I represent both of those things.”

She said her experience working for Udall has helped her better understand both the needs of the district and the ways of Washington.

Both candidates said they had been told by farmers in the district that they were concerned they won’t have the workers they need.

We should have some kind of guest worker program, Hildebrandt said, with protections in place for the workers. And, she said that because young people learn everything covered on the citizenship test while they are in school, citizenship should be given along with a diploma at their graduation ceremony.

Torres Small said some people want to work in the United States, then return to their home country, while others want to stay. She said she supports family reunification because immigrants are more likely to be successful if they have their family for support.

Hildebrandt said she supports universal health care, which she would pay for by reducing defense spending.

“I’m a veteran, but I think we’ve gone overboard on our level of funding for the military. What that says to me is we’re building up for war,” she said. “I would shift money around (to pay for health care) rather than increase taxes."

Torres Small said the first priority for health care should be to preserve the Affordable Care Act.

“We also have to achieve comprehensive health care so that everybody has access to affordable health care. In doing that, I’m open to pursuing all pathways,” she said.

Hildebrandt said that both the state and national parties had been working against her campaign, and that she had been told by a former leader of the state Democratic party that they didn’t want her to run. Torres Small denied that she has been getting any help from either the state or national parties.

Both said they would bring a change to Congress.

“Congress isn’t looked at very positively right now,” Hildebrandt said. “They do need a shakeup. I am the outside candidate.”

“There’s a whole bunch of reasons why I’ve decided to run, but the biggest one is I’m tired of being ignored,” Torres Small said. “Southern New Mexico is not being served by Washington.

“I was afraid we would lose our opportunity here, not just to elect someone good but, if Democrats win the House we need to use that as an opportunity to start working together, because Washington is broken.”

Walter Rubel can be reached at 575-541-5441, wrubel@lcsun-news.com and @WalterRubel on Twitter.

Madeline Hildebrandt (Photo: Provided by candidate)

Madeline Hildebrandt

Education: Received associates and bachelor’s degrees in Individual Studies — History with a concentration in Middle East Terrorism — at Columbia College’s military facility branch on Treasure Island Naval Station, San Francisco. Attained a master’s degree in History at San Francisco State University, specializing in Labor History, and went on to earn a PhD in History at University of Maine.

Occupation: Online History Instructor at Rowan College at Burlington County, a community college situated in New Jersey

Previous political experience or public service: Served in U.S. Coast Guard Has been active in church, school and community activities.

Campaign Website: http://mad4nm.com/

Xochitl Torres Small (Photo: Photo provided by Xochitl Torres Small)

Xochitl Torres Small

Education: Georgetown University; University of New Mexico School of Law

Occupation: Lawyer specializing in water and natural resources

Age: 33

Immediate family: Rep. Nathan Small – Husband. Marcos Torres – Father. Cynta Irwin Torres – Mother. Sue Small – Mother-in-law

Previous political experience or public service: I am a water and natural resources attorney, as well as a former staffer for Sen. Tom Udall and clerk for a federal district court judge. After attending college, I returned home to work on then Rep. Tom Udall’s successful run for the Senate. Following his victory, I helped to set up his southern New Mexico district office. As a Field Representative for Sen. Udall, I worked on issues ranging from water conservation and infrastructure development to education and health care accessibility. Inspired by the work I did for Sen. Udall on water, I left his office to attend law school at the University of New Mexico (UNM), where I specialized in natural resources and conservation. Immediately after completing my degree, I clerked for a New Mexico federal judge with one of the heaviest criminal dockets in the country.

Campaign Website: XochforCongress.com

Top three priorities if elected:

Among the top issues facing southern New Mexico are healthcare accessibility, the quality of our public education system, and economic development. In terms of healthcare accessibility, we need to work to make affordable healthcare accessible to everyone. In order to do that I’ll work across party lines to expand rural healthcare access by providing incentives for medical professionals to serve our rural communities.

When it comes to education, we must work to ensure that every student—regardless of income, location, or background—has access to an excellent education. That’s why I’ll fight for increased funding for our public schools so that all students have access to the proper tools and technology, all families have access to early childhood education, and all students are prepared to succeed in their selected careers.

Lastly, we must work to grow our local economy. This starts with making investments in our education system, as well as increasing the efficiency of government agencies so that the New Mexican businesses that rely on them are not hampered by government bureaucracy. It also means working closely with local businesses and economic development leaders to identify and support local market opportunities. This includes investing in 21st century infrastructure from safe roads to reliable high-speed internet and cell phone service so we can attract and support new business.

Why are you the top candidate for the job:

My experience, I have spent my career in the public, private, and non-profit sectors bringing stakeholders together to create solutions to the challenges facing southern New Mexico. As a Field Representative for Sen. Tom Udall, I helped improve cell service and broadband in our rural communities. In the non-profit sector, I advocated for increasing access to healthcare. And now, as a water and natural resources attorney, I have brought farmers, conservationists, and communities together to protect New Mexico’s water. These experiences will allow me to be an effective representative for southern New Mexico on day one.

Read or Share this story: https://www.lcsun-news.com/story/news/politics/2018/05/30/xochitl-torres-small-mad-hildebrandt-congressional-district-2-new-mexico-democrat/651974002/