Hope this is just the start for local films
CLOSE

1966 • Most popular movie: "The Good, the Bad and the Ugly" • Director: Sergio Leone • Starring: Clint Eastwood, Eli Wallach, Lee Van Cleef • Domestic box office: $6.1 million (Photo: United Artists)

We will resist the cheap and easy puns as to how the recent announcement that a major film production will be shooting in Las Cruces made our day, and will simply state how encouraged we are that Las Cruces was selected by Clint Eastwood as a location for his upcoming film, “The Mule.”

Eastwood will star in, direct and produce the film, which tells the story of a man in his 80s who unwittingly becomes involved in a Mexican drug cartel. Other cast members include Bradley Cooper, Laurence Fishburne, Michael Peña, Dianne Weist, Taissa Farmiga, Igancio Serricchio and Eastwood’s daughter, Alison Eastwood

Produced by Warner Brothers, the film is expected to employ about 85 crew members and 200 background talent. It will provide an excellent opportunity for local actors and technical crew to build their resumes.

The production was the first major get for Film Las Cruces, the fledgling organization created to bring film and TV production to southern New Mexico. State tax credits passed more than a decade ago have made New Mexico a popular site for filmmakers, but nearly all of that new business has been concentrated in Albuquerque and Santa Fe.

Film Las Cruces, which recently opened a new film studio in the old Coca-Cola bottling plant off Valley Drive, has been working to catch up and bring a share of that business here.

Local Film Liaison Jon Foley has been working with the film’s production crew to find sites in the area that will fit the needs of the film.

“Securing a high-profile film from one of America’s legendary actors and film makers is extremely rewarding," Foley said.

Jeff Steinborn, president of Film Las Cruces, said the production would likely result in an additional 1,000 hotel room nights, as well as thousands of dollars in business for local restaurants and other vendors.

Along with actors and film crew members, the production will also be utilizing local businesses for things like food, building sets or supplying plants or other items needed for background scenery.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-321-0015. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

We hope that as many local workers and businesses as possible apply for these jobs and services, allowing us to get the maximum economic impact from the production. Contact the film office at 575-805-3456 for information on how you or your business might be able to get involved.

This is the second major studio production to film in southern New Mexico, following the filming of scenes for "Creed II” in Deming last month.

This will be Eastwood’s first return to film making since the release of “Trouble With the Curve” in 2012. His new film will be shot both here and in Georgia,

It was also announced this week that comedian George Lopez will star in a film to be shot in Las Cruces in September.

Titled “Walking With Herb,” the film is based on a novel by Las Cruces author Joe Bullock, converted into a screenplay by Mark Medoff, the Oscar-nominated screenwriter who also lives in Las Cruces.

We are hopeful that this is just the start of what will one day become an important contributor to our local economy, just as it already is in Albuquerque and Santa Fe.

Read or Share this story: https://www.lcsun-news.com/story/opinion/editorial/2018/07/13/we-hope-just-start-local-films/784144002/