W. Ian Lipkin
Biography

W. Ian Lipkin, MD, is internationally recognized as an authority on the use of molecular methods for pathogen discovery. Dr. Lipkin has over 30 years of experience in diagnostics, microbial discovery and outbreak response, has mentored and trained more than 30 students and post-doctoral fellows and leads a team of over 65 investigators, post-doctoral fellows and research and support staff in New York City and another 150 across the world. In the 1980s, Dr. Lipkin identified AIDS-associated immunological abnormalities and inflammatory neuropathy, which he showed could be treated with plasmapheresis, and demonstrated that early life exposure to viral infections affects neurotransmitter function. He was the first to use purely molecular methods to identify an infectious agent, developed MassTag PCR and GreeneChip technology and pioneered the use of high throughput sequencing in pathogen discovery. He and his team implicated West Nile virus as the cause of the encephalitis epidemic in New York in 1999 and have discovered or characterized more than 500 infectious agents including Borna disease virus, West Nile virus, LuJo virus and human rhinovirus C. Dr. Lipkin assisted the WHO and the Peoples Republic of China during the 2003 SARS outbreak and currently advises the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in addressing the challenge of MERS. He also directs large programs focused on autism and chronic fatigue syndrome wherein gene-environment interactions such as infection and intoxication are postulated to cause disease. Dr. Lipkin has been featured by the New York Times, the Los Angeles Times, Discover Magazine, Nature Medicine, the History Channel, National Geographic, CNN, Fox, National Public Radio, Wired, and the Huffington Post. He was the chief scientific consultant for the Soderbergh film "Contagion" and is working on a new series for AMC.

Topics

Education

Other, 1984, Residency in Neurology, UC-San Francisco Other, 1981, Residency in Internal Medicine, U of Washington MD, 1978, Rush University BA, 1974, Sarah Lawrence College

Mailman Affiliations

Director, Center for Infection and Immunity

Editorial Boards

mBio Open Biology

Columbia Affiliations

Senator, University Senate Member, Senate Education Committee Member, Honors and Prizes Committee Member, Dean's Advisory Group, MSPH

Academic Appointments

Director, NIAID Center for Research in Diagnostics and Discovery Scientific Director, Joint Research Laboratory for Pathogen Discovery Daldorf Affiliated Research Physician, Wadsworth Center

Other Affiliations

Honors & Awards

Silverstein Lecturer, Northwestern University (2017) Medel Medal, Villanova University (2014) Drexel Prize in Translational Medicine (2013) Senior Scholor in Global Infectious Diseases, Ellison Medical Foundation (2002) Pew Scholar, Biomedical Sciences (1991)

Areas of Expertise

Autism, Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Emerging Infections, Epidemics, Infectious Disease, Pathogen Discovery

Select Urban Health Activities

Pathogen Surveillance in NYC Rodents: Primary investigator on project to determine the microflora of rats and mice in proximity to densely populated and high traffic areas in New York City.

Select Global Activities

Gene: Environment Interactions in an Autism Birth Cohort , Norway: Dr. Lipkin is principal investigator of a prospective birth cohort of 100,000 women, their children and partners focused on determining the epidemiology, natural trajectory of disease, and pathogenesis of autism spectrum disorders. SARS Outbreak Training and Treatment, China (People’s Republic of): At the height of the 2003 SARS outbreak, Dr. Lipkin traveled to the People’s Republic of China at the invitation of WHO, the Chinese Minister of Science and Technology, and the Vice President of the Chinese Academy of Science, hand-carrying 10,000 test kits to Beijing and trained clinical microbiologists on the proper usage. MERS Outbreak Evaluation, Saudi Arabia: Dr. Lipkin was the first external investigator to be invited by the Ministry of Health in Saudi Arabia to assist in identifying reservoirs and vectors for transmission of the MERS coronavirus.

Select Publications