‘The Manila Times managing editor asked to resign’

home

/

News

/

Top Stories

/

‘The Manila Times managing editor asked to resign’

The Manila Times on Thursday clarified that the paper’s managing editor, Felipe Salvosa 2nd, was asked to resign.

“The Manila Times wishes to set the record straight regarding the recent departure of Mr. Felipe Salvosa 2nd from this publication as managing editor. First, Mr. Salvosa did not resign; he was asked to do so. He was quoted as such in some reports, but the other publications have twisted that fact to smear the reputation of his former employer,” the Times’ president and chief executive officer, Dante Francis “Klink” Ang 2nd, said in a statement.

“He behaved unethically when he posted a statement on social media without first notifying or clarifying with our Chairman Emeritus, Dr. Dante A. Ang, the issues that he had with the story ‘Oust-Duterte plot bared,’ written by the owner himself,” he added.

Salvosa’s resignation came after The Times published a story on Monday, complete with a matrix, linking the Philippine Center for Investigative Journalism (PCIJ), VERA Files, Rappler, and the National Union of People’s Lawyers to a supposed plot to oust Duterte from power.

Written by the Times’ chairman emeritus, the report stated that media practitioners allegedly plant fake news, “manipulate public emotion, touch base with the Leftist organizations, enlist the support of the police and the military, then go for the ‘kill.’”

Media entities tagged in the supposed plot have denied the allegations.

The article was backed by Malacañang.

Palace spokesman Salvador Panelo earlier said the matrix was based on intelligence information gathered by a foreign country, and has been validated.

Salvosa, a journalism professor at the University of Santo Tomas, has questioned the story on Facebook, saying “[a] diagram is by no means an evidence of ‘destabilization’ or an ‘ouster plot.’”

He confirmed that he was asked by The Times to step down.

“I felt it was time to go after the publication of the ‘matrix’ story. I posted about my thoughts on the story and the owners were displeased. I was asked to resign but told them, I was planning to quit anyway,” Salvosa said.

But the younger Ang noted that The Manila Times “has a long-standing open-door policy that allows any employee to contact or visit our Chairman Emeritus, especially on editorial matters.”

“He did not object to the story of our Chairman Emeritus, nor did the former managing editor suggest ways of rewriting or handling the piece,” he said.

“He (Salvosa) was merely told that copyediting of the story was no longer required as that was done by the editor in chief,” the Times president added.

The younger Ang also vouched for the veracity of the matrix, saying Duterte’s office itself provided the information to The Manila Times.

“The Manila Times stands by our ‘matrix’ piece, which is a story in itself. As was explained to Mr. Salvosa, our Chairman Emeritus had a credible source — no less than the Office of the President of the Philippines. Mr. Salvosa was also informed that our Chairman Emeritus did his own background check, using several sources, before submitting his draft for editing. There was also an effort to solicit a reaction from at least one of the names mentioned, but that could not be secured as of press time on Sunday,” he explained.

“Lastly, the oust-plot story was not a PR (press release) piece. It was a legitimate news item. Dr. Ang’s appointment as special envoy has no line item or office in the government or remuneration of any kind. He was simply acting on his journalistic instincts having been given an opportunity to write a legitimate story, that was later confirmed by the Palace,”Ang said.

Sought for comment, Salvosa said, “Their statement stands for itself, let the readers judge it.”

For the full statement, log on to www.manilatimes.net