Trump thanks Saudis for $54 oil, but says in Wednesday tweet, ‘let’s go lower’
‘Oil prices getting lower. Great! Like a big Tax Cut for America and the World. Enjoy! $54, was just $82. Thank you to Saudi Arabia, but let’s go lower!’ —President Donald Trump

President Donald Trump is continuing to call for lower oil prices, despite a drop that sent West Texas Intermediate crude-oil prices CLF9, -1.43% into bear-market territory, defined as a drop of at least 20% from a recent peak.

The president, who has been critical of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its lead member, Saudi Arabia, on Wednesday morning tweeted: “Oil prices getting lower. Great! Like a big Tax Cut for America and the World. Enjoy! $54, was just $82. Thank you to Saudi Arabia, but let’s go lower!

Oil prices getting lower. Great! Like a big Tax Cut for America and the World. Enjoy! $54, was just $82. Thank you to Saudi Arabia, but let’s go lower! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 21, 2018

Lower oil prices are sometimes viewed as a tax cut for average consumers, but the abrupt decline in oil from a recent peak in October stoked worries that oil’s drop is a further sign of sluggish economic expansion across the globe. Those concerns have partly led to the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA, +0.00% and the S&P 500 index SPX, +0.30% erasing their year-to-date gains on Tuesday and deepening the Nasdaq Composite Index’s COMP, +0.92% slide into correction, usually characterized as a slide of at least 10% from a recent peak.

On Tuesday, crude prices were pounded lower after Trump said that the U.S. remains a “steadfast partner” with the Saudis, despite tensions linked to the killing of journalist Jamal Khashoggi. The comments were seen easing the odds of an oil disruption to the Saudi market.

Read: Why falling oil prices are now a net drag on the U.S. economy

Check out: How plummeting oil prices will affect drivers over Thanksgiving weekend

Providing critical information for the U.S. trading day. Subscribe to MarketWatch's free Need to Know newsletter. Sign up here.