Shannon Monnat, Associate Professor of Sociology, Lerner Chair of Public Health Promotion, Center for Policy Research
Shannon Monnat

Associate Professor, Sociology





Contact Information

smmonnat@maxwell.syr.edu



426 Eggers Hall

315-443-2692

Office Hours:

Please email to schedule

an appointment



Staff Support

Katrina Wingle

(315) 443-9040

krwingle@maxwell.syr.edu

Curriculum Vitae

Monnat, Shannon

426 Eggers HallPlease email to schedulean appointmentStaff SupportKatrina Wingle(315) 443-9040krwingle@maxwell.syr.edu

Lerner Chair for Public Health Promotion

Research Affiliate, Aging Studies Institute

Aging Studies Institute

Senior Research Associate, Center for Policy Research



Degree

Ph.D., University at Albany, SUNY, 2008

Specialties

Social demography, social determinants of health and health disparities, spatial differences in morbidity and mortality, inequality and social stratification

Personal Website

http://smmonnat.expressions.syr.edu/

Courses

Summer 2018

Not Teaching

Biography

Shannon Monnat is an Associate Professor of Sociology. She is also the Lerner Chair for Public Health Promotion. Dr. Monnat received her Ph.D. in Sociology at the State University of New York at Albany in 2008. Prior to her appointment at Syracuse University, she was a faculty member for five years at University of Nevada Las Vegas and for four years at Penn State University. As a scholar of social inequality and social demography, Dr. Monnat's research examines the correlates and consequences of social disadvantage, particularly at the intersections of place, public policy, and health. A common theme binding much of her work is a concern for rural people and places. Her current research focuses on social determinants of opioid use disorders and mortality, particularly in rural and small town America. Full Biography

Publications

Selected Papers

Research Interests

Social Demography

Social Determinants of Health and Health Disparities

Spatial Differences in Morbidity and Mortality

Inequality and Social Stratification

Research Grants and Awards

Principal Investigator. “Population Health Mini-Conference and Seminar Series,” funded by Collaboration for Unprecedented Success and Excellence (CUSE) Grant Program. 2018 - 2020, with Co-Principal Investigators Dessa Bergen-Cico, Travisi R. Hobart, Janet Wilmoth, Rebecca Bostwick, and Mary Collins.

Co-Investigator. “Understanding Opioid Risks in Rural and Micropolitan Communities: Economic Restructuring, Social Disorganization, and Local Responses,” funded by USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture, Agriculture Food and Research Initiative (AFRI), 2018-2022, with David Peters (PI), Andrew Hochstetler (Co-I), Eric Rozier (Co-I), and Mark Berg (Co-I).

Co-Principal Investigator. “Identifying and Informing Strategies for Disrupting Drug Distribution Networks: An Application to Opiate Flows in Pennsylvania,” funded by National Institute of Justice, 2018-2019, with Glenn Sterner (PI) and Ashton Verdery (Co-PI).

Principal Investigator. “Despair, Death, and Democracy: Understanding Associations between Place-Level Economic Conditions, Population Health, and U.S. Election Outcomes," funded by The Institute for New Economic Thinking, 2017-2018.

Principal Investigator. “Understanding the Geography of Stress-Related Mortality in the U.S., with a Focus on Opiate Addiction and Drug Overdose Mortality,” funded by USDA Economic Research Service, 2016-2017, with David McGranahan (Co-I) and Timothy Parker (Co-I).