Your View: The pitfalls of socialism in America
Old Soviet joke: “Under capitalism, man exploits man. Under socialism, it’s the other way around.”

But what is socialism? There didn’t used to be much ambiguity. Under socialism the government owns and operates all businesses.

To establish socialism, Lenin and Stalin killed millions of people in the Soviet Union, and Mao killed tens of millions in China. To establish socialism in Cambodia in the 1970s, Pol Pot killed two million out of a population of 7 million.

U.S. socialists are naturally reluctant to be associated with that sad history. So in place of the old-time religion of abolishing the market system, socialists advocate … um … ah … well, it’s actually not clear what U.S. socialists mean by socialism these days.

Most of the policy proposals of socialists like Sen. Bernie Sanders or recently elected Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez could be those of any liberal Democrat.

New York Times columnist James Stewart has described these policies as “income redistribution, ever-expanding government entitlements, and identity politics.” Most (but not all) U.S. socialists say they believe in democracy. They want to be seen as nibbling around the edges of capitalism rather than destroying it outright.

That approach would strike a traditional socialist as weak-kneed. Stalin would have denounced it as right deviationism and given its advocates one-way tickets to Siberia.

But tweaks to the system are all that most U.S. socialists seem willing to advocate — at least publicly. Some socialists say they want us to become more like the countries of Western Europe.

Those countries generally have larger governments than we do, but they aren’t really socialist because their governments don’t own many businesses. Freight railroads are about the only large firms that are private in the United States but sometimes government-controlled in Europe.

Some European countries, including Sweden and France, have begun relying more on markets, reducing the role of government and cutting taxes. Sweden has even begun providing parents with vouchers to pay for their children’s education, spurring the growth of private schools.

The fuzziness of socialist policy proposals hasn’t stopped socialism from gaining in popularity. Polls show that about as many U.S. millennials support socialism as support capitalism. Why? Partly there’s the cool factor: Socialism is “Game of Thrones” to capitalism’s “The Brady Bunch.”

Most millennials also seem unaware that socialist governments past and present have killed millions of their own citizens. Because of the Great Recession of 2007-09 and its aftermath, older millennials began their working lives during the worst labor market since the 1930s. Not surprisingly, some believe that the economic system is rigged against them.

Many millennials struggle to make payments on their student loans and to pay for health insurance. As a result, they seem particularly attracted by two policies that Ocasio-Cortez and some other socialists have proposed: free college and free health care.

HUB WILLSON / CONTRIBUTED PHOTO Anthony Patrick O'Brien is professor of economics, emeritus, at Lehigh University. Anthony Patrick O'Brien is professor of economics, emeritus, at Lehigh University. (HUB WILLSON / CONTRIBUTED PHOTO)

The federal and state governments already pay for a significant fraction of college and health care costs. Should we go all the way and have the government pick up the whole bill for college and for health care?

It’s worth remembering that when governments give us free goods or services, they aren’t really free. Free college tuition means that everyone who pays taxes, whether they attend college or not, ends up paying for college.

Because the average college graduate earns much more than the average high school graduate, free college tuition can take from the poor and give to the rich. The taxes of someone who becomes a welder after graduating from high school will help pay for the college education of an investment banker. Doesn’t seem like the best way to reduce income inequality.

Free health care would be a godsend to the uninsured. People with bare-bones insurance policies would no longer face financial disaster if they become seriously ill.

But even proposals such as “Medicare-for-all,” which would not be completely free to enrollees, are extraordinarily expensive. Left-leaning and right-leaning economists agree that the additional cost would be tens of trillions of dollars more than we already spend on health care.

A more feasible system than “Medicare-for-all” would guarantee a level of health care more generous than what many low-income people now receive, but less generous than what people enrolled in good employer plans or in most public employee plans are used to.

In other words, to be even remotely affordable, free health care would require a substantial redistribution from the upper middle class, many union members, and many public employees to the lower middle class and the poor.

My political predictions are usually wrong, but I don’t see Congress enacting such a plan. If U.S. socialists are to differentiate themselves from run-of-the mill liberal Democrats, they’ll need to think up distinctive economic policies that have some hope of being adopted.

Anthony Patrick O’Brien, a professor of economics, emeritus, at Lehigh University, is co-author of several leading economics textbooks with Glenn Hubbard, including "Economics" and "Money, Banking, and the Financial System."