Roy Moore Stands by Assertion Keith Ellison Shouldn't Sit in Congress Because He's Muslim
Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore, who somehow served as a judge with a robe and everything, is the Trumpiest man to ever Trump the planet Trump. He’s pulled out a gun at a political rally, blamed the Sandy Hook massacre on people forgetting the law of God, and expressed a desire to criminalize being gay.

Wait, we aren’t done. Moore has allegedly referred to certain minorities as “reds and yellows,” blamed 9/11 on atheists and has remained resolute that Barack Obama was not born in America.

Then there’s his views on the Muslim faith. The former judge, who was twice ousted from the bench for his “sheer lack of integrity and impartiality,” has stated that he believes entire American communities have fallen “under Sharia law,” noting that these religious insurrections took place somewhere “up in Illinois.”

Candidate Moore, who was allowed to pound an actual judge’s gavel for over 20 years, once wrote an editorial about America’s first Muslim congressman, Keith Ellison. The essay, penned in 2006, strongly suggested that Ellison’s Muslim faith made him ineligible to serve in the House.

“Islamic law is simply incompatible with our law,” he wrote. “In 1943, we would never have allowed a member of Congress to take their oath on ‘Mein Kampf,’ or someone in the 1950s to swear allegiance to the ‘Communist Manifesto.’ Congress has the authority and should act to prohibit Ellison from taking the congressional oath today!”

Still, that editorial was written 11 long years ago. Moore must have evolved on that particular hardline stance by now, right?

Not quite. Moore spoke to MSNBC reporter Garrett Haake as he strode across the Senate floor today. Here is what he said when asked if he still believed that Congressman Ellison should be ousted from his post.

“Read my article and you’ll find out what I believe,” he said, alluding to the infamous 2006 editorial. “It’s clarified very clearly in my article.”

Additionally, the Alabama Republican refused to comment on his previous statements that homosexuality should be made illegal.

Moore is in Washington D.C. meeting with Senate Republicans, ostensibly to strategize ahead of December’s special election. A recent poll has him up 17 points over Democratic opponent Doug Jones.

Watch above, via MSNBC.

[image via screengrab]

Have a tip we should know? tips@mediaite.com