Right-Wing Media Distort Former Attorney General’s Words About Protests As A Call For Violence
Right-wing media outlets mischaracterized and scandalized former Attorney General Loretta Lynch’s video on civil rights as a call for violence by twisting her words to say she advocated for “blood and death on the streets.”

Lynch Posted Video On Senate Democrats’ Facebook Page Discussing Civil Rights

Loretta Lynch: To Gain Civil Rights In The Past, Protesters Have “Marched, They’ve Bled -- And Yes, Some Of Them Have Died.” Former Attorney General Loretta Lynch, in a video on the Senate Democrats’ Facebook page discussing civil rights history, said, "We have always had to work to move this country forward to achieve the great ideals of our founding fathers.” She also praised the civil rights effort of the marchers, saying, “They’ve marched, they’ve bled -- yes, some of them have died.” From the February 28 Facebook post:

LORETTA LYNCH: I know that this is a time of great fear and uncertainty for so many people. I know it’s a time of concern for people who see our rights being assailed, being trampled on, and even being rolled back. I know that this is difficult, but I remind you that this has never been easy. We have always had to work to move this country forward to achieve the great ideals of our founding fathers. And it has been people, individuals who have banded together, ordinary people who simply saw what needed to be done and came together and supported those ideals, who have made the difference. They’ve marched, they’ve bled -- yes, some of them have died. This is hard. Every good thing is. We have done this before; we can do this again. [Facebook, 3/5/17]

Right-Wing Media Outlets Distort Lynch’s Words, Falsely Claiming She Called For “Blood And Death On The Streets”

Fox News’ Heather Childers: Lynch Was Now “Calling For Blood” And “Encouraging Protesters To Help Get” Trump “ Out Of The White House.” During the March 6 edition of Fox News’ Fox & Friends, anchor Heather Childers played a clip of Lynch’s video -- followed by a clip of violent protests in Berkeley, CA -- and falsely claimed Lynch is “calling for blood, encouraging protesters to help get the president out of the White House.” From the March 6 edition of Fox & Friends:

HEATHER CHILDERS: [Former Attorney General] Loretta Lynch, now calling for blood, encouraging protesters to help get the president out of the White House, even if it costs them their lives. [...] Well the former Obama attorney general also using that video to accuse the Trump administration of trampling on civil rights. However, she failed to offer any shred of evidence supporting that claim. [Fox News, Fox & Friends, 3/6/17]

Billoreilly.com: “Former AG Loretta Lynch Seems To Endorse Violent Protests.” Fox host Bill O'Reilly's personal site posted the video with a caption saying, “Without naming Donald Trump specifically, [Lynch] says this is 'a time of fear' and praises those who have marched and bled and died.” [billoreilly.com, 3/5/17]

Gateway Pundit: “Loretta Lynch Released A Disturbing Video Calling For Marching, Blood And Even Death.” Gateway Pundit wrote that Lynch “released a disturbing video calling for marching, blood and even death.” The site also claimed that the former attorney general “was so terribly dishonest and incompetent” and claimed that the new video “shows how nutty she is.” From Gateway Pundit:

Overnight the former US Attorney General Loretta Lynch released a disturbing video calling for marching, blood and even death. Lynch worked for President Obama and is most known for not investigating the Clinton Foundation and for meeting former President Bill Clinton on an airport tarmac in June 2016 while his wife, Hillary Clinton, was being investigated for illegal email abuses while she was Obama’s Secretary of State. This woman was the head of the US Department of Justice under President Obama. She was so terribly dishonest and incompetent and now she shows how nutty she is. [The Gateway Pundit, 3/5/17]

WND: Loretta Lynch Posted An “Impassioned Video Plea For More Marching, Blood And Death On The Streets.” In an “exclusive” article, WorldNetDaily claimed Lynch made an “impassioned video plea” to call for “more marching, blood and death on the streets” From the March 4 article:

The Obama administration’s former Attorney General Loretta Lynch has made an impassioned video plea for more marching, blood and death on the streets – a video that was later posted on the Facebook page of Senate Democrats as “words of inspiration.” [...] But the strongest words come in a statement that seems to suggest the answer is street action that will inevitably turn bloody and deadly. [WND, 3/4/17]

Twitchy: “Is [Lynch] Saying It’s Time To March, Bleed And Die In The Streets?” Twitchy asked if the former attorney general was “ saying it’s time to march, bleed and die in the streets.” It also inquired whether “the former AG is calling for civil war or actual violence,” or if “she could just be making some sort of ploy for other Democrats to get all fired up.” From the March 5 article:

Well this is disconcerting: [...] Sooooo … is she saying it’s time to march, bleed and die in the streets? Or was she just being dramatic for the camera? [...] It’s hard to say for sure if the former AG is calling for civil war or actual violence, she could just be making some sort of ploy for other Democrats to get all fired up … but it’s clear she’s not calling for a more unified, peaceful country. And the Left says Sessions is bad? Sheesh! [Twitchy, 3/5/17]

BizPac Review: Some Say Lynch Is Calling “For Civil War.” Conservative news outlet BizPac claimed that “Democrats are now all in on their efforts to destroy President Donald Trump,” noting that Lynch’s video “has some hearing a call for civil war!” It also claimed hypocrisy, saying the Democratic Party’s “media allies excoriated tea party groups for violent rhetoric that didn’t come close to Lynch’s call for ‘marching, blood and death.’” From the March 5 article:

There is little doubt that Democrats are now all in on their efforts to destroy President Donald Trump. Amid growing concerns over former President Barack Obama working to undermine the Trump presidency, his then-Attorney General Loretta Lynch issued a call to action of her own last week. …which has some hearing a call for civil war! [...] For several years, the Democratic Party’s media allies excoriated tea party groups for violent rhetoric that didn’t come close to Lynch’s call for “marching, blood and death” in the streets of America. [BizPac Review, 3/5/17]

PJ Media: In “Rant” Video, Lynch “Spoke Approvingly Of How The Civil Rights Movement Achieved Some Of Its Goals.” PJ Media’s Ryan Moran asked whether Lynch is “advocating violence in the streets,” claiming that she “certainly spoke approvingly of how the civil rights movement achieved some of its goals.” He concluded that she was not “calling for street violence” but that the video was “hugely irresponsible nonetheless.” From the March 5 article:

Former Attorney General Loretta Lynch made a video rant that Senate Democrats found so "inspirational," they posted it to their Facebook page. [...] Even more hysterically, Lynch seemed to suggest that Trump opponents should mimic civil rights protesters from the 1960s, when ordinary people "marched, they’ve bled and yes, some of them died." Is Lynch advocating violence in the streets? [...] I don't necessarily think Lynch was calling for street violence, but she certainly spoke approvingly of how the civil rights movement achieved some of its goals. Not exactly the legal definition of incitement, but hugely irresponsible nonetheless. [PJ Media, 3/5/17]

After shooting of Rep. Steve Scalise, right-wing media again pushed their distortion of Lynch’s words

Congressman Scalise and others shot by gunman at baseball practice

Wash. Post: “A man angry with President Trump unleashed a barrage of gunfire” injuring House Majority Whip Steve Scalise and several others. The Washington Post reported that a gunman “unleashed a barrage of gunfire ... at Republican members of Congress as they held a baseball practice at a park in Alexandria” leaving House Majority Whip Steve Scalise (R-LA) and four others hospitalized. From the June 14 article:

A man angry with President Trump unleashed a barrage of gunfire Wednesday morning at Republican members of Congress as they held a baseball practice at a park in Alexandria, wounding House Majority Whip Steve Scalise and four others in a frenzied scene that included a long gun battle with police. The gunman, James T. Hodgkinson, a 66-year-old unemployed home inspector from southern Illinois, died after the shootout. Two Capitol Police officers assigned to Scalise’s security detail were wounded. [...] The targeted lawmakers were practicing for the Congressional Baseball Game, a charity competition against a team of Democrats. The game will be played on Thursday night at Nationals Park as planned. [The Washington Post, 6/14/17]

Right-wing media and fake news purveyors revive distortion of Lynch’s words to blame her for shooting

Fox host Eric Bolling partially blamed Loretta Lynch for the shooting. Fox host Eric Bolling noted the shooter was a Bernie Sanders supporter and played a clip in which Lynch talked about people protesting for their rights. Bolling took Lynch's words out of context to rhetorically ask, “Spill blood, die? Really, ma'am?” He then concluded, “Crazy people act on the crazy things they hear from politicians and celebrities.” From the June 14 edition of Fox News’ The Fox News Specialists:

ERIC BOLLING (HOST): So, today, this was clearly politically motivated, as the shooter was a [Sen.] Bernie Sanders 2016 campaign volunteer. [...] Cory Booker, a Democrat from New Jersey, said this will, quote, "mean death, pain, and suffering." Terry McAuliffe, the Democrat governor of Virginia, said, “People are going to die.” Yep, Virginia. Let's call it the home field for today's shooting. Listen to Democrat and former Attorney General Loretta Lynch go too far. [VIDEO BEGIN] LORETTA LYNCH: I know it's a time of concern for people who see our rights being assailed, being trampled on, and even being rolled back. It has been people, individuals who have banded together, ordinary people, who simply saw what needed to be done. They marched, they bled. Yes, some of them have died. [VIDEO END] BOLLING: Spill blood, die? Really, ma'am? Snoop Dogg's gun, Kathy Griffin's head, Shakespeare's bloody rampage -- it goes on and on. How many innocent people have to die before we realize that words do matter? Crazy people act on the crazy things they hear from politicians and celebrities. Think before you utter those blind, hateful words next time, liberals, because there are crazy people out there taking your metaphors literally. [Fox News, The Fox News Specialists, 6/14/17]

Infowars: Tim Kaine and Loretta Lynch are “two examples out of a stunning collection of calls to violence and murder from the intolerant, unhinged leftists in the Democrat party.” Infowars pointed to Lynch, claiming that “the attempted massacre of dozens of Republicans highlights the Democrats’ constant promotion of violence against their ideological opponents,” It added that Lynch used “incendiary language in a bizarre one minute video in which she seemed to call upon fellow ‘progressives’ to march, bleed, and die in the streets.” From the June 14 article:

The attempted massacre of dozens of Republicans highlights the Democrats’ constant promotion of violence against their ideological opponents – rhetoric that has been espoused recently by Senator Tim Kaine and former Attorney General Loretta Lynch. [...] Lynch also used similarly incendiary language in a bizarre one minute video in which she seemed to call upon fellow ‘progressives’ to march, bleed, and die in the streets – also in resistance to the Trump agenda, which has been endorsed and Constitutionally mandated by the American people. [...] These are only two examples out of a stunning collection of calls to violence and murder from the intolerant, unhinged leftists in the Democrat party, mainstream media, Hollywood, and the spider web of interwoven organizations and cabals like Antifa and Black Lives Matter who have effectively transformed into domestic terrorists in Trump’s America. [Infowars, 6/14/17]

The Gateway Pundit: “Is [Scalise’s shooting] what Loretta Lynch was talking about when she brought up the hard work that had to be done even if it requires bloodshed and death to achieve the left’s ideals?” An article published in The Gateway Pundit asked that when Lynch “brought up the hard work that had to be done even if it requires bloodshed and death to achieve the left’s ideals,” was she talking about Scalise's shooting. From the June 14 article:

As TGP reported back in March, former US Attorney General Loretta Lynch released a disturbing video calling for marching, blood and even death. [...] Earlier today, Congressman Scalise was shot by an ultra left-wing Bernie Sanders supporter. Is this what Loretta Lynch was talking about when she said brought up the hard work that had to be done even if it requires bloodshed and death to achieve the left’s ideals? [The Gateway Pundit, 6/14/17]

Conservative YouTube personality Mark Dice:

Remember, former attorney general Loretta Lynch called for blood in the streets to stop Trump. Liberalism is Terrorism #VAShooting — Mark Dice (@MarkDice) June 14, 2017

[Twitter, 6/14/17]

Vessel News’ Josh Caplan:

Did the Congressional baseball game shooter heed to AG Loretta Lynch's call for more 'marching, blood, death on streets'? Words matter. pic.twitter.com/aIbHPtmCRa — Josh Caplan (@joshdcaplan) June 14, 2017

[Twitter, 6/14/17]

“Alt-right” troll Jack Posobiec:

Flashback: Loretta Lynch: "We Need More Blood on the Streets" #Alexandria https://t.co/BjUdfstHuH — Jack Posobiec (@JackPosobiec) June 14, 2017

[Twitter, 6/14/17; Media Matters, 5/11/17]

TruthFeed: Lynch is “100 percent complicit in this tragedy.” Fake news purveyor TruthFeed claimed Lynch was one of the people “100% complicit in this tragedy" because the shooter “was an Anti-Trump radical.” From the June 14 article:

We now know the Virginia shooter was an Anti-Trump radical who called to “Destroy Trump.” Tim Kaine called for Democrats to “fight in the streets” while Loretta Lynch glorified those who “fought, bled and died” in resisting. Kathy Griffin held a mock severed head of Trump and days later a high profile play staged a mock assassination of the President. The liberal media and Democrat leadership are 100% complicit in this tragedy. [TruthFeed, 6/14/17; Media Matters, 12/14/16]

Conservative Fighters: “Is Loretta Lynch Complicit” in the shooting? Fake news purveyor Conservative Fighters wondered if Lynch was “complicit” in the shooting because she “in the recent past called for people to ‘march, bleed and die’ resisting President Trump. It added that people like her are “largely to blame for this shooting.” From the June 15 article:

A gunman made his way to a Virginia baseball field, where Republican lawmakers were practicing for an upcoming Congressional baseball game. [...] This appears to be an act of violence inspired by the violent liberal left. People like Loretta Lynch, who in the recent past called for people to “march, bleed and die” resisting President Trump, are largely to blame for this shooting, where 5 people were reportedly shot, including House Majority Whip Steve Scalise. Is Loretta Lynch Complicit? [Conservative Fighters, 6/15/17, 4/15/17; Snopes.com, 4/17/17]

Conservative Patriot: People like Lynch "are the ones accountable for this shooting.”​ Fake news purveyor Conservative Patriot said people like Lynch, who “urged people to ‘march, bleed and die’ protesting President Trump,” were “the ones accountable for this shooting.” From the June 14 article:

The gunman asked the following question, “Are these Republicans or Democrats” before starting to shoot. [...] This seems to be a violent act motivated by the liberal violent left. Figures alike Loretta Lynch, who not too long ago urged people to “march, bleed and die” protesting President Trump, are the ones accountable for this shooting, where five people were allegedly shot, involving House Majority Whip Steve Scalise. [Conservative Patriot 6/14/17, 4/15/17; Snopes.com, 4/17/17]

Washington Feed: “Loretta Lynch CALLS FOR BLOOD AND DEATH On The Streets JUST Before The Shooting.” Fake news purveyor Washington Feed blamed Lynch for the shooting in a piece headlined “WATCH: Loretta Lynch CALLS FOR BLOOD AND DEATH On The Streets JUST Before The Shooting .”The article said that Lynch should be “very careful what you wish for” because “‘we the people’ have greatly outnumbered you Anti-Freedom, Anti-American communist-heathens by a million to one at least.” From the June 15 article: