New Hampshire
Medicaid-Marketplace Overview

The Federally-facilitated Marketplace (FFM) is offering health coverage in New Hampshire in 2015 through a state partnership model. The FFM will make assessments of Medicaid/CHIP eligibility and then transfer the applicant's account to the state agency for a final eligibility determination. New Hampshire has expanded Medicaid coverage to low-income adults.

Medicaid and CHIP Eligibility Levels

To view the modified adjusted gross income (MAGI)-based eligibility levels, expressed as a percentage of the federal poverty level (FPL) and by monthly dollar amount and family size for Medicaid and CHIP, visit the National Medicaid and CHIP Eligibility Levels page.

State Medicaid Expansion Children - Medicaid Separate CHIP Pregnant Women Parents3 Other Adults Ages 0-11 Ages 1-52 Ages 6-182 Medicaid CHIP

Monthly Medicaid and CHIP Enrollment Data

Each month, CMS releases state-reported data on State Medicaid and CHIP program Enrollment. The enrollment data for each month is a point-in-time count of total Medicaid and CHIP enrollment on the last day of the month, and is not solely a count of those newly enrolled during the reporting period. Below, this data is compared to average enrollment from July-September 2013, the period before the initial open enrollment period of the Health Insurance Marketplaces. Additional information and enrollment data is available on the Medicaid and CHIP Application, Eligibility Determination, and Enrollment Data page.

State State Medicaid & CHIP Enrollment National Total Medicaid & CHIP Enrollment ( currentMonth ) (Preliminary) Comparison of currentMonth data to July-September 2013 Average Enrollment Total Medicaid & CHIP Enrollment, all States ( currentMonth ) (Preliminary) Comparison of currentMonth data to July-September 2013 Average Enrollment Net Change % Change Net Change % Change

Medicaid and CHIP Applications

The Affordable Care Act established a streamlined enrollment process through which individuals can gain access to affordable insurance coverage for which they are eligible. The law directed the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) to develop a model application that will be used to apply for coverage through the Marketplace, Medicaid and CHIP. States have the option to adopt the Secretary of HHS’s model application form for affordable insurance programs or to adopt an alternative application that meets federal requirements.

Targeted Enrollment Strategies

In response to CMS Guidance provided on May 17, 2013, many states have adopted one or more "targeted enrollment strategies" designed to facilitate enrollment and retain coverage for eligible individuals in Medicaid/CHIP. The states that have adopted one or more targeted enrollment strategies are listed on the Targeted Enrollment Strategies page.

Medicaid and CHIP State Plan Amendments

The state Medicaid and CHIP plans spell out how each state has chosen to design its program within the broad requirements for federal funding. As always, states amend their Medicaid and CHIP state plans in order to inform CMS of programmatic and financing changes and to secure legal authority for those changes. The Affordable Care Act included many new opportunities for states to augment and improve their Medicaid and CHIP programs. As a result there has been a great deal of state plan amendment activity over the past several years in the areas of eligibility, benefits design and financing, as well as new approaches to providing health homes, long-term services and supports, and enrollment strategies like hospital presumptive eligibility. See below for a state-specific list of approved Medicaid and CHIP SPAs.

Demonstration and Waivers

Demonstration and waivers are vehicles states can use to test new or existing ways to deliver and pay for health care services in Medicaid and CHIP. The primary types of waivers and demonstration projects include section 1115 demonstrations, section 1915(b) managed care waivers, and section 1915(c) home and community-based services waivers. More information about waivers is available on the Waivers page.

Medicaid Delivery System

States have choices in their approach to delivery system design under the Medicaid and CHIP programs. States are increasingly moving to the use of managed care and other integrated care models in serving their Medicaid beneficiaries. On average, more than 70 percent of the Medicaid population is enrolled in some form of managed care.

CHIP Program Information

The Children's Health Insurance Program was established in 1997 to provide new coverage opportunities for children in families with incomes too high to qualify for Medicaid, but who cannot afford private coverage. Like Medicaid, CHIP is administered by the states, but is jointly funded by the federal government and states. States had the opportunity to design their CHIP programs as an expansion of Medicaid, as a stand-alone program or through a combined approach.

Medicaid/CHIP Participation Rates

The participation rate is the percentage of eligible children enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP in the state. Data from 2013 show 88.3 percent of the eligible children in the United States are enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP programs. More information about the participation rate among children in New Hampshire is available on InsureKidsNow.gov.

State Participation

Medicaid/CHIP Eligibility Verification Plans

Medicaid and CHIP agencies now rely primarily on information available through data sources (e.g., the Social Security Administration, the Departments of Homeland Security and Labor) rather than paper documentation from families for purposes of verifying eligibility for Medicaid and CHIP.

MAGI Conversion Plans

CMS provided states with a template for completing their “MAGI Conversion Plans” that are designed to reflect the MAGI-based eligibility standards that are used to determine Medicaid and CHIP eligibility. The MAGI-conversion process involved a translation of pre-2014 net income eligibility standards into MAGI-based eligibility standards. Moving to MAGI replaced income disregards with simpler, more universal income eligibility rules that are generally aligned with the rules that are used to determine eligibility for the premium tax credits in the Marketplace. To complete the transformation to MAGI, states needed to “convert” their net-income based eligibility standards to MAGI-based standards.