February 2019 Medicaid & CHIP Enrollment Data Highlights

All states—including the District of Columbia—provide data each month about their Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Programs (CHIP) eligibility and enrollment activity. These data reflect a range of indicators related to key application, eligibility, and enrollment processes within the state Medicaid and CHIP agency. View the complete dataset on Data.Medicaid.gov. February 2019 Medicaid & CHIP Enrollment COUNT individuals were enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP in the REPORTING states that reported enrollment data for MONTH . COUNT individuals were enrolled in Medicaid.

were enrolled in Medicaid. COUNT individuals were enrolled in CHIP. were enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP in thethat reported enrollment data for COUNT individuals were enrolled in CHIP or were children enrolled in the Medicaid program in the COUNT states that reported child enrollment data for MONTH representing 50.7% of total Medicaid and CHIP program enrollment. List

Map 32 expansion states 19 non-expansion states Show Medicaid Expansion Status State Medicaid Enrollment CHIP Enrollment Total Medicaid and CHIP Enrollment Total Medicaid Child and CHIP Enrollment State Expanded Medicaid State Notes

View the complete monthly enrollment dataset on Data.Medicaid.gov

Medicaid and CHIP Child Enrollment - Medicaid child and CHIP enrollment figures represent the number of children enrolled in the Medicaid program and the total enrollment for separate CHIP programs as of the last day of the reporting period. These figures are point-in-time counts of total program enrollment, and not solely counts of those newly enrolled during the reporting period. These figures include only those individuals who are eligible for comprehensive benefits (for example, emergency Medicaid, family planning-only coverage and limited benefit dual eligible individuals are excluded). States use the definition of "child" as included in the state’s Medicaid or CHIP state plan in reporting performance indicator data to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), which varies from state to state.

Total Medicaid and CHIP Enrollment - Total enrollment figures represent the total unduplicated number of individuals enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP as of the last day of the reporting period. These figures are point-in-time counts of total program enrollment, and not solely a count of those newly enrolled during the reporting period. These figures include only those individuals who are eligible for comprehensive benefits (for example, emergency Medicaid, family planning-only coverage and limited benefit dual eligible individuals are excluded), except as indicated in the state-specific notes included with the tables.

Other Sources of Enrollment Data - CMS collects Medicaid and CHIP enrollment data from states through multiple reporting vehicles, such as Statistical Enrollment Data System (SEDS) and Medicaid Budget and Expenditure System. These enrollment data may not align with the data included in this report because of methodological differences. For example, in the most recent published SEDS annual enrollment report, CHIP enrollment was reported as nearly 9.5 million. Unlike the point-in-time, monthly enrollment counts included in this report, the SEDS CHIP enrollment figure represents the number of individuals ever enrolled in CHIP throughout the year. View the SEDS total and state-specific annual enrollment data on our CHIP Reports and Evaluations page.