Definition of Execution by Merriam-Webster
He is in prison awaiting execution. The quarterback's execution of the play was perfect. skillful execution of the dance steps

Recent Examples on the Web

The French queen’s house arrest and, ultimately, execution in the wake of revolution caused Maria Carolina to abandon relatively liberal rule in Naples and Sicily for a program of reactionary crackdowns and surveillance. Matthew Guerrieri, BostonGlobe.com, "Mozart for an era of political machinations," 28 June 2018

Demetre Mason and Frankland Henderson were sentenced to life without parole plus 30 years in DeKalb County for their roles in the executions of two young women in 2014. Joshua Sharpe, ajc, "DeKalb Bloods gang members get long sentences for executing 2 women," 15 June 2018

State executions in California have been held up by court challenges since 2006. Dennis Romero /, NBC News, "Man sentenced to death in torture, murder of boy he thought was gay," 8 June 2018

Jackley's office said the warden of the state penitentiary will choose the specific time and date, which will be announced within 48 hours of the execution. James Nord, Fox News, "South Dakota sets execution for man in prison guard's death," 9 Aug. 2018

On Wednesday, the Lefferts Boulevard bridge, with its health food shop, pharmacy and Art Deco movie theater, received a stay of execution of sorts. Sarah Maslin Nir, New York Times, "A Bridge, the Rickety Heart of Kew Gardens, Gets a Reprieve," 12 July 2018

The drug that led to the stay of execution was not fentanyl but midazolam, the sedative in the three-drug cocktail. Richard A. Oppel Jr., BostonGlobe.com, "Nevada execution is blocked after drug maker sues," 12 July 2018

Scott Dozier is one of almost 3,000 incarcerated people awaiting execution in the United States. Abdullah Shihipar, Teen Vogue, "Lethal Injection Drugs and the Death Penalty, Explained," 30 Oct. 2018

The newest take on tattoos at New York Fashion Week was dreamed up with a more delicate execution in mind. Calin Van Paris, Vogue, "These Delicate Lace Tattoos on the Dion Lee Runway Looked So Real, They Were Mistaken for Fabric," 9 Sep. 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'execution.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.