Definition of Town Hall by Merriam-Webster
Recent Examples on the Web

Hundreds of residents packed into the Sewell Mill Library Monday night to hear Chairman Mike Boyce make his case for a tax increase at the last of a series of town halls on the subject. Christina Maxouris, ajc, "A full house for Cobb chairman’s final tax town hall," 11 July 2018

The price of repairs and upgrades to town hall was underestimated by about $2 million, officials said. Jesse Leavenworth, Courant Community, "East Hartford Town Hall Repair Costs Increase By $2 Million-Plus," 11 July 2018

Hundreds packed an immigration town hall on July 2 in Evanston, where U.S. Rep. Jan Schakowsky spoke about the ongoing controversy at the border. Genevieve Bookwalter, chicagotribune.com, "'What can we do for the children?': Town hall in Evanston on immigration draws crowd looking for answers," 3 July 2018

Dunphy is a part of a cadre of parents and advocates planning that town hall at Oakland University to push for more cultural sensitivity across the entire city. Rochelle Riley, Detroit Free Press, "Detective fights racism in suburb where shots were fired at black kid," 10 June 2018

The main lobby includes a full-service complimentary coffee bar and 63-foot-by-9-foot living green wall, as well as a town hall space with an open layout of conference rooms with operable partitions and bleacher seating for large events. Dave Brooks, Billboard, "Brooklyn Sports & Entertainment Rebrands to BSE Global," 7 June 2018

Jim Sensenbrenner's town hall this morning in the Wisconsin town of Rubicon (pop 2,249) and just 1 constituent showed up. Sophie Tatum, CNN, "One person in attendance for Sensenbrenner town hall," 4 June 2018

At regular town hall sessions, issues are aired and victories celebrated. Philly.com, "1 in 3 Philly students doesn't graduate on time. To fix that, high schools focus on freshmen," 21 May 2018

Archie and the gang discuss the second shooter, who shot Fred Andrews while Betty's dad was with the Coopers, and who also shot at the mayoral candidates at the town hall debate. Amy Mackelden, Harper's BAZAAR, "Riverdale Season 2 Episode 22: Did Jughead Die in the Season Finale?," 17 May 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'town hall.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.