Flint's Water Remains Stable, Continues to Test Well Below Federal Action

Environmental Quality

July 18, 2018

Contact:

Tiffany Brown, MDEQ Public Information Officer, BrownT22@michigan.gov, 517-284-6716

Free water filters and test kits remain available to help rebuild confidence in water quality

FLINT, Mich. Since July 2016, the city of Flint’s water system has tested below action levels of the federal Lead and Copper Rule (LCR). The latest 6-month monitoring period from Jan. 1 through June 30 shows that 90 percent of the Tier I (high-risk) samples collected are at or below 6 parts per billion (ppb).

Federal regulations require that at least 90 percent of tests come in at or below 15ppb. A Tier I site is considered at higher risk per federal guidelines. This includes homes that have a confirmed lead service line or meet other criteria that make it an eligible location to determine compliance with the federal LCR.

Two years of LCR data show that Flint’s water is testing the same as or better than similar cities across the state. Third-party independent experts have also confirmed that Flint’s water currently tests below actionable levels for lead and copper.

To help ensure the city’s water quality is maintained, residents are encouraged to use their water to keep fresh water flowing through the distribution system.

Free water filters and water test kits continue to be available to Flint residents

Free water filters, replacement cartridges and water test kits continue to be available at City Hall and by calling CORE (Community Outreach and Resident Education) at 810-238-6700 for residents who have service line replacements underway at their homes or for residents who would feel more comfortable using a filter until their confidence in the water quality can be reestablished.

CORE team members have made multiple visits to homes where a water test hasn’t been submitted to encourage residents to have their water tested for free. Teams made over 8,500 contacts and provided nearly 6,000 water testing kits, with some residents passing on the opportunity to get their water tested. A follow-up visit is made to any home with a residential water test result over 15ppb.

In addition to the residential water testing effort, CORE members have completed more than 518,400 visits at Flint homes and had over 162,300 conversations with residents to make sure they are properly installing and maintaining their filters and aware of available resources.

Residents are reminded to ensure verification of official CORE credentials before allowing an individual into their home. Credentials include an official blue Flint Water Response Team badge with a security hologram, a GST MichiganWorks! badge with photo identification and a bright yellow vest. Team members will be ready to and are required to display their two pieces of identification at all times, and especially upon approach of a home.

State taxpayers have provided more than $350 million to Flint, in addition to the $100 million from the federal government. The funding is helping with water quality improvements, pipe replacement, healthcare, nutritional food distribution, educational resources, job training and creation, and more.

Testing results can be found by visiting www.michigan.gov/flintwater.

# # #