MoffettNathanson LLC
Partners + Corporate Craig Moffett Founding Partner Craig Moffett has been elected to Institutional Investor Magazine’s All-American Research Team in the U.S. Telecom and/or Cable & Satellite sectors on fifteen separate occasions, including nine separate appearance as the #1 analyst in America in either U.S. Telecom and/or Cable & Satellite. He has also been rated the #1 analyst in the U.S. Telecommunications sector by Bloomberg Markets, and he has consistently ranked #1 in Research Quality in Greenwich Research’s annual survey in both Telecommunications and U.S. Cable and Satellite sectors.



Prior to founding MoffettNathanson, Mr. Moffett spent more than ten years at Sanford Bernstein & Co., LLC as a senior research analyst. In 2011 he became the first analyst in the firm’s history to be ranked #1 in two sectors simultaneously by Institutional Investor.



He was previously the President and founder of the e-commerce business at Sotheby’s Holdings, the venerable auction house. In 1999, he led Sothebys.com to what was then the highest first year sales of any consumer website ever launched.



Mr. Moffett spent more than eleven years at The Boston Consulting Group, where he was a Partner and Vice President specializing in telecommunications. He was the leader of BCG’s global Telecommunications practice from 1996 to 1999. While at BCG, he led client initiatives in the U.S. local, long distance, and wireless sectors, in both consumer and commercial services, and advised companies outside the U.S. in Europe, Latin America, and Asia. His relationship with a U.S. RBOC spanned more than a decade, and he was the author of more than 20 articles about the telecommunications industry during the 1990s. He published analyses and forecasts of the overcapacity and pending collapse of the U.S. long distance business as early as 1998. Mr. Moffett graduated from Harvard Business School with Honors in 1989. He received a BA from Brown University phi beta kappa in 1984. Michael Nathanson Founding Partner Michael Nathanson is a Senior Research Analyst at MoffettNathanson, covering both the Media industry and the leading Digital Advertising companies. For the past decade, Nathanson has been consistently named one of the leading Media analysts in the U.S. by Institutional Investor Magazine.



Prior to co-founding MoffettNathanson with Craig Moffett in 2013, Nathanson worked at Sanford Bernstein from 1998 to 2010 and at Nomura from 2010 to 2013. Before he began working on Wall Street, Nathanson held strategic planning and financial analysis positions at Time Warner, Cablevision and MGM. He received a B.A. from Brandeis University and a master's degree from the Yale School of Management. Nathanson lives in Scarsdale, NY with his wife and two children.

Greg Melich, CFA Partner Greg Melich is a MoffettNathanson Partner and leads MN’s Retail and Internet Retail business. He has over 20 years of experience as a highly regarded Retail and Autos analyst on two continents, attaining a #1 Institutional Investor ranking nine times. Prior to joining MN, Greg was a Partner, Senior Managing Director, and Head of EvercoreISI’s Consumer Research effort, serving on ISI’s management committee from 2012-2013 prior to its acquisition by Evercore. Greg has been ranked #1 in Institutional Investor for Retail Broadlines & Hardlines for six consecutive years (2012-2017). Prior to joining ISI, Greg spent sixteen years at Morgan Stanley in consumer-related research, nine of which were as Managing Director. Over 7 years, he built Morgan Stanley's European auto research effort, and was ranked Institutional Investor #1 auto analyst for three years (2001-2003). He returned to the US in 2003 to head Morgan Stanley's Global Retail Research Team.



Mr. Melich graduated cum laude from the College of William & Mary in 1992 and is a CFA charterholder. Lisa Ellis Partner Lisa Ellis is a MoffettNathanson Partner and leads the Payments, Processors, and IT Services business. She is also a recognized expert on Bitcoin, blockchain and other cryptocurrencies. She is among the most highly-regarded analysts on Wall Street, authoring seminal investment research reports and frequently appearing as a commentator on her sector and disruptive payment technologies. Lisa was most recently a Managing Director and Senior Research Analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. While at Bernstein, Ellis was the #1 Institutional Investor ranked Payments, Processors and IT Services analyst. Prior to Bernstein, Lisa spent thirteen years at McKinsey & Co. where she was a Partner in the firm's Technology & Telecom and Marketing & Sales consulting practices. While at McKinsey, Ellis was the lead partner on dozens of engagements focused in strategic areas including specialty networks, mobile applications, cloud, and outsourcing. She is a technologist by training, with advanced degrees in Physics, Math, Engineering, and Business. In total, Lisa has nearly two decades of Technology experience as a research analyst and consultant. Patrick O'Connell Partner, Institutional Sales Patrick O'Connell covers accounts in the Northeastern United States, Canada, and Continental Europe. Pat worked in Sales at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., LLC for 11 years, where he covered Institutional accounts, was a Managing Director and Regional Sales Manager. Before joining Bernstein, he was in Business Development at an internet startup Atlas Commerce, and at Goldman Sachs in Corporate Bond Sales. Pat started his career in Network Advertising sales at NBC, where he held different positions in sales and planning, including Sports Sales Manager. Pat earned his B.A. from Colgate University, and an M.B.A. from Kellogg at Northwestern University. He lives in New Canaan, CT with his wife and four children. Ethan Steinberg Partner, Institutional Sales Ethan Steinberg covers U.S. accounts in the West Coast, Midwest and Texas, as well as accounts across Asia, Latin America, the Middle East, Australia and Africa. Prior to joining MoffettNathanson, he worked for 10 years in Institutional Sales at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., LLC in New York and Los Angeles. At Bernstein, Ethan covered the firm's largest accounts on the West Coast. Earlier in his career, Ethan held a number of senior sales and business development positions at venture-backed technology companies in the Silicon Valley. He began his professional career practicing transactional law in the Bay Area. Ethan holds a B.A. from Brandeis University, from which he graduated summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa. He earned a JD degree from Stanford Law School where he was Law Review Editor. Ethan is a member of the California Bar. He lives in Santa Monica with his wife and son. John Towers, CFA Partner, Institutional Sales John covers accounts in New York, New Jersey, Maryland and the United Kingdom. Prior to joining MoffettNathanson, John worked in Institutional Sales at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., LLC for 17 years. Earlier in his career John worked in magazine publishing for Harris Publications. John earned a B.A. from Denison University, a M.B.A. from Fordham University. John is a CFA charterholder. He lives in Manhasset, NY and is married with three children. Michael Rietbrock Chief Operating Officer and Director of Research Mr. Rietbrock is the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Research at MoffettNathanson. He was previously Head of Global Equity Research and Co-Head of US Equites for Nomura Securities. He has also held senior management positions at Bank of America/Merrill Lynch, Caxton Associates and Citigroup, where he was the #1 ranked Lodging & Gaming analyst for a decade. Mr. Rietbrock serves on the Board of Directors of MGM Growth Properties, and on the Board of Trustees of The Ideal School of Manhattan. He received an AB in Economics from Harvard College. Mitch Avnet Chief Compliance Officer Mitch serves as Chief Compliance Officer of MoffettNathanson. Prior to MoffettNathanson, Avnet was a member of Corporate Leadership Group (CLG) at Lincoln Financial Group (LFG) where he was Senior Vice President and Chief Ethics and Compliance Officer, having direct oversight of the company’s anti-money laundering, privacy, ethics and compliance risk management programs. In addition, Avnet maintained responsibility for Lincoln’s entire Compliance and Ethics Technology strategic initiatives, developing and implementing a long term strategic approach to upgrade and modernize the effectiveness and efficiency of Lincoln’s overall Compliance programs. Avnet was a member of the Social Media Governance Committee, having direct influence regarding LFG’s overall strategy toward the enablement and usage of Social Media outlets across the LFG footprint.



Throughout the course of Avnet’s 24-year career in the financial services industry, he has worked for top-tier investment banks, commercial banks and hedge funds such as Wachovia Capital Markets, PNC Bank and D E Shaw, developing an extensive knowledge of both buy side and sell side businesses, with a deep understanding of Equity and Fixed Income Markets, Derivative Instruments, Structured Products and Variable Products.



Avnet maintains the Series 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 14, 24, 55, 63 and 65 securities license designations. He obtained his bachelor’s degree in economics, graduating magna cum laude from the State University of New York at Oneonta. Tara Wachenheim Director of Operations Tara Wachenheim is focused on developing and implementing processes for all day-to-day operations. She oversees operations including A/P, A/R, cash management, financial reporting, payroll, Human Resources, Client Relationship Management and IT. Prior to joining MoffettNathanson, Tara was Vice President of Client Relations and Marketing at Conquest Capital Group for 11 years. Tara received her B.S. in Employment Relations from Rutgers University, with a concentration in Law and the Workplace. She lives in NJ with her husband and two children. Erin Turner Operations Assistant Erin Turner joined MoffettNathanson in June of 2017. She is responsible for providing key day-to-day support to the Operations team. Erin earned her B.S. in Accounting in 2015 and her M.B.A. in 2017, both from Mount St. Mary’s University. Monica Arone Corporate Access Coordinator Monica Arone has served as Corporate Access Coordinator at MoffettNathanson since August 2013. She is responsible for the organization and execution of the firm’s annual investor conferences, bus tours, company visits, and other industry events. Monica also supports the sales team with marketing logistics and account maintenance. Prior to joining MoffettNathanson, Monica worked for 3 years as Institutional Sales Assistant to the Los Angeles office at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., LLC. Monica graduated with honors from Elon University, earning a B.A. in Communications. Emily Bott Sales Assistant Emily Bott joined MoffettNathanson in January of 2017. She supports the sales team in client relations, account maintenance, and daily operations of the firm. Emily graduated summa cum laude from The University of Alabama in 2015 where she earned a B.S. in Human Environmental Sciences, with a concentration in Hospitality & Event Management.