State Policy
States with medical marijuana laws States that have removed jail time for possessing small amounts of marijuana States that have both a medical marijuana law and have removed jail time for possessing small amounts of marijuana Marijuana is legal for adults and is taxed and regulated similarly to alcohol; state also has a medical marijuana law Marijuana is legal for adults (no sales); medical marijuana law

MPP has been responsible for most of the major state-level marijuana policy reforms enacted in the past 15 years. MPP played the leading role in drafting, funding, and staffing the historic 2012 Amendment 64 initiative in Colorado — which made the state the first place in history to legalize marijuana for adults and regulate it like alcohol — and led the coalitions that passed measures to legalize and regulate marijuana in Alaska, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, and Nevada in 2014, 2016, and 2018. MPP also spearheaded the advocacy campaign that made Vermont the first state to legalize marijuana for adults through state legislation in early 2018.

MPP and the campaign committees it funded also played a leading role in successful efforts to pass 13 recent state medical marijuana laws (in Arizona, Delaware, Illinois, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, New Hampshire, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Utah, and Vermont) and seven recent decriminalization laws (in Delaware, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont).

Looking forward, MPP is devoting significant resources to ending prohibition in several more states over the next few years. MPP is lobbying to regulate marijuana like alcohol via several state legislatures: Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Maryland, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Rhode Island, and Vermont.

Meanwhile, MPP is also working with patient advocates to advance medical marijuana-related bills in several other states, including Kentucky and South Carolina. In addition, MPP monitors and analyzes all marijuana-related bills in all 50 states and the District of Columbia.

Use the links on the right to choose your state, to learn about current marijuana-related legislation or initiatives in your state, or to contact your state legislators. Also, we invite you to review MPP’s resources in support of decriminalization, legalization and regulation, and medical marijuana.