Buzz Aldrin passes 'lie detector' on claims that Apollo astronauts saw UFOs
© Reuters Apollo 11 space mission Audio recordings and sound bytes of astronauts from the Apollo program, including Buzz Aldrin, were reportedly put through a "lie detector" test. Results of the test found that what astronauts said about seeing UFOs is actually true, leading many to now believe that there are indeed intelligent aliens that are aware of Earth out in the cosmos.



© Getty Portrait of American astronaut Edwin 'Buzz' Aldrin Jr, Florida, 1960s. (Photo by NASA/Interim Archives/Getty Images)

The study was conducted by the Institute of BioAcoustic Biology in Albany, Ohio, according to a report by the Daily Mail (DM). Buzz Aldrin reportedly said that on the way to the Moon in 1969, along with Neil Armstrong, they encountered a strange flying object. "There was something out there that was close enough to be observed, sort of L-shaped," he said.

© Getty UNITED STATES - JULY 16: Left To Right : Astronauts Neil Armstrong, Michael Collins And Edwin Aldrin, Who Reached The Moon On Board The Apollo 11 Spacerocket On July 16, 1969. (Photo by Keystone-France/Gamma-Keystone via Getty Images)

Technology used to study and analyze audio clips from the four astronauts is still kept a secret, notes the report, but the claim is that it is far more advanced than general lie detectors. Sharry Edwards of BioAcoustic said that their tests found that Aldrin is sure he saw the L-shaped UFO even though his logical mind "cannot explain it".

© Getty (Eingeschränkte Rechte für bestimmte redaktionelle Kunden in Deutschland. Limited rights for specific editorial clients in Germany.) Aldrin, Buzz (eig. Edwin Eugene) *20.01.1930- Astronaut, USA - Portrait im Raumanzug fuer die Apollo-11-Mission- 1969 (Photo by NASA/ullstein bild via Getty Images)

Only last year, Al Worden astronaut on Apollo 15, told Good Morning Britain that he saw aliens during his mission. Tapes of the now-deceased NASA astronauts – Gordon Cooper and Edgar Mitchell – were also analyzed for this study. Cooper and Mitchell, according to the results of the study, were also telling the truth.

Buzz Aldrin's voice patterns reveal that he was certain about seeing a UFO, said Edwards.

© Getty BEVERLY HILLS, CA - MARCH 02: Buzz Aldrin arrives at the 11th Annual Celebration Of The 2018 Female Oscar Nominees Presented By Women In Film at Crustacean on March 2, 2018 in Beverly Hills, California. (Photo by Steve Granitz/WireImage)

In 2014, Buzz Aldrin did a Reddit AMA where one commentator asked him about the incident. Here, he makes it clear that what he saw was not aliens. However, this comes several decades after what he saw in space and a report by Inquisitr notes that by then, he was able to come up with a logical conclusion of what he remembered seeing. The tapes that were analyzed for the study came from the statements he made soon after landing in Earth after Apollo 11, notes the report.

© Getty Buzz Aldrin attends the 2018 amfAR Gala New York at Cipriani Wall Street on February 7, 2018 in New York City. / AFP PHOTO / ANGELA WEISS (Photo credit should read ANGELA WEISS/AFP/Getty Images)

Does this mean there are aliens out there? Buzz Aldrin himself put it eloquently when he wrote, "There may be aliens in our Milky Way galaxy, and there are billions of other galaxies. The probability is almost CERTAIN that there is life somewhere in space. It was not that remarkable, that special, that unusual, that life here on earth evolved gradually, slowly, to where we are today.

'But the distances involved in where some evidence of life may be, they may be hundreds of light years away."

Buzz Aldrin: life in pictures (Photo Services)