Texas Democrat Julian Castro tells crowd 'I might' run for president Wendy Davis also leaves the door slightly open to another gubernatorial run

Julian Castro is under scrutiny for the HUD's Distressed Asset Stabilization Program, which allows banks to buy delinquent mortgages at "rock-bottom prices." Julian Castro is under scrutiny for the HUD's Distressed Asset Stabilization Program, which allows banks to buy delinquent mortgages at "rock-bottom prices." Photo: Timothy Tai, Staff Photographer

The August 2013 cover of Texas Monthly magazine, featuring San Antonio Mayor Julian Castro, left, State Senator Wendy David, and U.S. Representative Joaquin Castro, is seen in an image taken from the magazine's Twiiter feed. less The August 2013 cover of Texas Monthly magazine, featuring San Antonio Mayor Julian Castro, left, State Senator Wendy David, and U.S. Representative Joaquin Castro, is seen in an image taken from the magazine's ... more Photo: COURTESY, COURTESY TEXAS MONTHLY

Former lawmaker Wendy Davis says the initiative, called Deeds Not Words, will tackle issues such as campus sexual assault, health care access and equal pay. Former lawmaker Wendy Davis says the initiative, called Deeds Not Words, will tackle issues such as campus sexual assault, health care access and equal pay. Photo: Johnny Hanson, Staff

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-4', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 4', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});



Photo: Timothy Tai, Staff Photographer Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Texas Democrat Julian Castro tells crowd 'I might' run for president 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

AUSTIN -- Texas Democrat Julian Castro confirmed Sunday he is seriously considering running for president in 2020 and former state Sen. Wendy Davis left open the possibility she will take another run at running for governor in 2018.

"I might," Castro told more than 350 people at a political conference near the University of Texas on Sunday morning. Davis' comments came at the same event.

Castro, the secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development under President Barack Obama, said the country needs a very different president than what is in office now and he will spend 2018 weighing a bid. He said the country needs someone "fundamentally honest" in the White House.

"We've had too much lying out of the White House," Castro said.

In an interview with the Houston Chronicle after the event, Castro unloaded more criticism of the Trump Administration.

"This administration is a disaster on so many issues," Castro said. "This just is not working. He's completely in over his head."

It's some of the strongest comments Castro has made yet on the prospects of running in 2020. Castro, the former San Antonio mayor, was rumored to be on Hillary Clinton's short list for a running mate in 2016 before she selected U.S. Sen. Tim Kaine, a Virginia Democrat.

The comments were made at a two-day conference organized by Voto Latino, a non-profit group that tries to promote civic engagement and voter participation in Hispanic communities.

Davis up for rematch?

At the same event, Davis meanwhile left open the possibility that she will be running for governor again in 2018.

The former state senator from Fort Worth said although she was defeated in 2014 by Gov. Greg Abbott, it was before voters knew how far right he would go in supporting legislation like SB 4, which she called the "show me your papers" law that threatens every citizen with brown skin. Supporters of SB 4 have said the legislation was to outlaw so-called sanctuary cities and allow local law enforcement to check the immigration status of people they pull over.

Davis made clear she's only considering it largely because other Democrats have failed to step forward to run.

"Because no one else is stepping forward," Davis said when asked by moderator Evan Smith of The Texas Tribune why she was not ruling it out.

She said Democrats have a shot "if we are able to field a candidate for governor."

Castro, pushed by moderator Evan Smith of The Texas Tribune, said his brother Joaquin Castro is 99 percent certain not to run for governor in 2018. Joaquin Castro himself has repeatedly said he will run for re-election to Congress in 2018.

Playing ball with GOP

Julian Castro also took Democrats in the Texas Legislature to task and made clear he has real problems with fellow San Antonian Joe Straus, the Republican Speaker of the House who announced last month that he will not seek re-election.

"The Democrats in this state – the Legislature – have been too willing to play ball with the Republicans," Castro said.

He noted most Democrats end up voting for the budget and some even considered voting for SB 4. He said Democrats in the Legislature need to be more strident in opposing Republicans.

It also SB 4 at the root of Castro's issues with Straus. While other Democrats celebrate him as having been a backstop against bad legislation, Castro questions why Straus let SB 4 get to the floor and pass.

"That has to be put on his record like everything else," Castro said.

Jeremy Wallace writes about state politics and government for the Chronicle. Follow him on Twitter at @JeremySWallace