State officials detail increased National Guard deployment to border
The troop deployment is in response to President Donald Trump’s request for help with border security.

Texas National Guard deployment will increase by 300 each week until the total deployment reaches 1,400.

At least 762 Texas National Guard troops are now deployed to the border, state officials announced at a legislative hearing Wednesday.

The figure — up from 130 in March — shows how Texas has stepped up operations in response to President Donald Trump’s call for broader border security operations.

Speaking to the Texas House Committee on Appropriations, Angela Isaack, manager of the Legislative Budget Board, said deployment will increase by 300 each week until the total deployment reaches 1,400.

The Texas National Guard troops are chiefly being deployed around El Paso and the Rio Grande Valley, the Texas Military Department’s adjutant general Maj. Gen. John Nichols, told lawmakers.

He said their aim is to assist U.S. Customs and Border Patrol agents to allow those agents to spend more time in the field.

RELATED: Gov. Abbott welcomes Trump plan to send National Guard to Texas border

The deployment could last through mid-September, he said. In response to a question about whether National Guard personnel might be needed during the upcoming hurricane season — Texas National Guard troops assisted in the Houston area in the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey — Nichols told lawmakers, “If need be, we’ll pull them off the border to where they need to be.”

Texas was the first state to act on Trump’s call to deploy National Guard troops to the border. The Texas National Guard also will send aircraft, ground surveillance vehicles and equipment to the Texas-Mexico border, officials have said.

While federal law prohibits active-duty service members from performing law enforcement duties, National Guard troops have conducted surveillance missions along the banks of the Rio Grande and in aerial missions in Texas for much of the last decade.

Gov. Greg Abbott has said that some National Guard members will be armed if they are placed in potential danger. He said that he wanted to “downplay any notion” that “our National Guard is showing up with military bayonets trying to take on anybody that’s coming across the border, because that is not their role.”

The troop deployment is paid for by the federal government, he said.

RELATED: Gradual deployment of U.S. troops to Mexico border underway

But lawmakers were told that Texas agencies spent $783.7 million on border security in 2016 and 2017, according to the latest data available. The vast majority of it — $678.5 million — was spent by Department of Public Safety.

State Rep. Donna Howard, D-Austin, asked if state agencies might at some point ratchet back the spending.

Department of Public Safety chief Steve McCraw said that Texas has “leaned forward and used its own funds for a federal mission.”

+ Jay Janner Jay Janner × Steve McCraw, Director of the Texas Department of Public Safety, speaks about border security at a House Appropriations hearing at the ... read more

“I don’t think we should put a dime on border security,” McCraw said. Paying for it should be the federal government’s duty, “plain and simple,” he said.

For the 2018-19 budget period, Texas lawmakers have appropriated $800 million for border security. Among the highlights are $428.4 million for a DPS border security base; $97.1 million for 250 additional DPS troopers and support staff; $10.6 million to pay Texas Parks and Wildlife Department game wardens deployed to the border; $3 million for the installation and maintenance of border cameras; and $3 million for the removal of carrizo cane, a tall, weedy plant that grows along the Rio Grande.

Amid the money talk, deeper political issues surfaced on border and immigration.

+ Jay Janner Jay Janner × John Zerwas, R-Richmond, left, and state Rep. Oscar Longoria, D-Beeville, listen to Texas Department of Public Safety Director Steve McCraw speak ... read more

At one point, state Rep. Mary González, D-Clint, asked McCraw if the agency could reconsider referring to unauthorized immigrants as illegal aliens.

“I always use IAs. It’s a legal term, a federal term in statute, and it’s not intended to degrade anyone in any shape or form,” he said.

She said the term is counterproductive “as we try to build bridges” in terms of working across communities on policing matters.

“I will talk to my staff to re-evaluate the use of terms that their director has been using,” he said. “If it’s truly insulting, I don’t intend that.”

Later, examining some border statistics, González asked Nichols, “With apprehensions down, do we really need more guys on the border?”

He said the National Guard would complete the mission outlined by the governor.