About NAF Jobs
What is NAF Employment?

NAF employment is considered federal employment. It is, however, different from federal civil service employment because the monies used to pay the salaries of NAF employees come from a different source. Civil service positions are paid for by money appropriated by Congress. NAF money, on the other hand, is self-generated by Air Force clubs, bowling centers, golf courses, and other activities that use NAF employees. We have two types of NAF positions: "flexible" and "regular." Flexible employees have work schedules that depend on the needs of the activity. These employees may work a minimum of zero hours to a maximum of 40 hours per week, and do not receive benefits. Regular employees work between 20 and 40 hours a week depending on position requirements, and are entitled to receive benefits. Human Resources Office Activity Scope Services over 25,000 NAF positions at Air Force Installations worldwide Counsels and provides staffing, position classification, labor and employee relations services to supervisors of NAF employees

Counsels and provides assistance to NAF employees

Manages training program for all Division military members and employees

Develops and schedules military ancillary training, home station training, and OJT program; monitors civilian ancillary training Benefits Employees with regular appointments are eligible for the following benefits and compensation: Health and life insurance, awards, retirement plan, 401(k), annual leave, sick leave, military leave, administrative leave, maternity leave, paternity leave, and court leave, overtime pay, holiday pay, Sunday premium pay, shift differential, workers' compensation, and unemployment compensation. Employees with flexible appointments are eligible for the following benefits and compensation: Overtime pay, shift differential, awards, workers' compensation, and unemployment compensation. Other Benefits: Generally, all Services programs (except dining facilities) may be used by individuals who contribute to the Air Force mission. Listed are some of the programs that may be available to you as an employee. Activities and Programs Bowling Center Information,

Ticket and Tour Office Off

Base Recreation Area

Golf Course

Auto Skills Center

Skills Craft Center

Fitness Center

Wood Skills Center

Youth Center

Equipment Rental

Base Restaurants

Child Development Center