5 Employment and Wage Impacts of Immigration: Empirical Evidence
comparable because of differences in the way the number of immigrants is captured. For example, the study may focus on immigrants as a share of the labor force or the share of the labor force that is of a particular skill (instrumented by the predicted immigrant inflows of that skill type). For this reason, in Table 5-2, the panel presents in terms of a common metric the results of several prominent spatial and skill cell papers discussed in this chapter, along with the largest and smallest structural impacts for all natives and for native high school dropouts, based on the results in Table 5-1. For each study, the table shows calculations of the wage effect on the indicated group of natives of an increase in immigrants that raises labor supply of the state, occupation, skill cell, or education group by 1 percent. Wage effects in bold are the coefficients reported in the source study; other coefficients were calculated by the panel as outlined in the Technical Notes in Section 5.9.

For most spatial and skill cell studies, the calculations to convert their results into the common metric are straightforward (see Technical Notes in Section 5.9), though they do involve using a particular value of the share of immigrants in the labor force. To make the studies as comparable as possible, the same value of the share of immigrants in the labor force should be used in all the calculations, even though a given study’s average share will depend on the exact years of data used. To calculate the underlined values in Table 5-2, the panel set the immigrant share of the labor force at its 2000 value of 12.6 percent for those studies requiring harmonization. However, the harmonization approach for spatial and skill cell papers does not lend itself as readily to the structural studies, which involve several parameters rather than a single parameter. Nevertheless, it is useful to make a more crude adjustment to see whether the structural results are broadly in line with those of other studies, setting aside the issue of relative versus absolute wage changes. For the structural studies, the simulations reported in Table 5-1 above may be thought of as the result of a simple increase in the share of immigrants in the labor force from 1990 to 2010, rather than the result of more complex changes in different types of labor over the period. The wage effects reported in the simulations may then be divided by this increase in immigrant share to get the effect of a percentage point increase in immigrant share, a figure that may then be converted to the effect of a 1 percent increase in the labor supply, as was done for the spatial and skill cell studies. A similar exercise may be performed for Borjas (2016b) and Peri and Yasenov (2015). (See the last two subsections of Section 5.9 for Technical Notes on the panel’s calculations for Borjas (2015), Peri and Yasenov (2015), and the structural studies.)

Table 5-2 confirms that there is a wide range of estimated elasticities and makes clearer than do unharmonized results which estimated elasticities are most negative and what patterns exist in the size of elasticities. Consider first the results for all natives and native dropouts (i.e., excluding