The Safety and Quality of Abortion Care in the United States
The fifth section examines the evidence on the use of analgesia, sedation, and anesthesia in abortion care, including its safety and implications for the site of care.

The fifth section examines the evidence on the use of analgesia, sedation, and anesthesia in abortion care, including its safety and implications for the site of care. The following section compares the mortality rates for abortion and other common outpatient procedures.

The next section presents a brief discussion of state regulation of abortion care.

The final, summary section reviews state regulation of abortion safety in light of the clinical evidence presented earlier in the chapter.

The committee’s review emphasizes contemporary approaches to abortion care because abortion methods have been refined in response to new evidence. Some research conducted before 2000 is unlikely to reflect the outcomes of how abortions are typically performed in the United States today. As discussed below, for example, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved protocol for medication abortion was updated in 2016 based on extensive research showing improved outcomes with a revised regimen (CDER, 2016). Techniques used in aspiration procedures are also safer and more effective than in the past. Sharp metal curettes, once commonly used, are considered obsolete by many professional groups, and their use is no longer recommended for abortion because of the increased (albeit rare) risk of injury (NAF, 2017a; RCOG, 2011, 2015; Roblin, 2014; SFP, 2013; WHO, 2012). New approaches to cervical preparation and the use of ultrasound guidance have also improved abortion safety (Darney and Sweet, 1989; SFP, 2013).

This chapter draws primarily on the scientific literature but also includes the recommendations (i.e., clinical practice guidelines and best practices) of professional groups that provide obstetrical and gynecological care or are concerned with the quality of abortion services. Appendix D summarizes the literature search strategies the committee used to identify the relevant evidence, while Table 2-1 describes the sources of the clinical guidelines cited throughout this report.

When women seek an abortion, they present with a variety of experiences and needs (Moore et al., 2011; Zurek et al., 2015). Patient-centeredness—a fundamental attribute of quality health care—means “providing care that is respectful of and responsive to individual patient preferences, needs, and values and ensuring that patient values guide all clinical decisions” (IOM, 2001, p. 6). Thus, when women seek an abortion, they should have the opportunity to discuss their questions and concerns and receive support in their decision making. They should also