National Service in West Virginia
Meeting Community Needs in West Virginia: Last year more than 3,800 Americans of all ages and backgrounds met local needs, strengthened communities, and expanded economic opportunity through national service in West Virginia. The Corporation for National and Community Service (CNCS) invested more than $12.2 million to support cost-effective community solutions, working hand in hand with local partners to empower citizens to solve problems. AmeriCorps members and Senior Corps volunteers are preparing today's students for tomorrow's jobs, reducing crime and reviving cities, connecting veterans to services, fighting the opioid epidemic, helping seniors live independently, and rebuilding communities after disasters. Service members served at more than 600 locations across West Virginia, including schools, food banks, homeless shelters, health clinics, youth centers, veterans facilities, and other nonprofit and faith-based organizations. Through a unique public-private partnership, CNCS, its grantees, and project sponsors generated more than $7.0 million in outside resources from businesses, foundations, public agencies, and other sources in FY 2017. This local support strengthened community impact and increased the return on taxpayer dollars.

AmeriCorps

Last year, more than 1,000 AmeriCorps members met pressing local needs across West Virginia, making a lasting impact in communities while gaining valuable skills and experience to advance their careers. AmeriCorps members serve through one of three programs:

AmeriCorps State & National engages men and women in intensive service at thousands of locations across the country through nonprofits, schools, public agencies, tribes, and community and faith-based groups. Most AmeriCorps grant funding goes to Volunteer West Virginia, the Governor-appointed State Service Commission, which in turn awards grants to organizations to respond to local needs.

engages men and women in intensive service at thousands of locations across the country through nonprofits, schools, public agencies, tribes, and community and faith-based groups. Most AmeriCorps grant funding goes to Volunteer West Virginia, the Governor-appointed State Service Commission, which in turn awards grants to organizations to respond to local needs. AmeriCorps VISTA (Volunteers In Service To America) taps the skills, talents, and passion of Americans of all ages to support community efforts to overcome poverty.

(Volunteers In Service To America) taps the skills, talents, and passion of Americans of all ages to support community efforts to overcome poverty. AmeriCorps NCCC (National Civilian Community Corps) is a full-time, team-based residential program for 18-24 year-olds. Members develop leadership skills by serving in public safety, environment, and disaster projects. FEMA Corps, a unit of NCCC, focuses solely on disaster preparedness, response, and recovery.

Senior Corps

Senior Corps taps the skills, talents, and experience of Americans age 55 and over to meet a wide range of community challenges. Last year, more than 2,700 West Virginia seniors met critical community needs while contributing to longer, healthier lives through one of three Senior Corps programs:

Foster Grandparents serve one-on-one as tutors and mentors to young people with exceptional needs.

serve one-on-one as tutors and mentors to young people with exceptional needs. Senior Companions help homebound seniors and other adults maintain independence primarily in their own homes.

help homebound seniors and other adults maintain independence primarily in their own homes. RSVP volunteers conduct safety patrols, renovate homes, protect the environment, tutor and mentor youth, respond to natural disasters, and provide other services.

Last year in West Virginia, Foster Grandparents tutored and mentored 840 young people, Senior Companions helped 320 seniors live independently, and RSVP volunteers strengthened the impact of 190 organizations across the state.