The next generation of scenarios for climate change research and assessment
The use of scenarios originated in military planning and gaming, and in the early 1960s was extended into strategic planning in businesses and other organizations where decision makers wanted to analyse, in a systematic way, the implications of investment and other strategic decisions with long-term consequences5,6,7,8. The goal of working with scenarios is not to predict the future, but to better understand uncertainties in order to reach decisions that are robust under a wide range of possible futures9.

In climate change research, scenarios describe plausible trajectories of climate conditions and other aspects of the future. A variety of techniques have been used, including temporal and spatial analogues of future climates and model-based scenarios, which are the focus of this Perspective10. The earliest model-based ‘scenarios’ were stylized representations of increases in the atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide (a greenhouse gas that retains energy radiating from the Earth’s surface). Initially a doubling or quadrupling of carbon dioxide was used as an input to ‘force’ early climate models. These scenarios provided a coherent basis for using climate models to address the question, ‘If carbon dioxide concentrations increased by a specified amount or rate, how might the climate system respond?’

Over time, an increasingly broad array of scenarios has been developed to address different components of the issue11; we show in Fig. 1 an historical perspective on the development of scenarios, some notable applications, and some context. Today, scenarios represent major driving forces, processes, impacts (physical, ecological and economic) and potential responses important for informing climate change policy (Fig. 2). Within the overall category of scenarios, several types are prominent in climate change research.

Figure 1: Timeline highlighting some notable developments in the creation and use of emissions and climate scenarios. The entries are illustrative of the overall course of model-based scenario development (blue) and application (beige) described in this Perspective, and also give some context (green); they do not provide a comprehensive account of all major scenarios and significant studies or assessments that have used them. See Supplementary Information for details. GCM, general circulation model; GHG, greenhouse gas; IAMC, Integrated Assessment Modelling Consortium. Full size image Download PowerPoint slide

Figure 2: Major natural and anthropogenic processes and influences on the climate system addressed in scenarios. The climate system consists of five interacting components: the atmosphere, the hydrosphere, the cryosphere, the land surface and the biosphere. Scenarios of emissions and other drivers are used to assess the impact of a range of human activities on these components. Changes in climate described in climate scenarios are major drivers of changes in both natural and human systems. Impacts on ecosystems, natural resources, economic activities and infrastructure, and human well-being, depend not only on climate change, but also on other changes in the environment (depicted in environmental scenarios) and the capacity of societies and economies to buffer and adapt to impacts (addressed in scenarios of vulnerability and adaptive capacity). Closer integration of scenarios is required to address feedback loops and other issues, such as the ecological and economic implications of different sets of adaptation and mitigation policies. Figure from ref. 83. Full size image Download PowerPoint slide

Emissions scenarios

Emissions scenarios are descriptions of potential future discharges to the atmosphere of substances that affect the Earth's radiation balance, such as greenhouse gases and aerosols. Along with information on other related conditions such as land use and land cover, emissions scenarios provide inputs to climate models. They are produced with integrated assessment models (Box 1) based on assumptions about driving forces, such as patterns of economic and population growth, technology development, and other factors. Over time, the information provided by integrated assessment models and used in climate models has become increasingly comprehensive, including time-dependent emissions of radiatively significant gases and particles, precursor pollutant compounds, and land cover and use.

In addition to their use as inputs to climate models, emissions scenarios are used to explore alternative energy and technology futures. This allows exploration of what changes in technologies, economic development, policy, or other factors would be required to shift emissions from a baseline to a lower path—for example, keeping greenhouse gas concentrations (or global average surface air temperature increases) below a specified level. They can be used to analyse the need for and the value of technology, and the implications of choices to limit radiative forcing to prescribed limits. Although scenario outputs include emissions and land use/cover, they also include drivers of change, such as patterns and rates of economic growth, demographic change, technology, policy and other factors that are important for the assessment of the impacts of climate change12.

Emissions scenarios for climate change research are not forecasts or predictions, but reflect expert judgments regarding plausible future emissions based on research into socioeconomic, environmental, and technological trends represented in integrated assessment models. Emissions scenarios for climate change research do not track ‘short-term’ fluctuations, such as business cycles or oil market price volatility. Instead, they focus on long-term (decades to centuries) trends in energy and land-use patterns. The long-term focus is necessary for evaluating the slow response of the climate system (centuries) to changing concentrations of greenhouse gases. The long-term focus also reflects the long time horizon for retiring and replacing many components of energy and economic infrastructure. Uncertainty in emissions scenarios results from the inherent uncertainty of future socioeconomic and technology conditions, uncertainty in the policy environment, and differences in representations of processes and relationships across integrated assessment models, among other factors. An underlying key issue is whether probabilities can be usefully associated with scenarios or different levels of radiative forcing; for example, the probability that concentrations will stabilize above or below a specified level13,14,15.

Climate scenarios

Climate scenarios are plausible representations of future climate conditions (temperature, precipitation and other climatological phenomena). They can be produced using a variety of approaches including: incremental techniques where particular climatic (or related) elements are increased by plausible amounts; spatial and temporal analogues in which recorded climate regimes that may resemble the future climate are used as example future conditions; other techniques, such as extrapolation and expert judgment; and techniques that use a variety of physical climate and Earth system models, including regional climate models10. All of these techniques continue to play a useful role in development of scenarios, with the appropriate choice of method depending on the intended use of the scenario16, but most major advances are expected with model-based approaches. There is a notable increase in interest in regional-scale climate scenarios and projection methods, especially for impact and adaptation assessment17.

Environmental scenarios

Analysis of the potential impact of a particular climate scenario requires environmental scenarios of ecological and physical conditions at greater detail than is included in climate models. These scenarios focus on changes in environmental conditions other than climate that may occur regardless of climate change. Such factors include water availability and quality at basin levels (including human uses), sea level rise incorporating geological and climate factors, characteristics of land cover and use, and local atmospheric and other conditions affecting air quality. Climate change merges with these factors, and in many cases, the potential impact of climate change and effectiveness of adaptation options cannot be understood without examining these interactions16,18.

Vulnerability scenarios

Finally, scenarios of factors affecting vulnerability, such as demographic, economic, policy, cultural and institutional characteristics are needed for different types of impact modelling and research. This information is crucial for evaluating the potential of humankind to be affected by changes in climate, as well as for examining how different types of economic growth and social change affect vulnerability and the capacity to adapt to potential impacts. Although some of these factors can be modelled and applied at regional or national scales19, for the most part data at finer spatial resolution are required. An increasing body of literature, including some using integrated assessment models, is exploring alternative methods for the quantitative and qualitative ‘downscaling’ of these vulnerability factors in a way that is consistent with the socioeconomic assumptions underlying global emissions scenarios20,21,22.

Earlier scenario work

Antecedents of contemporary global scenarios were developed in ‘futures studies’ that explored the long-term sustainability of natural resources23,24,25,26 and the implications of global energy needs for future CO 2 emissions and concentrations27,28,29. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has used emissions and climate scenarios as a central component of its work of assessing climate change research. It stimulated development of the field by commissioning several sets of emissions scenarios for use in its reports. In earlier emissions scenario exercises, the IPCC convened authors and modellers, provided terms of reference, and approved the scenarios through an intergovernmental process that took several years. The 1990 IPCC scenario A (SA90)30 set explored four emissions pathways, including a ‘business as usual’ future and three policy scenarios. They were followed by the 1992 IPCC scenarios (IS92)31 that played out the implications of uncertainties in economic growth, population and technology in a number of business as usual energy and economic futures. The latest set of scenarios from the IPCC, contained in the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES)32, investigated the uncertainty of future greenhouse gas and short-lived pollutant emissions given a wide range of driving forces. Some of the cases explored the implications of economic convergence between developed and developing countries. Unlike previous emissions scenarios, the quantitative SRES projections were complemented by ‘storylines’ or narratives of the future, which facilitated the interpretation of the scenarios. Unlike previous scenarios that were developed using only one or two models, the SRES scenarios were produced through an ‘open process’ involving many different modelling teams. The IS92 and SRES scenarios assumed there were no policy actions to mitigate climate change.

Many other organizations have developed scenarios that include greenhouse gas emissions and their interactions with other socioeconomic and environmental systems (for example, the International Energy Agency33 and the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment34) or have played a substantial role in shaping the scenario development process (the Energy Modelling Forum). Overviews of scenario development in climate change research are available32,35,36 (see also timeline in Fig. 1).