Twentieth-century contribution to sea-level rise from uncharted glaciers
The mass balance model used for hindcasting glacier evolution is the same as that described in ref. 11, with the output updated for the RGIv516 and CRU 3.24 climate observations19. The only modification is a change to the handling of data gaps to make it consistent with the treatment of uncharted glaciers: instead of assuming regional mean rates of glacier volume and area change for glaciers, which cannot be explicitly modelled (22.7% of all glacier area globally, of which 76.8% comes from Antarctic and Subantarctic peripheral glaciers; see Extended Data Table 1 for breakdown), the regional mean rates for glaciers within the same size class (as defined below) are assumed. For Antarctic and Subantarctic peripheral glaciers, where CRU data are not available so no glaciers can be explicitly modelled, global mean rates for glaciers within the same size class are assumed. See Methods section ‘Impact of Antarctic peripheral glaciers’ for a detailed consideration of the validity of using Antarctic peripheral glaciers in this study. We note that all SLE mass change values assume a global sea surface area of 3.619 × 1014 m2.

A ‘base’ run of the glacier model is established first. We require a snapshot of global glacier area distribution for a single point in time, but the observation years for RGIv5 glaciers differ. We model each glacier forward to 2015 if it has an observation year before 2015, to homogenize the data to a single snapshot in 2015 (distributed as shown in the dark green line in Fig. 1a, d), as well as hindcasting their sizes in 1901 (distributed as shown by the light green line in Fig. 1b, e).

The results for all glaciers are separated into size classes based on their modelled areas in 1901 and 2015. Size classes are logarithmic, defined as each set of glaciers with surface area S such that 100.1i km2 ≤ S < 100.1(i+1) km2 for each integer i with −20 ≤ i < 40 (resulting in size classes that span from 0.01 km2 to 10,000 km2). As these size classes do not cover equal area ranges, we divide the glacier count in each size class (unitless) by the width of each size class (upper area limit minus lower area limit, in units of km2) to get the glacier frequency density, N(S), (in units of km−2). It is glacier frequency that we work with for the power law.

From the distribution of glaciers in 2015, we can determine a power law of the form N(S) = aSb (with a and b coefficients to be determined) for glacier frequency density by surface area that holds for glaciers not at either extreme end of the area distribution, with the theoretical basis in ref. 13, and extending a regional method5. In this specific case, we fit the regression line (purple line in Fig. 1a, d) for glaciers between 100.3 and 102.6 km2, with this range selected based on the section of the graph that best fits a straight line while encompassing as many size classes as possible. We note that the regression coefficient is only generated once, globally, rather than for individual regions: this is because the distribution of differently sized glacierized regions is also part of the underlying distribution, and the power-law exponent calculated globally is not necessarily the same as the mean of exponents calculated for each region. Thus, the mass of uncharted glaciers calculated globally is not necessarily the same as the sum of the masses of uncharted glaciers if they were calculated for individual regions. In the context of SLE mass loss contributions, it is important to consider the entirety of the glacierized area rather than focusing on individual regions selected based on geographical convenience.

Estimation of errors

We generate the error values on the regression coefficients by varying the size classes over which the regression is calculated. The upper and lower limits are varied by one size class in each direction, independently, and the resulting distribution of 9 regression coefficients (lower limits of 23rd, 24th and 25th size classes, upper limits of 45th, 46th and 47th size classes in each possible combination) is used as a sample for generation of a 95% confidence interval. The regression coefficient error is generated independently for each of the two regressions performed (one to account for missing glaciers, one to account for disappeared glaciers), which results in a larger proportionate error for disappeared glacier SLE mass loss contribution. The 4.4% proportionate error from the original Marzeion11 model is assumed to hold also for missing and disappeared glaciers and thus added to the error due to the power laws, to determine the total error for these mass loss contributions.

Missing glaciers

In this Letter, ‘small glaciers’ is taken to mean glaciers with area 10−2.0 km2 < S < 100.3 km2, that is, glaciers below the size of those to which the power law is fitted. We determine a scaling factor for each small glacier size class equal to the ratio of the power-law-predicted frequency density in 2015 to the observed frequency density in 2015 (with a lower cut-off in glacier size for the lower-bound estimate). To obtain an estimate of the missing glacier mass change, the contribution of each RGIv5 small glacier is multiplied by the scaling factor for the 2015 size class it occupies (regardless of what size class the same glacier may have occupied historically). Missing glaciers are defined as those small glaciers that are not included in RGIv5, but are expected to exist in 2015 from this power-law upscaling. The hindcast 1901 glacier distribution with missing glacier scaling applied is shown by the pink line in Fig. 1b, e. The annual GMLSR contribution from missing glaciers is then found by applying the upscaling factors based on 2015 glacier size class to each glacier’s mass-change timeseries for RGIv5 small glaciers.

Disappeared glaciers

We fit the disappeared glacier power law (orange line in Fig. 1c, f) in the same manner as the power law for missing glacier upscaling, but with the pink line (RGIv5 + missing glaciers, hindcast to 1901) as the basis for the calculation of the power-law constant and exponent. However, a correction is needed for the ‘bump’ in the hindcast RGIv5 + missing glaciers. In large part, we believe this ‘bump’ to be due to the fact that the glacier model is unable to resolve the merging of two glaciers within a larger valley if they grow (or correspondingly, recombine glaciers, when hindcasting, that were previously the same glacier but split as they shrank); modern separate glaciers in adjoining valleys may have historically been part of a single larger glacier, but the fact that in the 1901 hindcast they are always represented as two separate glaciers artificially inflates some of the smaller size classes in the RGIv5 + missing glacier 1901 distribution, while reducing the glacier count in larger size classes. For this reason, we do not apply any scaling to small glacier size classes for which the power-law-predicted disappeared glacier frequency is lower than the RGIv5 + missing 1901 glacier frequency. The impact of this omission is not expected to be large, and we expect that it results in an overall underestimation of the disappeared glacier SLE mass-loss contribution, because the artificial inflation of size classes below 100.3 km2 and reduction of larger size classes is expected to result in a smaller power-law exponent. The smaller the power-law exponent (that is, the ‘flatter’ the distribution for the size classes on which the power law is calculated), the smaller the disappeared glacier mass added through our upscaling.

The time series shown in Fig. 2 (light and dark orange) is not explicitly calculated for disappeared glaciers. Whereas missing glaciers are upscaled on the basis of existing RGIv5 glaciers, disappeared glaciers have no existing analogues for time series upscaling. It is theoretically possible to generate a time series of mass loss by recalculating the power law on a yearly basis and determining how much of the original 1901 disappeared glacier mass is remaining, but the variability in the power-law exponent is almost certain to dominate over actual climate-driven variability. As we know that the contribution is zero in 2015 owing to these glaciers being entirely melted away, we instead show a linear decrease from a maximum in 1901, which is close to what we observe in missing glaciers.

Upper- and lower-bound estimates

We refer to the scaling of all small glacier size classes up to the power laws as the upper-bound contribution estimate. To obtain the lower-bound contribution estimates, we include an additional step: instead of upscaling all small glacier size classes to the calculated power law, we impose a cap on glacier frequency density based on the frequency density at 0.1 km2, and upscale only to this cap for size classes between 0.01 km2 and 0.1 km2. This modified upscaling can be seen in Fig. 1d (for missing glaciers) and Fig. 1f (for disappeared glaciers).

In Extended Data Fig. 2, we show the glacier distribution for Switzerland alone, in order to examine the apparent power law for a region where we expect the available glacier inventories to be much more complete. The Swiss Glacier Inventory22 is based on 25-cm-resolution aerial orthophotographs, and as we see in Extended Data Fig. 2, it gives us an apparent power law of exponent 1.16 down to the smallest measured glacier sizes in the RGI. In fact, the RGI itself also exhibits such a power law—with exponent 1.26—across small glaciers, and is apparently no less complete for this region than the SGI. With the limited number of glaciers in the SGI (1,420 in total) and in the RGI restricted to Switzerland, we do not have enough data to determine a power law for larger glaciers, so we are unable to say whether this lower-exponent power law is a characteristic of the region, or a characteristic of the distribution of smaller glaciers with a transition into a steeper power law for larger glaciers. As a compromise, instead of guessing at transitions between power laws for different glacier size scales, we suggest a lower-bound estimate of the uncharted glaciers’ contribution by assuming a cut-off at 0.1 km2, so the power law observed for larger glaciers continues down to 0.1 km2, and below this the distribution is flat. The exponent observed in Switzerland lies somewhere between the lower bound (effectively an exponent of 0) and the upper bound, with the exponent of around 1.8 derived from larger glaciers globally.

For missing glaciers, the upper- and lower-bound estimates are based on the same power law, calculated for RGIv5 glaciers homogenized to 2015, but for disappeared glaciers, because the power law is based on the distribution of RGIv5 + missing glaciers hindcast to 1901 and this differs based on the upscaling used for missing glaciers, the upper- and lower-bound estimates are based on separately calculated power laws, with different exponents. In practice, we note a slightly smaller exponent (but not by much) for the lower-bound estimate, probably owing to the lessened effect of the merging of glaciers when hindcasting caused by the model not accounting for glaciers coming together as their area increases (see ‘bump’ in Fig. 1c, with a much less noticeable bump in Fig. 1f). We also note that the lower-bound contribution for missing glaciers is by definition smaller than the upper bound, because the upscaling is from the same base glacier distribution to a strictly smaller-than-pure-power-law distribution. This is not the case for the lower-bound contribution of disappeared glaciers. Owing to the potentially different power-law exponents and the different distributions that are being upscaled from, the lower-bound disappeared-glacier contribution could be larger than the upper-bound contribution, although in practice this is not the case.

Impact of Antarctic peripheral glaciers

Glaciers in the RGIv5 Antarctic and Subantarctic region are unique in this study, as our climate data does not extend to these latitudes. This means that none of the glaciers in this region can be explicitly modelled (Extended Table 1), so global mean mass balance within each size class is assumed for each glacier. This is a strong and not well justified assumption, so it is worthwhile to consider both why it is still valuable to include these glaciers in our analysis, and what the impact on the results is if the region is removed.

Inclusion of Antarctic and Subantarctic peripheral glaciers is desirable, if possible, because the basis for a global upscaling of small glaciers must be a global glacier inventory. Generation of independent power laws on a regional basis and summing the upscaling for uncharted glaciers over these regions does not yield the same results as performing the upscaling based on global glacier distribution, and the distribution of glaciers across regions containing different-sized glacier populations is fundamentally part of the global distribution we are trying to represent. Furthermore, the definition of the RGI regions is largely a matter of convenience, and the ability to artificially partition the world’s glaciers into geographically separate boxes does not reflect the fact that the overall distribution of glaciers is the result of the interaction of much less separable factors such as topography, precipitation and surface energy balance, which are variables that are more continuous across glaciated and non-glaciated areas. In the same way that individual glaciers within a region are part of a larger pattern of glacierized area within that region, individual regions are part of a larger pattern of glaciated regions across the globe. Antarctic and Subantarctic peripheral glaciers are part of this global distribution, so we consider their inclusion worthwhile despite the additional modelling assumption, provided they do not have a clearly destabilizing influence on the overall results.

Although the Antarctic and Subantarctic region comprises a large amount of overall glacier mass, it does not represent a large proportion of the total area of small glaciers (4.7%, as compared to 43.1% and 19.3% in the Greenland Periphery and Central Asia regions, respectively). Small glaciers are the ones that contribute to the upscaling for uncharted glaciers, so lack of explicit surface mass balance modelling for Antarctic and Subantarctic peripheral glaciers does not have a larger effect on the upscaled glacier SLE mass-loss contribution. Nevertheless, for completeness we provide data for the global modelling and upscaling with the Antarctic and Subantarctic region removed, corresponding to the same data included in the main text including the region. Only the upper-bound estimate is compared, as the intention is to give an impression of the maximal effect of including or removing Antarctic and Subantarctic glaciers. Removing Antarctic and Subantarctic glaciers, the RGIv5 SLE mass-loss contribution is reduced to 75.8 ± 3.3 mm SLE (from 89.1 ± 3.9 mm including Antarctic and Subantarctic peripheral glaciers), but the missing- and disappeared-glacier contributions actually increase (insignificantly; P = 0.14 and 0.50 respectively) to 49.1 ± 5.2 mm and 6.3 ± 2.5 mm SLE respectively (from 42.7 ± 6.5 mm and 5.3 ± 2.4 mm SLE, respectively, including the Antarctic and Subantarctic peripheral glaciers). The reason for the increase in these contributions when Antarctic and Subantarctic glaciers are removed appears to be a change in power-law exponents to −1.83 ± 0.01 for the initial missing-glacier upscaling and −2.01 ± 0.04 for the disappeared-glacier upscaling (from −1.80 ± 0.01 and −1.98 ± 0.04 respectively); these increase the amount of upscaling applied for small glacier size classes by enough to more than account for the reduced overall number of RGIv5 small glaciers used in the dataset, given the aforementioned small proportion of small glaciers that are found in the Antarctic and Subantarctic region.

Exponent constraints

The nature of the power-law explanation of glacier distribution places certain constraints on the power law in order for the outcome to be physically plausible. We concern ourselves with three integrals that relate to the distribution:

$$\underset{m}{\overset{n}{\int }}N\left(S\right){\rm{d}}S$$ (1)

giving the total number of glaciers with area between m and n

$$\underset{m}{\overset{n}{\int }}SN\left(S\right){\rm{d}}S$$ (2)

giving the total area of all glaciers with areas between m and n, and

$$\underset{m}{\overset{n}{\int }}j{S}^{k}N\left(S\right){\rm{d}}S$$ (3)

giving the total volume of all glaciers with areas between m and n, with the exponent k and constant j being volume/area scaling factors k = 1.375 and j = (0.0340 km)(3 − 2k) taken from literature23,24. In our analysis, we find a practical upper bound on the power law of 102.6 km2, and this is understood to be a physically meaningful upper bound reflecting restrictions on how many large glaciers can exist in glacierized regions of limited size, so we can fix n = 102.6 and do not need to worry about the convergence of these intervals as n increases. At the lower end of glacier areas, we do not have a physically meaningful cutoff for minimum glacier size m. We fix a lower limit of 10−2.0 km2, because this is the smallest glacier size represented in RGIv5, but this is purely a limitation of the dataset, so in order to have physically plausible power laws, we should expect convergence in some of these integrals as m tends to zero. In equations (2) and (3), convergence is necessary as the total area and total volume of glaciers globally must be finite regardless of how small we make our minimum limit on glacier size, but equation (1) should not necessarily converge, because dropping the threshold for what we consider to be glaciers can plausibly add huge numbers of increasingly small ice masses. In essence, we can continue to add large numbers of increasingly small glaciers as long as they do not contribute a substantial overall area or volume. As N(S) is proportional to Sb for the power-law exponent b, in order for equations (2) and (3) to converge as m tends to zero, we require, respectively:

$$b+1 > -1$$ (4)

$$b+1.375 > -1$$ (5)

Equation (5) is satisfied comfortably by every value of the exponent for all the power laws we generate, meaning that the total ice volume is at least theoretically consistent in every case. Equation (4) is satisfied comfortably for both the missing glacier power laws with and without Antarctic and Subantarctic glaciers, so the power-law explanation of 2015 glaciers is theoretically consistent. Both with and without Antarctic and Subantarctic glaciers, the upper-bound power laws based on 1901 glacier areas to derive disappeared-glacier contributions have error margins that straddle the b = −2 threshold for area convergence, and the corresponding power law for the lower bound is below but extremely close to the b = −2 threshold. This means there is uncertainty over whether the power law is too steep to be an accurate description of a possible 1901 glacier distribution if the minimum glacier size approaches zero. However, we do recognize that the inability of the model to account for the fact that separate modern glaciers may actually have been part of the same ice masses in the past when they were larger may ‘bunch up’ the distribution of smaller glaciers (and we note a slightly smaller exponent for the lower bound, where this effect is lessened). We therefore trust the estimate of the missing-glacier SLE mass-loss contribution more than the disappeared-glacier contribution, but we choose to include the figures as part of a consistent whole given that they originate from the same theoretical basis.

Code availability

The glacier model used11 is available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. The remaining code consists of scripts for data processing that are not provided owing to their relative simplicity.