Trump Lobs ‘Rape’ Allegation at Bill Clinton in FOX Interview
Donald Trump on Wednesday used the word "rape" regarding a decades old allegation against Bill Clinton — and said it should be on the table when it comes to scrutiny of Hillary Clinton’s campaign.

The charge rehashed a controversial claim by an alleged Clinton mistress in the 1990s that was never ultimately corroborated in court.

His comments came in a wide-ranging interview with Fox News’ Sean Hannity that was taped earlier Wednesday and aired that night.

Hannity questioned whether the New York Times, after publishing an extensive evaluation of Trump’s professional and personal relationships with women, would take the same approach to Bill Clinton’s affairs.

"For example, I looked at The New York Times. Are they going to interview Juanita Broaddrick? Are they going to interview Paula Jones? Are they going to interview Kathleen Willey?" Hannity asked Trump, listing women who have made allegations against Bill Clinton. "In one case, it's about exposure. In another case, it's about groping and fondling and touching against a woman's will."

Trump replied, "And rape."

"And rape," Hannity agreed.

Trump continued: ”And big settlements, massive settlements. And lots of other things. And impeachment for lying."

Juanita Broaddrick, a nursing home administrator expressed interest in volunteering for Bill Clinton’s 1978 gubernatorial campaign in Arkansas, accused him of sexual assault in a 1999 interview with NBC News.

She eventually filed an affidavit saying there was no assault, which she later recanted. Clinton was never charged, and he denied the allegations when they were first made.

In response to Trump's latest jab, Clinton spokesman Nick Merril said: "Trump is doing what he does best, attacking when he feels wounded and dragging the American people through the mud for his own gain. If that’s the kind of campaign he wants to run that’s his choice. Hillary Clinton is running a campaign to be President for all of America. It’s not surprising that after a week of still refusing to release his taxes and likening Oakland and Ferguson to the dangers in Iraq, of course he wants to change the subject. So while he licks his wounds, we'll continue to focus on improving the lives of the American people."