TRANSCRIPT: JEB BUSH INTERVIEWED BY TELEMUNDO NEWS
News July 27, 2015

Please credit Telemundo if you decide to quote this material. This transcript was translated to English from its original Spanish-language version. Interviewer: José Díaz-Balart. Interviewed: Jeb Bush. Place: Orlando, FL. Date: 07/27/2015.

José Díaz-Balart: Governor thank you for being here with us.

Jeb Bush: It’s a pleasure.

José Díaz-Balart: Governor I want to start with your personal life, you have been married for over 40 years with Columba Bush born in Guanajuato, Leon, how Hispanic is your family?

Jeb Bush: We are very Hispanic in the sense that we speak Spanish at home. Columba is very Mexican. She is proud of her US citizenship naturally, but we eat Mexican food at home. Our children are Hispanic in many aspects and we don’t talk about that. But yes, the Hispanic influence in my family is something quite important in my life.

José Díaz-Balart: Do you speak Spanish at home?

Jeb Bush: Yes, yes. Especially when my first lady is mad at me, and I listen to her in Spanish with that happens.

José Díaz-Balart: And I assume you hear words that are mostly spoken in Mexico.

Jeb Bush: That is so. That is so. Yes, that is so. Whenever there are emotions, we all go back to our roots, right?

José Díaz-Balart: One thing Governor, I know your 3 sons are bilingual, where there times when they were younger were they were targeted either because of the color of their skin or their accent and as a father how did you talk to them when they would tell you that they were laughed at because of their accent or the color of their skin?

Jeb Bush: It was important. I remember there was a time when my son went to Ocala to play baseball, a game on a team. And the team was a Miami team, the majority were Hispanics, my son George, he’s dark-skinned. And they spoke horrible things about those from Miami.

And, naturally, I had to explain or describe that people who hate are not the majority, and we must accept them and move forward.

Because he was quite upset. Because he and his friends, never—since we live in Miami, we don’t have a problem. But in other parts of the country it exists. It’s a good lesson to learn, to always remember that we still don’t have a country that’s full justice for all. We can see this in the African-American communities also. There’s discrimination still. And in my life, it’s important to acknowledge this, and to act about that. Yes.

José Díaz-Balart : And act on it, but how?

Jeb Bush: When I was governor, I got to govern like this, bring in everybody who wanted to be with me.

In regards of assigning judges, people in important positions in my administration, I had the greatest diversity from any other governor, and always be aware of the diversity of the state of Florida as well as the country. It’s a virtue it’s something positive. It should not divide us, but we should respect and embrace diversity so that we can have better results.

José Díaz-Balart: How did the vision for your life change after meeting your wife

Jeb Bush Well, I was a child as they say in Mexico, a child, not organized. But when I saw Columba, it was like I was struck by lightning, really. From that moment on, I wanted to work, I wanted to finish my studies, I wanted to conquer her. I left Texas University in slightly over two years. Because I didn’t want to stay there, partying. I wanted to marry Columba, and I did so. I started my life early. We got married when I was 21-years-old and she was 20. And I started working. All my life was organized by that meeting in Leon.

José Díaz-Balart: Let’s talk immigration Governor. Both republican and democrats shave said the immigration system is broken, Very few are willing to act, Can you promise in front of the Hispanic population that if you win the Election you would give priority to immigration reform.

Jeb Bush: Yes, that’s it.

José Díaz-Balart: Is that a promise?

Jeb Bush: That is so. That is so. I do make that commitment and I know we can do it. This president committed also in 2008 to do so, and he didn’t do anything because he got 60 votes in the Senate. He had the majority of Democrats in the Senate and he did not do it.

He likes to talk about this as a political topic, because it wins votes. He thinks that way instead of solving the problem. I believe that a new president that’s committed to protect the border and to do everything that’s needed, so that there is more trust, that the laws can be complied with.

With that we can have an immigration reform that will solve the problem for 11 million people who are undocumented and living in the shadows

José Díaz-Balart: How do we resolve the problem of 11 million undocumented and what do you think is the formula for the border to be secured and deal with those those people who are here and contribute to the economy with their hard work?

Jeb Bush: Look, first of all, to arrive here legally has to be easier than to arrive here illegally. So one must have a commitment with a border, and JUST as important, there’s 40 percent of the undocumented that arrived here legally, that have a legal visa and they overstayed And they don’t go back. We must have a plan to solve that. It’s not the most complicated thing in our country, we can do it. We can accomplish it. But for the 11 million people, I believe that they come from out of the shadows they get a work permit, they pay taxes naturally, they pay small fine they, learn English. They don’t get benefits from the federal government, but they come out of the shadows. And they obtain a legal status after some time. I believe that’s the place where one could obtain consensus to solve this problem.

José Díaz-Balart: In your book you say that group should never have access to citizenship. Is that a viable option, in other words to create a category of second class citizens that can be here legally but never have access to full residency or citizenship.

Jeb Bush: One could have access if they receive legal status one way or the other. But what I don’t believe should be done is to cut in front of the line, you know? That’s the most difficult aspect of all this, but we must remember one thing: more than half of the people who received amnesty, because in 87 that was amnesty, more than half, they didn’t even try to become a citizen. The majority of these people want to work, and want to live out of the shadows. They want to receive the respect given by this country.

And if that reaches that as the commitment to comply with a balance of an immigration plan, I’m totally in favor of that.

José Díaz-Balart: Governor recently Republican candidate Donald Trump said that those Mexicans crossing the border were rapists, assassins, drug traffickers. How did you feel when you heard those comments?

Jeb Bush: I was hurt, hearing somebody speaking in such a vulgar fashion. This makes the solving of this problem much more difficult when we have politicians talking like that. We cannot progress.

There’s no benefit by trying to, how do you say this? If the people that are frustrated with a lack of being able to comply with the law, this is not the manner to solve this. We should say, “this is the plan how to solve it.” It’s not saying, I am just supporting you and that is all. That’s what Trump does.

And besides that this offends millions of people that are here legally. It makes no sense. In a political sense, it’s bad. But it creates an environment where we can resolve the problem it makes it worse.

José Díaz-Balart: Even after that candidate has said those things, he is still in first place. He’s beating you not only at a state level, but a national level in the most recent polls?

Jeb Bush: Yes, in the long term. I don’t believe that’s going to be like that. Because I believe that as a candidate, the presidential candidates must offer a plan not only about talking with emotions. So I’m not too concerned about that.

José Díaz-Balart: How are you preparing for the Republican debate against such a large group of pre-candidates and including someone like him who basically has no boundaries?

Jeb Bush: I see it as an opportunity to talk about what I did and accomplished as a governor in other years where we cut taxes, where we created an environment where Florida became the leader in economic growth. I can talk about educational reform, where Hispanics and others improved their understanding that other states couldn’t accomplish. I see this not as a bad thing, but I see it as an opportunity to talk about myself.

José Díaz-Balart: When candidates say, for example, that Mexicans that are crossing the border are rapists, etc., do you think this is affecting the image of the Republican

Sure, sure. It makes it more difficult having a more optimistic message, but that’s my obligation. I believe we soon if we stall solve some serious problems in Washington, this would be the best time to live.

And I believe it’s important that I, as a candidate, offer a more optimistic version than Trump’s negativity and other candidates.

José Díaz-Balart: Governor, your brother won 44% of the Hispanic vote in one election and the Republican candidate that followed won 29%. This number shows the Hispanic support for Republicans is declining. How can you obtain that vote?

Jeb Bush: In my re-election in 2002, I won the majority. I won more Hispanic votes than Anglo votes, 60 percent in the state. It can be done. I [? 0:11:39.9] I obtained the majority of Democratic Hispanic votes. It can be done, based on a more positive message that respects people. This can be changed.

José Díaz-Balart: Governor, what do you think in regards to President Obama and the reestablishment of diplomatic ties and his asking for the end of the economic embargo against the Castro regime?

Jeb Bush: I am totally against the, his politics, recognizing the Castro brothers without getting anything in return. This Sunday there were more people going to jail because they were against the regime. They have not done anything to receive the re-establishment, the diplomatic recognition. Besides that, we’re doing the same thing now with FARC and also with Venezuela. I believe that the policy should be that we always want freedom in Cuba. We want democracy, we want to change the relationship, but based on facts. In this case, they don’t even promise us that he has received to do this. And dictators are not going to leave quietly at night. They don’t leave. We must be vigilant, and this president, does not recognize that if we talk about the Iran mullahs, mistaken policies of the Cuban/Castro brothers.

José Díaz-Balart: You spoke about Venezuela, you lived there for 2 years, it’s been some years now since you’ve lived there, how do you see that country and what do you think the United States should or could do in terms of Venezuela?

Jeb Bush: Well, I believe that changing the policy, saying if there are elections, nothing else matters. In the case of Venezuela, maybe Chavez won the elections. But I don’t know. But after that, removing freedoms, or removing the democratic institutions and we don’t act. That was not correct, almost a failure. And in the case of Venezuela, if we’re vigilant and we want to help, we must help the dissidents just like we should do in Cuba.

We should not be as passive that would leave the leaders who can still travel freely. I think we should use sanctions just like we started last year. Those we should increase those.

José Díaz-Balart: In Puerto Rico, there is a very real crisis; $42 billion dollars in debt, the unemployment is through the roof. Very few Republicans have discussed the crisis in Puerto Rico and how to help. What is your position, and do you think Puerto Rico should be a priority for your government if you win?

Jeb Bush: I believe that since they are a territory, where there are citizens of this country they should receive the respect first of self-determination, and then we should assist them as much as we can in their economic crisis. The manner in which we can do this is maybe let the government renegotiate its debt, and besides that, change the social contract. Because the costs for the Puerto Rican government are so enormous and the economic growth is negative, as it has been for the past seven years, people come here because it’s easy. Sixty-nine dollars on JetBlue, they’re here. As citizens. We must give them more flexibility to solve this problem.

José Díaz-Balart: This would include?

Jeb Bush: Reform the bankruptcy law for Puerto Rico. Just like Detroit had that process, maybe Puerto Rico will also need to do the same thing. But it’s not allowed by federal law. And the Congress must act.

José Díaz-Balart: Former governor Mike Huckabee speaking on the Iran deal said that president Obama was marching the people of Israel towards the oven. Your reaction to that first, and then your reaction to President Obama saying that our only option is this plan or war?

Jeb Bush: That is not true. This agreement does not benefit the international interest of this country. It’s going to create more insecurity in the region, it’s going to create maybe the proliferation of nuclear bombs not only in Iran, but also in the neighboring countries.

They don’t do anything to recognize that Iran is the biggest supporter of terrorism in the region. So I believe it’s another example of a policy based on the fact that people change without pressure. They’re going to receive $150 billion dollars in less than a year to promote insecurity. I don’t believe that’s the right thing to be done. But besides, in the case of Mike Huckabee, who is my friend, those words, that use of those type of words, doesn’t help. Doesn’t help. We must have a more civil politics in this country.

José Díaz-Balart: Director Comey of the FBI is saying that ISIS is more dangerous than Al Qaeda in terms of national security to the U.S. When you see what is happening, do you think that there should be American boots on the ground and how do you think this crisis in the Middle East began?

Jeb Bush: It originated when we left Iraq. Because leaving Iraq, Al-Qaeda was finished. Everybody has said, even Barack Obama said a little while ago. And when we left too fast, too soon, the vacuum was filled by these groups, especially the ISIS group that has created a risk for the rest of the world.

And that, the solution is not for us to unilaterally resolve this, but jointly with our allies, friends in the region, we must start to create our tactics and do it, act on it, not just talk about it. But act on it.

Even though it’s a serious threat, we can solve this jointly with the Turks, with Jordan, with Egypt and other countries.

José Díaz-Balart: Lastly, you talked about education. How concretely can you tell Hispanic families who want to and don’t see light at the end of the tunnel?

Jeb Bush: Well, we did so in Florida. Because Hispanics in Florida are number one, compared to Hispanic students in the rest of the country. And we did so with accountability with school choice, with a much more open system, where parents could have more choosing power, and with that pressure, there was a better educational level, which is historical. I believe the federal government should be a partner in that type of reform. They should not try to delete the power or dilute the power from a state level but whatever there are states that want to have reforms, and the reforms in Florida are a manner in which Hispanics can be offered the possibility of having their children get more opportunities than what they received, which is what ever parent wants to have. Parents I know in this state, in the US.

José Díaz-Balart: Finally, what music do you listen to at home and what is your favorite kind of music?

Jeb Bush: I like and have a pretty wide array Jon Secada, because I met him, during one of my campaigns. And lately, I met Pitbull so, Mr. Worldwide, and I listen to his music, Michael W. Smith, who is also a singer that has got a great voice, really. It’s country, Christian, rap and Latin.

José Díaz-Balart: Governor, thank you very much.

Jeb Bush: Thank you.