How Much Do Hospitals Cost Shift? A Review of the Evidence
Abstract Context: Hospital cost shifting—charging private payers more in response to shortfalls in public payments—has long been part of the debate over health care policy. Despite the abundance of theoretical and empirical literature on the subject, it has not been critically reviewed and interpreted since Morrisey did so nearly fifteen years ago. Much has changed since then, in both empirical technique and the health care landscape. This article examines the theoretical and empirical literature on cost shifting since 1996, synthesizes the predominant findings, suggests their implications for the future of health care costs, and puts them in the current policy context. Methods: The relevant literature was identified by database search. Papers describing policies were considered first, since policy shapes the health care market in which cost shifting may or may not occur. Theoretical works were examined second, as theory provides hypotheses and structure for empirical work. The empirical literature was analyzed last in the context of the policy environment and in light of theoretical implications for appropriate econometric specification. Findings: Most of the analyses and commentary based on descriptive, industrywide hospital payment-to-cost margins by payer provide a false impression that cost shifting is a large and pervasive phenomenon. More careful theoretical and empirical examinations suggest that cost shifting can and has occurred, but usually at a relatively low rate. Margin changes also are strongly influenced by the evolution of hospital and health plan market structures and changes in underlying costs. Conclusions: Policymakers should view with a degree of skepticism most hospital and insurance industry claims of inevitable, large-scale cost shifting. Although some cost shifting may result from changes in public payment policy, it is just one of many possible effects. Moreover, changes in the balance of market power between hospitals and health care plans also significantly affect private prices. Since they may increase hospitals’ market power, provisions of the new health reform law that may encourage greater provider integration and consolidation should be implemented with caution. Keywords: Cost shifting, Medicare, hospital charges, health insurance, health policy

The definition, existence, and extent of hospital “cost shifting” are points of debate among participants and stakeholders in discussions of health care policy and reform. The academic literature defines the term precisely and characterizes the range of its effect. Even though that literature has grown considerably in recent years, not since the mid-1990s has it been systematically reviewed and summarized (Morrisey 1993, 1994, 1996; see also Coulam and Gaumer 1991). In this article, I update those older reviews, summarize the relevant features of and changes to health care policy, and place the results in today's policy context. That hospitals charge different payers (health plans and government programs) different amounts for the same service even at the same time is a phenomenon well known to economists as price discrimination (Reinhardt 2006). That hospitals charge one payer more because it received less (relative to costs or trend) from another also is widely believed. This is a dynamic, causal process that I call cost shifting, following Morrisey (1993, 1994, 1996) and Ginsburg (2003), among others. Price discrimination and cost shifting are related but different notions. The first depends on differences in market power, the ability to profitably charge one payer more than another but with no causal connection between the two prices charged. The second has a direct connection between prices charged. In cost shifting, if one payer (Medicare, say) pays less relative to costs, another (a private insurer, say) will necessarily pay more. Whereas cost shifting implies price discrimination, price discrimination does not imply that cost shifting has occurred or, if it has, at what rate (i.e., how much one payer's price changed relative to that of another). That hospitals shift their costs among payers is intuitively appealing. Public payments—from Medicare or Medicaid—go down (again, relative to cost or trend, qualifiers that I will omit from now on), and as a consequence, private payments go up, taking health insurance premiums along with them. Karen Ignagni, the president and CEO of America's Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), described cost shifting as follows: “If you clamp down on one side of a balloon, the other side just gets bigger” (Sasseen and Arnst 2009, http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/09_41/b4150026723556.htm). According to Dobson, DaVanzo, and Sen, it is a simple hydraulic effect: “As some pay less, others must pay more” (2006, 23). Is this intuition correct? Are costs immutable and simply shifted from one payer (that pays less) to another (that necessarily pays more)? If providers shift costs, by how much do they do so? When casually expressed or generously interpreted, the idea of cost shifting conjures up a dollar-for-dollar trade-off; that is, one dollar less paid by Medicare or Medicaid results in one dollar more charged to private payers. At least one recent health insurance industry–funded report (PWC 2009) assumed this level of cost shifting. Some health care policy stakeholders have an interest in convincing policymakers that cost shifting is both inevitable and large. Continuing the cost-shifting assumption (and ignoring a countervailing assumption of profit maximization, to which I will return later), if public payments are relatively less generous, then hospitals will raise private prices more than they would otherwise. In turn, insurers’ premiums for policies and self-insured firms’ health care costs would rise more quickly, making the private purchase and sponsorship of health care coverage relatively more difficult for consumers and firms, respectively. Thus, convincing policymakers to be concerned about cost shifting also is in the interest of the privately insured, employers, and the insurance and hospital industries, all of whom benefit from (or, at least, are not harmed by) higher public payments. Individuals and firms would rather not spend more for care, which cost shifting implies; insurance companies do not want to charge higher premiums; and hospitals would prefer higher public payments for their services. Of course, if costs could be shifted significantly, public payment policy would have little leverage on total health care costs. In that case, cost shifting would amount to price adjustments that would force private payers to subsidize most of the public programs’ payment shortfalls. Thus, the extent of cost shifting is important. Is it dollar-for-dollar, or is it less? If less, by how much? In other words, how much leverage does public payment policy have on total health care costs? How much does it influence private prices and premiums? For how much cross-subsidization does it account? The literature, as I will show, answers these questions. The literature offers several broad conclusions that modify Morrisey's (1993, 1994, 1996) main finding that cost shifting was small to nonexistent. First, based on theoretical considerations alone, the conditions necessary for cost shifting are possible but circumscribed. Furthermore, if there is cost shifting, it cannot always and forever be large and persistent. Second, the empirical literature finds that to the extent it has occurred at all, cost shifting usually is at a low rate. Instead, the vast majority of public payers’ shortfalls are accommodated by cost cutting, not cost shifting. Third, private payment-to-cost ratios are influenced by many factors other than public payment rates. Thus, changes in the former cannot, and should not, always or fully be explained by changes in the latter. Fourth, the rate of cost shifting largely depends on the intensity of price competition in the private market for hospital services, that is, the relative market power of hospitals and health care plans. Indeed, one cannot assume that estimates of cost shifting from one era or one market will apply at another time or in another place. Fifth and finally, private and public prices and margins can influence each other. In other words, the direction of causality between private and public payment levels goes both ways: they are jointly determined. Besides reviewing the literature in this article, I provide a framework informed by theory for empirical specifications of hospital cost-shifting analysis. In that framework I identify the control factors and estimation techniques required to obtain unbiased cost-shifting estimates. (Additional technical detail pertaining to this framework is found in Frakt 2010a.) I also examine each empirical study in light of this framework. Although no study (on any subject) is perfect, some are stronger than others. The stronger studies that I identify provide the most credible estimates of hospital cost shifting and indicate how the phenomenon varies with market structure. Ultimately, by considering the full body of work—imperfect as each individual effort may be—I have been able to draw some robust conclusions. In addition to public payer shortfalls, providing care to the uninsured may lead to hospital cost shifting and affect private premiums, although the estimates vary. Families USA (2005) estimated that private insurance premiums were about 10 percent higher in 2005 due to the use of health services by the uninsured, whereas both Kessler (2007) and Hadley and colleagues (2008) found less than a 2 percent effect. The remainder of my article focuses on hospital cost shifting from Medicare and Medicaid to private payers and does not cover what may be caused by the uninsured.

Review of the Empirical Literature The empirical literature identifies many possible hospital responses to decreases in public payments, including (1) a reduction in staff or wages, (2) a reduction in (underutilized) capacity, (3) changes in quality, (4) a reduction in services (trauma center, emergency rooms), (5) a lower diffusion rate of technology, (6) closure, (7) an upcoding of diagnostic information in order to get higher payments from Medicare, (8) volume shifting, and (9) cost shifting (Cutler 1998; Dafny 2005; Dranove and White 1998; Tai-Seale, Rice, and Stearns 1998). Given all these possible responses and in light of the relatively narrow range of circumstances in which cost shifting can theoretically occur, it is not surprising that the empirical literature shows that cost shifting usually does not completely offset shortfalls in public payments. With one exception, all the studies found no cost shifting or an amount far below dollar-for-dollar. The exception is Cutler (1998), who found dollar-for-dollar cost shifting between 1985 and 1990. But between 1990 and 1995, he found no evidence of cost shifting. The strongest study relevant to today's health care markets (Wu 2009) found an average 21 percent rate of cost shifting between 1996 and 2000. 's review of empirical literature is organized as follows. First, I examined studies that measure prices across hospitals but not over time. The results from these cross-sectional studies are often taken as evidence of cost shifting, but because they are a snapshot in time, they really are studies of price discrimination, a static phenomenon. Cost shifting is a dynamic relationship between prices, so they must be studied using data that include variations over time, not just across institutions. Next, I looked at two types of dynamic studies that exploit temporal as well as cross-sectional variation in prices. One type, fixed-effects specifications, measures price changes relative to an overall hospital-specific average. The other, difference models, measures price changes relative to a baseline year or a prior year. Both fixed-effects and difference models use hospitals as their own controls and are distinct and equally valid approaches (Wooldridge 2002). One study (Gowrisankaran and Town 1997) estimates a model that is outside the typology of studies just explained. Using Current Population Survey data, hospital cost report data from the Health Care Financing Administration (now the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services), and American Hospital Association data (all from 1991), the authors estimated a detailed (structural) model of the inpatient hospital market. The model captures the dynamics of a hospital industry in which for-profits and nonprofits compete and maximize different utility functions, have different preferences for investment, and face different levels of taxation. For-profits maximize profits, while nonprofits maximize a mix of profits and quality. The model includes the effects of hospital entry, exit, investment, and multipayers’ pricing decisions, as well as patients’ preferences for hospitals. Observable input parameters included proportion of patients requiring hospital services by payer, income threshold for free care, copayments, Medicare deductibles, Medicare reimbursement rates, corporate tax rates, and the discount rate. The model is used to simulate the effects of Medicare's 1984 switch from a retrospective, cost-based system to a prospective payment system for hospital services. The authors found that the new payment system resulted in a 10 percent reduction in quality and a 1 percent decline in private price owing to the more concentrated hospital markets. The authors characterized this as a cost shift in that the price per unit of quality increased. Cross-Sectional Studies The most recent study of cost shifting is that by Stensland, Gaumer, and Miller (2010), in which they describe two hypotheses to explain the descriptive evidence that is frequently considered the signature of cost shifting. One hypothesis, promoted by the hospital and insurance industries or consulting firms on their behalf (Fox and Pickering 2008; PWC 2009; see also Dobson et al. 2009), is that costs are not influenced by Medicare payments (i.e., are exogenous) and that lower Medicare payment-to-cost margins induce hospitals to seek higher payments from private sources. The alternative dynamic, described earlier, is that hospitals with strong market power and a profitable payer mix have strong financial resources, high costs, and therefore low Medicare margins. Although these are, strictly speaking, dynamic cost-shifting hypotheses, Stensland, Gaumer, and Miller test only static versions of them. That is, they examine only price discrimination. Pooling across years, the authors illustrate how margins correlate across payers and how they relate to costs and market power. Their descriptive findings are based on Medicare hospitals’ cost reports between 2002 and 2006. Because they stratify their analysis by degree of Medicare margin, it is (weakly) cross-sectional. This analysis is supplemented with two case studies of Chicago-area and Boston-area hospitals based on 2005 IRS filings and newspaper accounts to characterize qualitative differences in market power across hospitals. They discovered that hospitals with lower non-Medicare margins had higher Medicare margins. In turn, hospitals with higher Medicare margins had lower costs. Finally, hospitals with higher market power had higher costs, lower Medicare margins, and higher private pay margins. This descriptive analysis does not support causal inference, however. Thus, Stensland, Gaumer, and Miller did not find evidence of cost shifting. Indeed, they never tested for it (though, to be fair, neither did the industry-funded studies the authors tried to refute). Dobson, DaVanzo, and Sen (2006) used a cross-sectional analysis of static public and private margins, which is more appropriate for the study of price discrimination than for cost shifting. Using American Hospital Association survey data, they used year 2000 state variations in payment-to-cost margins for private payers, relating them to variations in Medicare, Medicaid, and uncompensated care margins and controlling for HMO penetration rates. Although they found statistically significant evidence of price discrimination, their analysis did not control for costs. Since costs are in the denominator of the dependent and independent margin variables, the results confound price with cost effects, another reason why their findings do not provide evidence of cost shifting. Fixed-Effects Specifications Owing to the abundance of hospital payment and discharge data available from the California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development (OSHPD), many cost-shifting studies focused on the California market, spanning different methodologies and time periods. I review them in succession, beginning with Zwanziger, Melnick, and Bamezai's study (2000), which considered the California market from 1983 through 1991. A year earlier, 1982, California enacted legislation that permitted establishment of selective contracting insurance products. By the end of the study period (1990), more than 80 percent of privately insured persons in California were enrolled in such plans. Thus, the period of study represents one of increasing price competition for hospitals due to the growing collective market share of network-based plans. In addition, during the 1980s Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements to California hospitals fell relative to costs (Dranove and White 1998). Zwanziger, Melnick, and Bamezai (2000) estimated a hospital-year level ordinary least squares (OLS) model of per-patient private payments with hospital and year fixed effects (meaning that the model controlled separately for each hospital's overall payment level, as well as yearly payment changes affecting all hospitals equally). Independent variables include per-patient Medicare and Medicaid revenue, measures of hospital competition, ownership status, average cost, and case mix. Costs and private payment levels are determined simultaneously because both are affected by quality (formally, costs are endogenous). To untangle the simultaneity and obtain unbiased estimates, costs were modeled with an instrumental variables (IV) technique.3 A large number of interactions were used to allow for the heterogeneity of public price variables by level of hospital competition, profit status, and time period (1983–1985, 1986–1988, 1989–1991). The study window was broken into three equal-size periods to test the hypothesis that cost shifting would be less feasible as managed care plans captured more of the market in later years. The results indicate that hospitals—both for-profit and nonprofit—shifted costs in response to reductions in Medicare rates. The percentage increase in private payments in response to a 1 percent decrease in Medicare revenue varied across time period and hospital market concentration, from a low of 0.17 percent to a high of 0.59 percent. Nonprofit hospitals in less competitive markets tended to have lower rates of cost shifting than did those in more competitive markets. Responses to Medicaid cuts were an order of magnitude smaller and generally statistically insignificant. The results were consistent over time, despite the increasingly competitive market. This result is puzzling and not consistent with the findings of other studies, reviewed next. One possible explanation is that the instruments for cost (each hospital's cost relative to average hospital costs computed over the state and over the hospital's market) may be correlated with the dependent variable (private payments), which violates an assumption of the IV technique. Zwanziger and Bamezei (2006) conducted a follow-up study in which they implemented a similar fixed-effects specification, focusing on the same dependent and key independent public payment variables from the same data source. The principal difference is that the study window, 1993 to 2001, was later than that considered in Zwanziger, Melnick, and Bamezai's 2000 study. They also used a slightly different set of controls: average costs (instrumented), level of hospital competition (the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index [HHI]),4 and HHI-year interactions. The justification for returning to the cost-shifting question with a very similar model and the same data source but at a later time was twofold: (1) California hospitals’ price competition increased over the 1990s, and (2) the Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997 reduced the growth rate of Medicare hospital reimbursements. That the study window straddles the 1997 passage of the BBA is a particular strength, especially if one believes that its provisions for Medicare payment changes are a source of exogenous variation in Medicare prices. Zwanziger and Bamezai's results (2006) were similar to those of their earlier study. They found no statistically significant difference in cost-shifting relationships between for-profit and nonprofit hospitals, no difference before and after the BBA, and no evidence of influence by the intensity of hospital competition. Their main finding is that a 1 percent decrease in Medicare (Medicaid) prices caused a 0.17 percent (0.04%) increase in private prices. Put another way, from 1997 to 2001, 12.3 percent of the total increase in private prices was caused by decreases in public payments. Difference Models Clement (1997/1998) examined the relationship between private revenue-cost margins and Medicare and Medicaid margins in California during three fiscal years (1985/1986, 1988/1989, 1991/1992) relative to a baseline year (1982/1983). Using OSHPD hospital discharge data, she estimated a hospital-level OLS with a dependent variable change in log of the private revenue-to-cost margin. Changes in Medicare's and Medicaid's payment-to-cost ratios (margins) were entered linearly and squared (not logarithmically) and interacted with year dummies. Control variables included the hospital's total margin, a measure of other revenue, a historical average of asset value, hospital competition, HMO market strength, private occupancy rate, service mix, profit and ownership status, and other measures of case mix and hospital characteristics. Clement found negative correlations between public and private margins, which could be evidence of cost shifting. However, because the model is of margins and not payment, one cannot separate the effects of payment and costs. In addition, the inclusion of separate margins for Medicare and Medicaid across multiple years complicates the calculation of a cost-shift rate. Dranove and White (1998) also examined changes in private price-cost margins, as well as in service levels and hospital closings, in the California hospital market during the 1980s and early 1990s. Their approach was based on the notion that if hospitals can shift costs, they will do so at a greater rate if their public caseload is larger.5 Furthermore, hospitals with larger public caseloads may reduce quality to a greater extent than those with smaller public caseloads as public reimbursements decline. Dranove and White used service intensity (number of services per day, controlling for DRG) as a proxy for quality. With 1983 and 1992 California OSHPD hospital discharge data, they estimated hospital-level OLS, seemingly unrelated regression (SUR), and logit (for closings) models of the effect of Medicare and Medicaid caseloads (proportions of billed charges) on changes in private margins; service levels to Medicare, Medicaid, or private patients (three different equations); and hospital closings, controlling for hospital competition, hospital size, a high-tech hospital indicator,6 profit status, and drivers of demand. They tested different specifications with the independent variables entered as levels, changes, or both. Dranove and White detected no evidence of cost shifting. Private margins decreased in hospitals with larger Medicare or Medicaid caseloads. But because margin, not price, was the dependent variable, one cannot say whether prices fell or costs rose. The intensity of services provided for all payer types was negatively associated with Medicare and Medicaid caseload sizes, although the results were not statistically significant for private payers. Dranove and White interpreted this negative intensity-caseload correlation across payers as support for the hypothesis that quality (as proxied by intensity) is a public good. Finally, they discovered evidence that Medicaid-dependent hospitals are more likely to go out of business. Taken together, the results indicate that the burden of public payer reductions is borne by public patients. Hospitals with higher public payer caseloads reduced quality and were more likely to close. Friesner and Rosenman's study (2002) is the final one based on California OSHPD hospital discharge data (from 1995 and 1998). The authors distinguished between charges and payments. Charges are what is billed, and payments are what the hospital actually receives. Their models include measures of charges and the proportion of them not paid (i.e., 1-payments/charges). Using hospital-level OLS models, Friesner and Rosenman estimated the effects of changes in Medicare or Medicaid charges and the proportion unpaid on changes in private prices and public and private service intensity (length of stay), controlling for changes in number of beds, race, ethnicity, outpatient prices, and income. They estimated three models separately by profit status: one for private price changes, one for public service intensity changes, and one for private service intensity changes. For the private price model, Friesner and Rosenman found a statistically significant and positive coefficient on the change in proportion of unpaid public charges for nonprofit hospitals but no statistically significant coefficient for for-profit hospitals. They interpreted this result as evidence that the former cost shifted and the latter did not. But they also found that the change in public charges was positively correlated with changes in private charges, which is not what hospitals actually receive in payments. For these reasons, their model did not support their conclusion of nonprofit hospitals’ cost shifting. That a decrease in the proportion of unpaid public charges was associated with an increase in private charges (not all of which were paid) is not evidence that lower public payments lead to higher private payments. Cutler (1998) looked at the extent to which lower Medicare payments led to cost cutting (provision of fewer services and lower quality) versus cost shifting. His conclusions depended partly on the nature of the private market, which varied considerably over the two time periods he examined: 1985 to 1990 and 1990 to 1995. The time periods of study overlapped with a series of Medicare hospital payment reductions, including those established by the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985; the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Acts of 1987, 1989, 1990, and 1993; and the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. For the key independent variable, Cutler constructed a measure of Medicare payment reduction he calls the “Medicare bite.” He noted that Medicare's hospital prospective payment system had been designed to increase with the costs of medical inputs. Reductions of the update factors, however, drove a wedge between the originally designed increases and the actual increases. The Medicare bite is the difference between the growth of the hospital market basket and the actual growth of Medicare payments multiplied by the number of Medicare patients served by the hospital. Using data from Medicare cost reports and Interstudy, Cutler estimated by OLS the effect of the Medicare bite on hospital's changes in per-patient non-Medicare private revenue, hospital closures, number of hospital beds, changes in nurse staffing levels, and the diffusion of technology, controlling for changes in cost, managed care enrollment, profit and ownership status, number of beds, and metropolitan statistical area (MSA) size, but not, notably, hospital market structure. He found that between 1980 and 1985, hospitals shifted their costs dollar-for-dollar, a much greater cost shift rate than that found by Clement (1997/1998) and Zwanziger, Melnick, and Bamezai (2000), who studied the same time period (although those two studies were of California only). From 1990 to 1995, Cutler detected no evidence of cost shifting. Also, in the earlier period, there was no evidence that the lower Medicare payments affected hospital closures, but in the later period, there was a small effect indicating a greater number of closures. In both periods, nursing input was reduced as Medicare payments declined. There was little evidence that payment changes affected hospital size or diffusion of technology. Cutler's interpretation is clear. In the late 1980s, Medicare payment cuts were financed by shifting costs to the private sector. But with the rise of managed care in the early 1990s, cost shifting was no longer feasible, and cost cutting was the dominant response to lower Medicare payments. Wu (2009) provided what may be the most careful study of the cost-shifting hypothesis relevant to today's health care markets. With a long difference model using 1996 and 2000 Medicare hospital cost report data, she examined the effect on private prices of reductions in Medicare payments to hospitals as a result of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. She also looked at the heterogeneity of that effect across private-public payer mix (a test of the “market” versus “strategy” hypotheses), levels of hospital competition, and share of for-profit hospitals in the market. Of all studies reviewed, Wu's provides the strongest mitigation against and test of the potential endogeneity of Medicare payment (that both Medicare and private prices are driven by unobserved factors), thereby producing the most plausible estimate of its causal effect. Wu constructed two instruments for changes in Medicare revenue: a “BBA bite” (similar to Cutler's “Medicare bite”) and a 1996 ratio of Medicare to non-Medicare discharges. The first of these, but not the second, is also used as an instrument for changes in Medicare price.7 The dependent variable was the change in the per-patient non-Medicare price, again similar to Cutler's. Two types of models were used, one with instrumented Medicare price changes as the key independent variable and the other with instrumented Medicare revenue changes as the key independent variable. Other independent variables included a bargaining-power measure (the share of private pay discharges less that for Medicare patients),8 hospital ownership type, level and change in HMO market penetration (also instrumented), change in case mix, hospital occupancy rate, level and change in Medicaid-to-Medicare physicians’ fee ratio, share of for-profit hospitals, and hospital market concentration. Wu estimated a variety of OLS models with hospital fixed effects. In some models, the key independent Medicare price or revenue change variables were interacted with the bargaining-power variable (to test the market power versus the strategy hypothesis). In other models, the Medicare revenue change also was interacted with the hospital's characteristics (profit status, teaching hospital indicator, public hospital indicator, HMO market penetration level and change, and level and change in proportion of discharges in the market represented by for-profit hospitals). She discovered that on average, hospitals shifted twenty-one cents of each Medicare dollar lost to private payers. The degree of cost shifting varied by the hospitals’ bargaining power: a one standard deviation increase in such power increased the cost shifting rate to thirty-three cents on the dollar. There was no statistically significant evidence of heterogeneity in cost shifting by for-profit, teaching, or public hospital status. Nor did it vary by HMO market penetration or any change in it. There was less cost shifting in markets with a higher share of discharges from for-profit hospitals.

Acknowledgments This article was supported by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation's Changes in Health Care Financing and Organization Initiative. The statements expressed in this article are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the VA Boston Healthcare System or the Boston University School of Public Health. I thank Uwe Reinhardt for his encouragement in conducting this research, and Michael Morrisey, Vivian Ho, Steven Pizer, Bradford Gray, and the anonymous reviewers for their comments on an early draft. Rick Mayes, Jonathan Oberlander, and Rob Maurer were instrumental in filling in a few details of historical Medicare policy.