Trends and correlates of cannabis-involved emergency department visits: 2004 to 2011
Between 2004 and 2011, the ED visit rate increased from 51 to 73 visits per 100,000 population aged ≥ 12 years for cannabis-only use (P-value for trend=0.004) and from 63 to 100 for cannabis-polydrug use (P-value for trend<0.001). Adolescents aged 12-17 years showed the largest increase in the cannabis-only-involved ED visit rate (Rate difference=80 per 100,000 adolescents). Across racial/ethnic groups, the most prevalent ED visits were noted among non-Hispanic blacks. Among cannabis-involved visits, the odds of hospitalization (versus ED visits only) increased with age strata compared with aged 12-17 years.

1. Introduction

The continued spread of decriminalization or medical cannabis use laws in many states as well as a rising cannabis use prevalence noted from the population-based surveys have drawn growing concerns about cannabis use’s potential adverse effects on health (e.g., addiction), which may trigger a wide range of unintended consequences (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration [SAMHSA], 2015a; Volkow et al., 2014). According to estimates from the 2014 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), 13.2% of persons aged ≥12 years (35 million) used cannabis in the past year, which increased by 2.6% (9.7 million) since 2004 (SAMHSA, 2015a). Nationally, an estimated 4 million of persons aged ≥12 years had a cannabis use disorder (CUD) in the past year (SAMHSA, 2015a). Among past-year cannabis users aged ≥12 years, 15% or more than 1 in 7 cannabis users were found to meet criteria for a CUD – an indicator of problem cannabis use or dependence that warrants intervention to reduce adverse effects (Wu et al., 2014). There has been an increased number of studies that examined cannabis use prevalence trends; however, the potential impact of cannabis use on healthcare utilization over time has not been adequately investigated (French et al., 2011; Hasin et al., 2015). This study used the national dataset to determine the national trend in cannabis-specific emergency department (ED) visits and hospitalization in order to better inform cannabis-involved healthcare utilization and to identify demographic groups disproportionally affected by cannabis-involved healthcare utilization.

Chronic or heavy cannabis use was associated with poor educational outcome and a wide range of health-related concerns, such as cognitive impairment, cannabis-impaired car accidents, addiction, symptoms of bronchitis, psychotic symptoms, depression, lung cancer, and reproductive health problems (Hall, 2015; Volkow et al., 2014). The latter may result in acute events or intensify existing medical conditions that are related to ED admissions. It was estimated that chronic drug use increased the probability of using ED for medical care by more than 30 percent (McGeary and French, 2000). Cannabis use may impair motor coordination and reaction times and interfere with driving performance (Volkow et al., 2014). A meta-analysis found that driving under the influence of cannabis use was associated with increased odds of motor vehicle collisions compared with unimpaired driving (Odds Ratio 1.92, 95% Confidence Interval (CI) 1.35-2.73) (Asbridge et al., 2012).

Despite continued concerns about cannabis use’s adverse effects on health and their related impact on healthcare utilization (Volkow et al., 2014), there is very limited information about cannabis-specific ED admission and subsequent hospitalization. Previously, Perron et al. (2011) found that 1.7% of lifetime adult cannabis users reported an ED visit. In a study of a national sample, Wu et al. (2012) estimated that 12.1% of adults nationally who sought medical care in ED used cannabis in the past year compared with 9.7% of adults who received care in ED. However, these self-report drug use and ED treatment data from surveys provide inadequate information to inform cannabis-involved treatment visits to determine the potential effects of cannabis use on ED admissions. Therefore, national-level datasets that include cannabis-involved ED admissions are needed. The Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) specifically collected data on drug-involved ED visits (either a direct cause or contributor for the visits), hence the DAWN data can improve the study of associations between problem cannabis use and cannabis-involved ED and hospitalization (Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality [CBHSQ], 2013).

Cannabis use was associated with sex, age, and race/ethnicity (Wu et al., 2012, 2014). Males in general were more likely than females to use cannabis and have a CUD (Wu et al., 2014). Adolescence is in the critical stage of brain development, and early and frequent cannabis use was associated with altered brain development (e.g., impairment in brain functional connectivity), which could increase adolescent users’ vulnerability to cannabis’s long-term effects on addiction, other psychiatric conditions, or cognitive impairment (Rubino et al., 2012; Volkow et al., 2014). Nationally, about 13% of adolescents used cannabis in the past year (Wu et al., 2014). Although past-year cannabis use was most common among adults aged 18-25 (29%), adolescent cannabis users were more likely than adult cannabis users to meet criteria for a CUD in the past year (Wu et al., 2014). Among U.S. high school seniors, the likelihood of unsafe driving was positively associated with substance use frequency, especially concurrent use of alcohol and cannabis (Terry-McElrath et al., 2014).

Nationally, approximately 13% of blacks aged ≥ 12 years used cannabis in the past year compared with 11% of whites and 9% of Hispanics (Wu et al., 2014). Recent data estimated that black adolescents were about 68% more likely than white adolescents to have used cannabis and 34% more likely to have a CUD in the past year (Wu et al., 2015). These findings point towards the need to determine whether the number of cannabis-involved ED admissions was associated with sex, age, and race/ethnicity (i.e., increases among males, adolescents, or blacks). Besides demographic variables, polydrug use may intensify adverse effects of drug use and increase treatment admissions (Dean, 2006; CBHSQ, 2012). Based on prior DAWN data, 73% of ED visits involving cannabis also included other drug(s) in 2009 (CBHSQ, 2012). Because of the cost and challenges of conducting the study in ED settings to determine substance-specific ED admissions, this study capitalizes on existing datasets to examine cannabis-involved ED visits and hospitalization.

We compare use of cannabis only with use of cannabis and other drug(s) (cannabis-polydrug) to better understand the trend and patterns of cannabis-involved healthcare use (including subsequent hospitalization). We determine the national trends in cannabis-involved ED visits, stratified by cannabis and other drug use status (cannabis-only, cannabis-polydrug); quantify demographic patterns in cannabis-involved ED visits (age, sex, race/ethnicity); determine specific drugs commonly identified among cannabis-involved ED visits; and conduct adjusted analyses to identify correlates of cannabis-involved hospitalization versus cannabis-involved ED visit only. To our knowledge, this study is among the first to specifically examine the pattern of cannabis-involve ED visits and subsequent hospitalizations. Results will have timely clinical implications for informing demographic groups impacted by cannabis-involved hospitalizations.