Friends of Dave Brat, Inc.Dave Brat
Dr. Dave Brat made international headlines when he became the first person in history to defeat a sitting Majority Leader of the U.S. House of Representatives since the position was created in 1899.

For years in Virginia -- and long before he entered politics -- the media, elected officials, and community organizations sought out Dr. Brat for his insight on the economy and budgets. That’s because he combined an expertise in economics, the principles of our constitutional founding, and the practice of real-world ethics to show lawmakers and others how government's decisions affect average citizens.

Before joining Congress, Dr. Brat served two Virginia governors on their Joint Advisory Board of Economists, providing them with critical economic forecasts to help manage the Commonwealth. His economic expertise has also been recognized by his peers, who elected him as president of the Virginia Association of Economists. The governor also appointed him to the Virginia Board of Accountancy.

He has also served on the Richmond Metropolitan Authority, the Great Aspirations Scholarship Program, and on the investment board overseeing retirement assets for the Virginia Association of Counties.

It’s precisely because he’s an economist that Congressman Brat understands that a free and growing economy is necessary for people to have good jobs, raise stable families, and thrive in this country. His message of economic prosperity has spread not only through the Seventh District of Virginia, it is spreading throughout the nation.

Congressman Brat united the different parts of the Republican Party -- as well as Tea Partiers, independents, libertarians, and Democrats -- by talking about such fundamental American principles as free markets, financial responsibility at all levels of government, equal treatment under the law, and protecting our liberty by ensuring the government adheres to the Constitution.

A product of the rural Midwest, he learned the value of faith, family, and a strong work ethic at a young age. He was determined to get an education that would empower him to help others reach their economic potential.

His journey led him to Princeton Theological Seminary, where he obtained a masters of divinity degree, and then to American University, where he earned a Ph.D. in economics.

He worked for the World Bank and in the private sector for Arthur Andersen until 1996, when he and his wife, Laura, moved to Henrico, where he began teaching economics and ethics at Randolph-Macon College. He later became the chairman of the economics and business department at the school.

Congressman Brat is the only career economist in Congress and currently sits on the House Budget Committee, Education and the Workforce Committee, and the Small Business Committee.

He and Laura have two children, Jonathan and Sophia, who attend public school in Henrico County. A man of deep faith, he attends St. Mary’s Catholic Church with his family.

Having him represent us in Congress means hard-working Virginians have a champion fighting for them every day.