Civitas Poll Shows Majority of NC Voters Feel Charlotte Ordinance Is Unsafe
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

March 23, 2016

CONTACT: Demi Dowdy (919) 834-2099

demi.dowdy@NCCivitas.org

69 Percent of Voters Believe the Recently Passed Charlotte Ordinance is “Unreasonable and Unsafe”

RALEIGH – A new Civitas poll finds that a majority of North Carolina voters believe the recently passed Charlotte “anti-discrimination” bathroom ordinance is “unreasonable and unsafe.”

“With the special session happening today, this is important information about what registered voters think about this issue,” said Civitas President Francis De Luca.

The actual questions asked of respondents are as follows:

As you may know, the Charlotte City Council passed a new bathroom ordinance for transgender people that allows biological men and biological women, who identify as the opposite sex, to use the bathroom or locker room of their choosing. Now I am going to read you two viewpoints on this topic; please tell me which one you agree with more? (options rotated) Supporters of the ordinance say this is a reasonable and inclusive policy that allows transgender people to use the bathroom or locker room of the opposite sex if it makes them more comfortable. Opponents of the ordinance say this is an unreasonable and unsafe policy because it allows men to use the women’s bathroom and locker rooms in front of women and girls.

24% Reasonable And Inclusive

69% Unreasonable And Unsafe

8% Not Sure

Should Attorney General Roy Cooper use his authority to go get a Court Order stopping the Charlotte Bathroom Ordinance from going into effect on April 1st?

62% Yes

26% No

12% Not Sure

Should small business owners have the right to refuse to participate in activities such as hosting same sex weddings or providing cakes or flowers for events that violate the religious beliefs of the businesses owners? Or do small business owners not have the right to refuse to participate in these activities?

67% Should Have The Right To Refuse

26% Should Not Have The Right

6% Not Sure

Follow up release will be out shortly to include a link to cross tabs.

About this poll: SurveyUSA interviewed 400 registered voters from the entire state of North Carolina 03/22/16 through 03/23/16 using blended sample, mixed mode with a margin of error of approximately plus/minus 5 percent. Respondents reachable on a home telephone were interviewed on their home telephone in the recorded voice of a professional announcer, using Registration-list Based Sample (RBS) from Aristotle of Washington, DC. 21 percent of respondents were reached on their smartphone, tablet or other electronic device.

Founded in 2005, the Civitas Institute is a Raleigh, NC-based, 501(c)(3) nonprofit policy organization committed to creating a North Carolina whose citizens enjoy liberty and prosperity derived from limited government, personal responsibility and civic engagement. To that end, Civitas develops and advocates for conservative policy solutions to improve the lives of all North Carolinians.

###