Newly Arrived Immigrants & Refugees - Chapter 8 - 2018 Yellow Book
BEFORE ARRIVAL IN THE UNITED STATES

Overseas Medical Examination and Treatment

CDC provides Technical Instructions to panel physicians and monitors the quality of the premigration medical examination process. The purpose of the mandated medical examination is to detect inadmissible conditions, including communicable diseases of public health significance, mental disorders associated with harmful behavior, and substance-use or substance-induced disorders (www.cdc.gov/immigrantrefugeehealth/exams/ti/panel/technical-instructions-panel-physicians.html). For certain refugee populations, a visit to the panel physician also provides an opportunity for health interventions such as presumptive therapy for parasitic diseases, including nematode infections and malaria (www.cdc.gov/immigrantrefugeehealth/guidelines/refugee-guidelines.html).

The medical examination includes a physical examination, mental health evaluation, syphilis serologic testing, review of vaccination records, and chest radiography followed by acid-fast bacillus smears and sputum cultures if the chest radiograph is consistent with tuberculosis (TB). Chest radiographs are required for all applicants ≥15 years of age. Applicants 2–14 years of age from high-TB-burden countries (incidence rate ≥20 cases per 100,000 population as estimated by the World Health Organization) must be tested for TB infection using either a tuberculin skin test (TST) or interferon-γ release assay (IGRA); chest radiographs are required for those who have a positive TST or IGRA. For people diagnosed with active TB, CDC’s Technical Instructions require Mycobacterium tuberculosis culture, drug susceptibility testing, and directly observed therapy through the end of treatment before immigration. Treatment is also required before immigration for certain other inadmissible conditions, such as specific sexually transmitted diseases (such as syphilis) and Hansen disease.

Proof of Vaccination

IMMIGRANTS

Applicants who apply for a US immigrant visa outside the United States are required to receive all age-appropriate immunizations before immigrating to the United States. Vaccines are administered by panel physicians according to CDC’s Vaccine Technical Instructions. These requirements are based on the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommendations, with some modifications for immigrant populations. For example, immigrants are not required to complete all doses of a multidose vaccine series as long as they have received the next dose in the series before arrival in the United States. New immigrant arrivals should be encouraged to complete vaccination schedules according to ACIP recommendations after arrival in the United States. CDC’s Vaccine Technical Instructions are available at www.cdc.gov/immigrantrefugeehealth/exams/ti/panel/vaccination-panel-technical-instructions.html.

CHILDREN ADOPTED INTERNATIONALLY

Parents adopting children internationally may request to delay immunization of children <10 years of age by agreeing to begin immunizations within 30 days of arrival in the United States. Adopting families should be aware that vaccinating children before arrival in the United States reduces the risk of importing diseases of public health concern, such as measles, which was reported in unvaccinated children adopted from China in 2004, 2006, and 2013.

REFUGEES

Refugees are not required to meet the INA immunization requirements before entry into the United States; however, CDC is working with domestic and international migration partners to implement a vaccination program for US refugees. Program updates and population-specific schedules can be found at www.cdc.gov/immigrantrefugeehealth/guidelines/overseas/interventions/immunizations-schedules.html. Refugees are required to show proof of vaccination when they apply for permanent US residence (adjustment of status exam performed by a US civil surgeon), typically 1 year after arrival.

Classification of Medical Conditions

Medical conditions of public health significance are categorized into those that preclude an immigrant or refugee from entering the United States (class A) or those that indicate a departure from normal well-being and for which follow-up after arrival is recommended (class B). An immigrant or refugee who has an inadmissible class A condition may still be issued a visa after the illness has been treated or after a waiver of the visa ineligibility has been approved by USCIS.

Notifications and Follow-Up on Arrival

The results of the immigrant medical exam are collected at US ports of entry when immigrants and refugees arrive. CDC then notifies state or local health departments of all arriving refugees, as well as immigrants with notifiable class A (with waiver) and class B conditions who may need follow-up evaluation after arrival. State and local health departments are asked to report follow-up evaluation results back to CDC, as well as any serious conditions of public health concern identified among recently arrived immigrants and refugees. Such reporting enables CDC to track epidemiologic patterns of disease in recently arrived immigrants and refugees and allows for monitoring of the quality of the overseas medical examinations.

AFTER ARRIVAL IN THE UNITED STATES: SCREENING & HEALTH ASSESSMENT

A comprehensive postarrival health assessment is an opportunity to screen for communicable and noncommunicable diseases, provide preventive services (such as immunizations and treatment for latent tuberculosis) and individual counseling (such as nutritional and mental health), establish ongoing primary care and a medical home, and orient new arrivals to the US health care system.

Challenges for health professionals in providing comprehensive health assessments for new arrivals include lack of familiarity with CDC screening recommendations and diseases endemic to a migrant’s country of origin, inability to find trained interpreters, and lack of knowledge of social and cultural beliefs of new migrant groups. Immigrants and refugees often have other priorities related to their new environment, such as English classes, school, housing, and work, which may take precedence over accessing health care services. Several organizations can facilitate health screenings for refugees (such as the Association of Refugee Health Coordinators [ARHC]), and networks of clinicians who serve refugees and immigrants are growing. Additional resources are provided in the online Yellow Book (see Box 8-08).

Medical Screening

Newly arrived immigrants and refugees may have undiagnosed infectious diseases or untreated chronic health conditions, such as hypertension, diabetes, or hypercholesterolemia. Ideally, each new migrant should receive a complete health assessment that includes screening for migration-associated illness plus the age-appropriate screening and health care recommended for anyone residing in the United States. Clinicians caring for migrants who are not recent arrivals should still ensure that migrant screening has been completed, especially for diseases of long latency such as TB, hepatitis B, and HIV, and complete any missing tests. It would also be ideal to be able to screen each individual for diseases specific to his or her country of origin, migration route, and individual epidemiologic risk. Described below are guidelines available for the 2 populations for which there are the most data to guide screening efforts (refugees and children adopted internationally), followed by an approach to performing health assessments for other categories of immigrants.

HEALTH ASSESSMENT OF REFUGEES

Evidence-based guidelines for refugees have been developed by CDC in collaboration with the Department of Health and Human Services Administration for Children and Families’ Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR), clinical and subject matter experts outside of CDC, and representatives of ARHC. The full guidelines and a summary checklist of the postarrival exam components and recommended testing are available at www.cdc.gov/immigrantrefugeehealth/guidelines/domestic/domestic-guidelines.html. CDC has also developed population-specific health profiles for certain populations (such as Bhutanese or Congolese refugees), available at www.cdc.gov/immigrantrefugeehealth/profiles/index.html.

Another function of the postarrival medical screening is to arrange and coordinate ongoing primary care. Many refugees have not had age-appropriate screening for chronic diseases such as heart disease, diabetes, cancer, or hearing, vision, or dental problems; these needs should be addressed at early follow-up visits. Several cancers are more prevalent in migrant populations, such as cervical, liver, stomach, and nasopharyngeal cancers. Refugees should be educated regarding age-appropriate cancer screening tests, such as mammography, colonoscopy and Papanicolaou tests during the postarrival exam.

HIV testing was removed from the requirements for US admission in January 2010, but HIV screening is highly encouraged in all newly arriving refugees and routinely recommended in the guidelines from the United States Public Health Service (USPHS) and the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Culturally sensitive counseling regarding HIV testing is critical.

Nutritional deficiencies occur commonly in refugee populations. For example, one study found that the prevalence of vitamin B12 deficiency in newly arrived Bhutanese refugees from Nepal was 64% in those tested premigration and 27%–32% in those tested after arrival in the United States. Clinicians should be aware of the possibility of malnutrition and micronutrient deficiencies and screen and treat accordingly.

CDC recommends checking blood lead levels of all refugee children aged 6 months to 16 years of age at the time of arrival, with follow-up blood lead testing for children 6 months to 6 years of age 3–6 months after settling into a permanent residence. Potential lead exposures include using lead-containing gasoline, burning fossil fuels and waste, and using lead-containing traditional remedies, cosmetics, foods, ceramics, or utensils. Ongoing lead exposure among refugee children after arrival in the United States also has been documented.

Mental health screening for refugees is another component of the postarrival exam and, when clinically indicated, a more detailed social history including any history of trauma, torture, or rape. Risk factors that may predispose refugees to psychiatric symptoms and disorders include exposure to war, state-sponsored violence and oppression, loss of family members, and the stress of adapting to a new culture.

Refugees may qualify for state Medicaid programs to cover medical screening and any ongoing medical care that may be needed. Refugees determined ineligible for Medicaid are eligible for Refugee Medical Assistance in many states, which provides for their medical care needs for up to 8 months from their date of arrival. For more information, clinicians and refugees can contact their state health departments and can access more information through the ORR, which administers this program (www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/orr/programs/cma).

Other published resources available to clinicians include consensus documents on evidence-based screening for newly arriving refugees to Canada, provided by the Canadian Collaboration for Immigrant and Refugee Health. A list of resources can be found in the online edition of the Yellow Book (see Box 8-08).