McCain: Americans are frustrated - The Prescott Daily Courier
U.S. Sen. John McCain stopped by The Daily Courier offices Monday afternoon and gave an update on what’s been happening in Washington, D.C., and around the world in the recent months. (Les Stukenberg/The Daily Courier)

Les Bowen

Multi-Platform Journalist



PRESCOTT - U.S. Sen. John McCain said on Monday, Jan. 4, that despite criticism of congressional inaction, he's pleased with recent accomplishments in the Senate, especially the Armed Services Committee he chairs.



He described his work as a lawmaker as "Trying to do the Lord's work in the city of Satan" - an allusion to statements he made on the 2008 presidential campaign trail.



McCain will seek re-election in 2016 for his sixth term, and recognized there are new forces at work among voters.



"The Trump phenomenon is real in that Americans are frustrated," he said.



McCain pointed to economic uncertainty and mistrust in the political system as factors driving that frustration.



"Anyone who is up for election this cycle and takes anything for granted is crazy," he said.



Earlier in the day he met with Prescott area community leaders, including recently elected Mayor Harry Oberg, whom McCain called "ambitious."



Looking back at 2015 action in Congress, McCain commended the passage of the Every Student Succeeds Act in December that replaces the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001.



"It did away basically with Common Core," he said, adding the new law puts more control of education in the hands of the states.



He also praised the passage in November of a highway bill, the first time Congress has done so in a decade.



The bill includes provisions for the Sonoran Corridor, that will one day become part of Interstate 11 between Nogales and Reno, Nevada, and connecting Buckeye, Kingman and Las Vegas.



McCain said Interstate 11 is essential to support commerce with Mexico and attract traffic into Arizona that currently goes to Texas.



Like with highways, 2015 was the first year in nine that Congress passed a budget. However, McCain was critical of the appropriations bill passed Dec. 18.



"I, as chairman of the Armed Services Committee, was outraged and offended," McCain said, describing a bill filled with unnecessary spending, particularly on defense.



He said his committee has worked to reform the U.S. military, including military retirement system reforms.



"We have a lot more to do," he said.



While he decried appropriations within the omnibus bill last month, he praised language in the prior year's omnibus bill that gave $65 million to the U.S. Forest Service to buy new air-tankers for firefighting.



McCain connected the USFS shortage of air-tankers to the deaths of the 19 Granite Mountain Hotshots in 2013 at the Yarnell Hill Fire, a claim backed up by state investigative reports.



"The bracelet I wore for them (the 19 hotshots) just broke the other day," he said.



McCain also defended his stance for the Resolution Copper Mine near Superior, though it's been opposed by environmental groups and the San Carlos Apache Tribe.



McCain said the mine would employ thousands and supply 25 percent of the nation's copper supply.



The senator said he hopes to see a settlement to water claims by the Yavapai-Apache Nation on the Verde River as well as the Hopi and Navajo tribes' claims in the Colorado, Gila and Little Colorado rivers.



"The Verde is a big issue," he said. "Most experts say the Verde will become intermittent over time."



He said water management plans must begin with the senior rights claimed by Native American tribes.



The senator also suggested a deadline for a state committee tasked with resolving the water dispute.



"We are trying to work with this committee that's been set up," he said. "We live in the desert and with the kind of growth we're going to see ... we've got to get serious."



Follow reporter Les Bowen on Twitter @NewsyLesBowen. Reach him at 928-445-3333, ext. 1110, or 928-830-9305.