Differing Birth Weight among Infants of U.S.-Born Blacks, African-Born Blacks, and U.S.-Born Whites
Table 1. Table 1. Birth-Weight Data in Illinois, 1980–1995, According to the Mother's Race and Place of Birth.

Figure 1. Figure 1. Distribution of Birth Weights among Infants of U.S.-Born White and Black Women and African-Born Black Women in Illinois, 1980–1995. The calculation of frequencies was based on all singleton births in Illinois. The study population included the infants of 3135 black women born in sub-Saharan Africa, 43,322 black women born in the United States (a sample that included 7.5 percent of the total number of black women giving birth in Illinois), and 44,046 U.S.-born white women (2.5 percent of the total number of white women giving birth in Illinois).

The mean birth weight of the white infants was 3446 g, as compared with 3333 g for the infants of the African-born black women and 3089 g for the infants of the U.S.-born black women (Table 1). The proportion of very-low-birth-weight infants was similar for African-born blacks and U.S.-born blacks. Even though the infants born to African-born blacks had a slightly lower mean birth weight than the white infants, the overall distribution of birth weights was similar in the two groups and was different from that among the infants of U.S.-born blacks (Figure 1).

Table 2. Table 2. Distribution of Selected Risk Factors in the Study Population According to the Mother's Race and Place of Birth.

Table 2 shows the distribution of selected risk factors in the three groups of women. The African-born black women delivered the highest proportion of infants who were their mothers' fourth or subsequent children and had the highest proportion of previous fetal and infant deaths. The U.S.-born black women were the youngest, the least likely to be married, the least well educated, and the most likely to have received prenatal care late or not at all. The white women surpassed both groups of black women with regard to only one risk factor — primigravidity.

When the infants of African-born black women were compared with those of U.S.-born women matched for the mother's age, marital status, education, prenatal care, parity, and prior fetal loss and the father's education, the differences between the groups narrowed somewhat, but their relation did not change (Table 1). With white infants as the reference group, the relative risks for low and moderately low birth weight were both significantly higher among infants of U.S.-born blacks than among infants of African-born blacks. However, the relative risk of very low birth weight was similar in the two groups of infants born to blacks.

Table 3. Table 3. Regression Models Showing the Predicted Effects of Low-Risk Sociodemographic and Reproductive Variables in the Mother on the Birth Weight of Infants in Each Subgroup Defined According to the Mother's Race and Place of Birth.

To gain more insight into the relative importance of the risk factors in the three groups, we used multiple-regression analysis to study the changes in birth weight predicted by each factor. The models we constructed (Table 3) all showed a positive effect of being married (an increase of 60 to 124 g in predicted birth weight), having had one or two previous pregnancies (an increase of 29 to 50 g), and having no previous fetal loss (an increase of 19 to 55 g). Of the risk factors, only marital status had a statistically significant effect among the infants of African-born blacks.

On the basis of the multivariable models in Table 3, the birth weight of the infants of African-born blacks was 14 g less than that of the infants of U.S.-born whites after we controlled for risk factors. In another model, we looked at only the U.S.-born white women and the African-born black women, with race included as a dichotomous variable. In that analysis, the infants of the U.S.-born whites weighed 98 g more than the infants of the African-born blacks after adjustment for age, education, marital status, gravidity, prenatal care, and a history of fetal loss. In a similar model that included only women born in the United States, the white infants weighed 248 g more than the black infants after adjustment for the same six variables.

Table 4. Table 4. Mean Birth Weights and Rates of Low Birth Weight among Infants with Mothers at Low Risk, According to the Mother's Race and Place of Birth.

Table 4 shows the mean birth weights and rates of low birth weight among infants born to the women at lowest risk — those 20 to 39 years of age who began their prenatal care in the first trimester, had at least 12 years of education, and were married to men who also had at least 12 years of education. Sixty-six percent of the white women fit this profile, as compared with 50 percent of the African-born black women and 14 percent of the U.S.-born black women. The mean birth weight and rates of low birth weight of the infants born to African-born blacks were intermediate between the values in U.S.-born whites and those in U.S.-born blacks. However, when reproductive risk factors were included in the selection of low-risk women, the differences between the infants of U.S.-born whites and the infants of African-born blacks in mean birth weight and rates of both low and very low birth weight were narrowed, whereas the differences between the infants of U.S.-born whites and U.S.-born blacks were unchanged. The greatest change was in very low birth weight; the exclusion of women with a history of fetal loss resulted in nearly identical rates among infants of African-born blacks and those of U.S.-born whites, eliminating the significant excess of infants with very low birth weight born to African-born blacks.