Is the death penalty unconstitutional?
William J. Brennan, JD, Justice of the US Supreme Court, in the July 2, 1976 dissenting opinion in Gregg v. Georgia , stated: "Death is not only an unusually severe punishment, unusual in its pain, in its finality, and in its enormity, but it serves no penal purpose more effectively than a less severe punishment... The fatal constitutional infirmity in the punishment of death is that it treats 'members of the human race as nonhumans, as objects to be toyed with and discarded. [It is] thus inconsistent with the fundamental premise of the Clause that even the vilest criminal remains a human being possessed of common human dignity.' As such it is a penalty that 'subjects the individual to a fate forbidden by the principle of civilized treatment guaranteed by the [Clause].' I therefore would hold, on that ground alone, that death is today a cruel and unusual punishment prohibited by the Clause... I would set aside the death sentences imposed... as violative of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments." July 2, 1976 William J. Brennan, JD The 4th Global Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates, in a Nov. 30, 2003 meeting in Rome (attended by Mikhail Gorbachev, Simon Peres, the Dalai Lama, Mairead Corrigan Maguire, Lech Walesa, Betty Williams, Jody Williams, Arias Sanchez, and others), issued their formal position on the death penalty, which stated:

"After a special session, the Nobel Peace Prize Winners have agreed that the death penalty is a particularly cruel and unusual punishment that should be abolished. It is especially unconscionable when imposed on children."



Nov. 30, 2003 4th Global Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates Final Statement

(175 KB) Amnesty International, in the Death Penalty Q&A section on its website (accessed Aug. 6, 2008), wrote:



"Amnesty International opposes the death penalty in all cases without exception. The death penalty is the ultimate denial of human rights. It is the premeditated and cold-blooded killing of a human being by the state in the name of justice. It violates the right to life as proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is the ultimate cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment." Aug. 6, 2008 Amnesty International



The National Coalition Against the Death Penalty (NCADP) stated in an article titled "Problems Associated with Lethal Injection," posted on its website (accessed Aug. 6, 2008):

"Recently, concerns have surfaced regarding Pavulon [a drug used in lethal injections], which could paralyze inmates to the point where they are unable to communicate any pain they are feeling from the following dose of potassium chloride. Painful, lengthy executions constitute violations of the 8th Amendment, which prohibits cruel and unusual punishment.



Aug. 6, 2008 National Coalition Against the Death Penalty



In Baze v. Rees (decided Apr. 16, 2008), the US Supreme Court, in a decision written by Chief Justice John G. Roberts, held that:

"Simply because an execution method may result in pain, either by accident or as an inescapable consequence of death, does not establish the sort of 'objectively intolerable risk of harm" that qualifies as cruel and unusual...



Kentucky has adopted a method of execution believed to be the most humane available, one it shares with 35 other States... Kentucky's decision to adhere to its protocol...cannot be viewed as probative of the wanton infliction of pain under the Eighth Amendment...



Throughout our history, whenever a method of execution has been challenged in this Court as cruel and unusual, the Court has rejected the challenge. Our society has nonetheless steadily moved to more humane methods of carrying out capital punishment."

Apr. 16, 2008 Baze v. Rees (529 KB) In Trop v. Dulles (decided Mar. 31, 1958) , the US Supreme Court, in a decision written by then Chief Justice Earl Warren, held that: "Whatever the arguments may be against capital punishment...the death penalty has been employed throughout our history, and, in a day when it is still widely accepted, it cannot be said to violate the constitutional concept of cruelty...



Fines, imprisonment and even execution may be imposed depending upon the enormity of the crime, but any technique outside the bounds of these traditional penalties is constitutionally suspect...



The [Eighth] Amendment must draw its meaning from the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society."



Trop v. Dulles

Mar. 31, 1958(180 KB) Kyle Janek, MD, anesthesiologist and former Texas State Senator, in his Feb. 1, 2004 article "Attack on Texas' Lethal Injections is Bogus," published in the Houston Chronicle, wrote: "In what amounts to practicing medicine without a license, those critics have started to attack the inclusion of pancuronium bromide as one of the medications used in the lethal injection process. They claim its use is 'cruel and unusual...' As any other anesthesiologist will tell you, this argument involving pancuronium bromide is bogus...



The current argument against executions seems to hinge on the supposition that the second and 3rd drugs in this regimen would be cruel to someone who could feel them...



Yet for that argument to be valid in any way, you must ignore the 1st drug in the process - sodium pentothal - that (1) renders the inmate to be completely unconscious, (2) has been used for decades to induce anesthesia in surgical patients and (3) is given in doses far exceeding what is needed to keep the inmate from being aware or feeling anything."



Feb. 1, 2004 Kyle Janek, MD