Tuberculosis now leading cause of death from infectious disease
We have made great strides against tuberculosis, but much remains to be done. Although infection rates are down, TB now ranks alongside HIV as the leading cause of death from infectious disease.

This year marks the deadline for the Millennium Development Goal of cutting the number of TB cases globally, set in 2000 by the UN. The World Health Organization’s annual report on the disease, out this week, says that goal has been reached. Even so, TB remains a major threat, killing 1.5 million people in 2014. The death toll for HIV was 1.2 million.

“TB mortality is falling slowly, but we have had to re-estimate the global situation based on new information we received from crucial countries including Indonesia,” says Mario Raviglione, director of the WHO’s Global TB Programme. At the same time, there has been a reduction in HIV-related deaths, due to increased availability of antiretroviral drugs. “While TB incidence is falling, HIV is coming down more quickly,” Raviglione says.

Advertisement

Last month, the UN set new global development targets – the Sustainable Development Goals – which include ending the global TB epidemic by 2030. In practical terms, this means a 90 per cent reduction in TB-related deaths, and an 80 per cent reduction in infections.

The WHO has even loftier ambitions: by 2035, it would like the global incidence of TB to be less than 100 cases per million people – similar to levels in developed countries today. By 2050, it hopes to have brought it down to just one case of TB per million people – the official definition of elimination.

Resistance rising

But just achieving the sustainable development goals will be a massive challenge, requiring five times the current rate of decline in TB cases. At the same time, the incidence of multidrug resistant and extremely drug-resistant (XDR) TB continues to rise. New drugs, better means of diagnosing TB infection and a more effective vaccine are all urgently needed.

“With the lack of funding, and the fact you can count the number of good TB research facilities on one hand, I think the idea that we can get rid of this disease in a few decades is unlikely,” says Ian Orme, an immunologist at Colorado State University in Fort Collins.

Indeed, to reach the new targets, the WHO admits it will need an additional $1.3 billion in funding for research and development. Even then, “we can’t do anything with these new tools if we are not able to deliver them to people who have poor access to healthcare, both in high and low-income countries,” says Luis Berrocal Almanza, a TB researcher at Imperial College London. But he thinks the goals are achievable “provided there is a strong political and financial commitment in the coming years”.

(Image credit: Tony Karbuma/AFP/Getty Images)