State Ag Dept.: East Texas school districts among those affected by ransomware - Longview News-Journal
Several East Texas school districts have been affected by a computer security breach, with students’ personal information potentially being compromised, according to a notice from the Texas Department of Agriculture.

Affected school districts include New Diana, Ore City, Gilmer, Gladewater, Harleton, Harrison County Juvenile Services, Karnack, Union Grove and Union Hill.

It’s not clear how many students are affected at each district, and state officials say there’s no indication that the information has been misused. Area superintendents on Tuesday said the only information they had gotten from the Department of Agriculture so far was the same notification posted on the state’s school nutrition website.

“You know what we know,” Gilmer ISD Superintendent Rick Albritton said. “That is the only documentation that we received.”

Officials say a Texas Department of Agriculture employee’s computer was attacked through malicious ransomware on Oct. 26, with the attack affecting more than 700 students. Personal information that may have been exposed includes names, Social Security numbers, home addresses, birth dates and personal phone numbers.

The Texas Department of Agriculture oversees school breakfast and lunch programs, which is why school districts were affected.

“Essentially what happened is we do daily monitoring of our security systems here at TDA, and in the process of that daily audit, that daily security monitoring, we found that there was this malware, the ransomware, on one of our systems,” Mark Loeffler, communications director for the Texas Department of Agriculture, said. “We caught it fairly early, but at the same time on that same system was this PII, this personal identifying information, and because of that, that by state statute, that triggers the notification.”

The department is recommending that affected students and parents contact the three major credit bureaus and activate a fraud alert for the ransomware attack. It’s a precautionary measure, Loeffler said.

“There’s not any evidence that we have that the information that might have been compromised was ever misused,” Loeffler said.

Local school districts said they received notification about the security breach this week. Albritton said Gilmer ISD is working on a district-wide letter to families about the matter.

Ore City ISD Superintendent Lynn Heflin said his district is waiting to get more information about which of its students are directly affected.

“At this point we don’t know how we’ve been affected at all,” he said. “We don’t know of any of those, how many are ours. I’m trying to find out some more information. It could be one or two of our students or all of our students. We’re just trying to find out more information.”