DeSantis has concerns on day before health-care vote
It was unclear Wednesday how Rep. Ron DeSantis, who represents Volusia and Flagler counties, will vote on the health-care overhaul sought by his Republican Party's leadership.

His communications director, Elizabeth Fusick offered up a one-line email on the Freedom Caucus member's position: "Congressman DeSantis is concerned that the bill doesn't address the core problems with Obamacare: the cost of insurance and the lack of competition and consumer choice."

However, DeSantis offered an amendment later in the day, proposing to end what he termed unauthorized "taxpayer subsidies" for Congress members buying health insurance through the Affordable Care Act.

“Due to an administrative workaround of dubious legality, members of Congress receive generous taxpayers subsidies for health insurance obtained in the D.C. small business exchange, which is supposed to be limited to businesses with fewer than 50 employees. This arrangement has shielded members from the burdens of ObamaCare," DeSantis said in a prepared statement. "The American Health Care Act does not disturb this special deal and it is high time that members live under the law as written. My amendment will rescind the questionable (Office of Personnel Management) rule from 2013 and make Congress live under the same system as everyone else.”

House leaders and President Trump worked Wednesday to win votes from undecided and party members leaning against the bill Wednesday. The tweaks and last-minute wrangling left some of the most loyal GOP members reluctant to offer their full endorsement.

Tony Ledbetter, chairman of the Volusia Republican Committee who's launched a pro-Trump radio show, said Wednesday — the day before a scheduled vote — he thinks the bill is "heading in the right direction" but that it "still needs some tweaks." He didn't wish to comment further until the bill is voted on.

"Anything we say today about it is just pure speculation," he said, adding that speculation without certainty "just creates more fake news."

Jewel Dickson, chairwoman of the Volusia Democrats, was more vocal about her opinion, saying the measure should be called "Trump-Don't-Care" instead of "Trumpcare."

"I feel like they are replacing the Affordable Care Act with a (system) that will deny health care for most of the American people," she said. "I think it's a denial program. I don’t think this program is making it better."