Andrew Gillum brings governor pitch to Volusia Democrats
DAYTONA BEACH — Andrew Gillum's appeal to Democrats involves a nod to history and an appeal to change.

The 38-year-old Tallahassee mayor, who's one of four Democrats with a shot at the party's nomination in the Aug. 28 primary, points to Gov. Rick Scott's two election victories, both by about 1 percentage point. And Gillum reasons that if Democrats can get behind a candidate who can move more Democrats and independents to turn out and actually cast ballots, they can get over the hump and win in 2018.

He's traveling the state attempting to make the case that he's that guy. And his travels brought him to a lecture room in the University of Central Florida building on the Daytona State College campus, where he addressed about three dozen members of the Volusia County Democratic Party for about 45 minutes.

If successful, Gillum would be the state's first African-American governor. The Miami-born, Gainesville-raised Gillum sounded more proud, though, to have become the first of his parents' seven children to graduate from high school and college.

"To have my brother and sister come behind me and do the same thing, you can't tell me I don't know what it means to have intergenerational poverty interrupted at the hands of a good, solid public education," Gillum said.

He called public education "foundational" to his campaign and made education the first issue he raised after introducing himself. He proposed a boost to early-childhood education programs, rolling back high-stakes testing and raising minimum teachers' salaries to $50,000.

Republicans, he said, have done all they can to shift funding for public schools and steer it to private, for-profit charter schools. That has resulted in Florida ranking 37th in quality.

"It should offend all of us, quite frankly," Gillum said.

In a year when many Democrats are running against President Trump's agenda, Gillum paid scant attention to that, spending about two lines out of a 45-minute talk on Trump, who he said "is a danger not just to himself but to all of us."

Instead, he took aim at Scott's administration, from his refusal to acknowledge climate science to his refusal to expand Medicaid and take Florida fully into the system of health care delivery set up by Obamacare and his refusal of more than $1.3 billion in federal stimulus funds to help build a high-speed rail system between Tampa and Orlando.

"We're the third-largest state in all of America, one of the fastest growing. And across the I-4 corridor is emblematic of the speed of growth in this state," Gillum said. "Why do we think we're going to asphalt our way out of traffic and congestion? We're an adult state. We need adult transportation."

Where Scott points to his successes in bringing 1.26 million private-sector jobs to the state, Gillum says Florida needs those jobs to provide better pay and benefits.

"He better be the jobs-jobs-jobs governor," Gillum said. "People need multiple jobs to make ends meet under this administration."

Many of Gillum's values are shared by his competitors in the Aug. 28 Democratic primary. What makes him think he can do better than Gwen Graham, Philip Levine and Chris King?

"I would submit we can't win elections if we don't run as Democrats," Gillum said.

He urged reform on Florida's criminal justice system, particularly in restoring felons' rights and moving beyond "the bastion of the old Jim Crow South."

Gillum said his experience in winning a legal battle against the National Rifle Association, which sued Tallahassee over an ordinance banning the firing of weapons in city parks, proves his mettle.

"I believe in fighting the right fight, not backing down. And that includes the NRA," he said, saying the recent law signed by Scott — extending the age to purchase long guns from 18 to 21, installing a three-day waiting period and providing funds for school safety — doesn't go nearly far enough to protect residents.

"It is a joke," Gillum said. "They did nothing on on background checks. They did nothing to close the gun-show loophole. They did nothing to ban assault weapons. They did nothing to ban high-capacity magazines."

Democrat Mike Williams of Deltona asked Gillum how he's going to reach the young people from Parkland, where 17 people were shot dead in a high school campus assault on Feb. 14, and all around the state who rallied over the weekend in the March for Our Lives.

"I trust them to do exactly what they said they were going to do," Gillum responded. "It's hard to compel young people to go and vote if you don't go and ask for their vote. ... We've got to talk about the issues they're concerned about."