Greitens defiant in face of 'political witch hunt'
CLOSE Missouri Republican Gov. Eric Greitens said Wednesday that a state House committee's report on an investigation into his extramarital affair with his hairdresser is a "political witch hunt." (April 11) AP

Then-candidate Eric Greitens speaks to a crowd of supporters Aug. 2, 2016, in Chesterfield. Some Missouri residents have been blocked from posting opinions on Gov. Greitens' social media accounts. (Photo: Michael Thomas, AP)

JEFFERSON CITY — Speaking to the media about an hour before House legislators released a report detailing his affair with a St. Louis woman, Gov. Eric Greitens characterized efforts to investigate him as a "political witch hunt."

The governor wasted no time with formalities and did not answer any questions after spending about seven minutes reading a prepared statement to journalists who crowded into his office Wednesday.

"We fully expect that the report being released tonight will include lies and falsehoods," Greitens said. "I want to say again what I have said from the beginning: This is a political witch hunt."

The governor faces a felony charge of invasion of privacy and was indicted by a St. Louis grand jury in February. He has denied criminal wrongdoing as prosecutors build their case and as lawmakers prepared to brief Missouri on their own investigation.

CLOSE Gov. Eric Greitens' tenure in Missouri has been marked by his ongoing scandal regarding his actions in 2015, during the early stages of his campaign. He faces a felony charge in St. Louis on suspicion of taking a photograph of woman with whom he had an affair without her permission while she was partially naked, blindfolded and restrained in the basement of Greitens' home. Will Schmitt/News-Leader

The report was publicly released soon after Greitens' briefing, in which Greitens declined to resign and forecast that a May trial would clear him.

More: Greitens report: Woman told lawmakers the governor initiated oral sex while she cried

Greitens' attorneys had asked the chair of the committee of lawmakers investigating the governor to postpone releasing the report until after Greitens' trial. The governor did not testify before the committee and called the report "one-sided tabloid trash gossip."

Greitens again characterized his sexual relationship with his former hairdresser as a "private mistake that has nothing to do with governing and shouldn't be about politics."

"But people are turning that personal mistake into a political spectacle, and telling new lies about it," Greitens continued.

The governor repeated a recent argument by his defense attorneys that implied the woman's memory of the affair may be based on a dream, because of a comment she made during a deposition. The woman's attorney disputes that notion and has called for her full testimony to be released.

"Let's call this what it is," Greitens went on, "a political witch hunt now based on the testimony of somebody who said under oath that they may be remembering this through a dream."

The governor slammed the process by which the committee operated: behind closed doors and without him. The committee's report notes that Greitens declined to testify and did not produce requested documents.

"If the committee had waited 33 days, they would have received a full set of facts," said Greitens, who anticipates a not-guilty verdict. "Instead, it was decided to publish an incomplete document made in secret — one that, based on the falsehoods that have been pushed from the beginning, seems will be filled with lies that we now know may have come from a dream."

Greitens also claimed that the committee's witnesses "faced no consequences for telling lies," though they all testified under oath.

The governor's statement was repetitive in its use of the phrase "witch hunt" — a refrain favored by President Donald Trump to describe investigations that anger him — and its characterization of witness testimony as lies.

"Fake charges and falsehoods aren't going to stop us," Greitens said.

Meanwhile, one leading Democrat who had seen the report already is calling for the Republican governor to resign.

"If he doesn’t, it will be the duty of the House of Representatives to restore integrity to the executive branch of state government," House Minority Leader Gail McCann Beatty said in a statement. "This duty must be conducted with careful deliberation following a thorough review of the evidence gathered to date. Once House members have had the opportunity to digest the special committee’s report and accompanying documentation, it is our hope that leadership in both parties can agree on the appropriate next step.”

The report comes about a month before Greitens is scheduled to go on trial in St. Louis, where a grand jury indicted him in February on suspicion of felony invasion of privacy. The committee's investigation continues.

Greitens is accused of taking a nonconsensual photograph of a partially naked woman who had been his hairdresser and of transmitting the image to a computer, according to the indictment. He also has been accused of threatening the woman with disseminating the image if she spoke about their relationship, as the woman told her ex-husband when he secretly recorded her confession about her affair with Greitens.

Greitens has denied criminal wrongdoing and said there was no blackmail threat, though he has not denied photographing the woman.

The report is expected to be made publicly available on the Missouri House website (house.mo.gov) Wednesday evening.

Anticipating an outcry, House leaders canceled most of Wednesday's session as well as regular days of work Thursday and Monday. After Greitens admitted an affair and denied blackmail in January, lawmakers were eager to leave the Capitol, too, but that time they could point to the prospect of an ice storm as they hustled away.

House Speaker Todd Richardson, R-Poplar Bluff, announced the panel in late February, a few days after St. Louis Circuit Attorney Kim Gardner, a Democrat, told the world that a grand jury had indicted Greitens. The committee included five Republicans and two Democrats.

Early meetings of the House Special Investigative Committee on Oversight were held in the offices of the Jefferson City Police Department. More recent hearings were held in the basement of the Missouri State Capitol.

The flow of information to the public during the legislative investigation has been limited, given that almost all meetings were held behind closed doors and that members were not to discuss the contents of their investigation outside the committee.

Reps. Kevin Austin, R-Springfield, and Gina Mitten, D-Richmond Heights, declined to comment Wednesday as they left a committee meeting in the direction of the Capitol garage.

Greitens, who is married with two children, admitted Jan. 10 that he had an affair. However, Greitens and his attorneys pushed back against the claim that he allegedly took a nonconsensual photo of a woman who cut his hair while she was partially naked in the basement of his family home in March 2015.

A few lawmakers publicly called for Greitens to resign, and several more joined this call after Greitens was indicted in February. He has not bowed to that pressure.

The indictment led Greitens to further bolster his legal counsel. He was arrested and briefly detained in St. Louis before being released on his own recognizance.

At the time of the initial encounter, Greitens' gubernatorial campaign was in its early stages.

The News-Leader has not named the woman because she may be the victim of a sex crime.

However, Greitens was investigated by Attorney General Josh Hawley, a Republican running for U.S. Senate, because the governor and his senior staff used a communication tool called Confide that deletes messages after reading. Hawley found no wrongdoing in that investigation, though he has been criticized for not trying hard enough to interview Greitens.

Hawley also continues to investigate Greitens in connection with how the governor's campaign obtained a list of donors from The Missouri Continues, the pro-veterans nonprofit Greitens founded after his service as a Navy SEAL. The charity has said it did not voluntarily give the list to Greitens or his campaign; the Missouri Ethics Commission has previously fined Greitens for failure to properly report the donor list, and another ethics complaint is pending against the governor regarding the list.

Rep. Jay Barnes, R-Jefferson City, kept most of the committee's business behind closed doors. He briefly made himself available to members of the media at a formal press conference in March, though he declined to answer many questions.

As the Capitol braced for the report Monday, Barnes offered a terse update.

“Nothing has changed," Barnes said in a statement. "The committee will release a report this week. The committee will also continue working through the end of session.”

The resolution creating the special committee — which passed the House unanimously — gave the committee 40 days from the outset but allowed the option to extend its efforts.

If impeachment proceedings are to occur, they would begin in the House, which has that power under the Missouri Constitution. Lawmakers could start those proceedings before the scheduled adjournment of the 2018 regular session. But if it decided to do so after May 18, it would take three-quarters of both the House and Senate for lawmakers to call themselves into a special session — unless Greitens did so himself.

Greitens has hired a high-powered legal team to fight the felony charge and a lobbyist to bolster his outreach and burnish his image with lawmakers, the media and the public. The governor's office has said Greitens' personal battles have not deterred his continued ability to govern.

Greitens had never held elected political office before he was elected in November 2016. The Democrat-turned-Republican campaigned in part on the notion that he would clean up corruption in Jefferson City and on his status as a husband and father — both stances that contrasted with former Attorney General Chris Koster, who served for years in various political offices.

Read or Share this story: https://sgfnow.co/2qpNYDe