Trump: I'll Take a 'Very Serious Look' at Term Limits for Congress
Donald Trump said Thursday that he was going to "take a very serious look" at imposing term limits on members of Congress should he win the White House in November.

"We're going to look into that because a lot of people are talking about term limits," the Republican presidential nominee told law enforcement in Statesville, N.C. "I hear it from more and more people — and we're going to take a very serious look at that.

"Without the term limits, you have two different scales. But we will see what happens.

"We'll look into this very strongly," Trump said.

His comments came in response to a question from a member of the local Fraternal Order of Police, who charged that career politicians pass laws that hold Americans accountable while exempting them.

In 2000, the average time in office for a member of the House of Representatives was nine years and 11 years for a senator, the Libertarian Party presidential ticket of Gary Johnson and Bill Weld wrote in an opinion piece for The Washington Times.

That compared with an average of three and a half years for House members at the end of the 19th century and six and a half years for those in the Senate.

Polls show that Congress continues to remain unpopular with voters because of career politicians — and many attribute that to the partisan gridlock in Washington.

A 2013 Gallup poll found that 75 percent of those surveyed would support legislation limiting terms for members of both the House and Senate.

The findings are in line with similar surveys the organization conducted between 1994 and 1996.

In addition, Americans gave Congress a 24 percent approval rating in a recent Bloomberg poll — the lowest in the history of the survey.

During the primaries, Trump called for term limits on Congress and the president.

He proposed at a rally in South Carolina in February that House members should only serve one term, lasting four years, and that senators and the president would have a single six-year term.

"Under my proposal, there will never be a 'next campaign' for any politician in America ever again," Trump said.