The News Journal from Wilmington, Delaware on November 16, 1972 · Page 38
38 ' Wilmington, Evening Journal November 16, 1972 CHILDREN'S LETTERS Del., DAILY RECORD BUSINESS U.S. Court District Criminal Budget Motels Are Cutting Costs for U.S. Travelers : O Oka FotMSnYTr,, W. !.: sent to 814 N. Broom St. 11.32 p.m. 200 block Fulton St. Wash-down. Nov. 16: 5:00 a.m. St. Francis Hospital. Mattress in 5th floor room. Blamed on careless smoking. New Castle County Nov. 15: 10:U a.m. Conrad High School. School fire alarm alert. Manquas, Belvedere and Five Points FJre Companies. No fire. 11.04 a.m. Delaware River. Service call. Boat adrift. Goodwill Fire Company. 11:44 a.m. Delaware River near Delaware City. River rescue. Rescue squad did not go Into service. Delaware City Fire Company. 12:05 p.m.-Bechtel Corp., Hay Road. Building alarm. Brandywlne Hundred and Claymont Fire Companies. 3:30 p.m. Maryland Ave. and Robinson Lane. Accident. Flv Points Flrt Company. 6:35 p.m.-Canby Park West. Woods. Five Points Fire Company. 9:44 p.m. -Linden Hill Road. Automobile. Mill Creek and Aetna Hose Hook & Ladder Fire Companies. 9:55 p.m. 700 block Gilpin Ave., Willow Run. Automobile. Elsmere Fir Company. 11:25 p.m. -1213 Talley Road, Belle-fonte. House, minor. Brandywine Hundred Fire Company. Nov. 16: 2:29 a.m. -Spanish Oaks Apartments. South Du Pont Road near Elsmere, Building. 41, Apartment 2. Minor fire. Five Points and Elsmere Fire . Kemmons Wilson and Wallace Johnson of Memphis, founders of Holiday Inns, didn't go too far with the junior inn venture partly because they ran into bitter opposition from Adolph and Joel Krisch. They control American Motor Inns of Roanoke, -Va., the largest single Holiday Inn franchise Sentencing: Judge James L. Lalchum's cases: John F. Bowling, 53, 3200 block Coachman Road, Surrey Park, making false statements on tax return, Hnposition of ail sentence suspended for one year's probation, $5,000 fine. Bruce Dean Roebke, 50, 4M0 block Hav srford Place, Haverford Apartments, causing false entry on bank records, imposition of jail sentence suspended for two years' probation under Youth Corrections Act. Sondra J. Keiser Roebke, 20, 4600 block Haverford Place, Haverford Apartments, causing false entry on bank records, imposition of ail sentence suspended for two years' probation under Youth Corrections Act. Ernest Lynn Turoln, 26, 100 block Ken-ma r Drive, Newark, possess Illegal firearm. Imposition of ail sentence suspended for three years' probation. Eddie Thomas Morton, Newport, N.C., state law violation on federal property, imposition of jail sentence suspended for five years' probation. Joseph Massetio, 25, 1900 block W. 2d St., possession of hypodermic syringe in Veterans Administration Hospital, indeterminate sentence under Narcotic Rehabilitation Act, Opinion: Judge James L. Latchum in three consolidated cases denied motions to dismiss criminal Indictments against Louis and Selma Goldstein, unit block Capa Court, Riidgewood, charged with income tax violations; John L. Matthews, 24, 100 block Adams Dam Road, Centerville, charged with embezzlement while empoyed by federally Insured bank; D. Irving Os-brow, Rumson, N.J., Walter O. Heinze, Swarthmore, Pa., Frederick W. Andrews, Dover, and Maxwell Feller, New York , City, charged with conspiracy to violate federal labor and income tax laws. Latchum held that composition of the grand1 jury which indicted the defendants di4 not violate provisions of the Jury Selection and Service Act of 1966 and the terms of the plan of the Court for the Random Selection of Grand and Petty Jurors. in 'the $8 class with Day's is Thr-rift Inns of Newport News, Va., with five motels. Happy Inns of Orlando, Fla., and Chalet Motor Lodges of Nashua, N.H., with 11 units between them, are around $9 and Imperial "400" of Engle-wood Cliffs, N.J., charges an average" of $10 at its 104 units. . BUDGET motels that have ILS., Cuba To Talk on Hijackings? ' Havana Broadcast Spurs Optimism WASHINGTON iffl - U.S. officials are very encouraged by a strong Cuban signal on opening negotiations toward ending aircraft hijacking, but they emphatically deny this could lead to a normalization in relations. ,' The Cuban signal came yesterday in a broadcast from Havana, saying "the government of Cuba is willing, and without delay, to take such steps which might lead to the adoption of a broad agreement" on hijacking. Even before this broadcast was monitored in Washington, State Department spokesman Charles W. Bray told news-m'en , "We do have the irripression now that there may now be a basis for reopening negotiations" on the issue. ' BRAY described the impression as based on unspecified i'straws in the wind" as seen in previous actions and state-m e n t s by Premier Fidel Castro's government following two recent hijackings of U.S. U.D. Professor Talks Stalled Negotiators for the American Association of University Professors at the University of Delaware reported no progress yesterday in a bargaining session. Stephen Finner, a member of the AAUP negotiating team, said the association presented its "final salary offer." The administration did not respond to the offer, . Finner said. . ' William D. Jones, vice president for employe . relations, was not available for com--ment. ' ; been organized but not yet in business include Friendly Inns JOHN Lesure of Orlando, Fla., partner in Laventhol, By LEROY POPE NEW YORK , (UPI) - A wave of construction of budget motels, charging less than $10 a night for single occupancy and sometimes as little as $11 for a couple, is cutting the cost ' of travel in the United States. . Day's Inns of Atlanta, which operates 28 budget hotels, says in newspaper advertisments "Mr. salesman, if you paid" more than $8 for your room tonight, you paid too much! Laventhol, Kreksten, Hor-wath & Horwath, statisticians of the lodging industry, named eight chains of budget motels in operation with a total of 206 motels and seven other chains 1 organized to operate, budget motels that haven't yet built any. Lowest cost of those already In operation are Motel' 6 of Santa Barbara, Calif., with 96 units at-$6.60 a" night and Scottish Inns of America, Kin- if there is no bar or nojes-taurant in the motel. Jft-his 1972 report on motel industry trends, Lesure pointed outjhat, the operating costs of motels' without restaurants or-bars are usually at least 20 percent below those of the full service motels. ; Lesure told United Press International - the big JWotel chains provoked the budget hotel movement in two ways. They built too many fancy tels and, when occupancy began to fall off two years ago, they tried to compensate by raising room prices sharply. THE $18 and $20 a night rale for double occupancy was already common two years' ago. But during 1971, this rate was puslhed up to $22 and even as high as $27 including sales taxes. Single occupancy rates' at the more elaborate motels have ranged from $14 up this year. Lesure said a 2-per-cent increase in occupancy rates the first four months of 1972 helped the standard motels somewhat but that competi Less Than $10 a Night For Single Occupancy Greater Dover Nov. 15: 12:10 a.m. Caravan Motel, 383 N. DuPont Hiqhway. Fire In laundry building. Heavy damage. Dover Fire Department. Sussex County Nov. 15: 8:27 a.m. Delaware routes" 215 and 162. Trailer. Slaughter Beach 1 Fire Company. 5:20 p.m.-Chimney fire at Williamsburg near Roxana. Roxana Fire Com pany. i Civil w Mm masre Licenses Verdict: Jury found for Robert Hawthorne Inc., 2900 E. Orthodox St., Philadelphia, Pa., defendant in suit by Exeter Industries Inc., of 5th and Monroe Sts., for damages resulting when Hawthorne, a demolition company, was contracted by Wilmington Housing Authority to demolish structure adjacent to Exeter in Aug. 1971. Exeter claimed damages to windows, brick and stone on first floor and basement which were not repaired by Hawthorne. Delaware Supreme Court Krekstein, Horwath & Horwath and the company.'s motel expert, said the budget motel .is the greatest competitive threat the motel and hotel industry faces. He said the budget motels appeal primarily to salesmen and "to the family en route to a destination, including campers." He said neither of these traveling types wants swimming pools or television, nor does he care of Carlisle, Pa. Family Inns of Rocky Mount, N.C., Southern Scottish Inns of New Orleans, Regal 8 Inns of Mt. Vernon, 111., Country Squire Inns of Perry,- Ga., and Overnight .Inns, which hasn't even set up a headquarters. The huge Holiday Inns, Inc., is in the budget motel business in a tiny way. It has some little fiber glass cabinette junior inns with rates as low as $6. New Castle Firm Low Bidder on 141 Greggo & Ferrara, Inc., of New Castle was the apparent low bidder yesterday when the Department of Highways and Transportation opened bids on -the substructure for Route 141 through Newport from 1-95 to Christian Street. ston, Tenn., 26 motels at $6 a night. Econo-Travel Motor Inns of Norfolk, Va,. with 28 establishments, charges $7.50 a night for. a single room afco New Castle County Jack L. Essary, Newark, and Donna A. Aikenhead, Newark. Frank A. Grieshop, New Castle, and Connie L. Stair, New Castle. William F. Benson Jr., Wilmington, and Maryellen Davis, Wilmington. William N. Haldas, Wilmington, and Shirley F. Kinney, Wilmington. Terrence E. Delane, Wilmington, and Sandra v. Freeman, Wilminqton. Stephen L. Tecot, Wilmington, and Alene Lewis, Wilmington. Marvin S. Saver, Wilmington, and Genevieve L. DuPont, Greenville. James J. Broad Jr., Wilmington, and Phyllis E. Pletz, Wilmington. James W. Baker, Newark, and Judith A. Smith, Wllminqton. Joseph Smith, Wilmington, and Dolores E. Parker, Wilmington. Frank W. Rankin Hancock's Brldqe, N.J., and Part! J. Boulden, Wilminqton. David T. Van Wickie, Wilmington, and Elaine S. Osfrand, Wilmington. From Fuiureland to Now Opinion by Justice James B. Carey, other justices concurring, upheld second-degree murder conviction of William M. Hallowell, 47, Woodside, In fatal stabbing Oct. 3, 1971, of Ron Charlst, holding that it was not error for trial judge to exclude Instruction on Involuntary manslaughter In his charge to the jury. Opinion by all justices dismissed appeal . of Dale F. Joy,.25, near Milford, of denial by Superior Court of his petition for a holding that preliminary hearing before a justice of the peace, who found probable cause for holding him on charges of possession of marijuana and cocaine, was Improperly conducted. Joy was indicted by grand iury shortly afterward eliminating the need for a preliminary hearing, making moot the propriety of the magis The Ibid placed by Greggo & Ferrara was $4,399,884.15. . . Other bidders were: J. E. Brenneman Co. of Philadelphia, $4,998,842; G.A. and S.C ' Wagman, Inc., of York, Pa., $5,389,470.15; James Julian; Inc., of Elsmere, $5,441,095.99, and Wilson Contracting Company of Wilmington, Sussex County 1st Electric Cars That Look Like Cars Set for Service airliners to Cuba. From the American viewpoint, the obstacle to past efforts to reach an accommodation on hijacking prevention was Havana's demand that the United States return Cu-Earis who fled to this country, 1. 1 n yesterday's broadcast, Havana criticized past American policy concerning Cuban omigration and acts by anti-. Castro elements based in the United States, but it did not repeat the demand for extradition of "illegal Cuban Emigrants." Ralph C. Ennls, Crlsfleld, Md., and Eleanor L. Steele, Salisbury, Md. Timothy T. Bak, Millsboro, and Sherry L. Ruth, Millsboro. Robert A. Weaver, Ocean View, and Susan L. Cobb, Ocean view. Gary K. Ruark, Delmar, Md., and Cathy E. Robinson, Delmar, Del. John A. Kline Jr., Lewes, and Emma L. Clifton, Lewes. Ronald L. Perdue, Seaford, and Terry L. LeCates, Seaford. Asbury Bazaar A doll shop featuring handmade doll clothes will be a new booth at this year's annual bazaar of the Asbury United Methodist Church women's group. The bazaar will be held Saturday from 10 to 4 at the church in Wilmington Manor. Offered for sale will be white elephants, fancy work, baked goods, homemade candy, Christmas cookies, trim-a-tree items, ceramics, books, cards and children's toys. Lunch will be served from 11:30 to 2 and snacks will be available throughout the day. trate's decision, me nign court nem. Opinion by all justices upheld conviction of Jack Harold Steele, 47, Galesvllle, Md., of second-degree arson, holding that there was no merit In Steele's contention that evidence was Insufficient to support his conviction of starting fire Feb. 25, 1970, at a house trailer in Kentwood Mobile Estates north of Dover. Court of Chancery Opinion by Vice Chancellor William Marvel dismissed for lack of jurisdiction suit by Delaware Bankers Association, Bank of Delaware, Delaware Trust Co., Farmers Bank and Wllminqton Trust Co., .against Division of Revenue, Department of Finance, and J. H. Kennedy, director of revenue, contesting occupational license fees assessed banks In addition to taxes imposed for banking and savings businesses. Opinion by Chancellor William Duffy granted partial pretrial judgment to Scot-ten, Dillon Co., F. Steven Berg, William Lerner, W. Dennis Prouty and Ernest Summers, defendants, in suit by Robert M. Schroder, Scotten Ditlon president, on Issue of composition of board of directors. Duffy also determined present officers of the company and that Robert L. Severance continues as vice president of ance continues as vice president of marketing. Suit Involved contest between two factions for control of the company. Superior Court New Castle County Civil Opinions: Judge Clarence W. Taylor reversed decision of Industrial Accident Board awarding compensation for 20 per cent disability for back Injury to Nathaniel Ellison, 1313 Du Pont St., employe of City of Wilmington, who appealed decision on ground the record . did not support the board's finding. Taylor also held that the board should award Ellison reasonable attorney's fee and remanded the case for further procfeedings. Births Born to Mr. and Mrs.: St. Francis Hospital BLAKE Steve K., 402 Stafford Ave., Newark, Nov. 15, son. Wilmington Medical Center General Division BOOTH Bruce, S1J Defoe Road, Hickory Hill. Nov. 15, son. CHANDLER - James, 2905 Crossfork Drive, Nov. 14, daughter. GRIFFIN Johann, 23 Rockland Court, Nov. 14, daughter. HARGADON Francis, 21 SkuH Drive, Devon Park, Newark, Nov. 14, daughter. HIBBITS Emory, 500 Homestead Road, Alban Park, Nov. 14, ton. PARSONS James, 201A Thomas Drive, Monroe Park, Nov. 14, son. ROSTOCKI Michael III, 500 S. Van Buren St., Nov. 13, son. SAVILLE Alexis, 62 N. Lunenberg Drive, New Castle, Nov. 14, daughter. TOV James, 144 Netherfield Drive, Glenville, Nov. 14, daughter. WOOD Ronald, 1209 Faun Road, Nov. 14, son. Kent General Hospital DIJON, France (AP) The first electric-powered automobiles to look like real cars instead of beach buggies or props for circus bears will go unglamorously into service next year in Dijon. Only the standard engine and transmission have been replaced in a series of 80 wor-k a d a y Renault R4s that Electricite de France, the state-owned utility monopoly, is modifying to serve as repair and customer relations cars. IT wants to push the idea that autos that don't make smoke or noise have grown out of the futureland sections of amusement parks and into something solid enough that is repairmen can start driving in June. "As far as we know, there's no other experimentation with electronic cars on this scale. Obviously, it's costing us, but we feel we are getting in right at - the beginning of something that will have tremendous growth," said Pierre Wolf, the monopoly's research director, in introducing the cars in Dijon. Turning the starter key in - THIS omission was seen by some U.S. experts as indicating the seriousness of the Cuban proposal. - Cuba, one official said, doesn't want to be known as a haven for criminals and is willing to deal with the United ' States on that basis. This is particularly true, he said, because the two most recent hijackings involved accused murderers, bank robbers and rapists. But the American experts say there is no sign Castro wants a better relationship with Washington and they say President Nixon is not in the mood for a change either. Biden Heads Leukemia Unit U.S. Sen-elect Joseph R. Biden Jr. has been appointed general campaign chairman of the Delaware Chapter of the Leukemia Society of America, Inc. -The chapter is seeking $130,000 in .donations during 1973 to help in research and patient care. Biden urged an SORRY tion from the new budget chains is becoming a real challenge. Production Up Sharply In October Economy Growth Seen Continuing WASHINGTON (F)-The Fed-e r a 1 Reserve Board . says industrial production rose sharply in October, indicating the nation's.economy is continuing to expand. ' J The board said its index of output by the nation's facto-r i e s , mines and utilities, increased .9 per cent last month. That brought the index to 116.7 per cent of the 1967 base. ' - , The biggest output gains were in consumer goods, equipment and materials. Pro-d u c t i o n of automobiles increased by 7 per cent and production schedules indicate another gain in auto output this month. . - The October gain brought the index to 9.3 per cent higher than it was at this time last year. Bread Rise Gets Grayson A Dusting s NEW YORK (UPI) - Two young women yesterday pro- tested a price increase granted a milling company by throwing a few handfuls of flour at C. Jackson Grayson, chairman ofthe Federal Price Commission. - Grayson, unperturbed, brushed himself off, said he sympathized with the women and continued his address.' to about 200 members of the New York Society of Securtiy Analysts. r Grayson was lightly dusted with the flour while about a BRADFORD John, Magnolia, Nov. 15, twin dauotiters. GINGINRICH - Jeffrey, Dover, Nov., 15, daughter. LAW Ivan, Dover, Nov. 16, daughter. MOSHER Ramseiy, Dover, Nov. 14, ton. REICHELT Paul, Dover, Nov. 14, son. SLUSS Charles, Dover, Nov. 14, son. Milford Memorial Hospital Judge Andrew D. Christie upheld decision of Industrial Accident Board denying petition by Gov. Bacon Health Center, employer, to terminate total disability payments to Helen M. Noll, 1200 Bayshore Blvd., Indian Rocks Beach, Fla. (formerly of Wilmington), employe. Georgetown, Nov. 15, 1 CAVE-Charles, son." Nov. MITCHELL Lewis, Georgetown, 13, son. Court of .The story about the volume of milk found in half gallon milk cartons which appeared in' the Evening Journal Monday said the Country Maid cartons measured averaged .54 of an ounce under a half gallon. An accompanying table said the average was .97 of an ounce under. The table was correct. Mr.' and Mrs. Ramsey Mosh-er of Dover had twin daughters Tuesday at Kent General Hospital, not a son as reported yesterday in the Daily Record. AP Wlrephoto car The first electric ear to look like Back seat full of batteries Bishop Re-Eleeleil MEMPHIS, Tenn. (Bishop J. O. Patterson of Memphis was re-elected Presiding Bishop of the Church of God in Christ at the denomination's 65th International Holy Convocation General Assembly. the remodeled R4s brings the disarming novelty of power and motion without noise. The transmission is anchored to second gear, but the car accelerates rapidly, the engine working itself up to the drone of a souped-up electric razor. THE source of power is 18 regular automotive batteries placed across the width of the car where a back seat normal the cars for our own fleet by 1975." The choice of DiJon, a city of 150,000 in the center of France, as a test center is probably most honestly explained by the presence of Robert Poujade, the French government's minister of environment, as mayor or Dijon. ice and garaged at night. The cost in electricity works out to about 2 cents per mile. "THERE'S a great deal of research going on to get a greater yield from the batteries," says Wolf. "We have enough faith in the program to have projected building 250 of Common Fleas Sussex County Judge Lawrence C. Elliott's cases! Se-tpneings: William Adams, 60, Georgetown, apeeding, 450 fine. Richard Ziegler, 36, Claymont, speeding 50 fine. After court conviction: Preston W. Elliott, 45, Georgetown, speeding, $75 fine. State Board of Parole Applications granted: Ricardo Bruce Brown, 23, 600 block Jefferson St. from five vears for robbery, possession of narcotic drug with Intent to sell, possession of hypodermic needle and syringe and conspiracy. Sherwood White, M, 1300 block N. Clayton St., from two years for burglary. Eugene Fuller, 46 300 block West St.. from two years for breaking and entering. John Govert Roza. 71, Los Anqeles, Calif., from two years for possession of dangerous and depressant drug and conspiracy. Keitri Watson K, 300 block West St., from one year for assault with intent to rob ajid conspiracy. Bnilli?ifif Permits Sussex County ($10,000 or more) 305'? John Chapis, Seaford Hundred, dwelling, $27,000. Like Foreign Policy Laird Sees Gain For Sharing Plan Anchor Hocking' Dividend Told yone interested in contributing to contact the chapter office at 610 Delaware Ave., Wilmington. Dover Bomb Calls Traced to 3 Pupils : DOVER Three juveni'les were arrested yesterday in connection with false bomb threats which caused the evac-nation of the Caesar Rodney High School on several occasions over the past 30 days. " Police said the three, all students of the school, were charged with making false bomb threats. They were released in the custody of their parents for a hearing in Family Court. A dividend of 25 cents per share has also been declared on the common stock, payable Dec. 20 to holders of record Dec. 6. Based in Lancaster, Ohio, Anchor Hocking has a major glass container plant at Salem, N.J. A quarterly dividend of $1 per share on the $4 cumulative preferred stock of Anchor Hocking Corp. has been declared by its directors, payable Jan. 1 to holders of rec-. ord Dec. 6. time he rose to become the ranking member of the House Health, Education and Welfare Appropriations, ly would be. The batteries drive an electric motor linked! to each axle. The weight of the batteries close to 800 pounds and their cumber-someness is one of the big disadvantages of the car. The cars' range in city driving is 40 to 48 miles without recharging the batteries. Electricite de France says this corresponds to the normal in-town daily mileage of its vehicles in Dijon. The cars have a top speed of 40 miles per hour. Recharging the batteries takes 10 hours, but Electricite de France maintains this is unimportant because the cars normally would be out of serv- Remington Arms Reports KANSAS CITY (UPI) -Looking toward the next four years of the Nixon Administration, Defense Secty. Melvin R . Laird today predicted "tremendous" increases in the application of the President's domestic revenue-sharing philosophies. Laird said rever was very close in concept to the Administration's "Nixon Doctrine," foreign policy, which calls for other nations .7 dates iue? darnings uro) 30515 Ralph & Eila M. Graves, Georgetown Hundred, dwelling, $37,800. 30517 Howard & Miriam Bird, Baltimore Hundred, modular dwelling, 30519 Sea Colony, Inc., Bethany Beach, dwelling, $31,500. 30550 Sea Colony, Inc., Bethany Beach, dwelling, $31,500. 30521 Sea Colony, Inc., Bethany Brh dwelling, $31,500. 305W Sea Colony, Inc., Bethany Beach, dwelling, $31,500. 30573 Sea Colony, Inc., Bethany Beach, dwelling, $31,500. 30574 Beatrice Lavfleld, Dagsboro Hundred, dwelling, $17,500. 30573 Pet Poultry Products, Inc , Norm West Fork Hundred, addition to plant, $15,000. Committee. He said that now, "more than at any other time in our history," there is a close correlation between domestic and foreign policies. "Revenue-sharing the President's solution to many domestic problems has marked similarities in concept to increased burden-sharing under the Nixon doctrine in national security policy," Laird said. "THE unifying thrust in both domestic and foreign policy is an underlying trust in the ability and willingness of others to do a needed job local officials and local citi- dozen security analysts ttfok a heavier dose during the meeting in the financial district. The women, Susan Stein-man, 22, and Sharon Ayling, 21, said they renrpwifprj 3 group called" Women United for Action and were protesting .' rising food prices and an: 11 per cent price increase grant- ed to Pillsubry Mills, Inc. - Kohino Eyes J Fla. A cquisition Frank. A. Robino Jr.. president of Robino-Ladd, yesterday said the firm Bas agreed to acquire all outstanding capital stock of Federal . Construction Corp., of Florida. Terms were not' revealed, and the move is subject to approval of stockholders. Federal Construction holds 635 acres of potential housing land in Orlando, along with holdings in Gainesville, Day-tone Beach and Casselberry. Flea Market I A Shuk Ha Pishpishim, an Israeli Flea Market, will be held Nov. 19 from 10 to 6 at Temple Beth Shalom, 18th St. and Baynard Blvd. - Sponsored by the Sisterhood of the temple, the Shuk will feature booths of all kinds. Antiques, decoupage, pottery, games, mushrooms, , paper goods, stationery, jewelry and home baked goods will all be available as well as handmade items from residents of the Kutz Home. 'A small cafe will serve holiday treats and there will be an ongoing demonstration of peanut butter making. Vernon Good, Wilmington artist, will display paintings and paint portraits at the market. ' Everyone is invited. to do more for their own defense. In a speech prepared for the Associated Press Managing Editors' annual meeting, Laird called passage of the revenue-sharing bill just before Congress adjourned last month "a major milestone." "THE next four years will, in my view, see tremendous strides in implementing this new philosophy here at home," he said. Laird said he felt qualified to talk about domestic pro The Du Pont Co.'s Remington Arms subsidiary yesterday reported improved sales but lower earnings for the first nine months of the year. Sales through Sept. 30 totaled $106,299,000, about 8 per cent more than the sales of $98,462,000 during the same period last year. Net income through Sept. 30 was $7,324,000 (including a nonrecurring gain of $134,000), a decline of about 12 per cent from the net income of $8,318,000 during the same period last year. Remington said the figures reflect higher operating costs and expenses associated with the opening of a new plant in Lonoke, Ark. Per-share earnings for the first nine months of this year were $1.02 (including 2 cents a share from the nonrecurring gain), compared with $1.13, (including 6 cents a share from the nonrecurring gain), for the comparable nine months of 1971. A quarterly dividend of $1,125 has been declared by Remington directors on the preferred stock, plus a year-end dividend of 20 cents a share on the common stock. Both dividends are payable Dec. 15 to holders of record Nov. 21. Ford Rejects Holiday Bid DETROIT (B-United Auto Workers union members at Ford plants will not be getting a four-day Thanksgiving weekend. In turning down a union request to switch the Dec. 17 paid "bonus holiday" to Nov. 24, Ford said yesterday that a strong demand for Ford products makes it essential to keep the factories producing at peak performance. The "bonus holiday" was a product of 1970 contract 3U5j Frar & sara inorougnqood, Dagsboro Hundred, addition to nursery, $10,000. 30536 Broad Creek Farms. Inc., Little Creek Hundred, dwelMng, $40,000. 30539 Harry & Louise French, Baltimore Hundred, dwelling, $20,000. ' !) a Wilmington Nov. 14: Nov. 15: 3:58 p m. 401 Wesf St. Defective Wirinq. Slight damaqe. 4:52 p.m. Foot of Prospect Road. Grass. 5:78 p.m. 9 E. 3d if. Boxes outside. 5:32 p.m. 1909 W. 2d St. Fresh fire. 6:17 p.m. 614 N. Broom St. Vacant building. Two finetnen overcome with smoke. Treated at Delaware Division and released. 6:20 p.m. Addition M equipment sent to H N. Broom St. 6:27 p.m.- 700 block Union St. Wash-down. 4.33 p.m Additional Engine Company ' zens in America, governments, and their citizens in other nations.'.' Laird told the managing editors that he is "hopeful and confident that the great initia-t i v e s which have been undertaken by our President will lead to a peace that will last." grams because of his 16 years as a Republican congressman from Wisconsin, during which