Pat Robertson Accuses George Soros of ‘Financing’ Migrant Caravan, Admits That There Is No ‘Hard Evidence’
Televangelist Pat Robertson has accused the philanthropist George Soros of financing the caravan of migrants heading toward the U.S. border—though admitted that there is “no hard evidence” to support his claim.

The founder of the Christian Broadcasting Network appeared on the network’s flagship show The 700 Club to discuss the thousands of Central American migrants who are currently making their way to the U.S. border.

Robertson said that if the caravan of as many as 7,000 people does make it to their destination, the matter could become a “public relations nightmare” for President Donald Trump.

“When they arrive, what do we want to greet them with?” Robertson asked. “Do we want to have a bunch of soldiers beating them up—little children and women and peasants—is that the kind of image we want the world [to see]?”

The 88-year-old said that the army should put up tents to feed and take care of them until “it seems humanitarian,” then arrest the migrants and deport them to their home nations of El Salvador, Honduras or Guatemala.

Robertson also called on the Justice Department to investigate his assertion that Soros is financing the migrants.

“The person who has apparently been financing this thing is George Soros. Now, we don’t have hard evidence on that, but that’s the suspicion; that the George Soros foundation has somehow been providing money because somebody has been paying those people off,” he said.

Mario Tama/Getty Images

“My suggestion is that would be Justice Department needs to get a warrant to search the books of the Soros foundation to see if indeed they have in deed been setting this thing up,” he added. “The whole idea was to use these people to embarrass the president and just before the election you have this awful PR nightmare of troops beating up on poor peasants from Central America, it’s going to be awful.”

Soros, a Jewish Hungarian immigrant who lived through the Holocaust as a child, has donated billions to liberal and progressive causes through his Open Society Foundations. He is often the target of anti-Semitic conspiracy theories.

President Donald Trump claimed the demonstrators who protested against the Supreme Court nomination of Brett Kavanaugh had their placards paid for by Soros, without offering any evidence.

“Look at all of the professionally made identical signs. Paid for by Soros and others. These are not signs made in the basement from love!” Trump tweeted.

During a recent appearance on The 700 Club, Robertson also suggested that the U.S. should not allow the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi to dampen their relationship with Saudi Arabia and run the risk of damaging their multibillion-dollar arms deal with the Gulf nation.

“You’ve got $100 billion worth of arms sales.… We cannot alienate our biggest player in the Middle East,” he said, reported Right Wing Watch.