A Brief History of Oaths and Books
When Suzi LeVine took the oath of office on a Kindle, at the end of last month, she must have known that her swearing-in ceremony would attract more attention than what is usually given to the Ambassador to Switzerland and Liechtenstein. LeVine was not the first American official to take the oath of office using an electronic device. In February, 2013, a group of firefighters from Atlantic City used a Bible app downloaded onto an iPad; at the beginning of this year, a Long Island county executive took his oath in the same way. LeVine swore on the Constitution rather than on the Bible, but more than this distinguishes her case from the other two. In each of the earlier ceremonies, the use of the iPad was impromptu: no one had remembered to bring along a printed copy of the Bible, and an iPad happened to be at hand. It did the job perfectly well, but it was still second choice.

LeVine, on the other hand, decided in advance that she would swear on an e-reader. She used her own Kindle Touch, “open” to the Nineteenth Amendment, which states that no citizen should be prevented from voting on account of their sex. A Kindle is not a beautiful object. The photos of LeVine during the ceremony, her hand resting on a flat gray rectangle, make vivid by its absence the appeal of paper and ink and a fancy binding. Explaining her decision, LeVine acknowledged this appeal. “As cool as a copy of the Constitution from the eighteenth century would have been, I wanted to use a copy that is from the twenty-first century, and that reflects my passion for technology and my hope for the future,” LeVine said. (She has spent much of her career working in technology, at Microsoft and Expedia.) Her words were a gentle rebuke to people who are inclined to see the use of an e-reader as a gimmick. In LeVine’s formulation, it becomes not merely the most modern or practical choice but also the most meaningful.

But the use of any text during a swearing-in ceremony is, if not exactly a gimmick, at least more style than substance. There is no constitutional requirement for any federal official—firefighter, ambassador, or President—to take the oath of office over a particular text or, in fact, over any text at all. This explains why LeVine was able to swear over the Constitution rather than the Bible, which is a much more common choice. Legally, if not diplomatically, “Moby-Dick” or “The Cat in the Hat” would have been just as acceptable.

The earliest Western use of oath books in a legal setting dates to ninth-century England when, in the absence of a structured royal government, certain transactions were conducted at the altar, the participants swearing on a gospel book. Three centuries later, English courts adopted the practice, requiring jury members and individuals in particular trials to take an oath on the Bible. An unnamed thirteenth-century Latin manuscript, now held in the library of Trinity College, Cambridge, sets out the method and the significance of the act. By placing a hand on the book and then kissing it, the oath-taker is acknowledging that, should he lie under oath, neither the words in the Bible nor his good deeds nor his prayers will bring him any earthly or spiritual profit. In time, this became standard legal procedure—all witnesses swearing to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth—and made its way into American courts. British witnesses today still take their oaths “by Almighty God,” as American oath-takers conclude theirs with “so help me God.” (Witnesses and officials can opt to make an affirmation rather than take an oath; the affirmation omits reference to God and uses the words “I affirm” rather than “I swear.” The formula was developed to accommodate those branches of Christianity that believe swearing to be an offence, but it is now available to atheists and to agnostics. In such cases, no book is used.)

The tradition of using a book during the oath of office is borrowed from the courts, which explains in part why the Bible is the most frequently chosen text. An oath is religious in origin and in essence, yet the paragraph in the Constitution requiring that all officials “be bound by Oath or Affirmation” concludes with the declaration that “no religious test” should be applied to a person taking office. The swearing-in ceremony transforms the oath into a public, secular commitment: a verbal contract between the oath-taker and the nation rather than between an individual and God. But the oath book tips the balance back toward the individual, allowing her to profess her personal—usually religious—values through both the text on which she chooses to swear and the copy of the text that she uses. The majority of Presidents have sworn in on their own Bible or on a family Bible, and over a particular page rather than over a closed book. (Isaiah and the Psalms are popular choices; Franklin D. Roosevelt swore four times on I Corinthians 13: “And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity.”)

At the same time, the book emphasizes the public and the performed aspects of the oath, making visual and physical what would otherwise be only verbal. This physicality is twofold: the physical object (the book) and the physical display on the part of the oath-taker. Left hand on book, right hand raised: it’s an iconic scene, familiar from sixty-five years of televised Presidential inaugurations and from countless courtroom dramas. In “To Kill a Mockingbird,” Harper Lee relies on her readers’ knowledge of oath-taking procedure to signal Tom Robinson’s innocence. When he is unable to keep his injured, “rubber-like” left hand on the Bible during his oath in court, we realize that he cannot be Mayella’s left-handed attacker.

The Bible brings personal and communal values into happy alignment, demonstrating that the official’s beliefs accord with the beliefs of three-quarters of American citizens. The Constitution, representing the whole nation, offers a even neater overlap. Other texts pose more of a problem. Even before Keith Ellison, America’s first Muslim congressman, was elected, in 2006, he was asked whether he would take his oath on a Koran. After some evasion (“I haven’t thought that far”) he said that he would. Cue much conservative hand-wringing: the oath text became a focus for people troubled by the idea of having a Muslim in the House of Representatives. Ellison should not be permitted to swear on the Koran, wrote the columnist and broadcaster Dennis Prager; Ellison’s intention to do so demonstrated his belief that ‘it is of no consequence what America holds as its holiest book; all that matters is what any individual holds to be his holiest book.” It would “do more damage to the unity of America… than the terrorists of 9-11.” In the end, Ellison did swear on the Koran. He used the copy, in English translation, owned by Thomas Jefferson.

Since her swearing-in ceremony, LeVine has donated her e-reader to Bern’s Museum für Kommunikation. In a recent blog post, she wrote about her realization that rituals “transcend the physicality with which they’ve been conducted…. The words of the US Constitution (and the ideas formulated by those words) were what was ratified on June 21, 1788. Not the paper.” Yet Ellison’s example shows that the physical form of those words, whether print or digital, has its own significance. The words on which Ellison swore spoke of his personal faith, distinct from the faith of most of the citizens he represents; the particular book that held those words was a symbol of his national identity and a physical manifestation of the coexistence of Muslim faith and American values. Each copy of every text has its own history and authority, one that stems as much from its previous readers as from its weight in our hands. Used as part of a ritual, each book also represents and draws authority from all the other books that have been used similarly, each one a symbol of good faith.

One iPad is much like another; an electronic device can’t represent family history or effect the reconciliation that Jefferson’s Koran did. But, though e-readers continue to be visually and emotionally unappealing to many, their incorporation into a centuries-old tradition confers upon them a certain weight and legitimacy, marking another step in their acceptance as an alternative to print. In the remarks that she made following her oath, LeVine paid testimony to both the personal and the communal significance of the e-reader. As much as the Constitution, she suggested, it “symbolizes the very best of our nation… innovation, entrepreneurship and the voice that each of us has in our democracy.” Of course, it also symbolizes a more mundane commonality. If there’s one thing that binds us together in the twenty-first century, it’s the amount of time we spend looking at a screen.

Hannah Rosefield is a writer living in London.

Photograph courtesy of the U.S Department of State.