CHAPTER 42. CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES; SENTENCES
TITLE 11 Crimes and Criminal Procedure Criminal Procedure Generally CHAPTER 42. CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES; SENTENCES

§ 4201 Transition provisions.

(a) Felonies are classified, for the purpose of sentence, into 7 categories:

(1) Class A felonies;

(2) Class B felonies;

(3) Class C felonies;

(4) Class D felonies;

(5) Class E felonies;

(6) Class F felonies;

(7) Class G felonies.

(b) Any crime or offense which is designated as a felony but which is not specifically given a class shall be a class G felony and shall carry the sentence provided for said class felony.

(c) The following felonies shall be designated as violent felonies:

Title 11, Section Crime

513 Conspiracy First Degree

602 Aggravated Menacing

604 Reckless Endangering First Degree

605 Abuse of a Pregnant Female in the Second Degree

606 Abuse of a Pregnant Female in the First Degree

607 Strangulation

612 Assault in the Second Degree

613 Assault in the First Degree

614 Assault on a Sports Official

[Former] 615 Assault by Abuse

617 Criminal Youth Gangs

629 Vehicular Assault in the First Degree

630 Vehicular Homicide in the Second Degree

630A Vehicular Homicide in the First Degree

631 Criminally Negligent Homicide

632 Manslaughter

633 Murder by Abuse or Neglect in the Second Degree

634 Murder by Abuse or Neglect in the First Degree

635 Murder in the Second Degree

636 Murder in the First Degree

645 Promoting Suicide

768 Unlawful Sexual Contact in the Second Degree

769 Unlawful Sexual Contact in the First Degree

770 Former Unlawful Sexual Penetration in the Third Degree or Rape in the Fourth Degree

771 Former Unlawful Sexual Penetration in the Second Degree or Rape in the Third Degree

772 Former Unlawful Sexual Penetration in the First Degree or Rape in the Second Degree

773 Former Unlawful Sexual Intercourse in the Third Degree or Rape in the First Degree

774 Sexual Extortion

775 Bestiality

776 Continuous Sexual Abuse of Child

777 Dangerous Crime Against a Child

777A Sex Offender Unlawful Sexual Conduct Against a Child

778 Sexual Abuse of a Child by a Person in a Position of Trust, Authority or Supervision in the First Degree

778A Sexual Abuse of a Child by a Person in a Position of Trust, Authority or Supervision in the Second Degree

782 Unlawful Imprisonment in the First Degree

783 Kidnapping in the Second Degree

783A Kidnapping in the First Degree

787 Trafficking of an Individual, Forced Labor and Sexual Servitude

802 Arson in the Second Degree

803 Arson in the First Degree

825 Burglary in the Second Degree

826 Burglary in the First Degree

826A Home Invasion

831 Robbery in the Second Degree

832 Robbery in the First Degree

835 Carjacking in the Second Degree

836 Carjacking in the First Degree

846 Extortion

1108 Sexual Exploitation of a Child

1109 Unlawfully Dealing in Child Pornography

1112A Sexual Solicitation of a Child

1112B Promoting Sexual Solicitation of a Child

1250 Assault in the First Degree Against a Law-Enforcement Animal

1253 Escape After Conviction, if convicted as a Class C Felony or a Class B Felony

1254 Assault in a Detention Facility

1256 Promoting Prison Contraband (Deadly Weapon)

1257(a) Resisting Arrest with Force or Violence

1302 Riot

1304 Hate Crimes

1312 Stalking

1338 Bombs, Incendiary Devices, Molotov Cocktails and Explosive Devices

1339 Adulteration (Causing Injury or Death)

1353 Promoting Prostitution in the First Degree

1442 Carrying a Concealed Deadly Weapon (Firearm Offense)

1444 Possessing a Destructive Weapon

1445 Unlawfully Dealing With a Dangerous Weapon

1447 Possessing a Deadly Weapon During the Commission of a Felony

1447A Possessing a Firearm during the Commission of a Felony

1448(e) Possession of a Deadly Weapon by Persons Prohibited (Firearm or Destructive Weapon Purchased, Owned, Possessed or Controlled by a Violent Felon).

1455 Engaging in a Firearms Transaction on Behalf of Another (Subsequent Offense)

1449 Wearing Body Armor During the Commission of a Felony

1503 Racketeering

3533 Aggravated Act of Intimidation

Title 16, Section Crime

1136 Abuse/Mistreatment/Neglect of a Patient

4751 Former Manufacture/Delivery/Possession With Intent to Deliver a Controlled or Counterfeit Controlled Substance, Manufacture or Delivery Causing Death

4752 Former Manufacture/Delivery/Possession With Intent to Deliver a Controlled or Counterfeit Controlled Substance

4752A Former Unlawful Delivery of a Noncontrolled Substance

4753A Former Trafficking in Marijuana, Cocaine, Illegal Drugs, Methamphetamine, LSD, Designer Drugs or MDMA

4752 Drug Dealing — Aggravated Possession; Class B Felony

4753 Drug Dealing — Aggravated Possession; Class C Felony

4754(1) Drug Dealing — Aggravated Possession; Class D Felony

4761 Former Distribution to Minors

4761(c) and (d) Illegal Delivery of Prescription Drugs

4774 Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to a Minor

Title 31, Section Crime

3913 Abuse/Neglect/Exploit/Mistreat an Adult who is Impaired

(d) Any attempt to commit any felony designated in subsection (c) of this section as a violent felony shall also be designated as a violent felony.

67 Del. Laws, c. 130, § 6; 70 Del. Laws, c. 186, § 1; 70 Del. Laws, c. 477, § 1; 71 Del. Laws, c. 285, § 14; 71 Del. Laws, c. 467, § 10; 72 Del. Laws, c. 34, § 5; 72 Del. Laws, c. 43, § 6; 72 Del. Laws, c. 197, § 7; 72 Del. Laws, c. 480, § 17; 74 Del. Laws, c. 106, § 8; 75 Del. Laws, c. 421, § 3[2]; 76 Del. Laws, c. 66, § 3; 76 Del. Laws, c. 343, § 5; 77 Del. Laws, c. 313, § 2; 77 Del. Laws, c. 318, § 13; 78 Del. Laws, c. 13, §§ 8-10; 78 Del. Laws, c. 224, § 19; 78 Del. Laws, c. 252, § 9; 78 Del. Laws, c. 406, § 3; 79 Del. Laws, c. 276, § 3; 80 Del. Laws, c. 28, § 1; 80 Del. Laws, c. 173, § 1.;

§ 4202 Classification of misdemeanors.

(a) Misdemeanors are classified for the purpose of sentence into 2 categories:

(1) Class A misdemeanors;

(2) Class B misdemeanors.

(b) Any offense defined by statute which is not specifically designated a felony, a class A misdemeanor, a class B misdemeanor or a violation shall be an unclassified misdemeanor or an environmental misdemeanor or environmental violation.

67 Del. Laws, c. 130, § 6; 70 Del. Laws, c. 436, § 10; 79 Del. Laws, c. 421, § 13.;

§ 4203 Violations.

There shall be a class of offenses denominated violations. No offense is a violation unless expressly declared to be a violation in this Criminal Code or in the statute defining the offense.

11 Del. C. 1953, § 4203; 58 Del. Laws, c. 497, § 2.;

§ 4204 Authorized disposition of convicted offenders.

(a) Every person convicted of an offense shall be sentenced in accordance with this Criminal Code, with the exception of an environmental misdemeanor as defined in § 1304 of Title 7. This section applies to all judgments of conviction, whether entered after a trial or upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere.

(b) A person convicted of a class A felony may be sentenced to life imprisonment in accordance with § 4205 of this title, unless the conviction is for first-degree murder, in which event § 4209 of this title shall apply. Notwithstanding any other statute, a sentence under § 4209 of this title may not be suspended or reduced by the court.

(c) When a person is convicted of any offense other than a class A felony the court may take the following action:

(1) Impose a sentence involving an Accountability Level I sanction. — Such sanctions include imposition of a fine as provided by law for the offense or placement of the offender upon unsupervised probation with or without special conditions, or with or without the imposition of a fine as provided by law for the offense;

(2) Impose a sentence involving an Accountability Level II sanction. — Such a sanction includes a placement of the offender upon supervised probation amounting to field supervision rather than intensive supervision, with or without special conditions, or with or without the imposition of a fine as provided by law for the offense;

(3) Impose a sentence involving an Accountability Level III sanction. — Such sanctions include placement of the offender upon intensive supervision or placement of the offender upon community service, with or without special conditions, or with or without the imposition of a fine as provided by law for the offense. Such intensive supervision shall entail at least the equivalent of 1 hour of supervision per day and no more than 56 hours of supervision per week;

(4) Impose a sentence involving an Accountability Level IV sanction. — Such sanctions include placement of the offender upon partial confinement under house arrest under the supervision of the Department of Correction or commitment of the offender to the Department of Correction under partial confinement to a half-way house or restitution center or placement of the offender in a residential treatment facility, all with or without special conditions, and all with or without the imposition of a fine as provided by law for the offense;

(5) Impose a sentence involving an Accountability Level V sanction. — Such a sentence consists of the commitment of the offender to the Department of Correction for a period of incarceration, with or without the imposition of a fine provided by law for the offense;

(6) Impose a period of incarceration, with or without the imposition of a fine provided by law for the offense, and placement of the offender in a less restrictive sanction, with or without special conditions, to commence when the offender is released from incarceration;

(7) Suspend the imposition or execution of sentence, or suspend a portion thereof;

(8) Impose any sentence as authorized in this subsection to include any special condition such as the payment of restitution to the victim or victims of the crime for which the offender is being sentenced and/or participation in a drug/alcohol outpatient treatment program, job training program, mental health treatment program, education program, community service program or other like programs. With regard to any such programs, the offender may be ordered to pay a fee covering, in whole or in part, the costs of such program and such fees shall be based upon the offender's ability to pay therefor;

(9) Wherever a victim of crime suffers a monetary loss as a result of the defendant's criminal conduct, the sentencing court shall impose as a special condition of the sentence that the defendant make payment of restitution to the victim in such amount as to make the victim whole, insofar as possible, for the loss sustained. Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, for the purposes of ensuring the payment of restitution the court shall retain jurisdiction over the offender until the amount of restitution ordered has been paid in full;

(10) Whenever restitution is ordered pursuant to paragraph (c)(9) of this section or any other applicable statute or rule, and if deemed appropriate to ensure or facilitate the collection of restitution from the defendant or if otherwise required by statute, the court may impose a sentence involving an Accountability Level I—Restitution Only sanction. Such a sanction shall be limited to the placement of the offender upon unsupervised probation, and the conditions of such probation shall be limited to those that are necessary to ensure or facilitate the collection of restitution. No offender shall be found to be in violation of the conditions of such a sanction unless the offender is found to be in violation of an applicable restitution order.

(d) Notwithstanding anything in this Criminal Code to the contrary, probation or a suspended sentence shall not be substituted for imprisonment where the statute specifically indicates that a prison sentence is a mandatory sentence, a minimum sentence, a minimum mandatory sentence or a mandatory minimum sentence, or may not otherwise be suspended.

(e) The court may authorize the payment of a fine in installments. When imposing probation the court shall direct that the offender be subject to the supervision of the Department of Correction and the court order shall specify those conditions under which the offender may remain at liberty on probation.

(f) In committing an offender to the Department of Correction the court shall fix the maximum term of incarceration.

(g) Where modification of judgment is not provided by rule of court, the court may modify a judgment within 90 days after it is ordered. Dispositions other than commitment to the Department of Correction, and such commitments which are revoked, shall not entail the loss by the offender of any civil rights, except as provided in the state Constitution.

(h) The court may direct that a person placed on probation be released on entering into a recognizance, with or without surety, during such period as the court directs, to appear and receive sentence when called upon, and, in the meantime, to keep the peace and be of good behavior.

(i) The court may, if it thinks proper, direct that the offender pay the costs of the prosecution or some portion thereof, and may further impose terms and conditions to be complied with by the offender during any period which it deems proper.

(j) At any time within the period mentioned in the recognizance, but not afterwards, the court may, upon being satisfied by information on oath that the offender has failed to observe any of the conditions of recognizance, or any of the terms or conditions of probation, issue an order for the offender's apprehension and thereupon, after proper hearing, impose sentence upon the offender.

(k)(1) Except as provided in this subsection, notwithstanding any statute, rule, regulation or guideline to the contrary, the court may direct as a condition to a sentence of imprisonment to be served at Level V or otherwise that all or a specified portion of said sentence shall be served without benefit of any form of early release, good time, furlough, work release, supervised custody or any other form of reduction or diminution of sentence.

(2) For the purposes of this subsection, statutes which authorize early release, good time, furlough, work release, supervised custody, or reduction or diminution of sentence include but are not limited to §§ 4205(h) and (i), 4206(g) and (h), 4217, 4381, 6533, 6533A [repealed] and 6537-6539 of this title.

(3) The provisions of this subsection shall be applicable only to sentences of imprisonment at Level V for 1 year or less, or to sentences of imprisonment at Level V which are equal to the statutory maximum Level V sentence available for the crime or offense.

(l ) Except when the court imposes a life sentence or sentence of death, whenever a court imposes a period of incarceration at Level V custody for 1 or more offenses that totals 1 year or more, then that court must include as part of its sentence a period of custodial supervision at either Level IV, III or II for a period of not less than 6 months to facilitate the transition of the individual back into society. The 6-month transition period required by this subsection may, at the discretion of the court, be in addition to the maximum sentence of imprisonment established by the statute.

(m) As a condition of any sentence, and regardless of whether such sentence includes a period of probation or suspension of sentence, the court may order the offender to engage in a specified act or acts, or to refrain from engaging in a specified act or acts, as deemed necessary by the court to ensure the public peace, the safety of the victim or the public, the rehabilitation of the offender, the satisfaction of the offender's restitution obligation to the victim or the offender's financial obligations to the State, or for any other purpose consistent with the interests of justice. The duration of any order entered pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed the maximum term of commitment provided by law for the offense or 1 year, whichever is greater; provided that in all cases where no commitment is provided by law the duration of such order shall not exceed 1 year. A violation of any order issued pursuant to this subsection shall be prosecuted pursuant to § 1271 of this title. Any such prosecution pursuant to § 1271 of this title shall not preclude prosecution under any other provision of this Code.

(n) Whenever a court imposes a sentence inconsistent with the presumptive sentences adopted by the Sentencing Accountability Commission, such court shall set forth on the record its reasons for imposing such penalty.

11 Del. C. 1953, § 4204; 58 Del. Laws, c. 497, § 2; 62 Del. Laws, c. 259, § 2; 66 Del. Laws, c. 134, §§ 1, 2; 67 Del. Laws, c. 130, §§ 6, 17, 18; 67 Del. Laws, c. 260, § 1; 67 Del. Laws, c. 350, §§ 1, 33; 70 Del. Laws, c. 186, § 1; 70 Del. Laws, c. 436, § 11; 71 Del. Laws, c. 32, § 1; 71 Del. Laws, c. 98, § 5; 71 Del. Laws, c. 154, § 1; 74 Del. Laws, c. 27, §§ 1-3.;

§ 4204A Confinement of youth convicted in Superior Court.

(a) When a child who has reached that child's sixteenth birthday is sentenced in Superior Court such sentence shall be served with the Department of Correction.

(b) When a child who has not reached that child's sixteenth birthday is sentenced in Superior Court to a period of incarceration, such sentence shall initially be served in a juvenile facility upon imposition of the sentence and such child shall remain in the custody of or be transferred forthwith to the Division of Youth Rehabilitative Services until the child's sixteenth birthday, at which time such child shall be transferred forthwith to the Department of Correction to serve the remaining portion of said sentence.

(c) When a child (youth) has been lawfully sentenced in Superior Court or has been lawfully transferred to the Department of Correction (DOC), DOC shall be exclusively responsible for all aspects of the child's (youth's) care, custody and control, including services associated with those responsibilities. The Department of Correction, and not the Department of Services for Children, Youth and Their Families shall have authority or jurisdiction of such child (youth).

(d)(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary, any offender sentenced to an aggregate term of incarceration in excess of 20 years for any offense or offenses other than murder first degree that were committed prior to the offender's eighteenth birthday shall be eligible to petition the Superior Court for sentence modification after the offender has served 20 years of the originally imposed Level V sentence.

(2) Notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary, any offender sentenced to a term of incarceration for murder first degree when said offense was committed prior to the offender's eighteenth birthday shall be eligible to petition the Superior Court for sentence modification after the offender has served 30 years of the originally imposed Level V sentence.

(3) Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection or title to the contrary, any offender who has petitioned the Superior Court for sentence modification pursuant to this subsection shall not be eligible to submit a second or subsequent petition until at least 5 years have elapsed since the date on which the Court ruled upon the offender's most recent petition. Further, the Superior Court shall have the discretion at the time of each sentence modification hearing to prohibit a subsequent sentence modification petition for a period of time in excess of 5 years if the Superior Court finds there to be no reasonable likelihood that the interests of justice will require another hearing within 5 years.

(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 4205 or § 4217 of this title, any court rule or any other provision of law to the contrary, a Superior Court Judge upon consideration of a petition filed pursuant to this subsection (d), may modify, reduce or suspend such petitioner's sentence, including any minimum or mandatory sentence, or a portion thereof, in the discretion of the Court. Nothing in this section, however, shall require the Court to grant such a petitioner a sentence modification pursuant to this section.

(5) The Superior Court shall have the authority to promulgate appropriate rules to regulate the filing and litigation of sentence modification petitions pursuant to this paragraph.

69 Del. Laws, c. 353, § 1; 70 Del. Laws, c. 186, § 1; 70 Del. Laws, c. 597, § 2; 71 Del. Laws, c. 5, §§ 2-4; 72 Del. Laws, c. 149, § 2; 79 Del. Laws, c. 37, § 4.;

§ 4205 Sentence for felonies.

(a) A sentence of incarceration for a felony shall be a definite sentence.

(b) The term of incarceration which the court may impose for a felony is fixed as follows:

(1) For a class A felony not less than 15 years up to life imprisonment to be served at Level V except for conviction of first degree murder in which event § 4209 of this title shall apply.

(2) For a class B felony not less than 2 years up to 25 years to be served at Level V.

(3) For a class C felony up to 15 years to be served at Level V.

(4) For a class D felony up to 8 years to be served at Level V.

(5) For a class E felony up to 5 years to be served at Level V.

(6) For a class F felony up to 3 years to be served at Level V.

(7) For a class G felony up to 2 years to be served at Level V.

(c) In the case of the conviction of any felony, the court shall impose a sentence of Level V incarceration where a minimum sentence is required by subsection (b) of this section and may impose a sentence of Level V incarceration up to the maximum stated in subsection (b) of this section for each class of felony.

(d) Where a minimum, mandatory, mandatory minimum or minimum mandatory sentence is required by subsection (b) of this section, such sentence shall not be subject to suspension by the court.

(e) Where no minimum sentence is required by subsection (b) of this section, or with regard to any sentence in excess of the minimum required sentence, the court may suspend that part of the sentence for probation or any other punishment set forth in § 4204 of this title.

(f) Any term of Level V incarceration imposed under this section must be served in its entirety at Level V, reduced only for earned "good time'' as set forth in § 4381 of this title.

(g) No term of Level V incarceration imposed under this section shall be served in other than a full custodial Level V institutional setting unless such term is suspended by the court for such other level sanction.

(h) The Department of Correction, the remainder of this section notwithstanding, may house Level V inmates at a Level IV work release center or halfway house during the last 180 days of their sentence; provided, however, that the first 5 days of any sentence to Level V, not suspended by the court, must be served at Level V.

(i) The Department of Correction, the remainder of this section notwithstanding, may grant Level V inmates 48-hour furloughs during the last 120 days of their sentence to assist in their adjustment to the community.

(j) No sentence to Level V incarceration imposed pursuant to this section is subject to parole.

(k) In addition to the penalties set forth above, the court may impose such fines and penalties as it deems appropriate.

(l ) In all sentences for less than 1 year the court may order that more than 5 days be served in Level V custodial setting before the Department may place the offender in Level IV custody.

67 Del. Laws, c. 130, § 6; 67 Del. Laws, c. 260, § 1; 71 Del. Laws, c. 98, § 6; 74 Del. Laws, c. 106, §§ 9, 10.;

§ 4205A Additional penalty for serious sex offenders or pedophile offenders.

(a) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any other laws to the contrary, the Superior Court, upon the State's application, shall sentence a defendant convicted of any crime set forth in § 771(a)(2), § 772, § 773, § 776, § 777, § 777A, § 778(1) or (2) of this title to not less than 25 years up to life imprisonment to be served at Level V if 1 of the following apply:

(1) The defendant has previously been convicted or adjudicated delinquent of any sex offense set forth in this title and classified as a class A or B felony, or any similar offense under the laws of another state, the United States or any territory of the United States.

(2) The victim of the instant offense is a child less than 14 years of age.

(b) [Repealed.]

(c) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any other laws to the contrary, the Superior Court, upon the State's application, shall sentence a defendant convicted of any crime set forth in subsection (a) of this section to an additional 5 years to be served at Level V for any sentence imposed under subsection (a) of this section if the victim of the crime set forth in subsection (a) of this section is a child less than 7 years of age.

(d)(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any other laws to the contrary, the Superior Court, upon the State's application, shall sentence a defendant convicted of any crime set forth in § 769 or § 783(4) of this title to not less than 5 years to be served at Level V if the victim of the crime is a child less than 7 years of age.

(2) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any other laws to the contrary, the Superior Court, upon the State's application, shall sentence a defendant convicted of a crime set forth in § 783A(4) of this title to not less than 10 years to be served at Level V if the victim of the crime is a child less than 7 years of age.

75 Del. Laws, c. 438, § 1; 77 Del. Laws, c. 318, § 14; 80 Del. Laws, c. 26, § 3; 80 Del. Laws, c. 349, § 1; 81 Del. Laws, c. 297, § 1.;

§ 4206 Sentence for misdemeanors.

(a) The sentence for a class A misdemeanor may include up to 1 year incarceration at Level V and such fine up to $2,300, restitution or other conditions as the court deems appropriate.

(b) The sentence for a class B misdemeanor may include up to 6 months incarceration at Level V and such fine up to $1,150, restitution or other conditions as the court deems appropriate.

(c) The sentence for an unclassified misdemeanor shall be a definite sentence fixed by the court in accordance with the sentence specified in the law defining the offense. If no sentence is specified in such law, the sentence may include up to 30 days incarceration at Level V and such fine up to $575, restitution or other conditions as the court deems appropriate. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in any municipality with a population greater than 50,000 people, any offense under the building, housing, health or sanitation code which is classified therein as a misdemeanor, the sentence for any person convicted of such a misdemeanor offense shall include the following fines and may include restitution or such other conditions as the court deems appropriate:

(1) For the first conviction: no less than $250, nor more than $1,000;

(2) For the second conviction for the same offense; no less than $500, nor more than $2,500; and

(3) For all subsequent convictions for the same offense: no less than $1,000 nor more than $5,000.

In any municipality with a population greater than 50,000 people, a conviction for a misdemeanor offense, which is defined as a "continuing'' or "ongoing'' violation, shall be considered a single conviction for the purposes of paragraphs (c)(1)-(3) of this section. For all convictions subsequent to the second, the minimum fines required herein shall not be suspended, but such amounts imposed over the minimum may be suspended or subject to such other conditions as the court deems appropriate. The provisions of this subsection relating to municipalities with a population greater than 50,000 people shall not apply to offenses or convictions involving single family residences that are occupied by an owner of the property.

(d) The court may suspend any sentence imposed under this section for probation or any of the other sanctions set forth in § 4204 of this title.

(e) Any term of Level V incarceration imposed under this section must be served in its entirety at Level V, reduced only for earned "good time'' as set forth in § 4381 of this title.

(f) No term of Level V incarceration imposed under this section shall be served in other than a full custodial Level V institutional setting unless such term is suspended by the court for such other level sanction.

(g) The Department of Correction, the remainder of this section notwithstanding, may house Level V inmates at a Level IV work release center or halfway house during the last 180 days of their sentence; provided, however, that the first 5 days of any sentence to Level V, not suspended by the court, must be served at Level V.

(h) The Department of Correction, the remainder of this section notwithstanding, may grant Level V inmates 48-hour furloughs during the last 120 days of their sentence to assist in their adjustment to the community.

(i) Any sentence for issuing a worthless check pursuant to § 900 of this title shall require restitution to the person to whom the check was given. For the purposes of this subsection, restitution shall mean the amount for which the check was written plus a service fee of $30 for processing a worthless check, or a fee of $50 if more than 1 check by same person was processed.

(j) In all sentences for less than 1 year the court may order that more than 5 days be served in Level V custodial setting before the Department may place the offender in Level IV custody.

66 Del. Laws, c. 253, § 1; 67 Del. Laws, c. 130, § 6; 67 Del. Laws, c. 260, § 1; 67 Del. Laws, c. 350, § 2; 68 Del. Laws, c. 9, § 5; 74 Del. Laws, c. 153, § 1.;

§ 4207 Sentences for violations.

(a) The Court may impose a fine of up to $345 for the first offense of any violation, up to $690 for the second offense of that same violation and up to $1,150 for the third offense of the same violation; provided, that only violations which occurred within 5 years of the violation for which sentence is imposed shall be considered in determining sentence.

(b) The Court may impose a period of Level I probation up to 1 year for any violation.

67 Del. Laws, c. 130, § 6; 67 Del. Laws, c. 260, § 1.;

§ 4208 Fines for organizations.

A sentence to pay a fine, when imposed on an organization, shall be the amount specified in the law setting forth the offense if a penalty is specified in that law, or, if there is no specific penalty defined in the law setting forth the offense, a sentence to pay a fine when imposed on an organization shall be as follows:

(1) For a felony or a misdemeanor resulting in death or serious physical injury, such fine as the court deems reasonable and appropriate;

(2) For a felony that does not result in death or serious physical injury, not more than $500,000;

(3) For a class A misdemeanor that results in physical injury, not more than $250,000;

(4) For a class A misdemeanor that does not result in physical injury, not more than $100,000;

(5) For a class B misdemeanor, class C or unclassified misdemeanor that results in physical injury, not more than $75,000;

(6) For a class B misdemeanor, class C or unclassified misdemeanor that does not result in physical injury, not more than $50,000; or

(7) For a violation, not more than $10,000.

If the defendant derives pecuniary gain from the offense, or if the offense results in pecuniary loss or damage to a person or organization other than the defendant, the defendant may be fined an amount equal to 3 times the amount of the pecuniary gain or 3 times the value of the pecuniary loss or damage incurred in lieu of the penalties set forth in paragraphs (1)-(7) of this section.

11 Del. C. 1953, § 4208; 58 Del. Laws, c. 497, § 2; 68 Del. Laws, c. 9, §§ 3, 4; 74 Del. Laws, c. 71, § 6.;

§ 4209 Punishment, procedure for determining punishment, review of punishment and method of punishment for first-degree murder committed by adult offenders.

(a) Punishment for first-degree murder. — Any person who is convicted of first-degree murder for an offense that was committed after the person had reached the person's eighteenth birthday shall be punished by death or by imprisonment for the remainder of the person's natural life without benefit of probation or parole or any other reduction, said penalty to be determined in accordance with this section.

(b) Separate hearing on issue of punishment for first-degree murder. —

(1) Upon a conviction of guilt of a defendant of first-degree murder, the Superior Court shall conduct a separate hearing to determine whether the defendant should be sentenced to death or to life imprisonment without benefit of probation or parole as authorized by subsection (a) of this section. If the defendant was convicted of first-degree murder by a jury, this hearing shall be conducted by the trial judge before that jury as soon as practicable after the return of the verdict of guilty. Alternate jurors shall not be excused from the case prior to submission of the issue of guilt to the trial jury and may, but need not be, separately sequestered until a verdict on guilt is entered. If the verdict of the trial jury is guilty of first-degree murder said alternates shall sit as alternate jurors on the issue of punishment. If, for any reason satisfactory to the Court, any member of the trial jury is excused from participation in the hearing on punishment, the trial judge shall replace such juror or jurors with alternate juror or jurors. If a jury of 12 jurors cannot participate in the hearing a separate and new jury, plus alternates, shall be selected for the hearing in accordance with the applicable rules of the Superior Court and laws of Delaware, unless the defendant or defendants and the State stipulate to the use of a lesser number of jurors.

(2) If the defendant was convicted of first-degree murder by the Court, after a trial and waiver of a jury trial or after a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the hearing shall be conducted by the trial judge before a jury, plus alternates, empaneled for that purpose and selected in accordance with the applicable rules of the Superior Court and laws of Delaware, unless said jury is waived by the State and the defendant in which case the hearing shall be conducted, if possible, by and before the trial judge who entered the finding of guilty or accepted the plea of guilty or nolo contendere.

(c) Procedure at punishment hearing. —

(1) The sole determination for the jury or judge at the hearing provided for by this section shall be the penalty to be imposed upon the defendant for the conviction of first-degree murder. At the hearing, evidence may be presented as to any matter that the Court deems relevant and admissible to the penalty to be imposed. The evidence shall include matters relating to any mitigating circumstance and to any aggravating circumstance, including, but not limited to, those aggravating circumstances enumerated in subsection (e) of this section. Notice in writing of any aggravating circumstances and any mitigating circumstances shall be given to the other side by the party seeking to introduce evidence of such circumstances prior to the punishment hearing, and after the verdict on guilt, unless in the discretion of the Court such advance notice is dispensed with as impracticable. The record of any prior criminal convictions and pleas of guilty or pleas of nolo contendere of the defendant or the absence of any such prior criminal convictions and pleas shall also be admissible in evidence.

(2) At the hearing the Court shall permit argument by the State, the defendant and/or the defendant's counsel, on the punishment to be imposed. Such argument shall consist of opening statements by each, unless waived, opening summation by the State, rebuttal summation by the defendant and/or the defendant's counsel and closing summation by the State.

(3)a. Upon the conclusion of the evidence and arguments the judge shall give the jury appropriate instructions and the jury shall retire to deliberate and report to the Court an answer to the following questions:

1. Whether the evidence shows beyond a reasonable doubt the existence of at least 1 aggravating circumstance as enumerated in subsection (e) of this section; and

2. Whether, by a preponderance of the evidence, after weighing all relevant evidence in aggravation or mitigation which bear upon the particular circumstances or details of the commission of the offense and the character and propensities of the offender, the aggravating circumstances found to exist outweigh the mitigating circumstances found to exist.

b.1. The jury shall report to the Court its finding on the question of the existence of statutory aggravating circumstances as enumerated in subsection (e) of this section. In order to find the existence of a statutory aggravating circumstance as enumerated in subsection (e) of this section beyond a reasonable doubt, the jury must be unanimous as to the existence of that statutory aggravating circumstance. As to any statutory aggravating circumstances enumerated in subsection (e) of this section which were alleged but for which the jury is not unanimous, the jury shall report the number of the affirmative and negative votes on each such circumstance.

2. The jury shall report to the Court by the number of the affirmative and negative votes its recommendation on the question as to whether, by a preponderance of the evidence, after weighing all relevant evidence in aggravation or mitigation which bear upon the particular circumstances or details of the commission of the offense and the character and propensities of the offender, the aggravating circumstances found to exist outweigh the mitigating circumstances found to exist.

(4) In the instructions to the jury the Court shall include instructions for it to weigh and consider any mitigating circumstances or aggravating circumstances and any of the statutory aggravating circumstances set forth in subsection (e) of this section which may be raised by the evidence. The jury shall be instructed to weigh any mitigating factors against the aggravating factors.

(d) Determination of sentence. —

(1) If a jury is impaneled, the Court shall discharge that jury after it has reported its findings and recommendation to the Court. A sentence of death shall not be imposed unless the jury, if a jury is impaneled, first finds unanimously and beyond a reasonable doubt the existence of at least 1 statutory aggravating circumstance as enumerated in subsection (e) of this section. If a jury is not impaneled, a sentence of death shall not be imposed unless the Court finds beyond a reasonable doubt the existence of at least 1 statutory aggravating circumstance as enumerated in subsection (e) of this section. If a jury has been impaneled and if the existence of at least 1 statutory aggravating circumstance as enumerated in subsection (e) of this section has been found beyond a reasonable doubt by the jury, the Court, after considering the findings and recommendation of the jury and without hearing or reviewing any additional evidence, shall impose a sentence of death if the Court finds by a preponderance of the evidence, after weighing all relevant evidence in aggravation or mitigation which bears upon the particular circumstances or details of the commission of the offense and the character and propensities of the offender, that the aggravating circumstances found by the Court to exist outweigh the mitigating circumstances found by the Court to exist. The jury's recommendation concerning whether the aggravating circumstances found to exist outweigh the mitigating circumstances found to exist shall be given such consideration as deemed appropriate by the Court in light of the particular circumstances or details of the commission of the offense and the character and propensities of the offender as found to exist by the Court. The jury's recommendation shall not be binding upon the Court. If a jury has not been impaneled and if the existence of at least 1 statutory aggravating circumstance as enumerated in subsection (e) of this section has been found beyond a reasonable doubt by the Court, it shall impose a sentence of death if the Court finds by a preponderance of the evidence, after weighing all relevant evidence in aggravation or mitigation which bears upon the particular circumstances or details of the commission of the offense and the character and propensities of the offender, that the aggravating circumstances found by the Court to exist outweigh the mitigating circumstances found by the Court to exist.

(2) Otherwise, the Court shall impose a sentence of imprisonment for the remainder of the defendant's natural life without benefit of probation or parole or any other reduction.

(3)a. Not later than 90 days before trial the defendant may file a motion with the Court alleging that the defendant had a serious intellectual developmental disorder at the time the crime was committed. Upon the filing of the motion, the Court shall order an evaluation of the defendant for the purpose of providing evidence of the following:

1. Whether the defendant has a significantly subaverage level of intellectual functioning;

2. Whether the defendant's adaptive behavior is substantially impaired; and

3. Whether the conditions described in paragraphs (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section existed before the defendant became 18 years of age.

b. During the hearing authorized by subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the defendant and the State may present relevant and admissible evidence on the issue of the defendant's alleged serious intellectual developmental disorder, or in rebuttal thereof. The defendant shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant had a serious intellectual developmental disorder at the time of the offense. Evidence presented during the hearing shall be considered by the jury in making its recommendation to the Court pursuant to paragraph (c)(3) of this section as to whether the aggravating circumstances found to exist outweigh the mitigating circumstances found to exist. The jury shall not make any recommendation to the Court on the question of whether the defendant had a serious intellectual developmental disorder at the time the crime was committed.

c. If the defendant files a motion pursuant to this paragraph claiming he or she had a serious intellectual developmental disorder at the time the crime was committed, the Court, in determining the sentence to be imposed, shall make specific findings as to the existence of a serious intellectual developmental disorder at the time the crime was committed. If the Court finds that the defendant has established by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant had a serious intellectual developmental disorder at the time the crime was committed, notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the Court shall impose a sentence of imprisonment for the remainder of the defendant's natural life without benefit of probation or parole or any other reduction. If the Court determines that the defendant has failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant had a serious intellectual developmental disorder at the time the crime was committed, the Court shall proceed to determine the sentence to be imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. Evidence on the question of the defendant's alleged serious intellectual developmental disorder presented during the hearing shall be considered by the Court in its determination pursuant to this section as to whether the aggravating circumstances found to exist outweigh the mitigating circumstances found to exist.

d. When used in this paragraph:

1. "Adaptive behavior'' means the effectiveness or degree to which the individual meets the standards of personal independence expected of the individual's age group, sociocultural background and community setting, as evidenced by significant limitations in not less than 2 of the following adaptive skill areas: communication, self-care, home living, social skills, use of community resources, self-direction, functional academic skills, work, leisure, health or safety;

2. "Serious intellectual developmental disorder'' means that an individual has significantly subaverage intellectual functioning that exists concurrently with substantial deficits in adaptive behavior and both the significantly subaverage intellectual functioning and the deficits in adaptive behavior were manifested before the individual became 18 years of age; and

3. "Significantly subaverage intellectual functioning'' means an intelligent quotient of 70 or below obtained by assessment with 1 or more of the standardized, individually administered general intelligence tests developed for the purpose of assessing intellectual functioning.

(4) After the Court determines the sentence to be imposed, it shall set forth in writing the findings upon which its sentence is based. If a jury is impaneled, and if the Court's decision as to whether the aggravating circumstances found to exist outweigh the mitigating circumstances found to exist differs from the jury's recommended finding, the Court shall also state with specificity the reasons for its decision not to accept the jury's recommendation.

(e) Aggravating circumstances. —

(1) In order for a sentence of death to be imposed, the jury, unanimously, or the judge where applicable, must find that the evidence established beyond a reasonable doubt the existence of at least 1 of the following aggravating circumstances which shall apply with equal force to accomplices convicted of such murder:

a. The murder was committed by a person in, or who has escaped from, the custody of a law-enforcement officer or place of confinement.

b. The murder was committed for the purpose of avoiding or preventing an arrest or for the purpose of effecting an escape from custody.

c. The murder was committed against any law-enforcement officer, corrections employee, firefighter, paramedic, emergency medical technician, fire marshal or fire police officer while such victim was engaged in the performance of official duties.

d. The murder was committed against a judicial officer, a former judicial officer, Attorney General, former Attorney General, Assistant or Deputy Attorney General or former Assistant or Deputy Attorney General, State Detective or former State Detective, Special Investigator or former Special Investigator, during, or because of, the exercise of an official duty.

e. The murder was committed against a person who was held or otherwise detained as a shield or hostage.

f. The murder was committed against a person who was held or detained by the defendant for ransom or reward.

g. The murder was committed against a person who was a witness to a crime and who was killed for the purpose of preventing the witness's appearance or testimony in any grand jury, criminal or civil proceeding involving such crime, or in retaliation for the witness's appearance or testimony in any grand jury, criminal or civil proceeding involving such crime.

h. The defendant paid or was paid by another person or had agreed to pay or be paid by another person or had conspired to pay or be paid by another person for the killing of the victim.

i. The defendant was previously convicted of another murder or manslaughter or of a felony involving the use of, or threat of, force or violence upon another person.

j. The murder was committed while the defendant was engaged in the commission of, or attempt to commit, or flight after committing or attempting to commit any degree of rape, unlawful sexual intercourse, arson, kidnapping, robbery, sodomy, burglary, or home invasion.

k. The defendant's course of conduct resulted in the deaths of 2 or more persons where the deaths are a probable consequence of the defendant's conduct.

l. The murder was outrageously or wantonly vile, horrible or inhuman in that it involved torture, depravity of mind, use of an explosive device or poison or the defendant used such means on the victim prior to murdering the victim.

m. The defendant caused or directed another to commit murder or committed murder as an agent or employee of another person.

n. The defendant was under a sentence of life imprisonment, whether for natural life or otherwise, at the time of the commission of the murder.

o. The murder was committed for pecuniary gain.

p. The victim was pregnant.

q. The victim was particularly vulnerable due to a severe intellectual, mental or physical disability.

r. The victim was 62 years of age or older.

s. The victim was a child 14 years of age or younger, and the murder was committed by an individual who is at least 4 years older than the victim.

t. At the time of the killing, the victim was or had been a nongovernmental informant or had otherwise provided any investigative, law enforcement or police agency with information concerning criminal activity, and the killing was in retaliation for the victim's activities as a nongovernmental informant or in providing information concerning criminal activity to an investigative, law enforcement or police agency.

u. The murder was premeditated and the result of substantial planning. Such planning must be as to the commission of the murder itself and not simply as to the commission or attempted commission of any underlying felony.

v. The murder was committed for the purpose of interfering with the victim's free exercise or enjoyment of any right, privilege or immunity protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, or because the victim has exercised or enjoyed said rights, or because of the victim's race, religion, color, disability, national origin or ancestry.

(2) In any case where the defendant has been convicted of murder in the first degree in violation of any provision of § 636(a)(2)-(6) of this title, that conviction shall establish the existence of a statutory aggravating circumstance and the jury, or judge where appropriate, shall be so instructed. This provision shall not preclude the jury, or judge where applicable, from considering and finding the statutory aggravating circumstances listed in this subsection and any other aggravating circumstances established by the evidence.

(f) Method and imposition of sentence of death. — The imposition of a sentence of death shall be upon such terms and conditions as the trial court may impose in its sentence, including the place, the number of witnesses which shall not exceed 10, and conditions of privacy, and shall occur between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. on the date set by the trial court. The trial court shall permit one adult member of the immediate family of the victim, as defined in § 4350(e) of this title, or the victim's designee, to witness the execution of a sentence of death pursuant to the rules of the court, if the family provides reasonable notice of its desire to be so represented. Punishment of death shall, in all cases, be inflicted by intravenous injection of a substance or substances in a lethal quantity sufficient to cause death and until such person sentenced to death is dead, and such execution procedure shall be determined and supervised by the Commissioner of the Department of Correction. The administration of the required lethal substance or substances required by this section shall not be construed to be the practice of medicine and any pharmacist or pharmaceutical supplier is authorized to dispense drugs to the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee, without prescription, for carrying out the provisions of this section, notwithstanding any other provision of law. Such sentence may not be carried out until final review thereof is had by the Delaware Supreme Court as provided for in subsection (g) of this section. The Court or the Governor may suspend the execution of the sentence until a later date to be specified, solely to permit completion of the process of judicial review of the conviction.

If the execution of the sentence of death as provided above is held unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then punishment of death shall, in all cases, be inflicted by hanging by the neck. The imposition of a sentence of death shall be upon such terms and conditions as the trial court may impose in its sentence, including the place, the number of witnesses and conditions of privacy. Such sentence may not be carried out until final review thereof is had by the Delaware Supreme Court as provided in subsection (g) of this section. The Court or the Governor may suspend the execution of the sentence until a later date to be specified, solely to permit completion of the process of judicial review of the conviction.

(g) Automatic review of death penalty by Delaware Supreme Court. —

(1) Whenever the death penalty is imposed, and upon the judgment becoming final in the trial court, the recommendation on and imposition of that penalty shall be reviewed on the record by the Delaware Supreme Court. Absent an appeal having been taken by the defendant upon the expiration of 30 days after the sentence of death has been imposed, the Clerk of the Superior Court shall require a complete transcript of the punishment hearing to be prepared promptly and within 10 days after receipt of that transcript the clerk shall transmit the transcript, together with a notice prepared by the clerk, to the Delaware Supreme Court. The notice shall set forth the title and docket number of the case, the name of the defendant, the name and address of any attorney and a narrative statement of the judgment, the offense and the punishment prescribed. The Court shall, if necessary, appoint counsel to respond to the State's positions in the review proceedings.

(2) The Supreme Court shall limit its review under this section to the recommendation on and imposition of the penalty of death and shall determine:

a. Whether, considering the totality of evidence in aggravation and mitigation which bears upon the particular circumstances or details of the offense and the character and propensities of the offender, the death penalty was either arbitrarily or capriciously imposed or recommended, or disproportionate to the penalty recommended or imposed in similar cases arising under this section.

b. Whether the evidence supports the jury's or the judge's finding of a statutory aggravating circumstance as enumerated in subsection (e) of this section and, where applicable, § 636(a)(2)-(6) of this title.

(3) The Supreme Court shall permit the defendant and the State to submit briefs within the time provided by the Court, and permit them to present oral argument to the Court.

(4) With regard to review of the sentence in accordance with this subsection, the Court shall:

a. Affirm the sentence of death.

b. Set aside the sentence of death and remand for correction of any errors occurring during the hearing and for imposition of the appropriate penalty. Such errors shall not affect the determination of guilt and shall not preclude the reimposition of death where appropriately determined after a new hearing on punishment.

c. Set forth its findings as to the reasons for its actions.

(h) Ordinary review not affected by section. — Any error in the guilt phase of the trial may be raised as provided by law and rules of court and shall be in addition to the review of punishment provided by this section.

11 Del. C. 1953, § 4209; 58 Del. Laws, c. 497, § 2; 59 Del. Laws, c. 284, § 2; 61 Del. Laws, c. 41, § 1; 63 Del. Laws, c. 357, § 1; 65 Del. Laws, c. 281, § 1; 65 Del. Laws, c. 494, § 4; 66 Del. Laws, c. 269, § 29; 68 Del. Laws, c. 189, §§ 1-4; 69 Del. Laws, c. 206, § 1; 69 Del. Laws, c. 439, § 1; 70 Del. Laws, c. 33, § 1; 70 Del. Laws, c. 137, § 1; 70 Del. Laws, c. 182, § 1; 70 Del. Laws, c. 186, § 1; 71 Del. Laws, c. 430, § 2; 73 Del. Laws, c. 423, §§ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; 73 Del. Laws, c. 424, § 1; 74 Del. Laws, c. 174, §§ 1, 2, 4; 75 Del. Laws, c. 166, § 1; 77 Del. Laws, c. 191, § 2; 78 Del. Laws, c. 224, §§ 20, 21; 78 Del. Laws, c. 252, § 10; 79 Del. Laws, c. 37, § 2.;

§ 4209A Punishment for first-degree murder committed by juvenile offenders.

Any person who is convicted of first-degree murder for an offense that was committed before the person had reached the person's eighteenth birthday shall be sentenced to term of incarceration not less than 25 years to be served at Level V up to a term of imprisonment for the remainder of the person's natural life to be served at Level V without benefit of probation or parole or any other reduction.

79 Del. Laws, c. 37, § 3.;

§ 4210 Arrest and disposition of intoxicated persons.

(a) Any intoxicated person taken into custody for a violation of § 1315 of this title shall immediately be taken to a detoxification center where the person shall be admitted as a patient.

(1) The arresting officer shall leave a summons for such intoxicated person with the chief medical officer of the detoxification center ordering such intoxicated person to appear before a justice of the peace at a date not to exceed a period of 5 days from the date of admission to the center.

(2) The intoxicated person shall be given a physical examination to determine the possible existence of any disease or ailment which threatens the health or safety of such individual; and upon a finding of any such disease or ailment, the medical staff of the detoxification center shall give such treatment as it deems necessary and practicable.

(b) Upon regaining sobriety and being informed of the person's physical condition, the person in custody shall inform the chief medical officer of the detoxification center as to whether, until such time as the person is to appear for trial, the person wishes to remain a patient or be released from custody.

(c) Should the person in custody validly consent to remain as a patient and to undergo testing procedures, the person shall be tested to determine if the person is a chronic alcoholic. A diagnosis of chronic alcoholism shall serve as an affirmative defense to violations of § 1315 of this title.

(d) Should it be shown to the satisfaction of the court that the person accused of intoxication suffers from chronic alcoholism, the person shall be acquitted of the charge of drunkenness and:

(1) Released from custody; or

(2) Temporarily released from custody under such conditions of treatment as the court may prescribe; such period of temporary release shall not exceed 1 year after which defendant shall be unconditionally released.

11 Del. C. 1953, § 4210; 58 Del. Laws, c. 497, § 2; 70 Del. Laws, c. 186, § 1.;

§ 4211 Payment of expenses.

Any person treated under § 4210 of this title shall, any law to the contrary notwithstanding, be responsible for the incurred expenses, and shall be billed for same by the Department of Mental Health.

11 Del. C. 1953, § 4211; 58 Del. Laws, c. 497, § 2.;

§ 4212 Definitions relating to §§ 4210 and 4211.

For the purposes of §§ 4210 and 4211 of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:

(1) "Chronic alcoholic'' shall mean a person who compulsively and habitually uses alcoholic beverages to the extent that they injure the person's health and interfere with the person's social and economic functioning.

(2) "Detoxification center'' shall mean a medical facility, approved by the Department of Health and Social Services, or its successor, which shall provide appropriate medical services for intoxicated persons, including initial examination, diagnosis and temporary treatment.

(3) "Intoxicated person'' shall mean a person whose powers of self-control have been substantially impaired because of the consumption of alcohol.

(4) "Sobriety'' shall mean an individual's state of being when not under the influence of alcohol.

(5) "Valid consent'' shall mean the voluntary giving of assent to testing procedures by a legally competent person; in the case of a minor or incompetent, such assent shall be obtained from a parent or guardian of the individual or in the absence of either, a person in loco parentis, to undergo testing.

11 Del. C. 1953, § 4212; 58 Del. Laws, c. 497, § 2; 70 Del. Laws, c. 186, § 1.;

§ 4213 Arrest of persons under the influence of drugs; drug detoxification centers.

(a) For purposes of this section only, the following phrases shall have meanings respectively ascribed to them:

(1) "A person under the influence of drugs'' shall mean a person whose powers of self-control have been substantially impaired because of the consumption of a drug described in Chapter 47 of Title 16.

(2) "Drug abuser'' shall mean any person who compulsively and habitually uses drugs to the extent that they injure the person's health and interfere with the person's social and economic functioning.

(b) The Director of the Division of Drug Abuse Control shall designate certain hospital, clinic or other treatment facilities as "drug detoxification centers.'' The Director shall so designate such a facility only when the Director is satisfied that the facility has the medical and other staff, as well as the equipment, to diagnose and treat drug abusers as provided for in this section.

(c) Upon arrest for any crime which is not a felony under this title or Title 16, an arrestee who believes that the arrestee is under the influence of drugs as defined in subsection (a) of this section shall have the right to request immediate admission to a drug detoxification center. Upon such request, the arresting officer shall, as soon as transportation is available and as soon as conditions at the scene of the arrest permit, arrange to have the arrestee transported to the nearest available drug detoxification center.

(1) No expression of a desire to be admitted to a drug detoxification center shall be admissible in evidence in any criminal prosecution against the arrestee.

(2) Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, no arrestee shall be heard to object in any court to failure to arraign the arrestee before a magistrate during the period of transportation to or stay in a drug detoxification center, or for a reasonable time not to exceed 24 hours after release.

(3) An arresting officer shall, when the officer suspects an arrestee of being under the influence of drugs, inform the arrestee of the rights under this section.

(4) No arrestee may revoke a request to be taken to a drug detoxification center after having made that request, and any drug detoxification center to which an arrestee is brought must consent to admission and testing of the arrestee, subject to limitations of facilities and staff.

(d) A drug detoxification center shall initially test admittees under this section to determine if they are under the influence of drugs or are drug abusers. If tests prove negative, the admittee shall be released forthwith to the custody of the arresting authorities. Any arrestee requesting admission to a drug detoxification center is deemed to consent to all medical and psychiatric tests considered necessary by the center to carry out its function under this section. The results of tests taken at a drug detoxification center or statements made by admittees under this section to drug detoxification center staff shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal prosecution against the admittee.

(e) Admittees under this section whom the drug detoxification center determines to be drug abusers shall be asked if they wish to receive further treatment. Those consenting to further treatment shall remain until discharged by the drug detoxification center or until they wish to leave. No one admitted under this section shall be permitted to leave the drug detoxification center until the arresting police agency is notified.

(f) Upon a satisfactory showing to the court that a person is a drug abuser as defined in subsection (a) of this section and has completed treatment under this section in a manner satisfactory to the chairperson of the drug diagnostic team at the drug detoxification center to which the person was admitted, the charge of consumption or use of the drug, under Chapter 47 of Title 16, shall be dismissed.

(g) Whenever a police officer sees a person whom the officer believes to have taken drugs and needs medical treatment, the police officer may take that person into custody and arrange to have the person taken to a drug detoxification center or arrange to secure other medical help. This subsection shall apply whether or not the officer may under the circumstances lawfully arrest the person whom the officer believes to have taken drugs. No officer acting in good faith shall be subject to criminal or civil liability for any action under this subsection.

(h) To further the implementation of this section, the Director of the Division of Drug Abuse Control may prescribe regulations for the operation of drug detoxification centers and may assist such drug detoxification centers by distributing to them such funds as the General Assembly may from time to time appropriate to the Director for expenditure on their behalf.

11 Del. C. 1953, § 4212A; 58 Del. Laws, c. 250, § 1; 58 Del. Laws, c. 497, § 3; 58 Del. Laws, c. 543; 70 Del. Laws, c. 186, § 1.;

§ 4214 Habitual criminal; life sentence.

(a) Any person who has been 2 times convicted of a Title 11 violent felony, or attempt to commit such a violent felony, as defined in § 4201(c) of this title under the laws of this State, and/or any comparable violent felony as defined by another state, United States or any territory of the United States, and who shall thereafter be convicted of a subsequent Title 11 violent felony, or attempt to commit such a violent felony, as defined in § 4201(c) of this title, or any person who has been 3 times convicted of any felony under the laws of this State, and/or any other state, United States or any territory of the United States, and who shall thereafter be convicted of a subsequent felony is declared to be an habitual criminal. The court, upon the State's petition, shall impose the applicable minimum sentence pursuant to subsection (b), (c) or (d) of this section and may, in its discretion, impose a sentence of up to life imprisonment, unless the felony conviction allows and results in the imposition of capital punishment. Under no circumstances may the sentence imposed pursuant to this section be less than the minimum sentence provided for by the felony prompting the person's designation as a habitual offender.

(b) Any person who has been 3 times convicted of a felony under the laws of this State, and/or any other state, United States or any territory of the United States, and who shall thereafter be convicted of a subsequent felony, which is the person's first Title 11 violent felony, or attempt to commit such a violent felony, as defined in § 4201(c) of this title, shall receive a minimum sentence of 1/2 of the statutory maximum penalty provided elsewhere in this title, unless the maximum statutory penalty is life in which case the minimum sentence shall be 30 years, for the subsequent felony which forms the basis of the States petition to have the person declared to be an habitual criminal, up to life imprisonment, unless the felony conviction allows and results in the imposition of capital punishment.

(c) Any person who has been 2 times convicted of a felony under the laws of this State, and/or any other state, United States or any territory of the United States, and 1 time convicted of a Title 11 violent felony, or attempt to commit such a violent felony, as defined in § 4201(c) of this title under the laws of this State, and/or any comparable violent felony as defined by another state, United States or any territory of the United States, and who shall thereafter be convicted of a subsequent Title 11 violent felony, or attempt to commit such a violent felony, as defined by § 4201(c) of this title, shall receive a minimum sentence of the statutory maximum penalty provided elsewhere in this title for the fourth or subsequent felony which forms the basis of the State's petition to have the person declared to be an habitual criminal, up to life imprisonment, unless the felony conviction allows and results in the imposition of capital punishment.

(d) Any person who has been 2 times convicted of a Title 11 violent felony, or attempt to commit such a violent felony, as defined in § 4201(c) of this title under the laws of this State, and/or any comparable violent felony as defined by another state, United States or any territory of the United States, and who shall thereafter be convicted of a third or subsequent felony which is a Title 11 violent felony, or an attempt to commit such a violent felony, as defined in § 4201(c), shall receive a minimum sentence of the statutory maximum statutory penalty provided elsewhere in this title for the third or subsequent Title 11 violent felony which forms the basis of the State's petition to have the person declared to be an habitual criminal, up to life imprisonment, unless the felony conviction allows and results in the imposition of capital punishment.

(e) Notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary, any minimum sentence required to be imposed pursuant to subsection (b), (c), or (d) of this section shall not be subject to suspension by the court, and shall be served in its entirety at full custodial Level V institutional setting without the benefit of probation or parole, except that any such sentence shall be subject to the provisions of §§ 4205(h), 4381 and 4382 of this title. For purposes of the computation of good time under § 4381 of this title, a life sentence imposed pursuant only to this section shall equate to a sentence of 45 years.

(f) Notwithstanding any statute, court rule or regulation to the contrary, beginning January 1, 2017, any person sentenced as an habitual criminal to a minimum sentence of not less than the statutory maximum penalty for a violent felony pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, or a life sentence pursuant to subsection (b) of this section prior to July 19, 2016, shall be eligible to petition the Superior Court for sentence modification after the person has served a sentence of incarceration equal to any applicable mandatory sentence otherwise required by this section or the statutes describing said offense or offenses, whichever is greater. Absent extraordinary circumstances, the petitioner may only file 1 application for sentence modification under this section. A Superior Court Judge upon consideration of a petition filed pursuant to this subsection may modify, reduce or suspend such petitioner's sentence, excepting any minimum or mandatory sentence required by this section or the statutes describing said offense or offenses. If a Superior Court Judge modifies such petitioner's sentence, the Judge may impose a suspended sentence that includes a probationary term. Nothing in this section, however, shall require the Court to grant such a petitioner a sentence modification pursuant to this section. For the purposes of this subsection, the "applicable mandatory sentence'' shall be calculated by reference to the penalties prescribed for the relevant offense or offenses by this Code as of July 19, 2016, unless said offense has been repealed, in which case the penalties prescribed by this Code at the time of the act repealing said offense shall be controlling. The Superior Court shall establish rules to implement this subsection which are consistent with the statute, and those rules shall also provide that all petitions filed pursuant to this subsection where the felony establishing an inmate as a habitual offender was a Title 16 offense are heard first, followed by all petitions filed pursuant to this subsection where the felony establishing an inmate as a habitual offender was a crime against property, followed by all other petitions. Nothing in the rules or this subsection shall prohibit the Superior Court from hearing any petition without regard to this preferred sequence when the Department of Justice, through the personal authorization of the Attorney General, Chief Deputy Attorney General, State Prosecutor, or the Chief Prosecutor of a particular county, in response to a request authorized by the Chief Defender, Chief Deputy Defender, or Chief Conflicts Counsel, or private counsel if a petitioner is not represented by the Office of Defense Services, consents to the hearing of that petition and the Superior Court determines it is in the interest of justice to do so. The rules shall also provide for an initial review, including review of a formal response by the Department of Justice after consulting with the victim or victims, of sentence modification petitions involving crimes against persons or property, for the purpose of ensuring that victims are not inconvenienced by petitions that should be denied based upon the documents submitted; in cases not denied in this manner, all victims shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The Superior Court's review of any petitions filed pursuant to this subsection shall include a review of the applicant's prior criminal history, including arrests and convictions, a review of the applicant's conduct while incarcerated, and available evidence as to the likelihood that the applicant will reoffend if released, including a formal, recent risk assessment. The Superior Court shall articulate on the record the results of its review and its rationale for granting or denying a petition. In all cases where sentence modifications are granted, modified sentences should provide for step-down provisions to ensure successful reintegration of persons into the community. By January 1, 2017, the Department of Correction shall notify any criminal defendant whose Level V sentence was imposed under a statutory sentencing regimen which was subsequently changed in a manner that reduced the sentence applicable to the defendant's convictions, including any criminal defendant who received a minimum mandatory sentence that no longer exists by virtue of the enactment of 80 Del. Laws, c. 28. The Department of Correction shall similarly notify the attorney of record, and if the attorney of record is unavailable to receive notice, the Office of Defense Services.

11 Del. C. 1953, § 4213; 58 Del. Laws, c. 497, § 2; 59 Del. Laws, c. 547, §§ 19-21; 65 Del. Laws, c. 159, § 1; 66 Del. Laws, c. 269, § 7; 67 Del. Laws, c. 350, § 37; 70 Del. Laws, c. 186, § 1; 70 Del. Laws, c. 477, § 2; 71 Del. Laws, c. 285, §§ 15, 16; 72 Del. Laws, c. 34, § 4; 72 Del. Laws, c. 43, § 7; 72 Del. Laws, c. 197, § 8; 74 Del. Laws, c. 346, § 1; 77 Del. Laws, c. 318, § 15; 78 Del. Laws, c. 13, §§ 11, 12; 78 Del. Laws, c. 252, § 11; 78 Del. Laws, c. 406, § 3; 79 Del. Laws, c. 89, § 1; 80 Del. Laws, c. 321, § 1; 81 Del. Laws, c. 6, §§ 1-3; 81 Del. Laws, c. 313, § 1.;

§ 4215 Sentence of greater punishment because of previous conviction.

(a) If at the time of sentence, it appears to the court that the conviction of a defendant constitutes a second or other conviction making the defendant liable to a punishment greater than the maximum which may be imposed upon a person not so previously convicted, the court shall fully inform the defendant as to such previous conviction or convictions and shall call upon the defendant to admit or deny such previous conviction or convictions. If the defendant shall admit the previous conviction or convictions, the court may impose the greater punishment. If the defendant shall stand silent or if the defendant shall deny the prior conviction or convictions, the defendant shall be tried upon the issue of previous conviction; provided, however, that the foregoing procedure shall not apply in cases of fourth offenders liable to sentence of life imprisonment under § 4214 of this title.

(b) If, at any time after conviction and before sentence, it shall appear to the Attorney General or to the Superior Court that, by reason of such conviction and prior convictions, a defendant should be subjected to § 4214 of this title, the Attorney General shall file a motion to have the defendant declared an habitual criminal under § 4214 of this title. If it shall appear to the satisfaction of the Court at a hearing on the motion that the defendant falls within § 4214 of this title, the Court shall enter an order declaring the defendant an habitual criminal and shall impose sentence accordingly.

11 Del. C. 1953, § 4214; 58 Del. Laws, c. 497, § 2; 70 Del. Laws, c. 186, § 1.;

§ 4215A Sentence of greater punishment because of previous conviction under prior law or the laws of other jurisdictions.

(a) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, if a previous conviction for a specified offense would make the defendant liable to a punishment greater than that which may be imposed upon a person not so convicted, that previous conviction shall make the defendant liable to the greater punishment if that previous conviction was:

(1) For an offense specified in the laws of this State or for an offense which is the same as, or equivalent to, such offense as the same existed and was defined under the laws of this State existing at the time of such conviction; or

(2) For an offense specified in the laws of any other state, local jurisdiction, the United States, any territory of the United States, any federal or military reservation, or the District of Columbia which is the same as, or equivalent to, an offense specified in the laws of this State.

(b) This section shall apply to any offense or sentencing provision defined in this Code unless the statute defining such offense or sentencing provision or a statute directly related thereto expressly provides that this section is not applicable to such offense or sentencing provision.

74 Del. Laws, c. 62, § 1.;

§ 4216 Transition provisions.

(a) Where an inmate is serving a sentence to Level V (incarceration) imposed not under the Truth in Sentencing Act of 1989 and receives a subsequent sentence to Level V under the provisions of the Truth in Sentencing Act, serving of the earlier sentence shall be suspended and the inmate shall serve the new Level V sentence until it is completed and then resume serving the original sentence.

(b) Where an inmate is serving a "nonmandatory'' Level V (incarceration) sentence and is subsequently sentenced to a mandatory term of incarceration, serving of the earlier sentence shall be suspended and the inmate shall serve the new mandatory Level V sentence until it is completed and then resume serving the earlier sentence.

(c) Where an inmate is serving Level V (incarceration) sentence or sentences imposed not under the Truth in Sentencing Act of 1989, and is subsequently sentenced to Level V under the provisions of the Truth in Sentencing Act and had less than an aggregate 3 years remaining on the prior sentence or sentences, the court at the time of sentencing under the Truth in Sentencing Act may in its discretion suspend the remainder of the prior non-Truth in Sentencing Level V sentence or sentences, unless such sentence was a statutory mandatory term.

(d) Any individual convicted of a crime on or after January 1, 1990, which crime occurred prior to June 30, 1990, may elect to be sentenced under the provisions of the Truth in Sentencing Act of 1989 rather than under the prior provisions of this title.

67 Del. Laws, c. 130, § 14; 67 Del. Laws, c. 350, §§ 3, 28.;

§ 4217 Jurisdiction over sentence retained.

(a) In any case where the trial court has imposed an aggregate sentence of incarceration at Level V in excess of 1 year, the court shall retain jurisdiction to modify the sentence to reduce the level of custody or time to be served under the provisions of this section.

(b) The court may modify the sentence solely on the basis of an application filed by the Department of Correction for good cause shown which certifies that the release of the defendant shall not constitute a substantial risk to the community or the defendant's own self.

(c) Good cause under this section shall include, but not be limited to, rehabilitation of the offender, serious medical illness or infirmity of the offender and prison overcrowding.

(d)(1) Any application filed by the Department of Correction under this section shall be filed with the Board of Parole. The Board of Parole shall have the authority to promulgate reasonable regulations concerning the form and content of said applications. The Board of Parole may require the Department of Correction to provide it with any information in the possession of the Department reasonably necessary for the Board to assess such applications.

(2) Following the receipt of any application for modification filed by the Department of Corrections which conforms with any regulations and requirements of the Board of Parole promulgated pursuant to paragraph (d)(1) of this section, the Board of Parole shall hold a hearing under the provisions of § 4350(a) of this title for the purpose of making a recommendation to the trial court as to the approval or disapproval of the application. This hearing shall not be held unless written notice of the hearing is provided to the Attorney General's office at least 30 days prior to scheduled hearing date. A copy of the Department of Correction's application for modification shall be provided to the Attorney General's office along with written notice of the hearing date.

(3) Following the hearing described in paragraph (d)(2) of this section, the Board of Parole may reject an application for modification if it determines that the defendant constitutes a substantial risk to the community, or if it determines that the application is not based on good cause. Notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary, any application rejected pursuant to this paragraph shall not be forwarded to the Superior Court, and any offender who is the subject of such rejected application shall not be the subject of a subsequent application for modification for at least 1 year, except in the case of serious medical illness or infirmity of said offender.

(4) Only in those cases where the Board by a majority vote recommends a modification of the sentence shall the application be submitted to the Court for consideration.

(e) Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Board of Parole, the court may in its discretion grant or deny the application for modification of sentence. The Court may request additional information, but need not hold further hearings on the application. The Court shall not act upon the application without first providing the Attorney General's office with a reasonable period of time to be heard on the matter. Should the Court deny the application because of a determination that the defendant constitutes a substantial risk to the community, or because it determines that the application lacks good cause, the defendant who is the subject of the denied application shall not be the subject of a subsequent application for modification for at least 1 year, except in the case of serious medical illness or infirmity of the defendant.

(f) Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, in the case of any offender who is serving a sentence of incarceration at Level V imposed pursuant to a conviction for any crime, the Court may order that said offender shall be ineligible for sentence modification pursuant to this section until a specified portion of said Level V sentence has been served, except that no offender who is serving a sentence of incarceration at Level V imposed pursuant to a conviction for a violent felony in Title 11 shall be eligible for sentence modification pursuant to this section until the offender has served at least 1/2 of the originally imposed Level V sentence, and no offender who is serving a statutory mandatory term of incarceration at Level V imposed pursuant to a conviction for any offense set forth in Title 11 shall be eligible for sentence modification pursuant to this section during the mandatory portion of said sentence. Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude a sentence modification pursuant to this section which is based solely upon serious medical illness or infirmity of the offender.

(g) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the court's ability to modify a sentence within the scope of the trial court's duly promulgated rules.

(h) For purposes of this section, "rehabilitation'' is defined as the process of restoring an individual to a useful and constructive place in society especially through some form of vocational, correctional, or therapeutic retraining.

67 Del. Laws, c. 130, § 14; 67 Del. Laws, c. 350, §§ 4-6; 69 Del. Laws, c. 311, §§ 1-3; 70 Del. Laws, c. 186, § 1; 77 Del. Laws, c. 362, §§ 1, 2.;

§ 4218 Probation before judgment.

(a) Subject to the limitations set forth in this section, for a violation or misdemeanor offense under Title 4, 7, or this title, or for any violation or misdemeanor offense under Title 21 which is designated as a motor vehicle offense subject to voluntary assessment by § 709 of Title 21, or a violation of § 2702 of Title 14, or for violations of § 4166(d) of Title 21, or for violations of § 4172 of Title 21, or for a violation of a county or municipal code, or for a misdemeanor offense under § 4764, § 4771 or § 4774 of Title 16, or for a misdemeanor offense under § 4810(a) of Title 29, a court exercising criminal jurisdiction after accepting a guilty plea or nolo contendere plea may, with the consent of the defendant and the State, stay the entry of judgment, defer further proceedings, and place the defendant on "probation before judgment'' subject to such reasonable terms and conditions as may be appropriate. The terms and conditions of any probation before judgment shall include the following requirements: (i) the defendant shall provide the court with that defendant's current address; (ii) the defendant shall promptly provide the court with written notice of any change of address; and (iii) the defendant shall appear if summoned at any hearing convened for the purpose of determining whether the defendant has violated or fulfilled the terms and conditions of probation before judgment. The terms and conditions may include any or all of the following:

(1) Ordering the defendant to pay a pecuniary penalty;

(2) Ordering the defendant to pay court costs to the State;

(3) Ordering the defendant to pay restitution;

(4) Ordering the defendant to perform community service;

(5) Ordering the defendant to refrain from contact with certain persons; and

(6) Ordering the defendant to conduct themselves in a specified manner.

The length of the period of probation before judgment shall be fixed by the court, but in no event shall the total period of probation before judgment exceed the maximum term of commitment provided by law for the offense or 1 year, whichever is greater.

(b) This section may not be substituted for:

(1) Section 1024 of Title 10. First offenders domestic violence diversion program;

(2) Section 900A of this title. Conditional discharge for issuing a bad check as first offense; or

(3) Section 4177B of Title 21. First offenders; election in lieu of trial.

(c)(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, no person shall be admitted to probation before judgment if:

a. The person is currently serving a sentence of incarceration, probation, parole or early release of any type imposed for another offense;

b. The person is charged with any offense set forth in this title, and has previously been convicted of any violent felony;

c. The person is charged with any offense set forth in this title, and has previously been convicted of any nonviolent felony within 10 years of the date of the commission of the alleged offense;

d. The person is charged with any offense set forth in this title, and has previously been convicted of any misdemeanor offense within 5 years of the date of the commission of the alleged offense;

e. The person is charged with any offense set forth in Title 4 or 7, and has been previously convicted of any offense set forth in Title 4 or 7 within 5 years of the date of the commission of the alleged offense;

f. The person is currently charged with any offense set forth in § 709 of Title 21, and has been previously convicted of any offense set forth in Title 21 within 5 years of the date of the commission of the alleged offense;

g. The person is currently charged with a violation of § 2702 of Title 14 and has been previously convicted of a violation of 2702 of Title 14 within 5 years of the date of the alleged offense; or

h. The person is charged with a violation of a county or municipal code provision and has previously been convicted of a violation of another county or municipal code provision within 5 years of the date of the commission of the alleged offense.

i. The person is charged with an offense involving a motor vehicle and holds a commercial driver license (CDL).

(2) For the purposes of this subsection, the following shall also constitute a previous conviction:

a. A conviction under the laws of another state, the United States, or any territory of the United States of any offense which is the same as, or equivalent to, any offense specified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section;

b. An adjudication of delinquency; or

c. Any adjudication, resolution, disposition or program set forth in § 4177B(e)(1) of Title 21.

(d) This section shall not be available to any person who has previously been admitted to probation before judgment for any offense within 5 years of the current offense.

(e) Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit probation before judgment for a violation of a county or municipal code that would not be permitted for the corresponding state code offense.

(f) Upon a violation of a term or condition of the court's order of probation before judgment, the court may enter judgment and proceed with disposition of the person as if the person had not been placed on probation before judgment.

(g) Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions of probation before judgment, the court shall enter an order discharging the person from probation. The burden shall be upon the defendant to demonstrate that the terms and conditions of probation have been fulfilled. The discharge is the final disposition of the matter. Discharge of a person under this section shall be without judgment of conviction and is not a conviction for purposes of any disqualification or disability imposed by law because of conviction of a crime.

(h) Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the court shall not admit a defendant to probation before judgment nor otherwise apply any provision of this section unless the defendant first gives written consent to the court permitting any hearing or proceeding pursuant to this section to occur in the defendant's absence if:

(1) Timely notice of the hearing or proceeding is sent or delivered to the address provided by the defendant pursuant to subsection (a) of this section; and

(2) The defendant fails to appear at said proceeding.

In the event that a defendant fails to appear at any hearing or proceeding pursuant to this section, the court may proceed in the defendant's absence if it first finds that timely notice of the hearing or proceeding was sent or delivered to the address provided by the defendant pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the power of the court to hold a hearing to determine whether a defendant is in violation of the terms of that defendant's probation.

(i) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section to the contrary, in any case in which the Delaware Department of Justice does not intend to enter its appearance, the consent of the State shall not be required prior to placing a defendant on "probation before judgment.'' Notwithstanding the foregoing, except for the offenses under Title 21 to which this section applies, the Attorney General or other prosecuting authority may advise the court of aggravating circumstances in opposition to placing a defendant on "probation before judgment.''

72 Del. Laws, c. 126, § 1; 70 Del. Laws, c. 186, § 1; 72 Del. Laws, c. 453, §§ 1-8; 73 Del. Laws, c. 301, §§ 3, 4; 75 Del. Laws, c. 184, § 1; 75 Del. Laws, c. 364, § 2; 76 Del. Laws, c. 251, § 2; 78 Del. Laws, c. 13, § 13; 78 Del. Laws, c. 230, § 2; 80 Del. Laws, c. 238, § 1; 80 Del. Laws, c. 415, § 1; 81 Del. Laws, c. 250, § 3.;

§ 4219 Continuous Remote Alcohol Monitoring Program.

(a) There is hereby established for sentencing and probation purposes a Continuous Remote Alcohol Monitoring Program which shall use technology to monitor offenders for alcohol use. The program shall be administered by the Department of Correction which shall have the sole authority to determine which offenders are accepted into the program.

(b) The Board of Parole or any Court of competent jurisdiction may request and recommend, as part of conditions of release or the sentence of any person convicted under § 4177(a) of Title 21 for a first offense where the first offender election is not available, or for a subsequent offense involving a blood alcohol content of .20 or higher, a period of continuous remote alcohol monitoring not to exceed 90 days for a first offense and 120 days for a second offense.

(c) Any inmate incarcerated for violations of § 4177 of Title 21 and selected for participation in the program shall be released on Level IV status, subject to the conditions of the program, and those conditions imposed by the sentencing judge. The remainder of the participant's sentence of incarceration shall be suspended upon completion of the program requirements. Participants failing to satisfactorily complete the program shall be returned to the Board of Parole or the sentencing authority for resentencing.

(d) Any offender considered for participation must agree to adhere to the conditions established for participation before being accepted into the program.

(e) The Department of Correction shall report annually on the use of the program, and its effectiveness as a supervision mechanism.

75 Del. Laws, c. 143, § 1; 70 Del. Laws, c. 186, § 1; 75 Del. Laws, c. 381, §§ 1, 2; 76 Del. Laws, c. 134, § 1; 76 Del. Laws, c. 366, § 1.;

§ 4220 Modification, suspension or reduction of sentence for substantial assistance.

(a) The Attorney General may move the sentencing court to modify, reduce or suspend the sentence of any person who is convicted of any crime or offense specified in this Code, and who provides substantial assistance in the identification, arrest or prosecution of any other person for a crime or offense specified in this Code, in the laws of the United States, or any other state or territory of the United States.

(b) Upon good cause shown, any motion made pursuant to subsection (a) of this section may be filed and heard in camera.

(c) The provisions of § 4204(d) or § 4217 of this title, any court rule or any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, a judge of the court that is imposing or that has imposed a sentence, upon hearing a motion filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, may modify, reduce or suspend that sentence, including any minimum or mandatory sentence, or a portion thereof, if the court finds that the person rendered such substantial assistance.

77 Del. Laws, c. 46, § 1.;

§ 4221 Modification, deferral, suspension or reduction of sentence for serious physical illness, injury or infirmity.

Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, a court may modify, defer, suspend or reduce a minimum or mandatory sentence of 1 year or less, or a portion thereof, where the court finds by clear and convincing evidence, or by stipulation of the State, that the person to be sentenced suffers from a serious physical illness, injury or infirmity with continuing treatment needs which make incarceration inappropriate and that such person does not constitute a substantial risk to the community.

77 Del. Laws, c. 304, § 1.;