Joe Biden’s Gay Marriage Slip-Up
Gay marriage has always been a delicate thing for President Obama. For public consumption, he says he’s in favor of equivalent legal rights for same-sex couples, though not equal status—that is, civil unions, but not marriage. For gays, lesbians, and groups advocating for gay marriage, all of whom make up an important Democratic constituency, he says he’s “evolving,” hinting that he’ll finally support marriage publicly if they’ll just be patient.

And then there’s his Vice President. You have to hand it to Joe Biden—there aren’t many people who can threaten years of careful triangulating with a few comments the way he can.

During an appearance on “Meet the Press” on Sunday, as host David Gregory quizzed Biden on the subject, the Vice President made some news:

GREGORY: You’re comfortable with same-sex marriage now? BIDEN: Look, I am Vice President of the United States of America. The President sets the policy. I am absolutely comfortable with the fact that men marrying men, women marrying women, and heterosexual men marrying women are entitled to the same exact rights. All the civil rights, all the civil liberties. And quite frankly I don’t see much of a distinction beyond that.

Some people—like Igor Volsky, of ThinkProgress, a blog run by the Center for American Progress, a liberal think-tank with ties to the Administration—are interpreting this as an official endorsement of gay marriage. That is, as Andrew Sullivan argued, almost certainly not the case. Indeed, the White House was quick to walk back Biden’s remarks:

The vice president was saying what the president has said previously—that committed and loving same-sex couples deserve the same rights and protections enjoyed by all Americans, and that we oppose any effort to rollback those rights. That’s why we stopped defending the constitutionality of section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act in legal challenges and support legislation to repeal it. Beyond that, the Vice President was expressing that he too is evolving on the issue, after meeting so many committed couples and families in this country.

This doesn’t even appear to have been a trial balloon; if it was, the White House wouldn’t have shot it down so quickly. It looks like just another case of Biden sticking his foot in his mouth.

But we shouldn’t really blame him. The problem he faced is one his boss has had a hard time with as well: they can’t give a coherent explanation of their position because they don’t have a coherent explanation to give.

Obama’s objection to same-sex marriage is, by all appearances, not about principle—it’s about politics. You’d be hard pressed to find any close observers of the President who think that he actually believes what he says he does, but we’re still at at a point where supporting gay marriage would be a liability for a national politician. Biden may not have phrased it well, but he was indeed repeating the Administration’s line. It’s just that it’s not easy to explain why Obama is still stuck with a position that could be summed up as “separate, but equal.”