Report: Trump lawyer paid porn star to keep alleged affair with presidential candidate under wraps

NEW YORK — A lawyer for President Trump arranged a $130,000 payment to a former porn star a month before the 2016 election — part of an agreement to keep her quiet about an extramarital affair she had with the president, the Wall Street Journal reported Friday.

The reported payment came as the actress, Stephanie Clifford, 38, was discussing sharing her account with ABC’s “Good Morning America” and the online magazine Slate, according to the New York Times.

Jacob Weisberg, editor-in-chief of the Slate Group, said Friday that in a series of interviews with Clifford in August and October 2016, she told him she had an affair with Trump after meeting him at a 2006 celebrity golf tournament in Lake Tahoe. She told him that Michael Cohen, a lawyer for Trump, had agreed during the presidential campaign to pay her the $130,000 if she kept the relationship secret, Weisberg said, adding that Clifford had told him she was tempted to go public because the lawyer was late in making the payment and she feared he might back out of their agreement.

Trump has denied several allegations of sexual misconduct in the past. But the incident with Clifford was consensual, according to reports. At the time, he was newly married to Melania Trump, who was pregnant with their son, Barron.

Under the name Stormy Daniels, Clifford — 27 at the time — had appeared in scores of X-rated films including “Porking With Pride #2” and “Good Will Humping.”

“These are old, recycled reports, which were published and strongly denied prior to the election,” a White House official told the Journal.

Cohen, a longtime Trump Organization lawyer, denied anything took place between the president and Clifford and sent a two-paragraph statement by email addressed “TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN” and signed by “Stormy Daniels” denying that she had a “sexual and/or romantic affair” with Trump.

“Rumors that I have received hush money from Donald Trump are completely false,” the statement said.

New York Times contributed to this report.

Denis Slattery is a New York Daily News writer.