N.J. leads the nation in Superfund sites. Now Cory Booker can do something about it.
WASHINGTON -- U.S. Sen. Cory Booker was named as the top Democrat on the subcommittee that oversees Superfund sites, of which New Jersey has more than any other state.

Booker, D-N.J., became the ranking member of the Senate Environment and Public Works subcommittee on Superfund, waste management, and regulatory oversight, in addition to claiming a seat on the transportation and infrastructure subcommittee.

New Jersey has 116 polluted Superfund sites, more than any other state. The Environmental Protection Agency in December named three New Jersey locations --also more than any other state -- to a list of 21 Superfund sites to be immediately cleaned up.

"Roughly half of New Jerseyans live within three miles of a Superfund site, far higher than the national average," Booker said. "I look forward to using my position on the subcommittee to address this issue and be a more forceful advocate for providing the EPA with the resources it needs to clean up these toxic sites."

Trump administration promises to clean up these N.J. Superfund sites The sites are in Bridgewater, Bergen County and Newark

In his last budget. Trump proposed cutting federal funding for the program by $330 million to $762 million. The administration said the savings would come through reducing administrative costs.

Booker's other subcommittee assignment will put him in the middle of the action when the Senate writes a bill to rebuild America's public works. In his State of the Union address last month, Trump called for spending $1.5 trillion on infrastructure, but offered no details nor funding sources.

New Jersey has been counting on billions of federal dollars for the Gateway Tunnel project, a new rail tunnel under the Hudson River to the existing tubes can be closed to repair damage caused by Hurricane Sandy.

The Trump administration has appeared to backtrack on the federal commitment to pay half the costs, but Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen, R-11th Dist,, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, is seeking $900 million in funding in the final spending bill for the current fiscal year.

"New Jersey's transportation needs are enormous," Booker said. "I'll use this new position to advocate for much needed investment in our crumbling roads, bridges, and water infrastructure."

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant or on Facebook. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.