Trump may be Menendez's best friend in Jersey Senate race. So says a new poll.
WASHINGTON -- New Jersey voters dislike President Donald Trump more than they're worried about U.S. Sen. Robert Menendez's ethical problems, according to a poll released Thursday that gives the Democratic senator a 9-point lead over Republican Bob Hugin among likely voters.

Menendez led Hugin, the former Celgene Corp. executive, 49 percent to 40 percent, in the Monmouth University Poll.

It is the third consecutive survey to give Menendez at least a 7-point advantage following two polls earlier this month that put his lead within the margin of error. He held a 51-44 percent advantage in a Quinnipiac poll released Wednesday.

Menendez and Trump both have negative approval ratings. But 56 percent of likely voters said their views of the president were a more important factor in deciding which Senate candidate to support, while 31 percent said their opinion of the senator was more important.

"If these poll results hold, the first person Bob Menendez should thank in his election night victory speech is Donald Trump," said Patrick Murray, director of the Monmouth University Poll.

"Hugin was successful in making this one competitive by hammering away at Menendez's ethical baggage," Murray said. "But the incumbent has been able to fight back to get the margin into a range that is closer to the norm for New Jersey."

A majority of likely voters, 55 percent, disapproved of Trump's performance in office, while 42 percent supported him. Menendez was viewed unfavorably by 45 percent and favorably by 28 percent, with 27 percent having no opinion.

The opposition to Trump threatened to spill over into the New Jersey's U.S. House races, where the Cook Political Report rated Democratic candidates as no worse than 50-50 to win four of the five congressional districts now represented by Republicans.

In those five seats, 48 percent supported the Democratic candidate and 45 percent backed the Republican, In the 2014 midterm election, the Republican candidates held a 61 percent to 38 percent advantage.

"The question this year is whether ambivalence about the candidates at the top of the ticket or the Trump factor will have more of an impact down ballot," Murray said.

Voters said their No. 1 issue was health care, and trusted Menendez more than Hugin on that subject, 40 percent to 28 percent. By 48 percent to 14 percent, they had a negative view of the pharmaceutical industry.

Menendez has criticized Hugin's tenure at Celgene, which fought efforts to allow a lower-cost generic alternative to its Revlimid cancer drug while continuing to raise its price.

"Hugin's pharma past does not help him in a year when worries about rising health care costs top the list of voter concerns, which is true not just in New Jersey but nationwide," Murray said.

The No. 2 issue was corruption, the centerpiece of Hugin's campaign against Menendez. Hugin was trusted more to handle that issue, 39 percent to 26 percent.

Menendez was "severely admonished" by the Senate Ethics Committee for accepting gifts and trips from a friend and campaign donor, Dr. Salomon Melgen, while intervening with federal agencies on his behalf.

But 64 percent said Menendez's behavior was no different than that of other politicians, while just 22 percent said it was worse.

"You've got to wonder if New Jersey voters look at corruption through a different lens than other voters," Murray said.

Considering that two indicted House Republicans still are running competitive re-election campaigns, "perhaps the goalposts have been moved nationwide in recent years," he said.

The poll of 527 likely voters was conducted Oct. 11-15, with a margin of error of 4.3 percentage points.

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant or on Facebook. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.