Who says asylum seekers arrive here legally? U.S. laws do | Opinion
By Kerry W. Hartington

Some letters that I read in the South Jersey Times regarding current immigration issues repeat some common fallacies and misunderstandings regarding U.S. immigration laws, which I would like to clear up.

One recent letter writer asked: "Why do people who come to the border seeking asylum arrive here without legal permission? Why can't they first go to U.S. embassies in the countries they want to flee and ask for asylum there?"

Here is the reason: According to the Immigration and Nationality Act, applicants may only request asylum at a port of entry to the United States. This is a protection provided by the U.S. government to individuals facing persecution in their home country due to their race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership in a particular social group. It is not something that one can apply for at a U.S. embassy.

Therefore, someone arriving at a United States port of entry to seek asylum is not an "illegal" entrant, but rather, someone starting a lawful process to make his or her way through the immigration courts before the applicant is either permitted to stay in America, or is removed and sent back to their home country. Some applicants are ultimately successful and are permitted to stay in the United States. A larger number are ultimately deported.

The majority of individuals who are currently being apprehended and detained at the U.S.-Mexico border are fleeing horrific and violent conditions in the "Northern Triangle" countries of El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala, which have some of the highest murder rates in the world. I have met many individuals in my office who have been kidnapped, sexually assaulted or have had family members murdered in these countries. Fleeing their home and leaving their families to make a dangerous journey across multiple countries to seek the protection of the United States is not a decision made lightly. They are fleeing for their lives.

It is correct to state that the ancestors of nearly all natural-born citizens today were immigrants, many of whom were mistreated and discriminated against by the existing U.S. population when they arrived from their home countries.

We, who have had the great fortune of being born in this country, should not subject the newest generation of immigrants to the same ugliness and discriminatory treatment.

Kerry W. Hartington is an immigration and naturalization attorney and a partner in Hartington King English LLC, with offices in Vineland and Freehold. She resides in Monroe Township, Gloucester County.

Bookmark NJ.com/Opinion. Follow on Twitter @NJ_Opinion and find NJ.com Opinion on Facebook.