"Long gas lines" not forming in North Korean capital, sources say
Long lines of vehicles waiting to refuel have not recently been observed in Pyongyang, multiple sources told NK News on Monday.

The news comes despite U.S. President Trump’s suggestion on Sunday that gas shortages were causing problems in North Korea.

“Long gas lines forming in North Korea. Too bad!” Trump said in a tweet describing a telephone conversation with South Korean president Moon Jae-in on Sunday.

The President’s remark followed agreement last Monday on a new United Nations Security Council Resolution which, the U.S. claims, will result in 30% fewer oil products going to North Korea, including 55% fewer refined petroleum products.

But while sources said there was no evidence of supply issues causing lines of vehicles to form at Pyongyang gas stations as of Monday, petroleum and diesel prices remain far higher than usual.

Diesel currently costs 1.5 euros a liter, while petrol costs 1.25 euros a liter in the capital, NK Pro data shows.

These figures, respectively, represent increases of 102.7% and 100% since April, when an initial pricing spike of about 83% was abruptly initiated.

Last Saturday sources in Pyongyang reported new restrictions against customers filling up jerry cans to buy extra supplies, while a number of gas stations were reported as being closed in the city.

Gas stations in Pyongyang told foreign residents at the time that another price hike was anticipated on petrol and diesel, though new rates have still yet to be established, a source said as of last week.

“Traffic might be a little down, but nothing noticeable, at least not yet,” another source said in the aftermath of the Security Council vote on new sanctions.

Petrol prices increased by an additional 14% in mid-August, data from NK Pro previously indicated.

The extended increase in gas prices is beginning to impact food pricing, the Seoul-based Daily NK said last week.

Costs of rice, corn and bottled water have all crept up since North Korea’s sixth nuclear test, the outlet said, due to a combination of gas price rises and anticipated further Chinese participation in emerging North Korea sanctions implementation.

Edited by Oliver Hotham