Wisconsin: Important Right to Carry Legislation Scheduled for Committee Hearing This Week
This Wednesday, May 31, Senate Bill 169 is scheduled for a committee hearing in the Senate Judiciary Committee. SB 169 would allow for the concealed carry of a firearm without a concealed carry license anywhere in the state where an individual is legally allowed to be. Please contact the members of the Senate Judiciary Committee and urge them to SUPPORT this important Right to Carry legislation! Click the “Take Action” button below to contact the committee members.

SB 169 would also expand the list of places where firearm owners can legally carry and make the current concealed carry licensing system optional. This allows citizens to obtain a license and take advantage of reciprocity agreements with other states.

Self-defense situations are difficult, if not impossible, to anticipate. Accordingly, a law-abiding adult’s right to defend themselves in such situations should not be conditioned by government-mandated time delays and taxes.

SB 169 would eliminate these government mandates, and allow individuals to carry in a manner that best suits their needs. Under current law, an individual can carry a firearm openly without a concealed carry license; however, if an individual would rather carry their firearm in a purse or briefcase, or if their firearm becomes covered by a coat, they would be in violation of current concealed carry laws unless they obtained a concealed carry license. This bill recognizes a law-abiding adult’s unconditional Right to Keep and Bear Arms for self-defense in the manner he or she chooses. Further, twelve states currently have similar Right to Carry laws which allow law-abiding individuals to possess a concealed firearm for self-defense without a permit.

Again, please click the “Take Action” button above to contact the Senate Judiciary Committee members and urge them to support SB 169! Stay tuned to www.nraila.org and your email inbox for further updates on this bill.