NRA-PVF Endorses Joe Manchin for U.S. Senate in West Virginia
Fairfax, Va.-- The National Rifle Association Political Victory Fund (NRA-PVF) is endorsing Governor Joe Manchin for election to the U.S. Senate this November.



"Joe Manchin earned the NRA-PVF endorsement by supporting our Second Amendment rights and hunting heritage," said Chris W. Cox, chairman of NRA-PVF. "West Virginia's gun owners and hunters appreciate his commitment to protecting their right to keep and bear arms."



Gov. Manchin is a lifelong hunter and sportsman and as West Virginia's governor, he signed Castle Doctrine legislation into law to restore the right to self-defense in a person's home and property along with legislation to increase reciprocity for right-to-carry permit holders in West Virginia. He also signed Emergency Powers legislation into law that prohibits gun confiscation during states of emergency as happened after Hurricane Katrina; No-Net-Loss of hunting lands into law that ensures adequate access to public hunting land; and a bill to prevent anti-gun New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg's gun dealer entrapment schemes.



"Joe Manchin's support for individual gun ownership rights has earned him an "A" rating and endorsement from the NRA-PVF," Cox continued. "We ask all West Virginia gun owners, hunters and NRA members to vote Joe Manchin for U.S. Senate on November 2nd."



Chris W. Cox is NRA's chief lobbyist. He also serves as chairman of NRA-PVF. The National Rifle Association Political Victory Fund is responsible for political candidate rankings. These are based on candidate voting records, public statements and responses to NRA-PVF questionnaires.

Established in 1871, the National Rifle Association is America's oldest civil rights and sportsmen's group. More than five million members strong, NRA continues to uphold the Second Amendment and advocates enforcement of existing laws against violent offenders to reduce crime. The Association remains the nation's leader in firearm education and training for law-abiding gun owners, law enforcement and the armed services. Be sure to follow the NRA on Facebook and on Twitter @NRA.