THE GETTYSBURGH CELEBRATION.
GETTYSBURGH, Penn., Thursday Evening, Nov. 19, 1863.

All the noteworthy incidents of the celebration here to-day have already been sent off to you by telegraph, and it would have gratified your correspondent exceedingly if he could also have got off, but fate, combined with the miserable railroad arrangements, has ordained that he should spend another night in this over-crowded village. The only train that has been permitted to leave here, to-day, was the special train bearing the President and his party, which left at 6 o'clock this evening. Even the mail train, which should have left at 8 o'clock this morning, was detained for fear it would come in collision with some of the numerous trains that have been following each other in rapid succession from Hanover Junction, bringing visitors to the Dedication. How they are all to sleep here to-night it is difficult to imagine. All the hotels as well as the private houses were filled to overflowing last night. Every housekeeper in Gettysburgh has opened a temporary hotel, and extends unbounded hospitality to strangers -- for a consideration. People from all parts of the country seem to have taken this opportunity to pay a visit to the battle-fields which are hereafter to make the name of Gettysburgh immortal. The Dedication ceremonies were apparently a minor consideration, for even while Mr. EVERETT was delivering his splendid oration, there were as many people wandering about the fields, made memorable by the fierce struggles of July, as stood around the stand listening to his eloquent periods. They seem to have considered, with President LINCOLN, that it was not what was said here, but what was done here, that deserved their attention. During the last three days, the scenes of the late battles have been visited by thousands of persons from every loyal State in the Union, and there is probably not a foot of the grounds that has not been trodden over and over again by reverential feet. But little over four months have passed away since the champions of Slavery and Freedom met here in deadly strife, and already the name of Gettysburgh has become historical, and its soil is classic ground. This, too, while the contest is yet undecided, and the camp-fires of the contending armies still illumine the Southern sky. If the people of the North can thus forestall history, it is because the manifest justice of their cause enables them to see the future in the present, and to behold in the fresh made graves of their fallen sons the shining monuments of their glory in ages to come.

The National Cemetery which has been consecrated to-day by such imposing ceremonies is located in the very midst of the fierce strife of those terrible July days, and many of the Union heroes fell on the ground comprised within its inclosure. It is little over half a mile to the south of the Gettysburgh Court-house, in the outskirts of the town, on what is called Prospect Hill, which is but a continuation of the elevated ridge known as Cemetery Hill. This hill, it will be recollected, formed the northernmost line of the Union armies during the last two days of the battle, and was several times stormed by the rebel infantry without success. The new cemetery is contiguous to the town cemetery of Gettysburgh and comprises 17 1/4 acres. It was purchased by the State of Pennsylvania at something like $25,000, and is to be devoted exclusively to the loyal dead who fell in the three days' battles. The present appearance of the cemetery is not very inviting, but the plan on which it is laid out is excellent, and when it is finished and covered with green sward, it will be one of the most beautiful burial-grounds in the country. The graves will form semicircular rows, one within another, the whole presenting an appearance similar to the Senate Chamber or House of Representatives at Albany. Sections of the semicircle are allotted to the various States whose soldiers fell at the Gettysburgh battle, the different sections being divided from each other by a foot-walk. The number of States represented is eighteen, and at either end of the semicircle is a section devoted to the "unknown" dead, or those whose identity cannot be established. This class, however, is fortunately not so large as one would naturally be led to suppose. I am told that nearly all who fell in the last two days of the battle can be easily identified by the temporary head-boards placed ever their graves by their comrades. Out of 1,300 who have thus far been exhumed from the various battle-fields and buried in the new cemetery, there are not more than one hundred whose identity is not used. The work of exhuming the bodies and reburying them in the National Cemetery is to be done by the various States individually, or at least at their expense. It is proposed to erect a large monument near the base of the semicircle, to which all the States will contribute, and leave each State to erect such other monuments in its own section as it may see fit. All the bodies exhumed from the battle-fields are placed in most substantial coffins, and buried two feet apart in trenches from four to five feet deep. At the head of the coffins will be built a continuous stone wall 1 1/2 feet in thicknesss and extending from the bottom of the trench to the surface of the ground. On the top of this wall a smooth granite or marble railing will be erected 1 1/2 feet in height and one foot thick, on which will be inscribed the names of the dead, with the regiment and State to which each belonged.

The position of the new cemetery is very fine, and commands a view of the whole country for miles around, including the entire ground covered by the Union and rebel lines. It is less than a quarter of a mile from the house occupied by Gen. MEADE as his headquarters, about half a mile from Culp's Hill, where the hardest fighting occurred on the 3d of July, and about two miles from Round Top, which was occupied by the extreme left of the Union lines, and was the scene of the hand-to-hand fight of the 2d.

In wandering around these battle-fields, one is astonished and indignant to find at almost every step of his progress the carcases of dead horses, which the negligence, or laziness or stupidity of the people of Gettysburgh have permitted to remain above ground since the battle, and which still breed pestilence in the atmosphere of this whole region. I am told that more than a score of deaths have resulted from this neglect in the village of Gettysburgh, during the past Summer; and in the house in which I was compelled to seek lodgings there are now two boys sick with typhoid fever, attributed to this cause. Within a stone's throw of the whitewashed hut occupied as the headquarters of Gen. MEADE I counted yesterday no less than ten carcases of dead horses, lying on the ground where they were struck by the shells of the enemy.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The ceremonies of the Dedication to-day, of which you have already read a full account, passed off without accident, and nearly in accordance with the programme previously published. There was not, however, so large a military display as was anticipated, and the procession was unexpectedly slim, for the reason that most of the guests who were expected to join it were either off viewing the battle-fields, or hurried up to the cemetery before the procession started. The opening prayer, by Rev. Mr. STOCKTON, was touching and beautiful, and produced quite as much effect upon the audience as the classic sentences of the orator of the day. President LINCOLN's brief address was delivered in a clear, loud tone of voice, which could be distinctly heard at the extreme limits of the large assemblage. It was delivered (or rather read from a sheet of paper which the speaker held in his hand) in a very deliberate manner, with strong emphasis, and with a most business-like air. Previous to the President's address, the following ode, by Maj. B.B. FRENCH, was sung by a vocal Club from Philadelphia, in [???] of a dirge by J.C. PERCIVAL, which was to have been sung:

'Tis holy ground --

This spot, where, in their graves,

We place our country's braves,

Who tell in Breed[???]'s holy cause