Presidential Subpoena Upheld in 1807
Government attorneys asked Marshall who was presiding over the trial, as Supreme Court Justices often did in those days, to issue a subpoena compelling the President to appear and bring with him the Wilkinson letter. After some deliberation, the Chief Justice complied.

“The first magistrate of the Union,” Marshall wrote in granting the motion for a sub poena, “may more properly be likened to the first magistrate of a state [than to a king] and is not known ever to have been doubted but that the chief magistrate of a state might be served with a subpoena.

No Unremitting Demand

“If upon any principle, the President could be construed to stand exempt from the gen eral provisions of the Consti tution, it would be because his duties as chief magistrate de mand his whole time for na tional objects.

“But it is apparent that this demand is not unremitting, and, if it should exist at the time when his attendance on a court is required, it would rather constitute a reason for not obeying the process of the court than a reason against its being issued.”

In declining to honor the subpoena personally, Jefferson wrote the Burr prosecutor that compliance with such court orders “would leave the nation without an executive branch,” which the Constitution had never intended “be withdrawn from its station by any coordi nate authority.”

Following the Marshall ration ale, John Henry Wigmore, in his classic legal text on evi dence, declares there is “no reason at all” why a President should enjoy a special privilege not to be a witness in civil or criminal trials.

“The general principle of testimonial duty to disclose knowledge needed in judicial investigations is of universal force,” the 1961 edition of Wig more states. “It does not suffer an exemption which would apply irrespective of the nature of the person's knowledge and would rest wholly on the na ture of the person's occupa tion.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Another President who re fused to honor a request for information, but not a sub poena, was Andrew Jackson, In 1835 he declined to give the Senate information on his sur veyor general, Gideon Fitz, who had already been dismissed, in connection with hearings on his successor.

Jackson contended that Congressional investigators had no right to information about employes of the executive branch, even when they had been charged with wrongdoing.

The term “executive priv ileges” for this general theory was not used until the Eisen hower Administration.

Although the Supreme Court has never ruled on the right of a President to reject a sub poena, the majority in a 1972 decision had some relevant statements about the general responsibility of witnesses to testify.

Not Immune

“Citizens generally,” the Court observed, “are not con stitutionally immune from grand jury subpoenas: and neither the First Amendment nor other constitutional provi sion protects the average citi zen from disclosing to a grand jury information that he had received in confidence.”

Subscribing to this view, in a case that denied reporters any right to refuse to identify sources of information, were all four of President Nixon's appointees to the Court: Chief Justice Warren E. Burger and Associate Justices Harry A. Blackmun, Lewis F. Powell Jr. and William H. Rehnquist, plus Associate Justice Byron R. White, an appointee of Presi dent Kennedy.