Excerpts From Scranton's U.N. Speech
The second focus of our consideration must be the conduct of the occupation itself.

I propose to review the U.S; position today once more to point out that there are proper, principles and there are procedures under international law and praclite which, when applied and maintained, will contribute to civil order and will, over the longer run, facilitate just and a lasting peace.

Issue of Temple Mount

The area known to Moslems as the Haram ash‐Sharif and to Yews as the Temple Mount is of particular sensitivity.

Israel's puhctilious administration of, the holy places’ in Jerusalem has, in our judgment, greatly minimized the tepsions. To my Government, the standard to be followed ‐in Administering the holy Sites is contained in Article 27 of the Fourth Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. All parties to the Arab‐Israel conflict are signatories of the Convention.

Article 27 of the Convention prescribes that “protected persons are entitled, in all circumstances, to respect for their persons, their honor, their family rights, their religious convictions and practices, and their manners and customs.”

Status of Jerusalem

With regard to the immediate problem before usn—a ruling by a lower Israeli court which would have the effect of altering the status of the Haram—it is our view that Israel's responsibilities under Article 27 to preserve religious practices as they were at the time of occupation began cannot be changed by the ruling of an Israeli court. We are gratified, deeply gratified, that the Supreme Court of Israel has upheld the Israeli Government's position.

The status of the holy places is, of course, only one facet, however important, very important, of the problem of the status of Jerusalem itself. The United States position on.; the status of Jerusalem has been states; here on numerous occasions since the Arab portion of that city was occupied by Israel in 1967.

Ambassador Yost said in 1969 “that the part of Jerusalem that came under the control of Israel in the June war, like other areas occupied by Israel, Is occupied territory and hence subject to the provisions of international law governing the rights and obligations of an occupying power.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ambassador Goldberg said in 1968, to this Council, that “the United States does not accept or recognize unilater‐. al actions by any states in the area as altering the status of Jerusalem.”

I emphasize, as did Ambassador Goldberg, that as far as the United States is concerned such unilateral measures, including expropriation of land or other administrative action taken by the Government of Israel, cannot he considered other than interim and provisional and cannot affect the present international status nor prejudge the final and permanent status of Jerusalem.

The United States position could not be clearer. Since 1967 we have restated here, in other fora and to the Government of Israel that the future of Jerusalem will be determined only through the instruments and processe4 of negotiation, agreement and accommodation. Unilateral attempts to predetermine that future have no standing.

Next I turn to the question of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories. Again, my Government believes that international law sets the appropriate standards. An occupier must maintain the occupied areas as intact and unaltered as possible, without interfering with the customary life of the area, and any charges must be necessi: tated by the immediate needs of the occupation and be consistent with international law.

The Fourth Geneva Convention speaks directly to the issue, of population transfer in Article 49: “The occupying power shall not deport or transfer parts of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies.”

Clearly then substantial resettlement of the Israeli civilian population in occupied territories, including in East Jerusalem, is illegal under the Convention and cannot be considered to have prejudged the outcome of future negotiations between the parties on the location of the borders of states of the Middle East. Indeed, the presence of these settlements is seen by, my Government as an obstacle to the success of the negotiations for a just and final peace between Israel and its neighbors: