TALLY A SURPRISE
Zaretzki Beaten

In other major primary races, the State Senate majority leader, Joseph Zaretzki, was defeated by Assemblyman Franz Leichter, while several other incumbents — Representative Bertram Podell, State Senators Paul Bookson and Sidney Von Luther and Assemblymen Mark Southall and Calvin Williams were also defeated.

Although, the voters came up with a fairly balanced ticket, it was one that was different from the one picked by the state committee.

Mr. Carey is Roman Catholic; Mr. Abrams, Jewish; Mr. Cuomo and Senator Krupsak, both Catholic; Ramsey Clark, the Senate nominee, Protestant, and Controller Arthur Levitt, who was unopposed, Jewish.

Geographically, the ticket would be heavily oriented to. New York City, with only Senator Krupsak, the apparent nominee for Lieutenant Governor, from upstate.

Mr. Samuels conceded in a telephone call to Mr. Carey in his private suite at the Commodore Hotel.

“you beat my pants off —congratulations,” Mr. Samuels

“He was very decent, amiable and generous in his statement,” Mr. Carey said as he put down the phone.

“It was a very hard campaign with a design to go to the peopie,” Mr. Carey said, as Representative Ogden R. Reid, once a Democratic gubernatorial candidate himself; Mayor Beame; Mr. Abrams, and former Mayor Robert F. Wagner, all guests in the Carey suite, listened.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The issue in November will be the same that we started out with in this campaign,” Mr. Carey added. “We want our government back.”

Downstairs in Carey headquarters, supporters at 10:30 had already begun to celebrate their candidate's victory although Mr. Carey had not yet publicly appeared to make his victory statement.

The Carey sweep was virtually complete.

He took every borough exmajor county in the state by substantial marginscept Manhattan, where he and Mr. Samuels were breaking even. He also captured every major county in the state by substantial margms.

Mr. Carey even held commanding leads in the districts of the Democratic leaders in the city, who had all offered Mr. Samuels varying degrees of support. In the 86th District in the Bronx, where the leader, Patrick Cunningham, gave only lukewarm support to Mr. Samuels, Mr. Carey was piling up a 2‐to‐1 lead.

In Erie County, around Buffalo, where the Democratic leader, Joseph F. Crangle, was an early Samuels supporter and then turned neutral after the nominating convention, Mr. Carey was leading by close to 3 to 1.

Mr. Carey also piled up substantial leads in the home districts of the other leaders Stanley Steingut and Meade H. Esposito in Brooklyn and Matthew J. Troy Jr. in Queens.

At 9:52 P.M., Mr. Esposito, the Brooklyn leader, took a telephone call at his Jefferson Democratic Club from Mr. Samuels.

“Howard?” Mr. Esposito said. “How's it look?” A pause. “Well, we tried. O.K. kid, we still got one another.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It was a bad night for Mr. Esposito, who had been Mr. Samuels major supporter among the Democratic county leaders. In doing so, he had rejected a fellow Brooklyn Democrat, Mr. Carey.

Mr. Esposito was also apparently losing in his home Congressional District, where former Representative James A. Scheuer held a strong lead over Leonard Yoswein, the city's former Rent and Housing Administrator, who hails from Mr. Esposito's political club.

Traditional patterns of the ethnic and religious voting were disrupted as Mr. Carey swept Jewish and Catholic districts alike. In the heavily Jewish districts of Boro Park and East Flatbush in Brooklyn, Mr. Carey was leading Mr. Samuels by nearly 2 to 1. In the Jewish neighborhoods of Riverdale, Mr. Carey was leading by somewhat under that.

Mr. Carey also did well, as expected, in such Catholic neighborhoods as Inwood, in uptown Manhattan; Marine Park and Flatlands, in Brooklyn, and Ridgewood and Middle Village, Queens.

Mr. Samuels, however, held narrow but enduring leads in two predominantly white reform districts on Manhattan's West Side. Mr. Samuels also held a slight lead in a Puerto Rican district in the South Bronx but in another Puerto Rican district in East Harlem, Mr. Carey held the edge.

Cuomo Leads in City

Senator Krupsak, who is the wife of Edwin Margolies, counsel to the Assembly minority leader, Stanley Steingut, ran strongly upstate and in the suburbs.

In the city, Mrs. Krupsak was trailing slightly behind Mr. Cuomo, although she built up nearly 2‐to‐1 lead over him in Manhattan.

Mrs. Krupsak did relatively poorly in two heavily Puerto Rican areas in the Bronx and East Harlem and made a strong showing in two predominantly white reform districts in Manhattan.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In a heavily Jewish neighborhood in Riverdale in the Bronx, Mrs. Krupsak far outpolled her rivals, and in another Jewish area in Brooklyn she placed between them. She was not leading in any of the home districts of the Democratic leaders.

The defeat very likely finished Mr. Samuels's political caree, which began with his first bid for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination 12 years ago. He had turned to politics after a successful career as a plastics industrialist.

In fact, Mr. Samuels has the unenviable distinction of being the loser in the state's only two gubernatorial primaries in 1970 and yesterday.

The Samuels‐Carey campaign was a classic: Mr. Samuels had been carefully organizing his campaign for nearly 18 months. Part of that time he became widely known as the head of the city's Offtrack Betting Corporation.

Mr. Samuels, a wealthy man, could tap more wealth. He was the first major Democratic candidate in years to have the backing of both the Democratic “bosses” and the anti‐boss New Democratic Coalition. As a result, the bossism issue, which has been a mainstay of many Democratic primary contests, never came up in this campaign.

When Mr., Carey started his campaign nine months ago, his major assets were his brother, Edward who was prepared to Invest more than $1‐million in the Carey campaign, and David: Garth, the media specialist who with Edward Carey's money transformed a relatively unknown ‘Brooklyn Congressman into a credible statewide candidate.

Once the Carey campaign began rolling midsummer, it, received a major stimulant] when such charter members of the Democratic establishment in the state as former Mayors Wagner, former Gov. W.1 Averell Harriman and Mrs. Herbert Lehman, widow of the former Senator, and Governor, endorsed Mr. Carey.

The Brooklyn Representative was also aided by the less‐thanenthusiastic support of Mr. Samuels among many party leaders who had endorsed Mr. Samuels initially because they doubted that Mr. Carey had the means or the mettle to challenge Mc. Samuels seriously.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Once Mr. Carey began catching up to Mr, Samuels, there were many signs of defections in the regular organization and New Democratic Coalition ranks, with the leaders of either group reluctant or unable to enforce any party discipline.

Democratic politicians attributed the Carry victory to a $750,000 radio and, television commercial campaign financed by his brother, and his apparent image as a new face, even though he has been a Congressman since 1960 and ran unsuccessfully for the Democratic nomination for City Council President in 1969.

The television campaign, cre ated by Mr. Garth, who had handled John V. Lindsay's may oral and Presidential campaigns, heavily emphasized Mr. Carey's record.

Mr. Samuels early lead evaporated, according to politicians, because he was viewed as “a loser” who had never) won elective office. His image as “Howie the Horse,” arising] out of his leadership of the Off‐track Betting Corporation, gave hi mhigh visibility, but may have eventually turned off many voters.

Several top Democrats questioned the, value of the State Committee endorsement of Mr. Samuels, noting that four years ago, Mr. Samuels, then the antiorganization candidate, nearly upset Mr. Goldberg, who was supported by the state committee.

In last year's mayoral primaries, the New Democratic Coalition choice, Assemblyman Albert H. Blumenthal, ran last in the four‐way, primary.