Denham Co-Sponsors House Immigration Reform Legislation
WASHINGTON — U.S. Representative Jeff Denham (R-Turlock) today announced his co-sponsorship of H.R. 15, the House immigration bill introduced October 2, 2013 by Representative Joe Garcia (D-FL), on Univisión’s Sunday show “Al Punto.” Rep. Denham is the first Republican to co-sponsor the bill.

“We can’t afford any more delays,” said Rep. Denham. “We are a nation of immigrants, but today, our broken system has failed to secure the border, enforce our current laws and help us to attract the best and brightest who want to come and contribute to the greatness of America.

“I support an earned path to citizenship to allow those who want to become citizens to demonstrate a commitment to our country, learn English, pay fines and back taxes and pass background checks. This is a common-sense solution to our broken system. I also support a faster pathway for the children who were brought here by their parents through no fault of their own, who have been raised in America and educated in our schools and have no other country to call home.



“Border security is the first step to creating effective new immigration laws. This legislation includes language that makes securing the border a requirement, not a goal, and puts measurable benchmarks in place to be verified by independent sources to ensure that our border is secure.

“In California, our agricultural economy is the backbone of our state. We depend on agricultural visas which allow people to work and return home.

“I believe that those who are willing to serve in our military and put their lives on the line for this country should have the right to earn citizenship. During my time in the Air Force I served with many honorable immigrants who showed their love for America with their sacrifice. My ENLIST Act, which will be included in this bill going forward, will be the fastest path that would be available under the law.”

“I want to thank Congressman Denham for his leadership on comprehensive immigration reform,” said Rep. Garcia. “I look forward to working with him to build support for H.R. 15 so that we can get comprehensive immigration reform done in this Congress. As this legislation moves forward, I am committed to working with Congressman Denham to integrate his ENLIST Act, which I have signed onto, into H.R. 15. The ENLIST Act is important legislation that will finally allow our nation’s DREAMers to serve their country in the Armed Forces.”

More information about the ENLIST Act is available here.