Senate Votes Economic Sanctions Against China
WASHINGTON, Jan. 30— The Senate unanimously approved legislation today that included a series of economic sanctions against China.

But the Senate action leaves President Bush wide discretion to waive the sanctions if he considers it in the national interest to do so.

The sanctions, prompted by China's crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators last June, were approved five days after President Bush won a political victory when the Senate sustained his veto of a bill protecting Chinese students from deportation.

The sanctions approved today were part of a $9.7 billion measure authorizing State Department activities for fiscal years 1990 and 1991. The bill now goes to the President, who is expected to sign it into law.

The legislation, which was approved 98 to 0, urges the Export-Import Bank to continue to postpone financing for United States exports to China and suspends financial support from the Overseas Private Investment Corporation and the Trade and Development Program.

A Halt to Licenses

The legislation also halts the issuance of licenses for the export of military items and, if the repression in China deepens, calls for a review of China's most-favored-nation trade status and bilateral trade agreements related to satellite technology and nuclear energy.

But the measure gives Mr. Bush the power to end any of the sanctions if he decides that doing so serves the national interest of the United States or if he judges that significant change has taken place in China.

The bill includes $3.3 billion this year and $3.7 billion next year for the State Department, most of it for basic expenses like employees' paychecks and the expenses connected with American embassies and consulates. The bill also includes about $2 billion for the United States Information Agency and $600 million for the Board for International Broadcasting, which runs Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty.

Last Thursday Mr. Bush in effect won the right to pursue his own China policy when the Senate, by 62 votes to 37, sustained his veto of the bill on deporting Chinese students. The bill was passed by wide bipartisan majorities in November as a response to the crackdown in Tiananmen Square in June. Mr. Bush said that he had ordered the Immigration and Naturalization Service to adopt measures that would protect all Chinese who wanted to stay in the United States. The day before the Senate vote, the House had voted to override by 390 votes to 25.

The End of an Impasse

The vote today ends a two-month impasse between the Administration and Congress over authorizing funds for the State Department, the United States Information Agency and other related agencies.

Congress approved a State Department bill in November authorizing spending for the State Department, the Voice of America and other agencies. But President Bush vetoed the measure because it contained a provision stemming from the Iran-contra affair that would have made it a crime for American officials to solicit money from foreign nations or from individuals to promote military, intelligence or foreign policy activity barred by law. Mr. Bush said the provision would have infringed on his constitutional powers to conduct foreign policy.

The provision had been introduced by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York.

After the veto, the House dropped the provision from the bill and approved the measure. The Senate failed to vote on it before the recess.

Before the vote today, a group of liberal Democratic senators proposed a package of aid to Eastern European nations worth $511 million. The proposal, sponsored by Senators Clairborne Pell of Rhode Island, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Paul Simon of Illinois and Joseph Biden of Delaware, is an increase of more than $200 million over the Eastern Europe aid package that the Bush Administration requested in its fiscal 1991 budget.