THE 1994 ELECTIONS: THE NATION CALIFORNIA; Gov. Wilson's Comeback Ends in Re-election Victory
LOS ANGELES, Nov. 8— Pete Wilson was elected to a second term as California's governor tonight by a commanding margin over his challenger, Kathleen Brown, the State Treasurer.

But it remained unclear whether the powerful tide of support for Mr. Wilson ran deep enough to also spell victory for Proposition 187, the highly divisive voter initiative that would deny to undocumented immigrants most government services, including schooling and nonemergency health care.

Governor Wilson has made immigration control a central theme in his re-election battle with Ms. Brown.

Shortly after 11 P.M. Pacific time, The Associated Press said that based on early returns, it appeared that the measure would pass. The news service also reported that three-fourths of Californians who voted for Proposition 187 also voted for Governor Wilson.

Ms. Brown, in a mood of somber but good-humored realism, conceded defeat shortly after 10:15 P.M. Pacific time. After complimenting the Governor on his victory, Ms. Brown affirmed her commitment to the principles she had championed in a long, grinding campaign.

"Twenty-eight years ago tonight," Ms. Brown said, "My father told a group of supporters who were similarly gathered, he said we have to keep going. Our principles are right.

"We lost the battle," she concluded, "But we will win the war."

Minutes later, Mr. Wilson told a crowd of cheering supporters, "I must say it wasn't too long ago, the smart money pundits were not only writing me off, they were writing off California."

"About a year ago, I faced longer odds than George Foreman," he said, alluding to the boxer who on Saturday night became the oldest man ever to win the world heavyweight title.

"And to quote one of my favorite authors," he added, "as I said after the Northridge quake, they can shake us up, but they can't break us. All Californians have been fighting like a junk yard dog to turn this state around, and you are succeeding."

Mr. Wilson's triumph marked an extraordinary comeback for a politician all but repudiated by Californians less than a year ago when Ms. Brown, a 47-year-old moderate liberal, seemed to have the race sewn up. At that time some independent polls gave her a commanding 20-point lead over the incumbent.

But Ms. Brown's campaign began to falter, plagued in part by organizational disarray, but perhaps more importantly, by what analysts said was a deep current of discontent with politicians, particularly those espousing a liberal platform, coursing through the California electorate.

Political analysts also attributed Ms. Brown's slippage and eventual defeat to her ineffectiveness in finding a message to compete with Mr. Wilson's ability to define and exploit this year's most potent issues -- crime and immigration.

Moreover, Mr. Wilson was helped mightily by what many voters viewed as his decisive handling of California's recent traumas, not only natural disasters like drought, floods, fires and earthquakes, but also an economy that is beginning to show signs of reviving from the worst recession since the 1930's.

Since surveys of voters leaving polling places detected the Wilson victory long before the voting was over, Proposition 187 provided most of the suspense tonight.

Proposition 187, named "Save Our State" by its proponents, is based on the premise that California's social services are the main magnet drawing illegal immigrants across the border. Turning off that magnet, they argue, will deter new arrivals.

The measure would not only deny undocumented aliens schooling and nonemergency medical care, but would require teachers and doctors to give immigration authorities the names of all people they know or suspect to be in the nation illegally.

But no matter how Draconian benefit polices become, most analysts say the lure of California's jobs and comparatively high wages are likely to keep attracting Mexicans, Central Americans and others over the border and to keep most of the 1.5 million illegal immigrants now estimated to be in the state from voluntarily returning home.

Still, until last month, independent surveys consistently put the pro-187 forces far ahead, some by more than 25 points. Since then, there has been a drastic fallout in support for the proposition, particularly since it was criticized by national political figures who share little ideological common ground.

The Associated Press reported that about 500 people shouting "racism! racism!" rallied near the United States Embassy in Mexico City today in the latest of a series of boisterous protests against Proposition 187. At least 100 riot police with metal shields and clubs guarded the American compound.

Here In Los Angeles, several law enforcement agencies ordered extra patrols at polling places and schools after outbreaks of violence during the campaign, and some civic leaders here fear their could be an eruption of lawlessness if the measure should win.

There were also scattered student protests -- mostly by Hispanic-Americans, Asian-Americans and African-Americans -- against Proposition 187, but the demonstrators made up only a fraction of the enrollments of the local school districts.

Late tonight the Los Angeles Unified School District's Board of Education announced it will go to court on Wednesday if Proposition 187 won.

"We stand firmly with all of our students and their parents in opposition to this disruptive and divisive proposals," said Mark Slavkin, the school board president.