Laws That Can't Stop a Bullet
In the past two days, back-to-back attacks in Honolulu and Seattle have added new episodes to an ongoing American drama: everyday scenes of work or leisure suddenly transformed into carnage by killers who open fire with handguns. We recoil in horror and search for explanations, but we never face up to the obvious preventive measure: a ban on the handy killing machines that make the crimes so easy.

There have always been workplace pressures, shunned teenagers who dreamed of revenge and quiet neighbors who went berserk. What is new in the past 30 years is a deluge of high-powered, high-capacity handguns being marketed widely to consumers. These are the weapons that spray into crowds and cut people down in groups before the intended victims can even react.

Most gun-control groups -- and politicians who take up their cause -- are too timid to champion a forthright handgun ban like those in Britain and Japan, offering instead a weak assortment of regulatory doodads like requiring ''smart'' guns and new variations on licensing and registration. The role these groups and politicians play as enablers is even more disappointing than the predictable loud protests to any sort of regulation from the shrinking minority who own guns -- one in four who own any gun at all and one in six who own a handgun.

Gun-control groups have squandered vast reservoirs of popular energy in favor of ending the violence. They also find themselves increasingly defending the ineffective: why, the pro-gun faction reasonably asks, didn't some of the nation's toughest laws on gun licensing and registration prevent the carnage in Hawaii?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The man apprehended in Honolulu owned guns legally despite Hawaii's hurdles. Licensing and registration may slow down gun trafficking and provide useful tools for after-the-fact criminal investigation. But they can't screen out the killer who conceals a murderous intent or arrives at it later; nor can they guarantee that a gun won't end up with someone other than the legal owner.