Law tightens abortion limits
TALLAHASSEE — Planned Parenthood and other health clinics that provide abortions in Florida will go without taxpayer funds and face increased regulations for the procedure under a bill signed Friday by Gov. Rick Scott.

Scott did not say why he signed HB 1411, which he approved with 67 other bills. But the flood of statements from pro-choice and anti-abortion groups reflected the sharp divide over the issue.

“As a result of this bill, thousands of people across Florida may no longer be able to access essential reproductive health care, such as cancer screenings, birth control and well-woman exams,” said Cecile Richards, president of Planned Parenthood. “This cruel bill is designed to rip health care away from those most at risk.''

John Stemberger, president of the Florida Family Policy Council, an Orlando-based social conservative advocacy group, hailed the law as protecting women's health because he said more inspections will ensure greater quality care.

“This is a historic victory, and we are thrilled to have been an active part of this effort,” Stemberger said.

The law, which takes effect July 1, requires doctors performing abortions to have admitting privileges at a nearby hospital; requires annual licensure inspections for clinics; and bans the purchase, sell or transfer of fetal remains. The law upgrades the failure to properly dispose of fetal tissue from a second-degree misdemeanor to a first-degree misdemeanor.

A similar law in Texas, which women's health activists say has helped shut down several abortion clinics there, is under review by the U.S. Supreme Court. During a debate on the Senate floor earlier this year, sponsor Kelli Stargel, R-Lakeland, said the bill would likely close six of Florida's 65 abortion clinics.

Stemberger's group has pressured Scott since last fall, when a controversy erupted over videos from anti-abortion groups posing as researchers that showed Planned Parenthood officials in other states negotiating over the transfer of fetal tissue.

The videos, which involved Planned Parenthood executives in other states, set off a firestorm of protests from anti-abortion activists, who pushed Republicans at the federal and state level to block Planned Parenthood funding for health care services other than abortion. Federal law already blocks funds specifically for abortions.

Scott ordered his health agency to investigate all Planned Parenthood clinics in Florida, but Stemberger said he could go further by banning the clinics from receiving federal Medicaid funds.

Scott's investigation didn't find any sale of fetal tissue, but it did cite three clinics for performing abortions after the first trimester. Planned Parenthood disputed those allegations, and the case is still pending in court. A separate criminal investigation prompted by House Republicans turned up nothing.

The new law attempts to clarify that issue by defining the first trimester as 11 whole weeks after fertilization.

“[Lawmakers] collectively did what the governor failed to do, namely, provided leadership on this critical issue and made it happen. We are nonetheless pleased that Governor Scott did follow the Florida Legislature's lead in this matter and signed this important bill into law,” Stemberger said.

The national outcry over the videos came amid an ongoing battle in Florida over abortion. Scott signed a bill last year requiring women to wait 24 hours and get two appointments with a clinic before receiving an abortion.

“Anyone who has lived in Florida during the Rick Scott administration cannot be surprised by his signature on this legislation restricting women's access to health care,” Howard Simon, executive director of ACLU of Florida, said of the new law.