District 7 School Board
Home (District 7) Facebook Contact Us Biography District 7 Resources District 7 Schools District 7 Map Parents Students District 7 FCAT Scores Photo Gallery

Biography

Carlos Curbelo was born in Miami on March 1, 1980, to Carlos and Teresita Curbelo, Cuban exiles who fled Fidel Castro's tyranny in the 1960s. He attended John G. DuPuis Elementary in Hialeah before continuing to Miami's Belen Jesuit Preparatory School where he served as Student Council President his senior year. Carlos subsequently enrolled in the University of Miami where he earned a Bachelor's Degree in Business Administration while majoring in Political Science. More recently, he earned a Masterís Degree in Public Administration, also from UM.



In 2002, just months out of college, Carlos founded Capitol Gains, a public and media relations firm that has done work for South Florida companies as well as state, national, and international political campaigns. In 2009, he was named State Director for US Senator George LeMieux and was responsible for overseeing staff in seven offices throughout the state and advising the Senator on Latin-American policy and Hispanic issues. In 2010, he was appointed by Florida's Governor to the Miami-Dade Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO), a federally mandated board tasked with prioritizing local transportation and infrastructure projects. Carlos is also the co-founder of Centre Court Charities, a non-profit organization that runs basketball leagues for high school students during the summer months.



In November of 2010, Carlos was elected, with the support of over 27,000 voters, to serve on the Miami Dade County School Board. Miami Dade County Public Schools is the fourth largest school district in the country. Shortly after being elected, he was the only School Board Member in the state asked to serve on the Governorís Education Transition Team where he was a champion for reform and for equity in funding. On the School Board, Carlos has been a strong advocate for fiscal responsibility, parental involvement, and transparency in the districtís operations.



Marrying Cecilia Lowell in 2006, Carlos decided to settle his family in Kendall where he has lived since 1995. The coupleís first child, Sylvie Marie, was born In October of 2009, and another girl is on the way.