In Signing Farm Bill, Obama Extols Rural Growth
In his remarks, Mr. Obama announced a new “Made in Rural America” initiative that he said would help rural businesses market their goods abroad. White House officials also announced five regional forums on rural exports and an “investing in rural America” conference. Mr. Obama directed the White House Rural Council to host sessions in all 50 states to train Department of Agriculture staff members on how to promote rural exports.

The president called the farm bill a “jobs bill,” an “innovation bill,” a “research bill” and a “conservation bill.” But he said two main benefits of the bill would be to help rural communities and provide food assistance to poor families and children.

He noted that the legislation would provide the money for the nation’s food stamp program, which helps poor families buy groceries even as it provides an important market for the nation’s farmers.

“More than half of all Americans will experience poverty at some point during their adult lives,” Mr. Obama said. “For more than half a century, this country has helped Americans put food on the table when they hit a rough patch or when they’re working hard but aren’t making enough money to feed their kids. They’re not looking for a handout, these folks, they’re looking for a hand up.”

Some advocates for the poor criticized the new farm bill, saying that spending cuts in the food stamp program will reduce the amount of money that poor families receive for food. Margarette Purvis, the president of the Food Bank For New York City, said in a statement that she was “deeply disappointed” in the bill.

“Whatever the justifications being touted, we are left with the reality that hundreds of thousands of low-income families will face new hardship when they see their food assistance cut,” she said.

Mr. Obama has pledged to spend the next year focused on increasing economic opportunity for the middle class and confronting growing income inequality. But the president usually talks about the challenges for suburban and urban families. The appearance in Michigan on Friday gave him a chance to speak to the issues that many of the country’s rural families face.