Linda Sarsour Is a Brooklyn Homegirl in a Hijab
“Sometimes, it seems like the whole world has already set my life out for me,” Ms. Sarsour said, as the car took off. “But the question I have to answer before I actually do anything is: Will I be more influential on the inside or the outside? And I don’t have an answer yet.”

There are currently no Arab-Muslim elected officials in New York, but not long ago the Muslim Democratic Club ran a list of common Muslim surnames through a voter-registration database and found that there were quite likely more than 100,000 Muslim voters in the city.

Muslim-Americans have slowly gained footholds in various nodes of power in the city. The City Council speaker, Melissa Mark-Viverito, employs a staff member, Faiza Ali, as Muslim liaison. Ibrahim Khan, chief of staff to Letitia James, the public advocate, has done similar outreach work. And this summer, Mayor Bill de Blasio named Sarah Sayeed as a senior adviser to the city’s Community Affairs Unit, where she focuses on issues of concern to Muslims.

Ms. Sarsour said that if she did decide to seek office, it would probably be as part of a coalition of progressive candidates. “The community is there,” she said. “But we just haven’t found the inspiration yet to become politically engaged.”

Beyond that, Ms. Sarsour’s oft-stated ambition is to serve as the first mayor of an independent Brooklyn. This is a position, she said, that she would have to work toward by first becoming Brooklyn borough president and then accomplishing the tricky business of getting Kings County to secede from the rest of New York.

By now, it was almost dark and Ms. Sarsour had crossed the river once more, back to Manhattan. She was due — in just a few minutes — at a breaking of the Ramadan fast with the mayor at New York University. Though Mr. de Blasio has his own reputation for keeping people waiting, she urged her driver on, not wanting to be late herself for this event — mainly because she was famished. When the car pulled up at the destination, she had only two minutes before the fast would formally end.

There would be little time for politicking this night. She needed to eat.

“When I get in there,” she said, running, again, out of the car, “I’m literally gonna be like, ‘Yo, wassup, Mayor? Thanks for dinner, homie.’ ”