The Problem With G.O.P. Plans to Sell Health Insurance Across State Lines
In 2012, Ms. Corlette and co-authors completed a study of a number of states that passed laws to allow out-of-state insurance sales. Not a single out-of-state insurer had taken them up on the offer. As Ms. Corlette’s paper highlighted, there is no federal impediment to across-state-lines arrangements. The main difficulty is that most states want to regulate local products themselves. The Affordable Care Act actually has a few provisions to encourage more regional and national sales of insurance, but they have not proved popular.

Insurers have been muted in their enthusiasm for G.O.P. across-state-lines plans. Neither America’s Health Insurance Plans, the lobbying group for most private insurers, nor the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association have endorsed such a plan when it has come before Congress.

There’s a part of the health insurance market where regulations are largely identical around the country: the one for private Medicare Advantage plans. If uniform rules alone could ensure a broad array of competitors, you might expect to see many insurers participating. But that does not seem to be the case.

A recent report found that, in 97 percent of counties, the market for Medicare Advantage plans was “highly concentrated,” meaning very limited choices.

Beyond regulations and doctors, demographics help explain why insurance is cheaper in some places than others. Insurance tends to be less expensive in states like Utah and Colorado, where more people are young and healthy. If customers in New York wanted to start buying Utah plans, they might face two surprises: fewer local doctors and higher costs related to the health of the local population.

“I’ve tried for 10 years to explain this to Republicans; it is a big problem,” said Merrill Matthews, a resident scholar at the Institute for Policy Innovation, which focuses on free-market solutions to policy problems. “Just because a good affordable policy is available in another state doesn’t mean that I would be able to get the network of physicians and the good prices that are available in that other state.”

For that reason, even enthusiasts for interstate insurance sales say the plan is “not a panacea” or “not a silver bullet.”