Behind Puerto Rico’s Woes, a Broadly Powerful Development Bank
“Guarantees are good when you have a good venture,” said Melba Acosta Febo, the president and chairwoman of the bank. A lawyer and Harvard-trained accountant, Ms. Acosta is also now serving as a kind of financial magician, making cash appear as needed and staving off most defaults, at least for now.

In an interview in New York last week, Ms. Acosta acknowledged that even she found the “debt stack” confusing and called the golf venture “a great example” of how things had gone wrong.

“But this is just one example,” she added. “We have many failed ventures that have not been able to pay their debts.”

It is not clear how long her particular brand of magic can continue. Puerto Rico has been warning that it is running out of cash, and Ms. Acosta said the “extraordinary measures” she had been using to produce cash so far were unsustainable. The measures include delaying people’s tax refunds, borrowing from the island’s workers’ compensation fund, forcing community credit unions to hand over their cash in exchange for i.o.u.s, and now, even considering whether the island should withhold millions of dollars in holiday bonuses to government workers and retirees.

The bonuses are paid just in time for Christmas shopping. But the benefit is not only to consumers. The sales tax revenue from the year-end rush to spend helps fill the government’s coffers, and some is dedicated to making bond payments. “Usually we get that back,” Ms. Acosta said, explaining how a government outlay of more than $120 million in bonuses could be justified, even during a financial crisis.

The bond payments due on Tuesday are for principal and interest on debt issued by the development bank, but guaranteed as a general obligation by the island’s government. That puts them near the top of Puerto Rico’s hierarchy of credits.

People briefed on the situation say that Gov. Alejandro García Padilla, who must make the final decision, has revealed almost nothing about his intentions. He traveled to Europe last week, partly to court investors. The governor’s trip came in the midst of a cacophony of advice flowing his way about how to steer Puerto Rico out of its crisis.