New York City’s High School Graduation Rate Tops 70%
Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As New York State officials met on Monday to consider changes to high school graduation requirements, the state announced that the graduation rate inched up last year, with New York City’s edging above 70 percent for the first time.









Despite that increase, white students remained far more likely to receive a diploma than black or Hispanic students. And high school graduation remained out of reach for many students with disabilities.

Just over 78 percent of New York State students who entered high school in 2011 graduated on time, up from 76.4 percent of students the year before, state officials said at a Board of Regents meeting in Albany on Monday. But while 88 percent of white students graduated on time last year, only 65 percent of black and Hispanic students did, and only about 50 percent of students with disabilities did.

Nearly 7 percent of students in that class dropped out, a rate that held steady from the year before. Sixty-two percent of those students were black or Hispanic, and 64 percent of them were poor, the State Education Department said.

In New York City, the four-year graduation rate also made small gains, to 70.5 percent, up 2 percentage points from the previous year.

But a double-digit gap remained in city schools: 85 percent of Asian students graduated, as did 82 percent of whites, while black and Hispanic students graduated at a rate of 65.4 percent and 64 percent. Each group did see gains, with Hispanic students showing the biggest increase, at 2.5 percentage points.

The city’s dropout rate declined slightly, down 0.7 percentage points to 9 percent of students.

These small improvements have come amid significant changes to state graduation requirements in recent years.

Students are generally required to pass five Regents exams to receive their diploma. In 2012, the score needed to pass all five was raised to 65 from 55. And the exams themselves are becoming more rigorous as they are aligned with the Common Core standards, a set of skills intended to prepare students for college.

At the same time, New York State education officials have pushed to create more ways for students to demonstrate they are qualified to graduate. Instead of requiring students to pass one Regents exam in math, English, science and two in social studies, the Regents said in 2014 that students could swap the second social studies exam for an approved alternative, like a language exam or an assessment of vocational skills, such as accounting or hospitality management.

At the Regents meeting on Monday, a handful of alternatives to the traditional exams were introduced for consideration.

Among them was a proposal to allow students to demonstrate their mastery of a subject by doing a project rather than taking a test, provided they had passed the class and met an attendance requirement. The State Education Department said this option would be a boon to students who have struggled with standardized tests.

Another proposal discussed on Monday was changing the score at which students can appeal Regents exam results. Currently, students who score between 62 and 64 can appeal — if they have taken the test twice and passed the related course, among other requirements. The proposed change would allow students who score as low as 60 to appeal. If they are successful in their appeal, they are allowed to graduate with that score.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“This is not about changing our standard,” MaryEllen Elia, the state’s education commissioner, said in a statement. “It’s about providing other avenues for kids to show what they know so they can graduate.”

Graduating from high school and being prepared for college, however, are not necessarily the same thing. New York City officials highlighted growth in the number of graduates who met certain college readiness benchmarks, like scoring a certain amount on college admission tests, or passing the City University of New York’s readiness assessments. Though small gains were made on these measurements, fewer than half of New York City graduates were classified as ready to meet the academic demands of college.

At a news conference on Monday, Mayor Bill de Blasio celebrated the graduation increase, even tipping his hat to the work of his predecessor, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, whose education policies Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, has frequently criticized.

The Bloomberg administration “certainly made steady progress” on graduation rates, Mr. de Blasio said. “We’re proud to have picked that up and deepened that progress. And our new approach has us well on the way to the goal of 80 percent graduation rate over the next 10 years.”