No New Local Zika Transmissions in Florida, Governor Says
The rest of South Florida is also watching closely. In the Florida Keys, where Monroe County voters approved the release of genetically modified mosquitoes in a nonbinding referendum, Oxitec, a British biotech firm, is hoping to release its mosquitoes next year. Oxitec was embroiled in a long fight with residents of a tiny suburb of Key West called Key Haven — the designated site for the mosquitoes’ release.

Concerned about the new technology, voters there rejected the plan in a separate referendum, scratching the project after it had received the approval of the Food and Drug Administration. Now the Keys mosquito control board commission is scouting new locations on the chain of islands and Oxitec is holding discussion with the federal agency about the changes, said Oxitec’s senior scientist, Derric Nimmo.

As of Thursday night, Florida had 1,244, or 27 percent of all the cases reported in the United States. Of those, 249 of the Florida cases were locally acquired. The overwhelming majority of the others were people infected outside the United States mainland. In total, 185 of the cases involved pregnant women.

The situation in Puerto Rico, where the virus has proved far harder to control, is more serious. The island has 33,838 cases, almost all of them locally acquired. The disease is easily spread because few people have symptoms, making it hard to know they have been infected. Zika can also be sexually transmitted.

For pregnant women Zika can be a much bigger problem because they can pass the virus on to their fetuses, which can trigger serious brain abnormalities. Zika’s arrival in Florida prompted widespread apprehension in Miami. Some women moved out of state. Others left the house covered from neck to toe. Mr. Scott announced that pregnant women could receive free Zika testing, a generous offer but one that also caused considerable logjams and delays.

Dr. Christine Curry, an obstetrician-gynecologist at the University of Miami Health System, said two women in Florida have given birth to babies with either microcephaly or other Zika-related problems. But the university’s Zika response team continues to treat pregnant women.

“The majority don’t have a recollection of symptoms or mosquito bites and are surprised the antibody test came back positive,” Dr. Curry said.