Looking for a Trump Doctrine in the White House Kitchen
Image Cristeta Comerford is the White House executive chef. Credit Saul Loeb/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images

The idea of a White House garden began to take on political implications when the California chef Alice Waters pestered Bill and Hillary Clinton to install an organic one. Although the White House rejected the notion, saying a kitchen garden would not be in keeping with the formality of the grounds, the Clintons did plant a vegetable garden on the roof. They also hired the White House’s first American chef.

The Obamas more fully embraced America’s increasing interest in food culture and agriculture, dining at notable new restaurants and opening up the White House to visiting chefs.

“We became ‘foodie aware,’” said Bill Yosses, the head pastry chef in the White House under the Obamas and George and Laura Bush. “It was a good way for new information to make its way to the White House, because you are so closed off from the world.”

Mrs. Trump is under no obligation to retain the current White House chef, Cristeta Comerford, or its pastry chef, Susie Morrison, the first women to hold those positions. But there is little indication that their jobs are in peril.

Image Anna Cristina Niceta Lloyd, whom Mrs. Trump named as social secretary. Credit Jeff Elkins

Their employment could depend on how well they get along with Anna Cristina Niceta Lloyd, known as Rickie, whom Mrs. Trump named as social secretary on Feb. 17. Ms. Niceta Lloyd, an account executive for a Washington caterer, helped coordinate the traditional lunch after Mr. Trump’s swearing-in. She will oversee social events like the Easter Egg Roll, and help plan state dinners and other official meals, working with the White House chief usher, the State Department and Ms. Comerford.

Ms. Niceta Lloyd did not respond to a request for an interview, and it is not clear how much of a hand she will have in planning official menus. In the past, chefs have tried out dishes for a state dinner at a tasting hosted by the first lady. In the Obama administration, that menu would sometimes include specific vegetables grown for the occasion.

The kitchen garden, which has produced 2,000 pounds of food a year, planted a flag for the farmers’ market crowd. Its bounty became diplomatic gifts, with Mr. Obama handing out honey from the hives, tea bags made from chamomile and carved wooden boxes of seeds, one of which he gave to Pope Francis.