Partial Transcript: Trump’s Interview With The Times
THRUSH: What do you say to New Yorker officials that think those are really vital projects? What do you say to them? Do you support them?

TRUMP: Well, I may support them, I’m going to look at them. So what I’m doing — is you know — I did great in real estate in New York. I know all the developers. I know all of the folks. I know the good ones and the bad ones. And I’m setting up a commission of very smart people that know how to spend money properly. That know how to build on time, on budget. And ideally, under time and under budget. I’m setting up a commission. It’s going to be headed by [the developer] Richard LeFrak and it’s going to be headed — they’re going to be co- — Steve Roth. R-O-T-H of Vornado. Two very talented, smart, tough people. And they are going to, along with me, put on a group of 20 people, 20 to 25 people on a commission. We’re going to run projects through them. And they will have great expertise in that room. We’ll have it from both coasts, and right down the middle. We’re going to have representatives from various parts of the country that are all are very, very successful in terms of infrastructure. From different fields, but always infrastructure. But everything is going to be run by them. One of the things — you probably saw what I said yesterday — did you see where I held up the deal?

HABERMAN: I did. The chart.

TRUMP: That’s a highway. That’s a highway. What is that, 17 agencies, Gary? Hundreds and hundreds of approvals. Some of which, statutorily, you have to wait six months before you ask for the next one. If we do the — when we do the infrastructure, it’s going to be very important to me that if we give billions of dollars to a state, like New York, California or any other state, that they’re going to have to start spending that money, they’re going to have to have approval within 120 days.

[Cross talk.]

TRUMP: And if they don’t — well, otherwise, you’ll give them money and they won’t start the highway till — which is something that no one has ever done.

THRUSH: You’ve spent most of your career in New York. A, what do you think of the subway system in New York? Do you think it’s in good shape? And B, when’s the last time you were on the train in the city?

TRUMP: It’s been a long time. It’s been a long time. It has been. I know the subway system very well. I used to take it to Kew-Forest School, in Forest Hills, when I lived in Queens. And I’d take the subway to school. Seems a long time ago —

[Cross talk.]

TRUMP: I’d take it from Jamaica, 179th Street. Jamaica, right? To Forest Hills. I understand the subway very well. I used to ride between the cars.