Trump Discards Obama Legacy, One Rule at a Time
One eliminated regulation would have prohibited internet providers from collecting, sharing or selling consumers’ information without their permission. One would have required some businesses to keep records of work-related injuries and illnesses for five years instead of six months. And another would have prevented states from denying funding for women’s health services to facilities that also provided abortions.

Republicans viewed those rules and the other eliminated regulations as unnecessary burdens enacted by a president who had resorted to executive action because he could not get his agenda through Congress. While initially skeptical of using administrative power to govern, Mr. Obama increasingly embraced the use of regulation, reshaping government more by writing new rules than by passing new legislation.

“The biggest frustration in the last eight years was not knowing where the next regulation was coming from, the next rule, and that uncertainty stifled investment,” said Marc Short, Mr. Trump’s legislative affairs director, who participated in planning for the regulatory assault.

Mr. Trump’s efforts to unwind Mr. Obama’s regulations go beyond the use of the Congressional Review Act. He has issued executive orders, including one instructing the Environmental Protection Agency to begin the process of rolling back far-reaching rules that would shut down many of the country’s coal-fired power plants.

But reversing regulation through executive authority requires long periods of study, notice to the public and hearings. The final outcome is often challenged in court, adding to the delay.

Under the Congressional Review Act, the process is cleaner and simpler. It requires only an up-or-down vote, and the outcome cannot be challenged legally.

The use of that tool to attack Obama-era regulations was coordinated by a small group, including Mr. Short; Mr. Bremberg; Eric Ueland, a veteran Republican who works for the Senate Budget Committee; Rick Dearborn, the director of the transition effort and now a deputy chief of staff at the White House; and House and Senate aides. The group’s members settled on a list of rules they thought could be eradicated.