Advocate for Tough Voting Rules to Steer Trump’s Elections Commission
Mr. Kobach has drafted strict immigration legislation in states and towns nationwide and pressed lawsuits to make life more difficult for undocumented immigrants, such as an effort to deny in-state college tuition rates to undocumented students in California.

He also was the author of the proposal by the 2012 Republican presidential nominee, Mitt Romney, to make undocumented immigrants “self-deport” by cutting off government support.

Mr. Kobach has said he is working to preserve the nation’s “sovereignty,” telling Newsweek in 2011 that “you can’t have open immigration and a welfare state.” But opponents have used some of his actions to brand him a nativist and even a racist.

Mr. Kobach was widely criticized in 2015 after speaking at a writers workshop of The Social Contract Press, a publisher of white nationalist tracts. And he has been denounced for appearing on a weekly talk-radio program in which he has lent credence to some callers’ racial and religious conspiracy theories. He has questioned whether President Barack Obama might call for an end to prosecuting black criminal suspects and whether his support of the Arab Spring uprising was a pretext for “opening the door to radical Islamism.”

Only in 2009, when he decided to run for secretary of state, did Mr. Kobach begin a sustained attack on voter fraud, warning that fraud proponents “have burrowed into every corner of our country” and that illegal registration of immigrants was “pervasive.” Weeks after he took office in 2011, the Kansas Legislature adopted his proposal to require anyone registering to vote to prove citizenship, and to require an approved photo ID card at the polls.

Mr. Kobach has since declared victory in the fraud wars, claiming on Friday to have uncovered 125 illegally registered noncitizens out of 1.8 million Kansans on the voting rolls. But court documents filed in one Kansas lawsuit suggested that confusion, not fraud, was at issue in many cases. In one county where Mr. Kobach found 17 noncitizen voters, only one had cast a ballot, and five had actually self-reported their mistake to election officials. Most of Mr. Kobach’s nine fraud convictions involve people who voted in two states. Neither a citizenship requirement nor an ID would have prevented those offenses.

Representative Jim Ward, a Democrat and Kansas House minority leader who has known Mr. Kobach for 10 years, said Mr. Kobach’s efforts mainly had made it harder for eligible people to vote. Federal courts appear to agree: Last year, judges barred Kansas from requiring citizenship proof from people registering at drivers’ licensing offices and other places covered under the federal “motor voter” law. The requirement, which one Republican-appointed judge called a “mass denial of a fundamental constitutional right,” had prevented one in seven new registrants from casting ballots.