Stipend Scandal Fuels Divide Among New York’s Democratic State Senators
At the same time, the I.D.C. has repeatedly pushed back on suggestions that it alone is keeping Democrats out of power, noting that another Democratic senator, Simcha Felder of Brooklyn, has also sided with Mr. Flanagan.

On Monday, Mr. Klein’s group started a so-called Call the Roll campaign, asking Ms. Stewart-Cousins and other Democrats to sign a pledge to uphold “key progressive issues,” including an expansion of abortion rights, public campaign finance and single-payer health care, all of which have faced stiff Republican opposition in Albany. The group released a 3½ minute video to promote the idea, featuring all eight I.D.C. members.

“The clear and unequivocal objective is to be able to ensure we have 32 Democratic votes to adopt the seven pieces of progressive legislation in New York,” said Candice Giove, a spokeswoman for the I.D.C. “Until the Democratic Conference can deliver those votes, it is a failure of leadership on their part.”

Anger over the election of President Trump, has fueled opposition to the I.D.C. in recent months. This week, New York City’s public advocate, Letitia James, called on the I.D.C. to unify with Ms. Stewart-Cousins’ group, saying she would not endorse I.D.C. candidates if they could not reconcile. (She had previously endorsed Marisol Alcantara, who was elected to the Senate last year, but is a member of the I.D.C.)

The former United States Representative Charles B. Rangel also waded into the controversy over lulus and the I.D.C. on Tuesday. He called the practice of payments “so immoral” during a visit to a polling station for Mr. Benjamin, who will fill the 30th Senate District post last held by Bill Perkins, who left the Senate earlier this year after his election to the New York City Council. Later, Mr. Rangel elaborated, saying that he was bewildered that any Democrat “would join the opposition Republican Party.”

“I can’t find any good reason to desert the party that they ran on,” he said.

In her remarks, Ms. Stewart-Cousins agreed that there was “obviously a difference of opinion” about the legality of the stipend payments and the false documents sent to the comptroller.

“I’ve always said that somebody needs to get to the bottom of it because, again, this is taxpayer dollars,” she said. “And it’s either in law. Or not.”