Trump Says NATO Allies Don’t Pay Their Share. Is That True?
Mr. Obama raised it during a visit to Europe after Russia’s Ukraine intervention. “One of the things that I think, medium and long term, we’ll have to examine is whether everybody is chipping in,” he said. “And this can’t just be a U.S. exercise or a British exercise or one country’s efforts.”

One way Mr. Trump is different is that he has made this a far more consistent and far more intense theme of nearly every discussion he has about NATO. He may have better luck than his predecessors at badgering allies into increasing their spending simply because he has made it the essential condition of America’s relationship with the alliance.

Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s secretary general, said last month that the number of alliance members that would meet the 2 percent target next year would rise to eight.

Do NATO allies owe the United States money?

“Many of these nations owe massive amounts of money from past years and not paying in those past years,” Mr. Trump said.

No. This is not a matter of members failing to pay dues. The allies arguably may have less capable militaries than they should have, but none of them owe anyone anything. “Europe may owe itself; it certainly owes nothing to the U.S.,” said Ivo Daalder, a former ambassador to NATO under Mr. Obama.

What does Mr. Trump mean when he says NATO should have had $119 billion more?

“If all NATO members had spent just 2 percent of their G.D.P. on defense last year, we would have had another $119 billion for our collective defense and for the financing of additional NATO reserves,” the president said.

He is offering an estimate of what NATO would have spent had all of its members abided by the 2 percent guideline, but there is no way to recover that money after the fact. “Citing the amount not spent over the years is fine,” said Alexander R. Vershbow, a former deputy secretary general of NATO, “but demanding back taxes is not justified and only alienates allies.”