Full Transcript and Video: James Comey’s Testimony on Capitol Hill
BURR: All time’s expired for the hearing. Can I say, for members — we’ll reconvene promptly at 1 p.m. in the hearing room. We have a vote scheduled for 1:45. I would suggest that all members promptly be there at 1 o’clock. We have about three minutes.

I’d like to have order. Photographers — photographers, return to where you were, please. This hearing’s not adjourned yet. Either that, or we’ll remove you.

To members, we have about three minutes of updates that we would love to cover as soon as we get into the closed session, before we have an opportunity to spend some time with Director Comey.

Based on our agreement, it would be my intentions to adjourn that closed hearing between 2 and 2:10, so that members can go vote, and I would urge you to eat at that time.

Jim, several of us on this committee have had the opportunity to work with you since you walked in the door. I want to say, personally, on behalf of all this — all the committee members, we’re grateful to you for your service to your country, not just in the capacity as FBI director, but as prosecutor, and more importantly, being somebody that loves this country enough to tell it like it is.BURR: I want to say to your workforce that we’re grateful to them — with the level of cooperation that they have shown us, with the trust we’ve built between both organizations, the Congress and — and the bureau. We couldn’t do our job if it wasn’t for their willingness to share candidly with us the work that we need to see.

This hearing’s the ninth public hearing this committee has had this year. That is twice the historical year-long average of this committee. I think the vice chairman and my’s (ph) biggest challenge, when this investigation has concluded, is to return our hearings to the secrecy of a closed hearing, to encourage our members not to freely talk about intelligence matters publicly and to respect the fact that we have a huge job.

And that’s to represent the entire body of the United States Senate and the American people, to make sure that we work with the intelligence community to provide you the tools to keep America safe, and that you do it within the legal limit, or those limits that are set by the executive branch.