With Trump on Vacation, a Sprucing Up for the West Wing
No such plan has been enacted. But a dodgy, decades-old White House air-conditioning system waits for no president or piece of legislation, White House officials argue. In a statement, a spokesman for the General Services Administration, which oversees the renovation of government buildings, said the 27-year-old system that heats and cools the leader of the free world and his senior staff was “well past its life cycle and will fail in the near future without intervention.”

“We’re in a situation where it’s dire” Ms. Walters said of the heating and cooling systems, noting that given their constant use, their functional age is 81 years old.

The administration is also using the time, she said, to make cosmetic improvements, including furniture upgrades. The South Portico steps will receive their first upgrade in 64 years, and the White House mess will get an overhaul.

The installation of new heating and air-conditioning systems was initially slated for 2014, but the General Services Administration didn’t deliver a plan for carrying it out until the spring of 2016. Faced with the prospect of a major renovation that could stretch into the fall of 2016, Mr. Obama’s team decided against starting the construction, opting instead to leave it to the next administration.

Built during the Theodore Roosevelt administration in 1902, the West Wing is about 30,000 square feet and houses the Oval Office, the Cabinet Room and the Situation Room. The White House press office and briefing room are also located there, as are the warrens of carrels and narrow booths that serve as work space for journalists who cover the president.

The briefing room and press work space are not expected to be affected by the construction. But starting this week, West Wing officials packed up their belongings for the move to the Eisenhower building, where they crowded into unfamiliar office suites and competed for limited conference room space in their makeshift home.

Assistant press secretaries are now seated shoulder to shoulder in the Cordell Hull Room, the same ornate pink-and-gold-hued space where Mr. Hull, then the secretary of state, received a telephone call from President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1941 informing him of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.