Amid Scandal, N.C.A.A. Forms Commission to Reform Men’s Basketball
“We have a model at the N.C.A.A. that’s predicated upon students wanting to be students — that they want to be college students, they want to participate in a college experience, and they want to play college basketball — and their desire to play in the N.B.A. is subordinate to that,” Emmert said. “A model that forces somebody to go to college who has no interest in being in college is fundamentally flawed.”

N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver said in an email that the league was “impressed by the caliber and depth of experience of the Commission” and was “willing to provide any input it may seek from the N.B.A.” He added that the league was continuing to discuss the one-and-done rule.

Emmert, who will sit on the commission alongside the former N.B.A. stars David Robinson and Grant Hill, said that in his personal view prospects should be able to go straight from high school to the N.B.A.

But he drew the line at changes to the amateur model, which prevents colleges from compensating athletes beyond scholarships and related costs. While he declined to speak for the commission, its members do not include any public critics of amateurism, and some — such as the Rev. John I. Jenkins, the president of Notre Dame — are outspoken supporters.

“Our model of sport, and I don’t know anybody in higher education leadership positions who disagrees, is predicated on the fact that student-athletes are not employees of universities,” Emmert said. “If we’re paying someone $100,000, that’s twice the household income of America. I don’t know how that person’s not an employee.”

Emmert confirmed that he and the rest of the N.C.A.A. office in Indianapolis learned about the yearslong federal probe from news media reports. But if the criminal investigation surprised him, not all of the allegations did.

“There’s always been rumors and innuendo that swirled around about this kind of behavior,” he said. “I think one of the most disturbing elements of this whole circumstance is it seems to have uncovered, at least in these cases, a code of silence — that people who were aware of these things weren’t coming forward.”