U.S. and South Korea Start Trade Talks Amid Rising Tensions
With South Korea, the White House’s overarching goal for renegotiating the trade pact is to reduce America’s trade deficit, which was $17 billion in 2016. But analysts view such a goal with skepticism, saying that the tendency of the United States to import more than it exports is linked to larger economic factors like saving and spending rates, not the terms of trade agreements.

Each side was likely to look to the other on Friday to articulate their goals for the renegotiation, said Wendy Cutler, the former chief United States negotiator for the deal. The United States will probably focus on areas of the agreement that it believes have not met its expectations, Ms. Cutler said, including trade in automobiles and, potentially, financial services and procedures related to importing goods.

She noted that the Trump administration had not notified Congress of its intention to renegotiate the agreement, something that is required before substantial changes are made. That may suggest that the United States is not seeking to significantly alter the terms of the deal or that, although it is seeking changes from South Korea, it is not willing to make big concessions itself.

The United States Korea Free Trade Agreement, America’s largest trade pact after the North American Free Trade Agreement, was negotiated during the President George W. Bush’s administration and signed by the two countries in 2007. It set off enormous protests from Koreans in 2008 over concerns about the safety of imported goods, such as beef. And it was not ratified by Congress until 2011, after President Barack Obama reworked the pact.

The agreement took effect in March 2012, cutting almost all tariffs and many other trade barriers between the countries. The deal opened South Korea, now the United States’ seventh-largest export market for goods, to imports of American agriculture, services and investment, and the American market to Korean cars and other manufactured goods like washing machines.

Trade officials estimated in 2007 that the lower barriers to trade under the agreement would increase annual exports of American goods by up to $11 billion, a claim that Mr. Obama repeated.

But, as the Trump administration has argued, that did not happen.

“Since KORUS went into effect, our trade deficit in goods with Korea has doubled from $13.2 billion to $27.6 billion, while U.S. goods exports have actually gone down,” Mr. Lighthizer, said in a statement in July. “This is quite different from what the previous administration sold to the American people when it urged approval of this agreement. We can and must do better.”