Chris Christie Interview Excerpts: The Governor on Trump, the Transition and His Record
On the president’s rhetoric

“My approach from the beginning was, my first election was about Jon Corzine. It wasn’t about me. I was just the acceptable alternative to the person they have rejected.”

_____

To the president, “I said, ‘Now the next four years are about you.’ And so his re-elect will be about you. Not about your challenger. It’ll be about you.”

On New Jersey Transit

“So first off, this idea that, ‘Oh, New Jersey Transit has been starved’ — we had one big accident with, tragically, one person died because a guy had sleep apnea. O.K. And then this becomes like New Jersey Transit is falling apart. Before that you never heard anything about New Jersey Transit falling apart. Pre- that accident, you go back and look at the clips, there was not any big discussion about New Jersey Transit being in some crisis. It’s not in a crisis. Now, can it be improved? Yes. But we’re on track to get positive train control in by the federal deadline of December 18. And it’s already fully funded. The new governor’s not going to have put any new money into P.T.C. unless he wants to accelerate it. If he wants to accelerate it getting in before December 18 he could put more money in, I guess, and get it done a little more quickly. But he doesn’t need to.”

_____

“The key to infrastructure in New Jersey is going to be getting the Gateway tunnel done. I mean, and that’s nothing to do with New Jersey Transit. I mean, it’s going to be New York, New Jersey and the feds getting together in an equitable way which Governor Cuomo now has agreed on. We agreed on it with the Obama administration and the Trump administration has not come forward yet on it.”

_____

“My wife, up until about four years ago, took New Jersey Transit every day for 25 years, and she would complain to me all the time, no matter what. ‘Oh it’s too crowded, it’s too hot in the summer, in the winter it’s too cold.’ I mean, meet a commuter who likes to commute? Like someone who says, ‘Oh my commuting experience is so pleasant.’”

_____

“I think what the new governor will find when he comes in, especially with $2 billion a year being spent on infrastructure, is that he is going to have plenty of money available to him to do the things that he may want to do. And if that improves things, great. But the idea that somehow, people can’t get into New York now — like the ‘summer of hell’— I wanted to kill Cuomo when he said that. It was, seriously, it was one of the dumbest things. And you know, Andrew and I have a great relationship, we’ve worked really well for seven years, but when he said that, I called him, I said, ‘What are you doing? That’s all we’re going to hear now.’”

On James Comey and the F.B.I. case on Hillary Clinton

“I think that Jim Comey was wrong in this respect. Put aside the merits of whether Hillary committed a crime or she didn’t. He should have never been the one making that decision and announcing it. And once he did, he made the F.B.I. political.”