On North Korea, Trump Finds Himself in Same Position as His Predecessors
Mr. Kim also enters any negotiation with considerable leverage. North Korea has made such strides in its nuclear and ballistic missile program in recent years that experts say it could agree to a pause in the testing of missiles, while it conducts negotiations, without really damaging its drive to be a bona fide nuclear weapons state.

“They use negotiations to buy time,” said Christopher R. Hill, who negotiated with North Korea for several years during the Bush administration.

Still, Mr. Hill noted that it was the first time in more than eight years that North Korea had opened the door to negotiating on its nuclear program. Given that, he said the Trump administration should explore the prospect seriously, first by thoroughly debriefing South Korea’s envoys.

“We need to chart a course between negative churlishness and irrational exuberance,” Mr. Hill said.

Diplomacy between the United States and North Korea has gone through cycles of long stagnation, followed by brief bursts of hope and then disappointment, typically after North Korea reneged on any agreement. Those collapses have sometimes been accompanied by what Americans have called cheating, but what the North has called prudence.

In October 1994, Mr. Clinton concluded what was perhaps the most ambitious nuclear agreement ever reached between Washington and Pyongyang — called, appropriately, the Agreed Framework.

Under the deal, North Korea halted construction of two nuclear reactors that the United States believed would be used to produce fuel for a nuclear bomb. In return, the White House pledged to give North Korea two alternative nuclear power reactors that could not be used in a weapons program — as well as fuel to tide it over before the new reactors were ready.

The 1994 accord blocked the North from reprocessing plutonium from its reactor at Yongbyon. The North complied, but then purchased equipment to enrich uranium, another pathway to a bomb, from Abdul Qadeer Khan, one of the fathers of the Pakistani bomb.