Oskar Gröning, the ‘Bookkeeper of Auschwitz,’ Is Dead at 96
“That was the only time I saw a complete gassing,” he said. “I did not take part.”

Twice, he maintained, he asked to be transferred from Auschwitz to combat duties. He equally acknowledged that his attitude toward those whose money he counted had been shaped by his upbringing.

As a child, he told Der Spiegel in 2005, he had played marbles in the street with Anne Selig, the daughter of a Jewish ironmonger whose store was next to his home. When Nazi storm troopers held up a sign outside the shop saying, “Germans, do not buy from Jews,” he said, he was unmoved.

Indeed, so pervasive was the hatred of Jews that he recalled a song with the refrain: “When Jewish blood begins to drip from our knives, things will be good again.”

“Back then,” he said, “we didn’t even think about what we were singing.”

He said that throughout his early life, as a member of ultranationalist movements including the Hitler Youth, he had been raised to believe that Jews were Germany’s enemy within. His concerns about what he saw at Auschwitz related more to the modalities of killing than to its rationale or supposed principles.

“He had sworn an oath of loyalty, he believed the Jews were Germany’s enemy,” Mr. Rees, the BBC journalist, wrote in an article in 2015, “and he knew that he could still manipulate his life at the camp to avoid encountering the worst of the horror.”

On the first day of his trial — in a makeshift courtroom in an assembly hall chosen to accommodate the crush of survivors, lawyers, spectators and journalists — Mr. Gröning addressed the judge, Franz Kompisch, saying: “It is beyond question that I am morally complicit. This moral guilt I acknowledge here before the victims with regret and humility.”

But “as concerns guilt before the law,” he added, “you must decide.”

Mr. Gröning appeared at his trial as a silver-haired old man, a widower who found it difficult to walk unaided. Wartime photographs of him showed a self-confident and smiling young man in thin-rimmed spectacles, sporting the death’s-head emblem of the SS on his cap.