Replacing Schneiderman Is a Big Job. Some Say It’s One for a Woman.
For now, at least, a woman will lead the office: The state solicitor general, Barbara D. Underwood, will assume Mr. Schneiderman’s position until the Legislature chooses a successor. In a statement, Ms. Underwood called the office’s work “critically important.”

“Our office has never been stronger,” she said.

Ms. Underwood, a graduate of Harvard and Georgetown, has argued 20 cases before the Supreme Court and served as a clerk for former Justice Thurgood Marshall. She is the first woman to occupy the office.

Regardless of whom the Legislature selects as an interim attorney general, the race will be reopened in the fall for a general election in November. Whoever wins the next four-year term will be closely watched not only in New York but also nationwide, as he or she decides whether to double down on the legal gauntlet Mr. Schneiderman threw down for Mr. Trump. As attorney general, Mr. Schneiderman filed more than 100 legal or administrative actions against Republicans in Washington, sued the Weinstein Company over potential civil rights violations, and moved to change state law so that he could prosecute President Trump’s aides even if he pardoned them.

Already, the list of possible contenders is long and growing.

It includes Kathleen Rice, a United States representative from Long Island who unsuccessfully challenged Mr. Schneiderman in the 2010 Democratic primary; Alphonso David, Mr. Cuomo’s chief counsel; Michael Gianaris, a state senator from Queens and chief political strategist for the Democratic conference; Zephyr Teachout, a Fordham Law School professor who ran for governor in 2014; Carrie H. Cohen, a former federal prosecutor who handled the corruption trial of the former Assembly speaker Sheldon Silver; Representative Sean Patrick Maloney; and Benjamin Lawsky, formerly the state’s top financial regulator.

In a possible sign of the elevated visibility of the attorney general’s role, some of the other names that have been floated seemed more like a liberal wish list than a viable ballot lineup: Preet Bharara, the former United States attorney from Manhattan whose feud with Mr. Trump may have outdone Mr. Schneiderman’s, for example — or even Hillary Clinton. (Asked on CNN on Tuesday about the possibility of a bid for the position, Mr. Bharara did not outright dismiss the idea.)

None except Ms. Teachout has publicly expressed interest. Ms. Teachout said on Tuesday that she was “seriously considering running.” Press aides for Ms. Rice and Mr. Maloney both declined to comment, but sources familiar with their thinking each said they were seriously mulling a run. Both are already financially well positioned to launch a bid: Ms. Rice and Mr. Maloney each has more than $1.5 million in campaign cash on hand, as does Mr. Gianaris.

For all the political jockeying, women’s advocacy groups said the succession debate should remain focused on the heart of the attorney general’s role: its core legal responsibilities.

“We’re going to have more and more of these cases” of alleged sexual harassment or violence, said Sonia Ossorio, president of New York’s arm of the National Organization for Women, citing the strength of the #MeToo movement. “This role of being the top law enforcement officer in an era where we still have a great deal of discrimination and violence against women — we need someone who can really prioritize that.”