Wisconsin Legislature: 118.42
118.40(8)(b)1. 1. The governing body of a virtual charter school shall assign an appropriately licensed teacher for each online course offered by the virtual charter school. In this subsection, an individual who holds a license or permit to teach a subject and level in the state from which the online course is provided is appropriately licensed to teach the subject and level in this state. The governing body of a virtual charter school shall assign an appropriately licensed teacher for each online course offered by the virtual charter school. In this subsection, an individual who holds a license or permit to teach a subject and level in the state from which the online course is provided is appropriately licensed to teach the subject and level in this state.

118.40(8)(b)1g. 1g. The governing body of a virtual charter school may not permit a person holding both a license to teach exclusively in a charter school and a license to teach in other public schools to teach, in the virtual charter school, a subject or at a level that is not authorized by the latter license. The governing body of a virtual charter school may not permit a person holding both a license to teach exclusively in a charter school and a license to teach in other public schools to teach, in the virtual charter school, a subject or at a level that is not authorized by the latter license.

118.40(8)(b)1r. 1r. The governing body of a virtual charter school may not permit a person holding only a permit to teach exclusively in a charter school to teach in a virtual charter school. The governing body of a virtual charter school may not permit a person holding only a permit to teach exclusively in a charter school to teach in a virtual charter school.

118.40(8)(b)2. 2. If a pupil attends a virtual charter school, any person providing educational services to the pupil in the pupil's home, other than instructional staff of the virtual charter school, is not required to hold a license or permit to teach issued by the department. If a pupil attends a virtual charter school, any person providing educational services to the pupil in the pupil's home, other than instructional staff of the virtual charter school, is not required to hold a license or permit to teach issued by the department.

118.40(8)(b)3. 3. The department may not require a person licensed as provided under subd. The department may not require a person licensed as provided under subd. 1. to complete professional development not required of any other individual required to be licensed under s. 118.19

118.40(8)(c) (c) Staff duties. In a virtual charter school, an instructional staff member is responsible for all of the following for each pupil the instructional staff member teaches: In a virtual charter school, an instructional staff member is responsible for all of the following for each pupil the instructional staff member teaches:

118.40(8)(c)1. 1. Improving learning by planned instruction. Improving learning by planned instruction.

118.40(8)(c)2. 2. Diagnosing learning needs. Diagnosing learning needs.

118.40(8)(c)3. 3. Prescribing content delivery through class activities. Prescribing content delivery through class activities.

118.40(8)(c)4. 4. Assessing learning. Assessing learning.

118.40(8)(c)5. 5. Reporting outcomes to administrators and parents and guardians. Reporting outcomes to administrators and parents and guardians.

118.40(8)(c)6. 6. Evaluating the effects of instruction. Evaluating the effects of instruction.

118.40(8)(d) (d) Required days and hours. A virtual charter school shall do all of the following: A virtual charter school shall do all of the following:

118.40(8)(d)1. 1. Provide educational services to its pupils for at least 150 days each school year. Provide educational services to its pupils for at least 150 days each school year.

118.40(8)(d)2. 2. Ensure that its teachers are available to provide direct pupil instruction for at least the applicable number of hours specified in s. Ensure that its teachers are available to provide direct pupil instruction for at least the applicable number of hours specified in s. 121.02 (1) (f) each school year. No more than 10 hours in any 24-hour period may count toward the requirement under this subdivision.

118.40(8)(d)3. 3. Ensure that its teachers respond to inquiries from pupils and from parents or guardians of pupils by the end of the first school day following the day on which the inquiry is received. Ensure that its teachers respond to inquiries from pupils and from parents or guardians of pupils by the end of the first school day following the day on which the inquiry is received.

118.40(8)(e) (e) Parent advisory council. The governing body of a virtual charter school shall ensure that a parent advisory council is established for the school and that it meets on a regular basis. The governing body shall determine the selection process for members of the parent advisory council. The governing body of a virtual charter school shall ensure that a parent advisory council is established for the school and that it meets on a regular basis. The governing body shall determine the selection process for members of the parent advisory council.

118.40(8)(f) (f) Required notices. At the beginning of each school term, the governing body of a virtual charter school shall inform the parent or guardian of each pupil attending the virtual charter school, in writing, the name of, and how to contact, each of the following persons: At the beginning of each school term, the governing body of a virtual charter school shall inform the parent or guardian of each pupil attending the virtual charter school, in writing, the name of, and how to contact, each of the following persons:

118.40(8)(f)1. 1. The members of the school board that contracted for the establishment of the virtual charter school and the administrators of that school district. The members of the school board that contracted for the establishment of the virtual charter school and the administrators of that school district.

118.40(8)(f)2. 2. The members of the virtual charter school's governing body, if different than the persons under subd. The members of the virtual charter school's governing body, if different than the persons under subd. 1.

118.40(8)(f)3. 3. The members of the virtual charter school's parent advisory council established under par. The members of the virtual charter school's parent advisory council established under par. (e)

118.40(8)(f)4. 4. The staff of the virtual charter school. The staff of the virtual charter school.

118.40(8)(g) (g) Pupil's failure to participate.

118.40(8)(g)1. 1. Whenever a pupil attending a virtual charter school fails to respond appropriately to a school assignment or directive from instructional staff within 5 school days, the governing body of the virtual charter school shall notify the pupil's parent or guardian. Whenever a pupil attending a virtual charter school fails to respond appropriately to a school assignment or directive from instructional staff within 5 school days, the governing body of the virtual charter school shall notify the pupil's parent or guardian.

118.40(8)(g)2. 2. Subject to subd. Subject to subd. 2m. , the third time in the same semester that a pupil attending a virtual charter school fails to respond appropriately to a school assignment or directive from instructional staff within 5 school days, the governing body of the virtual charter school shall also notify the school board that contracted for the establishment of the virtual charter school, the school board of the pupil's resident school district, and the department. The school board that contracted for the establishment of the virtual charter school may transfer the pupil to his or her resident school district. If the pupil is a resident of the school district that contracted for the establishment of the virtual charter school, the school board may assign the pupil to another school or program within that school district. If the school board transfers or assigns a pupil, it shall notify the pupil's parent or guardian and the department.

118.40(8)(g)2m. 2m. If the parent or guardian of a pupil attending a virtual charter school notifies the virtual charter school in writing before a school assignment or directive is given that the pupil will not be available to respond to the assignment or directive during a specified period, the school days during that period do not count for purposes of subd. If the parent or guardian of a pupil attending a virtual charter school notifies the virtual charter school in writing before a school assignment or directive is given that the pupil will not be available to respond to the assignment or directive during a specified period, the school days during that period do not count for purposes of subd. 2. The virtual charter school shall require the pupil to complete any assignment missed during the period. This subdivision applies to no more than 10 school days in a school year.

118.40(8)(g)3. 3. The parent or guardian of a pupil transferred to the pupil's resident school district under subd. The parent or guardian of a pupil transferred to the pupil's resident school district under subd. 2. may appeal the transfer to the department within 30 days after receipt of the notice of transfer. The department shall affirm the school board's decision unless the department finds that the decision was arbitrary or unreasonable.

118.40 Annotation A public school district did not violate the equal protection clause of the U.S. constitution by refusing to bus the students of a charter school created under sub. (2r) located within its geographical boundaries. Racine Charter One, Inc. v. Racine Unified School District, A public school district did not violate the equal protection clause of the U.S. constitution by refusing to bus the students of a charter school created under sub. (2r) located within its geographical boundaries. Racine Charter One, Inc. v. Racine Unified School District, 424 F.3d 677 (2005).

118.42 118.42 Low-performing school districts and schools; state superintendent interventions.

118.42(1) (1) If the state superintendent determines that a school district has been in need of improvement for 4 consecutive school years, the school board shall do all of the following: If the state superintendent determines that a school district has been in need of improvement for 4 consecutive school years, the school board shall do all of the following:

118.42(1)(a) (a) Employ a standard, consistent, research-based curriculum that is aligned with the state's model academic standards, as determined by the state superintendent, and across grades in all schools. Employ a standard, consistent, research-based curriculum that is aligned with the state's model academic standards, as determined by the state superintendent, and across grades in all schools.

118.42(1)(b) (b) Use pupil academic performance data, including data indicating improvement in pupil academic achievement and English language acquisition, to differentiate instruction to meet individual pupil needs. To the extent practicable, the school board shall assess pupils in the language and form most likely to yield accurate data. Use pupil academic performance data, including data indicating improvement in pupil academic achievement and English language acquisition, to differentiate instruction to meet individual pupil needs. To the extent practicable, the school board shall assess pupils in the language and form most likely to yield accurate data.

118.42(1)(c) (c) Implement for all pupils a system of academic and behavioral supports and early interventions, including diagnostic assessments, instruction in core academic subjects, different instructional strategies for different pupils, and strategies to improve reading and mathematics instruction and promote positive behavior. Implement for all pupils a system of academic and behavioral supports and early interventions, including diagnostic assessments, instruction in core academic subjects, different instructional strategies for different pupils, and strategies to improve reading and mathematics instruction and promote positive behavior.

118.42(1)(d) (d) Provide additional learning time to address the academic needs of pupils who are struggling academically, including pupils whose proficiency in English is limited. The additional learning time may include an extended school day, an extended school year, summer school, or intersession courses. Provide additional learning time to address the academic needs of pupils who are struggling academically, including pupils whose proficiency in English is limited. The additional learning time may include an extended school day, an extended school year, summer school, or intersession courses.

118.42(2) (2) If the state superintendent determines that a public school was in the lowest performing 5 percent of all public schools in the state in the previous school year and is located in a school district that has been in need of improvement for 4 consecutive school years, the school board shall do all of the following in the school: If the state superintendent determines that a public school was in the lowest performing 5 percent of all public schools in the state in the previous school year and is located in a school district that has been in need of improvement for 4 consecutive school years, the school board shall do all of the following in the school:

118.42(2)(a) (a) Use rigorous and equitable performance evaluation systems for teachers and principals that include all of the following: Use rigorous and equitable performance evaluation systems for teachers and principals that include all of the following:

118.42(2)(a)1. 1. Annual performance evaluations; multiple rating categories; multiple rating criteria, including improvement in pupil academic achievement as a significant factor; observation-based performance assessments; and an up-to-date collection of professional practice materials. The school board shall ensure that improvement in pupil academic achievement is based on at least 2 measures. Annual performance evaluations; multiple rating categories; multiple rating criteria, including improvement in pupil academic achievement as a significant factor; observation-based performance assessments; and an up-to-date collection of professional practice materials. The school board shall ensure that improvement in pupil academic achievement is based on at least 2 measures.

118.42(2)(a)2. 2. A method of identifying mitigating factors, such as a high rate of pupil mobility, large class size, insufficient preparation time, insufficient paraprofessional support, insufficient professional development, and insufficient resources or support, that could affect a teacher's or principal's performance. A method of identifying mitigating factors, such as a high rate of pupil mobility, large class size, insufficient preparation time, insufficient paraprofessional support, insufficient professional development, and insufficient resources or support, that could affect a teacher's or principal's performance.

118.42(2)(b) (b) Adopt a policy establishing criteria for evaluating whether the distribution of teachers and principals within the affected schools relative to the distribution of teachers and principals throughout the school district, based upon their qualifications and effectiveness, is equitable. Using the criteria, the school board shall determine whether the distribution of principals and teachers is equitable. If the school board determines that the distribution is inequitable, the school board shall do all of the following: Adopt a policy establishing criteria for evaluating whether the distribution of teachers and principals within the affected schools relative to the distribution of teachers and principals throughout the school district, based upon their qualifications and effectiveness, is equitable. Using the criteria, the school board shall determine whether the distribution of principals and teachers is equitable. If the school board determines that the distribution is inequitable, the school board shall do all of the following:

118.42(2)(b)1. 1. Perform a comprehensive review of current policies and constraints that prevent low-performing schools from recruiting, placing, and retaining effective teachers and principals, and implement strategies to eliminate those policies and constraints. Perform a comprehensive review of current policies and constraints that prevent low-performing schools from recruiting, placing, and retaining effective teachers and principals, and implement strategies to eliminate those policies and constraints.

118.42(2)(b)2. 2. Provide additional support to teachers and principals, which may include professional development that is incorporated into their work and tuition reimbursement for courses related to their professional duties. Provide additional support to teachers and principals, which may include professional development that is incorporated into their work and tuition reimbursement for courses related to their professional duties.

118.42(2)(c) (c) Establish teacher and principal improvement programs that include all of the following: Establish teacher and principal improvement programs that include all of the following:

118.42(2)(c)1. 1. Supplemental mentoring for those with emergency licenses or permits. Supplemental mentoring for those with emergency licenses or permits.

118.42(2)(c)2. 2. Opportunities to pursue other professional certifications, including certification by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. Opportunities to pursue other professional certifications, including certification by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.

118.42(2)(c)3. 3. Annually, at least 60 hours of professional development that is incorporated into their work. The school board shall consult with teachers and principals on the content of the professional development. Annually, at least 60 hours of professional development that is incorporated into their work. The school board shall consult with teachers and principals on the content of the professional development.

118.42(2)(c)4. 4. A joint labor-management program designed to objectively identify teachers and principals who demonstrate serious performance deficiencies and provide them with opportunities for improvement, including weekly observation, mentoring, ongoing conferences, modeling, and professional development. The school board shall offer career counseling and other career transition benefits to those teachers and principals who continue to demonstrate performance deficiencies. A joint labor-management program designed to objectively identify teachers and principals who demonstrate serious performance deficiencies and provide them with opportunities for improvement, including weekly observation, mentoring, ongoing conferences, modeling, and professional development. The school board shall offer career counseling and other career transition benefits to those teachers and principals who continue to demonstrate performance deficiencies.

118.42(2)(d) (d) Adopt placement criteria for principals that include performance evaluations and measures of pupil academic achievement. Adopt placement criteria for principals that include performance evaluations and measures of pupil academic achievement.

118.42(3)(a) (a) If the state superintendent determines that a school district has been in need of improvement for 4 consecutive school years, the state superintendent may, after consulting with the school board, the school district superintendent, and representatives of each labor organization representing school district employees, direct the school board to do one or more of the following in the school district: If the state superintendent determines that a school district has been in need of improvement for 4 consecutive school years, the state superintendent may, after consulting with the school board, the school district superintendent, and representatives of each labor organization representing school district employees, direct the school board to do one or more of the following in the school district:

118.42(3)(a)1. 1. Implement or modify activities described in sub. Implement or modify activities described in sub. (1) (a) to (d)

118.42(3)(a)2. 2. Implement a new or modified instructional design, which may include expanded school hours or additional pupil supports and services. Implement a new or modified instructional design, which may include expanded school hours or additional pupil supports and services.

118.42(3)(a)3. 3. Implement professional development programs that focus on improving pupil academic achievement. Implement professional development programs that focus on improving pupil academic achievement.

118.42(3)(a)4. 4. Implement changes in administrative and personnel structures. Implement changes in administrative and personnel structures.

118.42(3)(a)5. 5. Adopt accountability measures to monitor the school district's finances or to monitor other interventions directed by the state superintendent under subds. Adopt accountability measures to monitor the school district's finances or to monitor other interventions directed by the state superintendent under subds. 1. to 4.

118.42(3)(b) (b) If the state superintendent determines that a public school is located in a school district that has been in need of improvement for 4 consecutive school years, and that the school has been in need of improvement for 5 consecutive school years or was among the lowest performing 5 percent of all public schools in the state in the previous school year, the state superintendent may, after consulting with the school board, the school district superintendent, and representatives of each labor organization representing school district employees, direct the school board to do one or more of the following in the school: If the state superintendent determines that a public school is located in a school district that has been in need of improvement for 4 consecutive school years, and that the school has been in need of improvement for 5 consecutive school years or was among the lowest performing 5 percent of all public schools in the state in the previous school year, the state superintendent may, after consulting with the school board, the school district superintendent, and representatives of each labor organization representing school district employees, direct the school board to do one or more of the following in the school:

118.42(3)(b)1. 1. Implement a new or modified instructional design, which may include expanded school hours or additional pupil supports and services. Implement a new or modified instructional design, which may include expanded school hours or additional pupil supports and services.

118.42(3)(b)2. 2. Create a school improvement council consisting of the state superintendent or his or her designee, the school district or school board president or his or her designee, the school district administrator or his or her designee, the school principal or his or her designee, and representatives of each labor organization representing school district employees, to make recommendations to the state superintendent regarding improving the school. Create a school improvement council consisting of the state superintendent or his or her designee, the school district or school board president or his or her designee, the school district administrator or his or her designee, the school principal or his or her designee, and representatives of each labor organization representing school district employees, to make recommendations to the state superintendent regarding improving the school.

118.42(3)(c)1. 1. If the state superintendent issues a directive under par. If the state superintendent issues a directive under par. (a) or (b) , he or she shall do all of the following:

118.42(3)(c)1.a. a. Notify the legislature's education committees under s. Notify the legislature's education committees under s. 13.172 (3) and each legislator whose legislative district includes any portion of the school district.

118.42(3)(c)1.b. b. Provide a system of support and improvement, including technical assistance, to the school board. Provide a system of support and improvement, including technical assistance, to the school board.

118.42(3)(c)2. 2. If a school board receives a directive from the state superintendent under par. If a school board receives a directive from the state superintendent under par. (a) or (b) , the school board shall seek input from school district staff, parents, and community leaders on implementing the directive.

118.42(4) (4) The state superintendent shall promulgate rules establishing criteria and procedures for determining whether a school or school district is in need of improvement and whether a school is among the lowest performing 5 percent of all public schools in the state, for the purposes of this section. The state superintendent shall promulgate rules establishing criteria and procedures for determining whether a school or school district is in need of improvement and whether a school is among the lowest performing 5 percent of all public schools in the state, for the purposes of this section.

118.42(5) (5) Nothing in this section alters or otherwise affects the rights or remedies afforded school districts and school district employees under federal or state law. Nothing in this section alters or otherwise affects the rights or remedies afforded school districts and school district employees under federal or state law.

118.42 Cross-reference Cross-reference: See also ch. See also ch. PI 43 , Wis. adm. code.

118.43 118.43 Achievement guarantee contracts; state aid.

118.43(1) (1) Definitions. In this section: In this section:

118.43(1)(a) (a) “Class size" means the number of pupils assigned to a regular classroom teacher on the 3rd Friday of September. “Class size" means the number of pupils assigned to a regular classroom teacher on the 3rd Friday of September.

118.43(1)(b) (b) “Low income" means pupils who satisfy the income eligibility criteria under “Low income" means pupils who satisfy the income eligibility criteria under 42 USC 1758 (b) (1).

118.43(2)(a) (a) The school board of any school district in which a school in the previous school year had an enrollment that was at least 50 percent low-income is eligible to participate in the program under this section, except that a school board is eligible to participate in the program under this section in the 2000-01 school year if in the 1998-99 school year a school in the school district had an enrollment that was at least 0 percent low-income. The school board of any school district in which a school in the previous school year had an enrollment that was at least 50 percent low-income is eligible to participate in the program under this section, except that a school board is eligible to participate in the program under this section in the 2000-01 school year if in the 1998-99 school year a school in the school district had an enrollment that was at least 0 percent low-income.

118.43(2)(b) (b) In the 1996-97 school year, the school board of an eligible school district may enter into a 5-year achievement guarantee contract with the department on behalf of one school in the school district if all of the following apply: In the 1996-97 school year, the school board of an eligible school district may enter into a 5-year achievement guarantee contract with the department on behalf of one school in the school district if all of the following apply:

118.43(2)(b)1. 1. In the previous school year, the school had an enrollment that was at least 30 percent low-income. In the previous school year, the school had an enrollment that was at least 30 percent low-income.

118.43(2)(b)2. 2. The school board is not receiving a grant under the preschool to grade 5 program on behalf of the school under s. The school board is not receiving a grant under the preschool to grade 5 program on behalf of the school under s. 115.45 , 2009 stats.

118.43(2)(bg) (bg) In the 1998-99 school year, the school board of an eligible school district may enter into a 5-year achievement guarantee contract with the department on behalf of one school in the school district if all of the following apply: In the 1998-99 school year, the school board of an eligible school district may enter into a 5-year achievement guarantee contract with the department on behalf of one school in the school district if all of the following apply:

118.43(2)(bg)1. 1. In the previous school year, the school had an enrollment that was at least 30 percent low-income. In the previous school year, the school had an enrollment that was at least 30 percent low-income.

118.43(2)(bg)2. 2. The school board is not receiving a grant under the preschool to grade 5 program on behalf of the school under s. The school board is not receiving a grant under the preschool to grade 5 program on behalf of the school under s. 115.45 , 2009 stats.

118.43(2)(br) (br) In the 2000-01 school year, the school board of an eligible school district may enter into a 5-year achievement guarantee contract with the department on behalf of one or more schools in the school district if all of the following apply: In the 2000-01 school year, the school board of an eligible school district may enter into a 5-year achievement guarantee contract with the department on behalf of one or more schools in the school district if all of the following apply:

118.43(2)(br)2. 2. The school board is not receiving a grant under the preschool to grade 5 program on behalf of any of the schools under s. The school board is not receiving a grant under the preschool to grade 5 program on behalf of any of the schools under s. 115.45 , 2009 stats.

118.43(2)(br)3. 3. The school board, if eligible to participate in the program under this section in the 1996-97 and 1998-99 school years, had participated in the program during either school year. The school board, if eligible to participate in the program under this section in the 1996-97 and 1998-99 school years, had participated in the program during either school year.

118.43(2)(br)4. 4. None of the schools is a beneficiary of a contract under this section. None of the schools is a beneficiary of a contract under this section.

118.43(2)(bt) (bt) In the 2010-11 school year, the school board of an eligible school district may enter into a 5-year achievement guarantee contract with the department on behalf of one or more schools in the school district if all of the following apply: In the 2010-11 school year, the school board of an eligible school district may enter into a 5-year achievement guarantee contract with the department on behalf of one or more schools in the school district if all of the following apply:

118.43(2)(bt)1. 1. In the previous school year, each school had an enrollment that was at least 30 percent low income. In the previous school year, each school had an enrollment that was at least 30 percent low income.

118.43(2)(bt)2. 2. The school board is not receiving a grant under the preschool to grade 5 program on behalf of any of the schools under s. The school board is not receiving a grant under the preschool to grade 5 program on behalf of any of the schools under s. 115.45 , 2009 stats.

118.43(2)(bt)3. 3. None of the schools is a beneficiary of a contract under this section. None of the schools is a beneficiary of a contract under this section.

118.43(2)(bv) (bv) In the 2011-12 school year, the school board of an eligible school district may enter into a 5-year achievement guarantee contract with the department on behalf of one or more schools in the school district if, in the 2010-11 school year, the school board received a grant under the preschool to grade 5 program on behalf of the schools under s. In the 2011-12 school year, the school board of an eligible school district may enter into a 5-year achievement guarantee contract with the department on behalf of one or more schools in the school district if, in the 2010-11 school year, the school board received a grant under the preschool to grade 5 program on behalf of the schools under s. 115.45 , 2009 stats.