Wisconsin Legislature: 253.10
253.09(1) (1) No hospital shall be required to admit any patient or to allow the use of the hospital facilities for the purpose of performing a sterilization procedure or removing a human embryo or fetus. A physician or any other person who is a member of or associated with the staff of a hospital, or any employee of a hospital in which such a procedure has been authorized, who shall state in writing his or her objection to the performance of or providing assistance to such a procedure on moral or religious grounds shall not be required to participate in such medical procedure, and the refusal of any such person to participate therein shall not form the basis of any claim for damages on account of such refusal or for any disciplinary or recriminatory action against such person. No hospital shall be required to admit any patient or to allow the use of the hospital facilities for the purpose of performing a sterilization procedure or removing a human embryo or fetus. A physician or any other person who is a member of or associated with the staff of a hospital, or any employee of a hospital in which such a procedure has been authorized, who shall state in writing his or her objection to the performance of or providing assistance to such a procedure on moral or religious grounds shall not be required to participate in such medical procedure, and the refusal of any such person to participate therein shall not form the basis of any claim for damages on account of such refusal or for any disciplinary or recriminatory action against such person.

253.09(2) (2) No hospital or employee of any hospital shall be liable for any civil damages resulting from a refusal to perform sterilization procedures or remove a human embryo or fetus from a person, if such refusal is based on religious or moral precepts. No hospital or employee of any hospital shall be liable for any civil damages resulting from a refusal to perform sterilization procedures or remove a human embryo or fetus from a person, if such refusal is based on religious or moral precepts.

253.09(3) (3) No hospital, school or employer may discriminate against any person with regard to admission, hiring or firing, tenure, term, condition or privilege of employment, student status or staff status on the ground that the person refuses to recommend, aid or perform procedures for sterilization or the removal of a human embryo or fetus, if the refusal is based on religious or moral precepts. No hospital, school or employer may discriminate against any person with regard to admission, hiring or firing, tenure, term, condition or privilege of employment, student status or staff status on the ground that the person refuses to recommend, aid or perform procedures for sterilization or the removal of a human embryo or fetus, if the refusal is based on religious or moral precepts.

253.09(4) (4) The receipt of any grant, contract, loan or loan guarantee under any state or federal law does not authorize any court or any public official or other public authority to require: The receipt of any grant, contract, loan or loan guarantee under any state or federal law does not authorize any court or any public official or other public authority to require:

253.09(4)(a) (a) Such individual to perform or assist in the performance of any sterilization procedure or removal of a human embryo or fetus if the individual's performance or assistance in the performance of such a procedure would be contrary to the individual's religious beliefs or moral convictions; or Such individual to perform or assist in the performance of any sterilization procedure or removal of a human embryo or fetus if the individual's performance or assistance in the performance of such a procedure would be contrary to the individual's religious beliefs or moral convictions; or

253.09(4)(b) (b) Such entity to: Such entity to:

253.09(4)(b)1. 1. Make its facilities available for the performance of any sterilization procedure or removal of a human embryo or fetus if the performance of such a procedure in such facilities is prohibited by the entity on the basis of religious beliefs or moral convictions; or Make its facilities available for the performance of any sterilization procedure or removal of a human embryo or fetus if the performance of such a procedure in such facilities is prohibited by the entity on the basis of religious beliefs or moral convictions; or

253.09(4)(b)2. 2. Provide any personnel for the performance or assistance in the performance of any sterilization procedure or assistance if the performance or assistance in the performance of such procedure or the removal of a human embryo or fetus by such personnel would be contrary to the religious beliefs or moral convictions of such personnel. Provide any personnel for the performance or assistance in the performance of any sterilization procedure or assistance if the performance or assistance in the performance of such procedure or the removal of a human embryo or fetus by such personnel would be contrary to the religious beliefs or moral convictions of such personnel.

253.095 253.095 Requirements to perform abortions.

253.095(1) (1) Definition. In this section, “abortion" has the meaning given in s. In this section, “abortion" has the meaning given in s. 253.10 (2) (a)

253.095(2) (2) Admitting privileges required. No physician may perform an abortion, as defined in s. No physician may perform an abortion, as defined in s. 253.10 (2) (a) , unless he or she has admitting privileges in a hospital within 30 miles of the location where the abortion is to be performed.

253.095(3) (3) Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be required to forfeit not less than $1,000 nor more than $10,000. No penalty may be assessed against the woman upon whom the abortion is performed or induced or attempted to be performed or induced. Any person who violates this section shall be required to forfeit not less than $1,000 nor more than $10,000. No penalty may be assessed against the woman upon whom the abortion is performed or induced or attempted to be performed or induced.

253.095(4)(a) (a) Any of the following individuals may bring a claim for damages, including damages for personal injury and emotional and psychological distress, against a person who performs, or attempts to perform, an abortion in violation of this section: Any of the following individuals may bring a claim for damages, including damages for personal injury and emotional and psychological distress, against a person who performs, or attempts to perform, an abortion in violation of this section:

253.095(4)(a)1. 1. A woman on whom an abortion is performed or attempted. A woman on whom an abortion is performed or attempted.

253.095(4)(a)2. 2. The father of the aborted unborn child or the unborn child that is attempted to be aborted. The father of the aborted unborn child or the unborn child that is attempted to be aborted.

253.095(4)(a)3. 3. Any grandparent of the aborted unborn child or the child that is attempted to be aborted. Any grandparent of the aborted unborn child or the child that is attempted to be aborted.

253.095(4)(b) (b) A person who has been awarded damages under par. A person who has been awarded damages under par. (a) shall, in addition to any damages awarded under par. (a) , be entitled to not less than $1,000 nor more than $10,000 in punitive damages for a violation that satisfies a standard under s. 895.043 (3)

253.095(4)(c) (c) A conviction under sub. A conviction under sub. (3) is not a condition precedent to bringing an action, obtaining a judgment, or collecting the judgment under this subsection.

253.095(4)(d) (d) Notwithstanding s. Notwithstanding s. 814.04 (1) , a person who recovers damages under par. (a) or (b) may also recover reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection with the action.

253.095(4)(e) (e) A contract is not a defense to an action under this subsection. A contract is not a defense to an action under this subsection.

253.095(4)(f) (f) Nothing in this subsection limits the common law rights of a person that are not in conflict with sub. Nothing in this subsection limits the common law rights of a person that are not in conflict with sub. (2)

253.095(5) (5) Confidentiality in court proceedings.

253.095(5)(a) (a) In every proceeding brought under this section, the court, upon motion or sua sponte, shall rule whether the identity of any woman upon whom an abortion was performed or induced or attempted to be performed or induced shall be kept confidential unless the woman waives confidentiality. If the court determines that a woman's identity should be kept confidential, the court shall issue orders to the parties, witnesses, and counsel and shall direct the sealing of the record and exclusion of individuals from courtrooms or hearing rooms to the extent necessary to safeguard the woman's identity from public disclosure. If the court issues an order to keep a woman's identity confidential, the court shall provide written findings explaining why the woman's identity should be kept confidential, why the order is essential to that end, how the order is narrowly tailored to its purpose, and why no reasonable less restrictive alternative exists. In every proceeding brought under this section, the court, upon motion or sua sponte, shall rule whether the identity of any woman upon whom an abortion was performed or induced or attempted to be performed or induced shall be kept confidential unless the woman waives confidentiality. If the court determines that a woman's identity should be kept confidential, the court shall issue orders to the parties, witnesses, and counsel and shall direct the sealing of the record and exclusion of individuals from courtrooms or hearing rooms to the extent necessary to safeguard the woman's identity from public disclosure. If the court issues an order to keep a woman's identity confidential, the court shall provide written findings explaining why the woman's identity should be kept confidential, why the order is essential to that end, how the order is narrowly tailored to its purpose, and why no reasonable less restrictive alternative exists.

253.095(5)(b) (b) Any person, except for a public official, who brings an action under this section shall do so under a pseudonym unless the person obtains the written consent of the woman upon whom an abortion was performed or induced, or attempted to be performed or induced, in violation of this section. Any person, except for a public official, who brings an action under this section shall do so under a pseudonym unless the person obtains the written consent of the woman upon whom an abortion was performed or induced, or attempted to be performed or induced, in violation of this section.

253.095(5)(c) (c) This section may not be construed to allow the identity of a plaintiff or a witness to be concealed from the defendant. This section may not be construed to allow the identity of a plaintiff or a witness to be concealed from the defendant.

253.10 253.10 Voluntary and informed consent for abortions.

253.10(1) (1) Legislative findings and intent.

253.10(1)(a) (a) The legislature finds that: The legislature finds that:

253.10(1)(a)1. 1. Many women now seek or are encouraged to undergo elective abortions without full knowledge of the medical and psychological risks of abortion, development of the unborn child or of alternatives to abortion. An abortion decision is often made under stressful circumstances. Many women now seek or are encouraged to undergo elective abortions without full knowledge of the medical and psychological risks of abortion, development of the unborn child or of alternatives to abortion. An abortion decision is often made under stressful circumstances.

253.10(1)(a)2. 2. The knowledgeable exercise of a woman's decision to have an elective abortion depends on the extent to which the woman receives sufficient information to make a voluntary and informed choice between 2 alternatives of great consequence: carrying a child to birth or undergoing an abortion. The knowledgeable exercise of a woman's decision to have an elective abortion depends on the extent to which the woman receives sufficient information to make a voluntary and informed choice between 2 alternatives of great consequence: carrying a child to birth or undergoing an abortion.

253.10(1)(a)3. 3. The U.S. supreme court has stated: “In attempting to ensure that a woman apprehend the full consequences of her decision, the State furthers the legitimate purpose of reducing the risk that a woman may elect an abortion, only to discover later, with devastating psychological consequences, that her decision was not fully informed." Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey, The U.S. supreme court has stated: “In attempting to ensure that a woman apprehend the full consequences of her decision, the State furthers the legitimate purpose of reducing the risk that a woman may elect an abortion, only to discover later, with devastating psychological consequences, that her decision was not fully informed." Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey, 112 U.S. 2791 , 2823 (1992).

253.10(1)(a)4. 4. It is essential to the psychological and physical well-being of a woman considering an elective abortion that she receive complete and accurate information on all options available to her in dealing with her pregnancy. It is essential to the psychological and physical well-being of a woman considering an elective abortion that she receive complete and accurate information on all options available to her in dealing with her pregnancy.

253.10(1)(a)5. 5. The vast majority of elective abortions in this state are performed in clinics that are devoted solely to providing abortions and family planning services. Women who seek elective abortions at these facilities normally do not have a prior patient-physician relationship with the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion, normally do not return to the facility for post-operative care and normally do not continue a patient-physician relationship with the physician who performed or induced the abortion. In most instances, the woman's only actual contact with the physician occurs simultaneously with the abortion procedure, with little opportunity to receive personal counseling by the physician concerning her decision. Because of this, certain safeguards are necessary to protect a woman's right to know. The vast majority of elective abortions in this state are performed in clinics that are devoted solely to providing abortions and family planning services. Women who seek elective abortions at these facilities normally do not have a prior patient-physician relationship with the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion, normally do not return to the facility for post-operative care and normally do not continue a patient-physician relationship with the physician who performed or induced the abortion. In most instances, the woman's only actual contact with the physician occurs simultaneously with the abortion procedure, with little opportunity to receive personal counseling by the physician concerning her decision. Because of this, certain safeguards are necessary to protect a woman's right to know.

253.10(1)(a)6. 6. A reasonable waiting period is critical to ensure that a woman has the fullest opportunity to give her voluntary and informed consent before she elects to undergo an abortion. A reasonable waiting period is critical to ensure that a woman has the fullest opportunity to give her voluntary and informed consent before she elects to undergo an abortion.

253.10(1)(b) (b) It is the intent of the legislature in enacting this section to further the important and compelling state interests in all of the following: It is the intent of the legislature in enacting this section to further the important and compelling state interests in all of the following:

253.10(1)(b)1. 1. Protecting the life and health of the woman subject to an elective abortion and, to the extent constitutionally permissible, the life of her unborn child. Protecting the life and health of the woman subject to an elective abortion and, to the extent constitutionally permissible, the life of her unborn child.

253.10(1)(b)2. 2. Fostering the development of standards of professional conduct in the practice of abortion. Fostering the development of standards of professional conduct in the practice of abortion.

253.10(1)(b)3. 3. Ensuring that prior to the performance or inducement of an elective abortion, the woman considering an elective abortion receive personal counseling by the physician and be given a full range of information regarding her pregnancy, her unborn child, the abortion, the medical and psychological risks of abortion and available alternatives to the abortion. Ensuring that prior to the performance or inducement of an elective abortion, the woman considering an elective abortion receive personal counseling by the physician and be given a full range of information regarding her pregnancy, her unborn child, the abortion, the medical and psychological risks of abortion and available alternatives to the abortion.

253.10(1)(b)4. 4. Ensuring that a woman who decides to have an elective abortion gives her voluntary and informed consent to the abortion procedure. Ensuring that a woman who decides to have an elective abortion gives her voluntary and informed consent to the abortion procedure.

253.10(2) (2) Definitions. In this section: In this section:

253.10(2)(a) (a) “Abortion" means the use of an instrument, medicine, drug or other substance or device with intent to terminate the pregnancy of a woman known to be pregnant or for whom there is reason to believe that she may be pregnant and with intent other than to increase the probability of a live birth, to preserve the life or health of the infant after live birth or to remove a dead fetus. “Abortion" means the use of an instrument, medicine, drug or other substance or device with intent to terminate the pregnancy of a woman known to be pregnant or for whom there is reason to believe that she may be pregnant and with intent other than to increase the probability of a live birth, to preserve the life or health of the infant after live birth or to remove a dead fetus.

253.10(2)(am) (am) “Abortion-inducing drug" means a drug, medicine, oral hormonal compound, mixture, or preparation, when it is prescribed to terminate the pregnancy of a woman known to be pregnant. “Abortion-inducing drug" means a drug, medicine, oral hormonal compound, mixture, or preparation, when it is prescribed to terminate the pregnancy of a woman known to be pregnant.

253.10(2)(b) (b) “Agency" means a private nonprofit organization or a county department under s. “Agency" means a private nonprofit organization or a county department under s. 46.215 46.22 or 46.23

253.10(2)(c) (c) “Disability" means a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, a record of having such an impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment. “Disability" includes any physical disability or developmental disability, as defined in s. “Disability" means a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, a record of having such an impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment. “Disability" includes any physical disability or developmental disability, as defined in s. 51.01 (5) (a)

253.10(2)(d) (d) “Medical emergency" means a condition, in a physician's reasonable medical judgment, that so complicates the medical condition of a pregnant woman as to necessitate the immediate abortion of her pregnancy to avert her death or for which a 24-hour delay in performance or inducement of an abortion will create serious risk of substantial and irreversible impairment of one or more of the woman's major bodily functions. “Medical emergency" means a condition, in a physician's reasonable medical judgment, that so complicates the medical condition of a pregnant woman as to necessitate the immediate abortion of her pregnancy to avert her death or for which a 24-hour delay in performance or inducement of an abortion will create serious risk of substantial and irreversible impairment of one or more of the woman's major bodily functions.

253.10(2)(dr) (dr) “Perinatal hospice" means comprehensive support that includes support from the time of a terminal diagnosis of an unborn child through the birth and death of the child and through the postpartum period and may include the supportive care of maternal-fetal medical specialists, obstetricians, neonatologists, anesthesia specialists, specialty nurses, psychiatrists, psychologists, mental health professionals, clergy, social workers, and other professionals. “Perinatal hospice" means comprehensive support that includes support from the time of a terminal diagnosis of an unborn child through the birth and death of the child and through the postpartum period and may include the supportive care of maternal-fetal medical specialists, obstetricians, neonatologists, anesthesia specialists, specialty nurses, psychiatrists, psychologists, mental health professionals, clergy, social workers, and other professionals.

253.10(2)(e) (e) “Probable gestational age of the unborn child" means the number of weeks that have elapsed from the probable time of fertilization of a woman's ovum, based on the information provided by the woman as to the time of her last menstrual period, her medical history, a physical examination performed by the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion or by any other qualified physician and any appropriate laboratory tests performed on her. “Probable gestational age of the unborn child" means the number of weeks that have elapsed from the probable time of fertilization of a woman's ovum, based on the information provided by the woman as to the time of her last menstrual period, her medical history, a physical examination performed by the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion or by any other qualified physician and any appropriate laboratory tests performed on her.

253.10(2)(f) (f) “Qualified person assisting the physician" means a social worker certified under ch. “Qualified person assisting the physician" means a social worker certified under ch. 457 , a registered nurse or a physician assistant to whom a physician who is to perform or induce an abortion has delegated the responsibility, as the physician's agent, for providing the information required under sub. (3) (c) 2.

253.10(2)(g) (g) “Qualified physician" means a physician who by training or experience is qualified to provide the information required under sub. “Qualified physician" means a physician who by training or experience is qualified to provide the information required under sub. (3) (c) 1.

253.10(2)(h) (h) “Viability" has the meaning given in s. “Viability" has the meaning given in s. 940.15 (1)

253.10(3) (3) Voluntary and informed consent.

253.10(3)(a) (a) Generally. An abortion may not be performed or induced unless the woman upon whom the abortion is to be performed or induced has and, if the woman is a minor and s. An abortion may not be performed or induced unless the woman upon whom the abortion is to be performed or induced has and, if the woman is a minor and s. 48.375 (4) (a) 2. does not apply, the individual who also gives consent under s. 48.375 (4) (a) 1. have given voluntary and informed written consent under the requirements of this section.

253.10(3)(b) (b) Voluntary consent. Consent under this section to an abortion is voluntary only if the consent is given freely and without coercion by any person. The physician who is to perform or induce the abortion shall determine whether the woman's consent is, in fact, voluntary. Notwithstanding par. Consent under this section to an abortion is voluntary only if the consent is given freely and without coercion by any person. The physician who is to perform or induce the abortion shall determine whether the woman's consent is, in fact, voluntary. Notwithstanding par. (c) 3. , the physician shall make the determination by speaking to the woman in person, out of the presence of anyone other than a person working for or with the physician. If the physician has reason to suspect that the woman is in danger of being physically harmed by anyone who is coercing the woman to consent to an abortion against her will, the physician shall inform the woman of services for victims or individuals at risk of domestic abuse and provide her with private access to a telephone.

253.10(3)(c) (c) Informed consent. Except if a medical emergency exists and subject to sub. Except if a medical emergency exists and subject to sub. (3g) , a woman's consent to an abortion is informed only if all of the following first take place:

253.10(3)(c)1. 1. Except as provided in sub. Except as provided in sub. (3m) , at least 24 hours before the abortion is to be performed or induced, the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion or any other qualified physician has, in person, orally informed the woman of all of the following:

253.10(3)(c)1.a. a. Whether or not, according to the reasonable medical judgment of the physician, the woman is pregnant. Whether or not, according to the reasonable medical judgment of the physician, the woman is pregnant.

253.10(3)(c)1.b. b. The probable gestational age of the unborn child, the probable postfertilization age of the unborn child, as defined in s. The probable gestational age of the unborn child, the probable postfertilization age of the unborn child, as defined in s. 253.107 (1) (c) , and the numerical odds of survival for an unborn child delivered at that probable postfertilization age, at the time that the information is provided. The physician or other qualified physician shall also provide this information to the woman in writing at this time.

253.10(3)(c)1.c. c. The particular medical risks, if any, associated with the woman's pregnancy. The particular medical risks, if any, associated with the woman's pregnancy.

253.10(3)(c)1.d. d. The probable anatomical and physiological characteristics of the woman's unborn child at the time the information is given. The probable anatomical and physiological characteristics of the woman's unborn child at the time the information is given.

253.10(3)(c)1.e. e. The details of the medical or surgical method that would be used in performing or inducing the abortion. The details of the medical or surgical method that would be used in performing or inducing the abortion.

253.10(3)(c)1.f. f. The medical risks associated with the particular abortion procedure that would be used, including the risks of infection, psychological trauma, hemorrhage, endometritis, perforated uterus, incomplete abortion, failed abortion, danger to subsequent pregnancies and infertility. The medical risks associated with the particular abortion procedure that would be used, including the risks of infection, psychological trauma, hemorrhage, endometritis, perforated uterus, incomplete abortion, failed abortion, danger to subsequent pregnancies and infertility.

253.10(3)(c)1.gm. gm. That the pregnant woman is required to obtain an ultrasound that meets the requirements under sub. That the pregnant woman is required to obtain an ultrasound that meets the requirements under sub. (3g) , if she has not already had an ultrasound that meets those requirements. The physician, or other qualified physician, shall provide to the pregnant woman a list of providers that perform an ultrasound at no cost to the woman, as described in par. (em) 1.

253.10(3)(c)1.h. h. The recommended general medical instructions for the woman to follow after an abortion to enhance her safe recovery and the name and telephone number of a physician to call if complications arise after the abortion. The recommended general medical instructions for the woman to follow after an abortion to enhance her safe recovery and the name and telephone number of a physician to call if complications arise after the abortion.

253.10(3)(c)1.hm. hm. If the abortion is induced by an abortion-inducing drug, that the woman must return to the abortion facility for a follow-up visit 12 to 18 days after the use of an abortion-inducing drug to confirm the termination of the pregnancy and evaluate the woman's medical condition. If the abortion is induced by an abortion-inducing drug, that the woman must return to the abortion facility for a follow-up visit 12 to 18 days after the use of an abortion-inducing drug to confirm the termination of the pregnancy and evaluate the woman's medical condition.

253.10(3)(c)1.i. i. If, in the reasonable medical judgment of the physician, the woman's unborn child has reached viability, that the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion is required to take all steps necessary under s. If, in the reasonable medical judgment of the physician, the woman's unborn child has reached viability, that the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion is required to take all steps necessary under s. 940.15 to preserve and maintain the life and health of the child.

253.10(3)(c)1.j. j. Any other information that a reasonable patient would consider material and relevant to a decision of whether or not to carry a child to birth or to undergo an abortion. Any other information that a reasonable patient would consider material and relevant to a decision of whether or not to carry a child to birth or to undergo an abortion.

253.10(3)(c)1.jm. jm. That the woman has a right to refuse to consent to an abortion, that her consent is not voluntary if anyone is coercing her to consent to an abortion against her will, and that it is unlawful for the physician to perform or induce the abortion without her voluntary consent. That the woman has a right to refuse to consent to an abortion, that her consent is not voluntary if anyone is coercing her to consent to an abortion against her will, and that it is unlawful for the physician to perform or induce the abortion without her voluntary consent.

253.10(3)(c)1.k. k. That the woman may withdraw her consent to have an abortion at any time before the abortion is performed or induced. That the woman may withdraw her consent to have an abortion at any time before the abortion is performed or induced.

253.10(3)(c)1.L. L. That, except as provided in sub. That, except as provided in sub. (3m) , the woman is not required to pay any amount for performance or inducement of the abortion until at least 24 hours have elapsed after the requirements of this paragraph are met.

253.10(3)(c)2. 2. Except as provided in sub. Except as provided in sub. (3m) , at least 24 hours before the abortion is to be performed or induced, the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion, a qualified person assisting the physician or another qualified physician has, in person, orally informed the woman of all of the following:

253.10(3)(c)2.a. a. That benefits under the medical assistance program may be available for prenatal care, childbirth and neonatal care. That benefits under the medical assistance program may be available for prenatal care, childbirth and neonatal care.

253.10(3)(c)2.b. b. That the father of the unborn child is liable for assistance in the support of the woman's child, if born, even if the father has offered to pay for the abortion. That the father of the unborn child is liable for assistance in the support of the woman's child, if born, even if the father has offered to pay for the abortion.

253.10(3)(c)2.c. c. That the woman has a legal right to continue her pregnancy and to keep the child; to place the child in a foster home for 6 months, in a group home for 15 days, or in a shelter care facility approved under s. That the woman has a legal right to continue her pregnancy and to keep the child; to place the child in a foster home for 6 months, in a group home for 15 days, or in a shelter care facility approved under s. 938.22 (2) (c) for 20 days; to petition a court for placement of the child in a foster home or group home or with a relative; or to place the child for adoption under a process that involves court approval both of the voluntary termination of parental rights and of the adoption.

253.10(3)(c)2.d. d. That the woman has the right to receive and review the printed materials described in par. That the woman has the right to receive and review the printed materials described in par. (d) . The physician or qualified person assisting the physician shall physically give the materials to the woman and shall, in person, orally inform her that the materials are free of charge, have been provided by the state and describe the unborn child and list agencies that offer alternatives to abortion and shall provide her with the current updated copies of the printed materials free of charge.

253.10(3)(c)2.e. e. If the woman has received a diagnosis of disability for her unborn child, that the printed materials described in par. If the woman has received a diagnosis of disability for her unborn child, that the printed materials described in par. (d) contain information on community-based services and financial assistance programs for children with disabilities and their families, information on support groups for people with disabilities and parents of children with disabilities and information on adoption of children with special needs.

253.10(3)(c)2.em. em. That the printed materials described in par. That the printed materials described in par. (d) contain information on the availability of perinatal hospice.

253.10(3)(c)2.f. f. If the woman asserts that her pregnancy is the result of sexual assault or incest, that the printed materials described in par. If the woman asserts that her pregnancy is the result of sexual assault or incest, that the printed materials described in par. (d) contain information on counseling services and support groups for victims of sexual assault and incest and legal protections available to the woman and her child if she wishes to oppose establishment of paternity or to terminate the father's parental rights.

253.10(3)(c)2.fm. fm. That the printed materials described in par. That the printed materials described in par. (d) contain information on services available for victims or individuals at risk of domestic abuse.

253.10(3)(c)2.g. g. That the printed materials described in par. That the printed materials described in par. (d) contain information on the availability of public and private agencies and services to provide the woman with information on family planning, as defined in s. 253.07 (1) (a) , including natural family planning information.

253.10(3)(c)3. 3. The information that is required under subds. The information that is required under subds. 1. and 2. is provided to the woman in an individual setting that protects her privacy, maintains the confidentiality of her decision and ensures that the information she receives focuses on her individual circumstances. This subdivision may not be construed to prevent the woman from having a family member, or any other person of her choice, present during her private counseling.

253.10(3)(c)4. 4. Whoever provides the information that is required under subd. Whoever provides the information that is required under subd. 1. or 2. , or both, provides adequate opportunity for the woman to ask questions, including questions concerning the pregnancy, her unborn child, abortion, foster care and adoption, and provides the information that is requested or indicates to the woman where she can obtain the information.

253.10(3)(c)5. 5. The woman certifies in writing on a form that the department shall provide, prior to performance or inducement of the abortion, that the information that is required under subds. The woman certifies in writing on a form that the department shall provide, prior to performance or inducement of the abortion, that the information that is required under subds. 1. and 2. has been provided to her in the manner specified in subd. 3. , that the ultrasound required under sub. (3g) has been performed or that requirement is waived under sub. (3m) (a) , that she has been offered the information described in par. (d) and that all of her questions, as specified under subd. 4. , have been answered in a satisfactory manner. The physician who is to perform or induce the abortion or the qualified person assisting the physician shall write on the certification form the name of the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion. The woman shall indicate on the certification form who provided the information to her and when it was provided and who performed the ultrasound and when it was performed, unless the ultrasound requirement is waived under sub. (3m) (a) . If the ultrasound required under sub. (3g) was performed at a facility other than the facility where the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion is located, the woman shall provide to the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion the certification form described under sub. (3g) (d)

253.10(3)(c)6. 6. Prior to the performance or the inducement of the abortion, the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion or the qualified person assisting the physician receives the written certification that is required under subd. Prior to the performance or the inducement of the abortion, the physician who is to perform or induce the abortion or the qualified person assisting the physician receives the written certification that is required under subd. 5. The physician or qualified person assisting the physician shall place the certification in the woman's medical record and shall provide the woman with a copy of the certification.