There’s No Nice Lady Caucus in Congress
Women in Congress say they bring their perspective to fill yawning gaps and previous blind spots in legislation. Issues at the forefront of the Democrats’ agenda affect women disproportionately — more women live in poverty, more receive Medicare or Medicaid because they live longer than men, and many women oversee health care and education in their households.

Veteran congresswomen cite examples of their advocacy. Representative Barbara Lee, Democrat of California, said she presses to make sure that clinical trials include women of color, since they have often been left out of medical studies. Professor Swers noted that Senators Gillibrand of New York and Claire McCaskill of Missouri and former Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire were driving forces behind hearings and legislation on sexual assault in the military, even if their specific solutions differed.

Of 83 women interviewed by the political scientist Kelly Dittmar and her co-authors for a recent book on women in Congress, “A Seat at the Table,” many said that they focused on getting things done — and that building personal ties can help them try to find some aspect of policy they can collaborate on. So even if the overall number of bipartisan bills isn’t different for women than for men, they do feel as though collaboration matters.

Representative Grace Meng, Democrat of New York, said: “It’s nothing scientifically proven, but I do feel women legislators have a very different dynamic when they’re working together. I have a network of women members, and when we have ideas we bounce them off each other and no one’s worried about someone stealing credit.”

She conceded that it has been harder than ever before to find cross-party agreement, but she pointed to two bipartisan initiatives: hearings on sexual assaults in the workplace, and her work with Republicans to offer wider access to feminine hygiene products. And constituent protection will unite congressional delegations: Representative Martha Roby, Republican of Alabama, worked with her Democratic colleague from Alabama, Representative Terri Sewell, to defeat amendments that would have harmed Alabama’s catfish industry, much of it in Representative Sewell’s district.

Professor Swers noted that women elected from swing districts will have incentives to embrace moderation and strike compromises to keep their seats and to placate voters disillusioned with congressional paralysis. With Democrats in control of the House, more women will be in positions of power in the institution — Nancy Pelosi of California may well become speaker again, and women will head a few powerful committees like Appropriations and Financial Services.

In the end, even with the record numbers of women elected, they remain less than one quarter of Congress. “We’re still a foreign body,” Representative Meng said.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram,