‘A Critical Time’: Border Businesses Jolted by $5.3 Million Loss in Crossing Shutdown
“That’s simply not reasonable and that’s simply not plausible — you’re talking about north of $600 billion in trade,” Mr. Sanders said. Already, he said, Sunday’s shutdown “made it real very quickly.”

“There is going to be impact if this happens again,” he said.

The San Ysidro shopping centers were mostly empty once again on Monday. Employees and regular shoppers at the outlet mall said they assumed it was because of concern over the chaos on Sunday. Black security helicopters flew low over the border area throughout the afternoon again on Monday, drowning out the amplified holiday music.

Maria Robledo-Sanchez, 50, said she had been trying to return home to the United States from Mexico on Sunday when she noticed foot traffic at the port of entry suddenly grind to a halt, creating a long line. Soon a heavy contingent of law enforcement officers gathered, she said, and she heard loud booms nearby and what looked like smoke rising. Later, she learned it was tear gas fired at migrants who had tried to storm the border fence.

“It was chaos. It was chaos,” she said, growing tearful. “It wasn’t until much later I realized what was happening.”

Ms. Robledo-Sanchez, who was born in Mexico but has lived in the United States for decades, crosses into Tijuana several times a week to visit family and go shopping. It normally takes her about 10 minutes to get through the crossing as an American citizen, she said, but on Sunday, it took about five hours.

Sunil Gakhreja, 43, a San Ysidro perfume wholesaler, said that his business had seen a sharp downturn in customers since an early contingent from a caravan of migrants first arrived in Tijuana, on the other side of the border, about two weeks ago. Ninety-five percent of his customers, he said, come from Mexico to buy perfumes in bulk to redistribute on the Mexican side of the border. He has seen few new customers in weeks, and his core clients, he said, have been skittish about making the trek across the border.

“There’s a lot of uncertainty and a sense of fear going on,” he said.

Ms. Robledo-Sanchez said she was crossing back into Tijuana on Monday to bring several packages of undergarments to some of the Central American migrants whom she had met while she was there. The garments are of better quality and cheaper than what they can buy in Mexico, she said, and she wanted to do what she could to help.

Still, she was bringing some extra money with her — in case the border closed down again. No one, she said, knows what to expect next.