Fast and Furious: OIG report By Richard A. Serrano An in­vest­ig­at­ive re­port by the De­part­ment of Justice’s Of­fice of the In­spect­or Gen­er­al found that 14 fed­er­al law en­force­ment of­fi­cials — from field agents in Ari­zona to top man­agers in the Bur­eau of Al­co­hol, To­bacco, Fire­arms and Ex­plos­ives and the Justice De­part­ment in Wash­ing­ton — cre­ated a “sig­ni­fic­ant danger to pub­lic safety” un­der Op­er­a­tion Fast and Furi­ous.

DEA acknowledges supporting role By Richard A. Serrano The head of the Drug En­force­ment Ad­min­is­tra­tion has ac­know­ledged to con­gres­sion­al in­vest­ig­at­ors that her agency provided a sup­port­ing role in the ill-fated Op­er­a­tion Fast and Furi­ous run by the group’s coun­ter­parts at the ATF.

Fast and Furious emails By Richard A. Serrano The ATF’s field su­per­visor on the South­w­est bor­der sent a series of emails last year to a top White House na­tion­al se­cur­ity of­fi­cial de­tail­ing the agency’s am­bi­tious ef­forts to stop weapons traf­fick­ing in­to Mex­ico, but did not men­tion that a botched sting op­er­a­tion already had al­lowed hun­dreds of guns to flow to drug car­tels.

Ballistics report from ATF agent’s killing By Richard A. Serrano The claim by seni­or ATF of­fi­cials that none of the weapons lost in the botched Fast and Furi­ous sting op­er­a­tion were used in the shoot­ing of a Bor­der Patrol agent is not sup­por­ted by FBI bal­list­ics tests, ac­cord­ing to a copy of the FBI re­port on the shoot­ing.

Fast and Furious Congressional report By Richard A. Serrano Rep. Dar­rell Issa (R-Vista) and Sen. Charles E. Grass­ley (R-Iowa) of the Sen­ate Ju­di­ciary Com­mit­tee are in­vest­ig­at­ing the ATF’s Fast and Furi­ous op­er­a­tion. A re­port re­leased Monday by the House Com­mit­tee on Over­sight and Gov­ern­ment Re­form, which Issa chairs, doc­u­ments their find­ings so far.

Embassy kept in dark as guns flooded Mexico By Richard A. Serrano An em­bassy cable adds to evid­ence that of­fi­cials at ATF were keep­ing oth­er parts of the gov­ern­ment in the dark about their op­er­a­tion.