One of the Deadliest Places on the Southwest Border
What to read: Books about the border

By Concepción de León, New York Times books department

I write a column in which I recommend books for readers who want to better understand a topic in the news — climate change, immigration or the economy, for instance. To pick the books, I try to understand the questions my selections should answer. In this case: How do we understand life at the border? What happens to those who try to cross it? Is it as dangerous as some fear?

These five books offer some answers to these questions, but they stand out because they also complicate and deepen our understanding of the stretch of land where Mexico and the United States meet, and the people who live there.

LOST CHILDREN ARCHIVE, by Valeria Luiselli (2019)

This road-trip novel follows two parents and their children on what may be their last trip together. They travel from east to west, each parent’s mind set on a different destination. For the mother, it is the border. She is haunted by the news of the unaccompanied minors crossing into the United States alone, and their journey looms throughout the book. Our reviewer wrote: “The novel truly becomes novel again in her hands — electric, elastic, alluring, new. And the story of the migrant, she believes, insists upon a new form: How else to tell a story that has no end?” Read the full New York Times review here.

UNACCOMPANIED, by Javier Zamora (2017)

Mr. Zamora, who was born in El Salvador, crossed the border alone at 9 to reunite with his parents in the United States. In this collection of poems, he mines his memories of crossing, remembers the country he left behind and imagines his parents’ journeys. Mr. Zamora wrote an essay about his experience for the opinion section last fall.

RETABLOS: Stories From a Life Lived Along the Border, by Octavio Solis (2018)

This memoir is told in a series of vignettes that focus on singular episodes formative to the writer’s identity. It’s modeled after the Mexican tradition of retablo painting, folk art that depicts life-altering stories visually on pieces of repurposed metal. Mr. Solis, who grew up just a mile from the Rio Grande in El Paso, writes about experiences such as being ridiculed for mispronouncing an English word in class or once finding a Mexican girl hiding in a cotton field.

THE LINE BECOMES A RIVER: Dispatches From the Border, by Francisco Cantú (2018)

Tired of reading about the border secondhand, Mr. Cantú decided to join the Border Patrol. This book covers his four years working as an agent in Arizona, New Mexico and Texas. Though the agents are primed for drug cartels, they more often encounter their victims: “bewildered, disoriented, helpless migrants,” our reviewer wrote. When it was released last year, Mr. Cantú’s book drew some criticism from immigrants. Read more about that controversy here.

ACROSS THE WIRE: Life and Hard Times on the Mexican Border, by Luis Alberto Urrea (1993)

Mr. Urrea, who is Mexican-American and was born in Tijuana, depicts the suffering of Mexico’s poor in Tijuana through a series of vignettes. A Times reviewer compared this book, one of a several Mr. Urrea has written which reckon with border life, to Elie Wiesel’s “Night,” about life in an internment camp, and says that it’s just as difficult to read. “But we keep returning to Mr. Urrea’s prose because it is startling, poetic and razor-sharp; in the midst of the most brutal sequences, we are informed and shaken, made to feel the pain of others as if it were our own,” wrote the reviewer.