Which Republicans Flipped to Allow the G.O.P. Health Care Bill to Finally Pass
House Republicans passed a long-anticipated health care overhaul bill, more than a month after pulling an initial version from the floor because they did not have enough votes to pass it.

Hard-Line Conservatives Tipped the Vote

A total of 19 hard-line conservatives associated with the Freedom Caucus, who expressed opposition or reservations to the original bill, voted “yes” on Thursday. These representatives, from the districts shown above, gave the revised bill enough votes to pass — the bill needed 216 “yes” votes and received 217.

Some of the group’s members who opposed the original bill were swayed by changes made last week that would allow states to obtain waivers from certain insurance rules, including one that prevents insurers from increasing prices for people with pre-existing health conditions.

Among the hard-line conservatives who voted “yes” were 14 who refused to budge last time, even after President Trump met with them and tried wooing them with concessions, including an amendment to weaken the requirement that health insurers provide a basic set of coverage, known as essential health benefits.

The only Freedom Caucus member to vote against the bill this time was Andy Biggs of Arizona, who wanted a clean repeal and stressed that the bill still did not meet his “constituents’ threshold for repeal.”

Here are the hard-line conservative representatives who went from opposing the bill to voting “yes”:

Which Republicans Still Opposed the Bill?

The amendment to the bill last week won over hard-line conservatives, but 20 Republicans, from the districts shown above, voted “no” on the new bill, including most moderates who also rejected the original bill. They include members of the Tuesday Group as well as Republicans from districts that voted for Hillary Clinton.

Four Republicans, including Will Hurd of Texas, who were undecided, ultimately voted against the bill. Mr. Hurd said that the plan fell short of combating skyrocketing premiums.

Earlier this week, two Republicans, Fred Upton of Michigan and Billy Long of Missouri, who were in favor of the initial bill, expressed opposition to the revision of the bill made to appease conservatives.

But a breakthrough came after Mr. Upton was able to add a last-minute amendment on Wednesday that included adding $8 billion over five years to help people with pre-existing conditions.

Here are the Republicans who voted “no”: