Trump Tops Obama, Bush and Clinton in Golfing and Private Getaways So Far
After years of criticizing former President Barack Obama for playing golf and going on private getaways, President Trump has already done more of both in his first 99 days than Mr. Obama, as well as former Presidents George W. Bush and Bill Clinton.

He Has Spent 19 Days at a Golf Course

Days at a Golf Course Weeks are counted beginning on the first Friday on or after Inauguration Day.

“I’m going to be working for you. I’m not going to have time to play golf.”

Mr. Trump at a Virginia campaign rally in 2016

Mr. Trump can be found at a Trump golf course on most weekends. Administration officials rarely confirm whether he actually played golf, forcing reporters to glean clues from photos posted on social media.

Spotted: President trump golfing for the second day in West Palm Beach. pic.twitter.com/nu88ahCP7l — Allie Malloy (@AlliemalCNN) April 9, 2017

He’s played some golf at least 17 times, according to Mark Knoller, a White House correspondent for CBS News.

Mr. Obama played just once during his first 100 days, but went on to hit a total of 333 rounds during his two terms as president, Mr. Knoller’s data shows.

The White House says Mr. Trump uses his time on the green to foster relationships with world leaders and lawmakers. However, the White House does not generally reveal whom he plays with.

Just because Mr. Trump is at a golf course, it does not necessarily mean he’s playing golf, Sean Spicer, White House press secretary, said in March, citing a “mini Cabinet” meeting at Mr. Trump’s golf club in Virginia.

Trump Has Spent Half of His Weekends at Mar-a-Lago

Days at Private Getaway Private residences include Mar-a-Lago for Mr. Trump, Chicago for Mr. Obama, and Crawford, Tex., for Mr. Bush. Mr. Clinton’s trips to Arkansas are not included because they were to visit his ailing father-in-law. Weeks are counted beginning on the first Friday on or after Inauguration Day.

“I would rarely leave the White House because there’s so much work to be done.”

Mr. Trump in an interview with The Hill in 2015

During their first 100 days, presidents often spend several weekends away from the White House, usually splitting their time between a private residence and Camp David, the official presidential retreat near Thurmont, Md.

Mr. Trump has spent seven of his 14 weekends as president flying to Mar-a-Lago, his exclusive resort in Palm Beach, Fla., on Air Force One. He has not traveled to Camp David, which is about a 30-minute ride on Marine One from the White House and likely less expensive.