Texas Attorney General
Wednesday, June 30, 2010

Printer Friendly

Texas Attorney General Abbott Demands Federal Action After Bullets Hit El Paso City Hall

Citing recent cross-border incident in El Paso, Abbott urges President Obama to make securing the border his top priority

AUSTIN—Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott sent the following letter to President Obama:



June 30, 2010



VIA FACSIMILE



The White House

1600 Pennsylvania Avenue NW

Washington, DC 20500



Dear Mr. President,



Deadly violence from drug cartels and transnational gangs in Mexico is knocking on the United States’ door with ever increasing frequency. Yesterday, gunfire from the cartels pierced that threshold and struck City Hall in El Paso. Fortunately no one was injured or killed. But that good fortune was not the result of effective border control – it was mere luck that the bullets struck buildings rather than bodies.



Luck and good fortune are not effective border enforcement policies. The shocking reality of cross border gunfire proves the cold reality: American lives are at risk. As the attached news article notes: “More than 1,300 people have been murdered in Juárez this year as a war continues relentlessly between the Juárez and Sinaloa drug cartels.” Americans must be protected as this deadly war bulges at our border.



Law enforcement officials with the Texas Department of Public Safety and your own U.S. Customs and Border Protection will reveal the hard truth. Our state is under constant assault from illegal activity threatening a porous border.



The time for talk has passed. The time for action is now. The need is urgent. Each day that passes increases the likelihood that an American life will be lost because of the federal government’s failure to secure the border.



This threat demands immediate and effective action by your Administration to secure our border. As the Attorney General of Texas, I urge you to make border security your top priority so that no more innocent lives are lost to border violence.