City of Oakland
Mayor Libby Schaaf was inaugurated into office in January 2015 and launched an agenda to elevate one of America’s most diverse and progressive cities into an equitable and resilient city.

Born and raised in Oakland, Schaaf immediately led new initiatives to offset the cost of living crisis, reduce crime, improve transit and infrastructure, and expand educational and career opportunities for the city’s most vulnerable residents.

She developed Oakland’s “17K/17K Plan” to protect 17,000 low-income households from displacement while producing 17,000 new housing units by 2024.

She created the city’s first Department of Transportation, an urban design unit to connect safe streets with housing and transportation. She also championed Measure KK, a $600-million infrastructure and affordable housing bond, which Oakland voters passed with 82 percent approval.

Mayor Schaaf received national attention for launching the Oakland Promise, an education initiative that will triple the number of college graduates from Oakland by 2025. To date, the program has sent 1,000 high-schoolers to college with scholarships, and will soon provide every baby born into poverty in Oakland with a $500 college savings account.

Before her election to City Council in 2010, Schaaf co-founded the non-profit Oakland Cares, which coordinated hundreds of volunteer community projects across the city. She also built and ran the first centralized volunteer program for Oakland public schools.

Schaaf served as a legislative aide for former mayor Jerry Brown, and later worked as the Oakland city council’s Economic Policy Advisor. She holds a law degree from Loyola Law School.

Mayor Schaaf is an Aspen Institute-Rodel Fellow in Public Leadership, a diverse and bi-partisan group of “the nation’s most promising young political leaders.” She is a member of the Bloomberg Harvard City Leadership Initiative for mayors, and has worked with the Rockefeller Foundation to ensure Oakland is among the foundation’s 100 Resilient Cities.

Both of her children attend Oakland public schools.

“Oakland has a rich tradition of social innovation and a strong legacy of resilience. In this time of hyper-prosperity brought on, in part, by the technology and real estate booms in the San Francisco Bay Area, Oakland is uniquely positioned to take advantage of its growth while remaining true to its roots and sense of self,” Schaaf said. “Our current challenges–rapidly rising income inequality and housing displacement, chronic homelessness, disparate unemployment and education rates, and community safety–are an opportunity to do what Oakland has always done: rethink old paradigms and balance the equation of equitable access to opportunity while building more creative and vibrant infrastructure to support our promising future.”