The Obama Presidential Center
The Library

The Library Building is the third main building of the campus — a portal for visitors to engage with the world beyond the Obama Presidential Center. We are partnering with the Chicago Public Library to bring a new 5,000-square-foot public library branch to Jackson Park. As a Chicago Public Library, it will house a multimedia collection with a focus on civic engagement and conduct programming to engage community members. The initial vision for the library includes spaces for reading and study (including homework help) that can be converted to open seating for programs and events; a dedicated children’s area and space for a program called YOUmedia, which lets teens explore the world and their own creativity using new technologies; and meeting space that will be available for public use. Adjacent to the library, we plan to include a special collections reading room, which may host a rotating series of small exhibits.

The Plaza

The Museum, Forum, and Library Buildings will wrap around a community-facing public plaza that will act as another gateway into the park. We’re envisioning the plaza as a public space for the local community — a place for informal and planned gatherings alike. It will host performances of all types, from celebrations honoring local figures to markets and fairs. There will be play areas, walking paths, and even a sledding hill.

The Program & Athletic Center

The Program & Athletic Center will invite the community to take part in physical activity year round, highlighting the importance of teamwork and exercise through sports. It will provide opportunities for programming partnerships with local institutions, including Hyde Park Academy, the South Side YMCA, and the Chicago Park District Field House.

Our Architects

The architecture and design firms dreaming up the Obama Presidential Center alongside us are Tod Williams Billie Tsien Architects | Partners (TWBTA) and Interactive Design Architects (IDEA) as their partner. TWBTA stood out to the Obamas for their commitment to explore the best ways of creating an innovative, engaging Center, while IDEA brings local knowledge and an excellent track record for creating large, complex civic projects.

Learn more about our team of architects.

Michael Van Valkenburgh Associates will lead our landscape architect team in partnership with Site Design Group and Living Habitats, two Chicago-based firms. This highly skilled and diverse team brings a commitment to creating accessible public spaces that honor their environment, community, and history.

Learn more about our landscape architects.