House plan would raise taxes for many in So Cal; two area GOP reps vote against it
Two Southern California Republican House members parted with GOP colleagues Thursday to vote against the sweeping tax reform measure that was approved despite unified opposition from Democrats.

Reps. Dana Rohrabacher, R-Costa Mesa, and Darrell Issa, R-Vista, voted against the measure, saying it was a bad deal for Californians because it would raise their taxes while residents of most other states would see a reduction.

“It’s disappointing that the bill approved today will not provide the same tax relief to Californians as it does to the rest of the nation,” said Issa, who won reelection last year by 0.6 percentage points in a district that straddles the Orange-San Diego county line. Both Issa and Rohrabacher are expected to face tough reelection battles in 2018.

Related Articles Two O.C. congressmen among most vulnerable in country, says prominent news site

Manafort indictment draws attention to contributions to local campaigns

Third Democrat challenges Issa, second Republican running against Rohrabacher Despite voting against the measure, Issa indicated he would support a plan that helped California taxpayers reduce what they paid.

“Before reform reaches the president’s desk, I will continue fighting for changes to deliver tax relief for all taxpayers regardless of where they live,” he said in an emailed statement.

Southern California’s other Republican House members all voted for the measure, which passed 227-205. The proposal is expected be modified further as the House and the Senate work out differences in their proposals.

Among Southern California Republicans backing the tax reform bill were three who’ve been targeted by national Democrats in their reelection bids next year: Reps. Steve Knight, R-Palmdale; Ed Royce, R-Fullerton; and Mimi Walters, R-Laguna Beach.

Royce was among those saying he hoped the final plan would better benefit Californians.

“Enacting pro-growth tax policies will directly lead to more economic prosperity for every single American,” Royce said. “While this bill is not perfect, it’s a good first step.”

California is one of several states where residents would likely pay more in federal income taxes under the House plan approved.

The plan would reduce deductions for state and local taxes and mortgage interest. The push to limit mortgage interest deductions to $500,000 — down from the present limit of $1.1 million — could be particularly tough in communities with high housing costs.

“The high value of homes, as well as high state and local tax rates, must be taken under consideration,” Rohrabacher said. “The House bill would have been a sizable tax increase for many of my constituents.”

A study of the bill by the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy found that people in California, New York, New Jersey and Maryland would pay $16.7 billion more in federal personal income taxes in 2027, while the other 46 states would receive a $101.5 billion tax cut.

But that didn’t stop many California House members from supporting the proposal

“This bill significantly removes many of the special interest loopholes, lowers the federal income tax rates of low and middle income families, and puts businesses on a level playing field to invest in American workers and create more opportunity,” Knight said.

Walters, who is on the House GOP leadership team and was an early backer of the tax reform plan, said she voted for the measure Thursday with confidence that a final deal would be better for Californians.

“Yesterday, on the floor of the House, I received a personal commitment from the Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, Rep. Kevin Brady, R-Texas, that changes will be made to the final version of tax reform legislation to benefit Orange County residents,” Walters said.

The five Southern California Republican incumbents targeted by Democrats all represent districts that could be particularly hit by the tax bill approved Thursday. In each of the districts, in 2015, more than 40 percent of federal tax returns used the state and local tax deductions that would be largely eliminated under the House plan, according to analyses of IRS data by the Sacramento Bee and the Tax Policy Center.

As for reducing the mortgage amount that qualifies for interest to $500,000, Orange County home buyers would be particularly affected as the median price of a home in the county is $799,000, according to the California Association of Realtors. The median price in Los Angeles County is $606,000 while its $386,000 in Riverside County and $279,000 in San Bernardino County.

More than 70 percent of the homes in the districts currently represented by Royce, Rohrabacher, Walters and Issa are priced over $500,000.

Staff writer Jeff Horseman contributed to this story.