Neal Kelley

Neal Kelley is Registrar of Voters for Orange County, California, the fifth largest voting jurisdiction in the United States, serving more than 1.6 million registered voters.



He joined the County as Chief Deputy Registrar of Voters in May 2004. Appointed Registrar of Voters in April 2006 by County Executive Officer, Thomas G. Mauk, Kelley has led the Registrar of Voters’ office through the largest cycle of elections in the County’s 123-year history. In his role as the County’s chief election official, he leads an organization responsible for conducting elections, verifying petitions and maintaining voter records.



Prior to joining Orange County, Kelley developed and grew several companies of his own, employing hundreds of people from 1989 to 2004. He was also an adjunct professor with Riverside Community College’s Business Administration Department, and served as a police officer in Southern California during the mid 1980's.



In 2009 Kelley earned professional election certification through the national Election Center and Auburn University as a Certified Elections and Registration Administrator (CERA). He has been the recipient of several awards for election administration, including recognition from the California State Association of Counties, the Election Center and the National Association of Counties. He was recently honored with the "2015 Public Official of the Year" from the National Association of County Recorders, Election Officials and Clerks.



Kelley is an appointed member of the United States Election Assistance Commission (EAC) Board of Advisors and the EAC Voting Systems Standards Board, is the past president of the California Association of Clerks and Election Officials (CACEO), and is the past president for the National Association of County Recorders, Election Officials and Clerks (NACRC). In addition he serves as a 2017-2018 member of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine's Committee on the Future of Voting.



Kelley earned a Bachelor of Science degree in business and management from the University of Redlands and an M.B.A. from the University of Southern California.