Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act U.S. Department of Education
Federal Programs Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act -- U.S. Department of Education Copyright © 1998 PhotoDisc, Inc.



The Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act (SDFSCA) State and Local Grants Program, authorized by the 1994 Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) (Title IV, §§ 4111­4116, 20 U.S.C. 7111­7116), is a central part of the Federal Government's effort to encourage the creation of safe, disciplined, and drug-free learning environments that will help all children meet challenging academic standards. The program provides support for school- and community-based programs to prevent youth violence and alcohol and other drug use. SDFSCA primarily supports prevention programs and activities. Its program provides funding for formula grants to States to support local educational agencies and community-based organizations in developing and implementing programs to prevent drug use and violence among children and youth. The program also provides funding for national leadership activities that directly support classroom teaching. The following list highlights some of these activities. Developing comprehensive drug and violence prevention programs for all students from preschool through grade 12 that include health education, early intervention, pupil services, mentoring, rehabilitation referral, and related activities.

Devising strategies to integrate family services from a variety of providers to enhance school performance and boost attachment to school and family.

Providing professional training and development for school personnel, parents, law enforcement officials, and other community members.

Supporting "safe zones of passage" for students between home and school through enhanced law enforcement, neighborhood patrols, and similar measures.

Offering direct services to schools and school systems afflicted with especially severe drug and violence problems. Contact information: William Modzeleski, Director

Safe and Drug-Free Schools Program

U.S. Department of Education

600 Independence Avenue SW., Room 604

Washington, DC 20202

202­260­3954 Previous Contents Next Promising Strategies to Reduce Gun Violence OJJDP Report