OpenSecrets
Our Team

Following the money, and reporting on how it influences politics and policy, has always been our beat, and nobody does it better than CRP. Together, our hardworking researchers, reporters and technology experts provide the unadulterated facts about where the money is coming from and going. If you'd like to join our team, check out the job openings and internship opportunities we've posted. And thank you for supporting our work!

Sheila Krumholz Executive Director

Follow @skrmhlz Sheila is the Center for Responsive Politics' chief administrator, the liaison to its board and major funders and its primary spokesperson. Sheila became executive director in 2006, having spent eight years as the Center's research director, supervising data analysis for OpenSecrets.org and CRP's clients. She first joined the organization in 1989 as assistant editor of the very first edition of Open Secrets, the Center's flagship publication. In 2010, Fast Company magazine named Sheila to its "Most Influential Women in Technology" list. Sheila has a degree in international relations and political science from the University of Minnesota.

Jennifer Barrett Development Director Jennifer Barrett joined the Center for Responsive Politics in February 2017 after a 10-year stint at the Smithsonian's Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden. A native Washingtonian, she has over 25 years of diverse experience that includes arts management, fundraising, development, marketing and public relations. Her career began on Capitol Hill with Rep. Millicent Fenwick, and she has worked at The Washington Monthly and The New Republic magazines, and participated in multimillion dollar fundraising campaigns for Washington's Shakespeare Theatre Company and the Hirshhorn. Jennifer also was an American Volunteer for International Development in Moscow for the Russian daily newspaper Nezavisimaya Gazeta.

Sarah Bryner Research Director

Follow @AKSarahB Sarah, who joined the Center in April 2011, is responsible for overseeing the Center's data analysis and research collaborations. Previously, she was CRP's lobbying and revolving door researcher. Prior to joining OpenSecrets, Sarah was a doctoral student at the Ohio State University, where she also taught undergraduate political science courses. Her dissertation, "Politicians Behaving Badly: The Determinants and Outcomes of Political Scandal in Post-Watergate America," incorporates both original data collection and political experiments. She received her Ph.D. from Ohio State in 2014 and her B.A. in political science and biology in 2006.

Jacob Hileman Information Technology Director Jacob, the founder of a web-hosting startup, spent 10 years in nonprofit IT before joining CRP in August 2015 to run its information technology operations. He has won the Youth Entrepreneur of the Year Award, the Non-profit Technology Innovation Award, and, most recently, the Presidential Innovation Award for Telemedicine.

Dan Auble Senior Researcher Dan is responsible for overseeing the Center's databases tracking lobbying activity and the revolving door and directs the Foreign Lobby Watch program, launched in 2017. He joined the Center in 2004 and has specialized in monitoring political action committees and the personal finances of government officials. Dan graduated from the University of Delaware with degrees in political science and history.

Soroush Bassam Database Programmer Soroush joined CRP in November 2015 as a database programmer. Previously, he worked as a research assistant for two years at the University of Maryland, focusing on data modeling for security systems. He holds a master's degree in systems engineering from the University of Maryland.

Alex Baumgart Individual Contributions Researcher Alex joined the Center for Responsive Politics in November 2014 as the Individual Contributions Researcher. He is a former CRP intern who has also spent time interning in the district and Washington D.C. offices of a U.S. House member. Alex graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder with degrees in political science and economics.

Brian Blend Development Associate, Individual Giving Brian joined the Center in January 2019 and is responsible for supporting development and individual giving. Prior to joining the CRP team, Brian worked and interned for a variety of non-profits, the most recent being the American Society for Microbiology in Washington D.C. He has both political campaign experience as well as NGO experience and holds a bachelor's degree in political science from George Mason University.

Karl Evers-Hillstrom Money-in-Politics Reporter Karl joined CRP as its money-in-politics reporter in October 2018. A native of Brooklyn, N.Y., Karl graduated from the State University of New York at New Paltz with a bachelor's degree in 2016. He spent the next two years covering a variety of topics, including city government and politics, as a reporter at The Globe, a regional newspaper in Worthington, Minn.

Grace Haley Gender and Race Researcher

Follow @gracephaley Grace is our Gender and Race Researcher and studies the intersection of gender and race of federal candidates and how it affects campaign fundraising, among other things. Prior to joining the Center, Grace worked as a research assistant for torture prevention academics, research institutions, and international human rights nonprofits, including the Danish Institute Against Torture in Copenhagen, Denmark. She has both political campaign experience as well as journalism and research experience concerning the intersectionality of gender and race.

Anna Massoglia Nonprofits and FARA Researcher

Follow @annalecta Anna first joined the Center for Responsive Politics in September 2015 and works with CRP's data on politically active nonprofits, nondisclosing groups, and foreign influence. She holds degrees in psychology and political science from from North Carolina State University and a J.D. from the University of the District of Columbia School of Law. Prior to rejoining CRP in June 2018, Anna worked as a research analyst, editor, and writer at Bloomberg BNA. Anna previously held roles with a lobbying firm, political action committee, the D.C. Superior Court Senior Judge's Chambers, the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law Voting Rights Project, the U.S. State Department, the D.C. Council Committee on Government Operations, the U.S. House of Representatives, and various other organizations.

Andrew Mayersohn Committees Researcher Andrew first joined the Center in February 2013 and works with CRP's data on committees, outside spending, and expenditures. Before joining the Center, Andrew was a fellow with the Progressive Change Campaign Committee. Andrew has a B.A. in political science from Yale, where he was the treasurer of Students for a New American Politics, the country's largest student-run PAC.

Jan Miller Bookkeeper After working for the federal government for 19 years (including three years with the Federal Election Commission) Jan joined the Center for Responsive Politics in 2003 as an independent bookkeeper. She is responsible for the bookkeeping and financial management. Jan graduated from the University of Maryland with a degree in behavioral science.

Brendan Quinn Outreach and Social Media Manager

Follow @Mighty_Quinner Brendan, who joined the Center in the crazy fall of 2016, is responsible for outreach as well as the Center's social media presence. Prior to joining the CRP team, Brendan worked for a number of institutions, including the Irish Consulate in New York City. He holds a bachelor's degree from the State University of New York at New Paltz.

HJ Rivera Web Content Manager/Developer HJ Rivera joined the staff of the Center for Responsive Politics as a Coder/Assistant Researcher in July 1999. He graduated from the University of Puerto Rico with a major in English literature and a minor in education.

Skyler Treat Database Manager Skyler Treat is a database programmer who joined the Center for Responsive Politics in early 2015. She spent the previous five years working for nonprofits in the Washington, D.C. region. Prior to moving to the area, she received her bachelor's degree in economics from Beloit College.

Douglas H. Weber Senior Researcher

Follow @DougWeber_CRP Douglas Weber joined the Center in the summer of 1997 as a researcher working on fulfilling research requests in our National Library on Money in Politics. He specializes in tracking candidates and congressional elections. Douglas has a B.A. in political science from SUNY University at Buffalo and a M.A. in political science from American University.

Raymond Arke Reporting Intern Raymond graduated from Duquesne University with a degree in political science in December 2018. Prior to joining CRP, Raymond served as news editor and, most recently, editor-in-chief for The Duquesne Duke, Duquesne’s independent student newspaper. He grew up in Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania.

Camille Erickson Reporting Intern Camille is an investigative journalist covering the economy, labor and politics through a social justice lens. Her work has been featured in In These Times, The Chicago Reporter, Social Justice News Nexus and Indian Country Today, among others. She's completing her graduate degree at Northwestern University's Medill School of Journalism. Camille loves telling data-driven stories that center the voices of communities most directly impacted by events. As a Senior Fellow of Humanity in Action, she continues to seek ways to build greater equity and accessibility in the journalism industry. Before diving into journalism, she worked behind the scenes in nonprofit arts organizations. She holds a bachelor's degree in International Studies and Art History from Macalester College.