Cobb County Government
Cobb County Department of Transportation

Click here to go to Cobb County Parks and Recreation for detailed park and trail information.





Cobb County Trail System/Directory

Cobb County has several trail networks with proposals for a countywide system to connect major areas of the county. This network of trails accommodates pedestrians and bicyclists while providing transportation alternatives to ease congestion. Although portions of the trail system are recreational, they provide connectivity between cities, access to regional activity centers, and a healthy commuting option for travelers who wish to avoid the congestion of some county thoroughfares.



Key to System Map (file size: 5 MB)

Last Updated March 2011







If you would like a hard copy of the System Brochure,

please email or write:

Cobb County Planning Division,

1890 County Services Parkway, Marietta, GA 30008





The trail projects on the Cobb County system map are in different phases of development:

Red indicates existing, usable trails

indicates existing, usable trails Yellow indicates that funding for the trail has been identified and construction will follow

indicates that funding for the trail has been identified and construction will follow Green indicates proposed trail construction when funding is available





The trails that can be accessed by transit A. L. Burruss Trail: Route 10

Bob Callan Trail: Routes 10, 10A, 10B, 15 & 50

Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area Trails: Routes 10, 10B, 50, & 65

Concord Road Trail; Route 20

East Cobb Trail (existing Roswell Road portion): Route 65

Heritage Park Trail: Route 70

Kennesaw National Battlefield Park Trails: Routes 40, 45 & 70

Mountain-to-the-River Trail: Routes 10, 10A, 10B, 15, 20, 30, 40, 45, 50, 70 & MARTA Route 12

Noonday Creek Trail: Routes 45

Powder Springs Road Trail: Route 15

Silver-Comet Trail: Routes 30, 35 & 70

Silver-Comet Cumberland Connector: Routes 10, 10A, 10B, 20, 30, 50, 70 & MARTA Route 12

Smyrna-Atlanta Road Trail A portion of the Cobb County trail system is accessible via transit. All Cobb Community Transit (CCT) buses are equipped with front-loaded bicycle racks. All CCT Park and Ride Lots have loop bicycle racks.The trails that can be accessed by transit (CCT) are listed below:

A.L. Burruss Trail

The A.L. Burruss Trail is a .9-mile walking trail located in A.L. Burruss Nature Park, southeast of downtown Marietta. The trail is located along Cobb Parkway, between the Delk Road/South Cobb Drive interchange and Barclay Circle at Life University, and Chastain Meadows Parkway. The Trail will connect the programmed University Trail, to areas adjacent to A.L. Burruss Park, such as Dobbins Air Reserve Base. The trail is served by the CCT Route 10.



Akers Mill Trail

This multi-use trail along Akers Mill Rd. will begin at Cumberland Blvd. The trail will link to the Rottenwood Creek Trail, Silver Comet Cumberland Connector and the Kennesaw Mountain to Chattahoochee River Trail. This trail will connect to the new Cobb Energy Centre for the Performing Arts, Cobb Galleria Complex and Cumberland Mall.



Big Shanty Road Trail

The Big Shanty Road Trail is a programmed 2-mile trail that is located between Chastain Road at KSU and Chastain Meadows Parkway. When constructed, the multi-use path will connect between the KSU Main Campus and the KSU Soccer Stadium. The Big Shanty Road Trail will be served by CCT Routes 40 and 45, and will link to the Town Center and Busbee Park and Ride Lots.



Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area Trails

There are five sections of the Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area located within Cobb County along the eastern boundary of the County. These include: Cochran Shoals/Sope Creek, West Palisades/Paces Mill, Johnson Ferry South, Johnson Ferry North, and Gold Branch. The National Recreation Area includes approximately 20 miles of trails within Cobb County. The recreational trails will connect the proposed East Cobb Trails, the proposed Wildwood Trail, the programmed Interstate North Parkway Trail, and the proposed Mountain-to-River Trail.



City of Acworth Trail System

Lake Acworth Trail

The Lake Acworth Trail is a .9-mile trail that is located on the northern shore of Lake Acworth. The trail is currently located near downtown Acworth, between Collins Circle and Winn Street. The walking trail includes two pedestrian bridges, with access to sidewalks linking downtown and adjacent neighborhoods. The trail is proposed to encircle Lake Acworth, with a 4.5-mile extension of the multi-use path.



Cowan Park Trail

The Cowan Park Trail is a .2-mile long trail that serves as the eastern link of the Acworth municipal trail system, separate from the Lake Acworth Trail. This multi-use trail, is located north of downtown Acworth, and begins at Cowan Park, from Terrace Drive to the Logan Farm Park Trail, near Cowan Road.



Logan Farm Park Trail

The Logan Farm Park Trail is a 1-mile long trail that serves as the central link of the Acworth municipal trail system, separate from the Lake Acworth Trail. This multi-use trail, is located north of downtown Acworth, and begins at Cherokee Street, linking the Tanyard Creek Park Trail to the Cowan Park Trail. The trail includes a multi-use path bridge across Tanyard Creek to Cowan Road, from Cowan Park.



Tanyard Creek Park Trail

The Tanyard Creek Park Trail is a .2-mile long trail that serves as the western link of the Acworth municipal trail system, separate from the Lake Acworth Trail. This multi-use trail, is located north of downtown Acworth, and begins at Tanyard Creek Park and links into the Logan Farm Park Trail, which begins at Cherokee Street.

City of Kennesaw Trail System

Deerfield Park Trail

The half-mile long Deerfield Park Trail, is located north of downtown Kennesaw at Deerfield Drive. The trail connects between the Winchester Forest Park Trail and the programmed Matlock Trail, serving Deerfield Park.



Kennesaw Trail

The proposed multi-use trail is approximately 2 miles and will begin at Pine Mountain Road and Main Street in downtown Kennesaw. This trail will link to the Civil War Museum in downtown Kennesaw, and will connect the Mountain to River Trail and Noonday Creek Trail systems.



Legacy Park Trail

The mile-long Legacy Park Trail links between the proposed Proctor Creek Trail and the proposed link to the Winchester Forest Park Trail, along Jiles Road. The trail is located north of downtown Kennesaw, and serves as part of the Legacy Park residential community.



Matlock Trail

The programmed .6-mile long Matlock Trail will connect between Deerfield Park and the proposed Kennesaw Trail. When completed, the trail will be located north of downtown Kennesaw.



Proctor Creek Trail

The Proctor Creek Trail is a two-mile long trail that is proposed to connect the Lake Acworth Trail to the City of Kennesaw. Located, north of downtown Kennesaw, the trail will link with three neighborhood trails, between the Acworth Sports Complex/ Kenworth Park and Downtown Kennesaw. A 4.4-mile eastern trail link is proposed to connect between Legacy Park and Kennesaw State University.



Winchester Forest Park Trail

The half-mile long Winchester Forest Park Trail connects between the proposed Legacy Park Trail extension, and the Deerfield Park Trail. The trail is located north of downtown Kennesaw, and links between Lindley Lane and the Deerfield Drive, in the Winchester Forest subdivision.

City of Powder Springs Trail System



Lewis Road Trail

The Lewis Road Trail is located southwest of downtown Powder Springs, and connects between Powder Springs Park and C.H. James Parkway. This 1.3-mile multi-use path connects adjoining communities and the Powder Springs Elementary School, into the Powder Springs Park.



Lucille Creek Trail

The Wild Horse Creek Trail connects to the Silver Comet Trail at Carter Road. The 1.5-mile trail features a wetlands observation tower, a state champion red maple tree, and a couple of creek overlooks. The trail is located, east of downtown Powder Springs, between the intersection of Macedonia Road-Lancer Drive and the Carter Road trailhead at the Silver Comet Trail.



Noses Creek Trail

The proposed Noses Creek Trail is located east of downtown Powder Springs, and is approximately 1.5 miles. The proposed scenic trail will follow Noses Creek and will link Wild Horse Creek Trail to Macedonia Road. When constructed, the trail will provide additional local access to the Silver Comet Trail from the adjoining communities of Powder Springs.



Powder Springs Creek Trail

The proposed Powder Springs Creek Trail is located southwest of downtown Powder Springs, and is approximately 1 mile long. The proposed scenic trail will follow Powder Springs Creek and will link Lucille Creek Trail to Lewis Road. When constructed, the trail will provide additional local access to the Silver Comet Trail from the adjoining communities of Powder Springs.



Wildhorse Creek Trail

The Lucille Creek Trail, follows Lucille Creek and intersects the Silver Comet Trail pedestrian bridge at C.H. James Parkway. The 2.3-mile long trail is located between Shipp Road and Powder Springs-Dallas Road, and flows west from Dillard Street, in downtown Powder Springs.

Cobb Parkway Trail

The Cobb Parkway Trail is a proposed one-mile multi-use pathway, which will link Cobb Galleria/I-285 and Cumberland Boulevard. This proposed trail is part of a streetscape beautification project in the Cumberland area along Cobb Parkway and will connect to the programmed Mountain-to-River Trail, commercial and office complexes, and CCT bus routes.





Concord Road Trail

The proposed Concord Road Trail will link to the Silver Comet Trail at the southernmost end. It will also provide a link to the Mountain to the River Trail and connect with an existing trail on Spring Road, in the City of Smryna.



Dallas Highway Trail

The Dallas Highway Trail is a programmed multi-use path, located off of Dallas Highway/SR 120 west of Marietta, with bicycle access to the City of Marietta, as well as the Kennesaw Mountain National Battlefield Park and its trail system. The programmed West Cobb Trail will link the Dallas Highway Streetscape to the Town Center and the programmed Noonday Creek Trail. Additionally, a link to the Silver Comet Trail will be provided by the proposed Noses Creek Trail and the existing Wild Horse Creek Trail.



East Cobb Trail

The East Cobb Trail is a programmed multi-use path covering approximately 9,500 linear feet, which parallels Roswell Road/SR 120 and Sope Creek.



This trail provides local access alternatives to neighborhood park facilities, Fullers Park, and East Cobb Park from multiple residential subdivisions. The CCT Route 65 serves this segment of Roswell Road (SR 120).



Floyd Road Trail

This two-mile trail will connect the Silver Comet Trail and Fontaine Road serving the Mableton community, providing a link to the Mable House Cultural Arts Center and Amphitheater. The Floyd Road Trail will be served by CCT Route 30.





Heritage Park Trail

This two-mile long trail begins at Heritage Park and crosses the wetlands on a boardwalk. It then crosses Nickajack Creek and parallels the creek for about a mile and a half. The trail traverses an old mill site that was operational in the late 1800s and connects to the Silver Comet Trail. The CCT Route 70 serves this trail.





Interstate North Parkway Trail

This programmed multi-use pathway will extend 1.5 miles along Interstate North Parkway, connecting the Cumberland/Galleria area, the programmed Rottenwood Creek Trail, and the Chattahoochee National Recreation Area. CCT Routes 10B and 50 run along Interstate North Parkway.





Johnston's River Trail

The proposed Johnston’s River Line Trail is approximately 1.5 miles and would afford visitors the opportunity to visit a series of historic embankments along the Chattahoochee River.



Part of the long-range plan is to provide a parking area adjacent to Discovery Boulevard. Included in the proposal is a trail that would connect to the Nickajack Creek Trail.





Kennesaw Mountain National Battlefield (KMNB) Park Trails

There are numerous recreation trails within KMNB Park. The most popular trail is the paved road to the top of the mountain. This trail winds over a mile from the base of the mountain near the Visitors Center to a parking lot near the top of the mountain. The park lists more than 17 miles of trails.





Kennesaw Mountain to Chattahoochee River Trail (Mountain-to-River)

The trail is a 13.5-mile multi-use urban trail, which runs through the heart of Cobb County, from Kennesaw Mountain National Battlefield Park to a connection with the City of Atlanta's Trail System at the Chattahoochee River. The project fills gaps between programmed trail projects at Tower Road, Marietta Station Walk, Atlanta Road and Spring Road.

Atlanta Road Trail

A vital component of the Mountain-to-River Trail that connects between the cities of Marietta and Smyrna. The 2.7-mile trail, located along Atlanta Road, will eventually connect to programmed trails in the cities of Marietta and Smyrna, and complete the north-south Mountain-to-River Trail. The trail is served by CCT Routes 15, 20 and 30.



Spring Road Trail

A vital component of the Mountain-to-River Trail that unites three trail systems (Silver Comet, Kennesaw Mountain to Chattahoochee River, and the Concord Road trails). The 1.3-mile trail, along Spring Road, links between the City of Smyrna and the Cumberland Community Improvement District; with connections to the Chattahoochee River National Recreational Area and the Cumberland Transfer Center. The link includes a ten-foot wide multi-use path, located in Spring Road Park, and also connects to a 0.3 mile walking trail spur on the south side of the street, known as thePoplar Creek Trail. The trails are served by CCT Route 10, 10A, 10B, 20, 50 and MARTA Route 12.





Laurel Creek Connector

The Laurel Creek Connector will link the Nickajack Trail with the Silver Comet Cumberland Connector.





Lower Roswell Road Trail

The Lower Roswell Road Trail is a programmed 2.8-mile trail that is located between Davidson Road and Timber Ridge Road. When constructed the multi-use path will connect between the Johnson Ferry Road area and the City of Roswell. The Lower Roswell Road Trail will be served by CCT Route 65, and will eventually link to the Johnson Ferry Road Baptist Church Park and Ride Lot, via the proposed East Cobb Trail, along Johnson Ferry Road.





Nickajack Creek Trail

The proposed Nickajack Creek Trail will be approximately 5.2 miles. It will connect with the Heritage Park Trail in the north and end at the Johnston's River Line Trail. It will run parallel to the Norfolk Southern rail line.





Noonday Creek Trail

This 2.3-mile path is located in the Town Center Community Improvement District. It currently exists along Noonday Creek, between Cobb Parkway and the intersection of Barrett Lakes Boulevard and Duncan Road. The trail is programmed to extend south to Old 41 Highway at Kennesaw Mountain National Battlefield Park, and east to Bells Ferry Road, with a proposed extension to the Cherokee County Line. Once completed, the trail will serve as a connection to the Mountain-to-River Trail, and West Cobb Trail. The trail is served by CCT Route 45.





Noonday Creek Trail – Cherokee Connector

This 4-mile trail is proposed from Bells Ferry Road to the Cherokee County line and will follow the Noonday Creek corridor.





Powder Springs Road Trail

The Powder Springs Road Trail is a programmed 1.5-mile trail that is located southwest of downtown Marietta. When completed the multi-use path will be served by CCT Route 15 and will link to the Powder Springs Station County Government Complex.





Rottenwood Creek Trail

This trail is programmed from the Interstate North Parkway to Terrell Mill Road. Once completed, the trail will link to the University Trail in Marietta. The majority of the trail length is located in the Cumberland Community Improvement District.





Silver Comet Trail - Trail Map

The Silver Comet Trail is part of a larger system that utilizes the railroad track bed that connected Atlanta to Birmingham. This paved pathway extends over 12.8 miles from south Cobb to Paulding County. The trail serves the following bus routes: GRTA Route 470 and CCT Routes 30, 35 and 70.



The trail links with the 5-mile long Silver Comet-Cumberland Connector Trail, which lies between Mavell Road and the Cumberland Community Improvement District, the largest employment Center in Cobb County. The Cumberland Connector Trail, ends at the Cumberland Transfer Center, serving the following bus routes: CCT Route 10, 10A, 10B, 20, 50 and MARTA Route 12.



The Silver Comet Trail will include 10 pedestrian bridges when the complete: Cooper Lake Road; East West Connector at Heritage Park Trail; Nickajack Creek; Olley Creek; Noses Creek; Lucille Creek; Powder Springs Creek; C.H. James Parkway; Mount Wilkinson Parkway; and Cumberland Boulevard.





Silver Comet Trail – Historic Mableton Connector

This proposed multi-use trail will begin at the Silver Comet Trail at the East-West Connector and traverse into Historic Mableton. The trail will begin at the proposed Fontaine Road trailhead, and will link Heritage Park, Thompson Park, the South Cobb Regional Library, Mable House Cultural Arts Center, and the Mableton Park and Ride lot. Trail users will be able to access GRTA Route 475 at the lot, and the CCT Route 30 at Floyd Road.





Smyrna-Atlanta Road Trail

This trail is nearly three miles long, with its location proposed between Concord Road/Spring Road and Paces Ferry Road. The link would connect the Mountain-to-River and Concord Road Trails in the City of Smyrna, with the Silver Comet Cumberland Connector. The trail serves CCT Route 20.



University Trail

The City of Marietta's programmed University Trail branches off of the Kennesaw Mountain to Chattahoochee River Trail, linking the trail to the CCT Transfer Station, the Kennesaw Mountain National Battlefield Park, the Marietta Square, Southern Polytechnic State University, Life University, and various parks along the trail route.





West Cobb Trail

The West Cobb Trail is a programmed multi-use pathway extending approximately 4.5 miles and paralleling Barrett Parkway from Dallas Highway (SR 120) to Cobb Parkway (US 41). When constructed, this trail will provide local access to Kennesaw Mountain National Battlefield Park, Noonday Creek Trail, multiple residential subdivisions, and to the CCT transit system.





Wildwood Trail

This trail is proposed and will connect the National Park Systems' Cochran Shoals Trail, Rottenwood Creek Trail, and other segments of the county's trail system from Wildwood, a mixed-used development which includes residential, commercial, and office centers. The Wildwood Development is located at Windy Hill and Powers Ferry Road, adjacent to the National Park Service land on the Chattahoochee River.