Obama To Ban 4.2 Million Social Security Recipients From Owning Guns
With that pesky 2nd Amendment in the way, Obama has to find clever ways to achieve his dream of total civilian disarmament. Rather than an outright ban on gun ownership, which won’t fly, the President has a plan to chip away at our rights until they are gone. His newest scheme involves using the Social Security Administration to deny 4.2 million Americans their right to keep and bear arms.

The LA Times explains this latest shredding of the Constitution:

Seeking tighter controls over firearm purchases, the Obama administration is pushing to ban Social Security beneficiaries from owning guns if they lack the mental capacity to manage their own affairs, a move that could affect millions whose monthly disability payments are handled by others. The push is intended to bring the Social Security Administration in line with laws regulating who gets reported to the National Instant Criminal Background Check System, or NICS, which is used to prevent gun sales to felons, drug addicts, immigrants in the country illegally and others.

Yes, because the NICS does such a bang up job of keeping felons, drug addicts, and illegal aliens from getting guns. If that were even remotely true there’d be almost no gun-related crime in this country.

So just who exactly would be banned from owning a gun under this new policy?

A potentially large group within Social Security are people who, in the language of federal gun laws, are unable to manage their own affairs due to “marked subnormal intelligence, or mental illness, incompetency, condition, or disease.” There is no simple way to identify that group, but a strategy used by the Department of Veterans Affairs since the creation of the background check system is reporting anyone who has been declared incompetent to manage pension or disability payments and assigned a fiduciary.

And how many law-abiding Americans would it affect?

If Social Security, which has never participated in the background check system, uses the same standard as the VA, millions of its beneficiaries would be affected. About 4.2 million adults receive monthly benefits that are managed by “representative payees.”

Here’s the problem: being financially incompetent doesn’t make someone crazy or dangerous. There are a million different reasons why an elderly or disabled person might have their finances handled by a loved one. Just because someone else handles your bills doesn’t mean you are a threat to society.

Look at this from another perspective: how much crime is committed by old or handicapped people on Social Security? I’d be willing to bet it is next to 0%. And of that nearly 0%, how much of that is gun-related crime? This is another liberal “solution” desperately looking for a problem.

And speaking of problems, if Obama suddenly declares 4.2 million people ineligible to own firearms, chances are many of those people already own firearms. You know what that means: gun confiscation. That’s right, the feds and the states will have to go around and scoop up all the firearms owned by people that meet the administration’s new criteria.

Obama keeps saying he isn’t coming for our guns, but here is a policy that would literally come for our guns. Not only would this deny millions of their right to gun ownership, it would result in house-to-house confiscation. I’m shocked that the President would lie to us because he’s been so truthful up until this point. JK.

I feel like I’ve asked this question a million times: Why are all of the democrats’ efforts to “fight crime” put into punishing law-abiding citizens? It’s pure insanity to think you can stop bad guys from doing bad things by going after the good guys. This leaves me with only two possible conclusions: democrats are stupid or their goal is not public safety but rather public control. Actually, both of those things are true.

Follow Brian Anderson on Twitter