WIC Approved Foods List
Georgia WIC Food Package

Revised July 2018

The WIC Approved Foods List shows the types, sizes, and packaging of foods WIC participants may receive with their WIC vouchers.

This update adds new food options of yogurt and whole wheat pasta and removes packaging options discontinued by the manufacturer.

To Submit a Food Product for Review:

The Georgia WIC Approved Foods List is updated approximately every two years**. The current update went into effect July 2018. A request for food submissions will be sent out to manufacturers nine to twelve months prior to the update. To receive this submission request and to be added to the manufacturer contact list, please contact the Nutrition Unit at 800-228-9173.

After submissions are received, a thorough analysis will be conducted based on USDA guidelines, nutritional quality, availability, cost, and acceptance of the product by WIC participants in Georgia. The updated list will be emailed to all manufacturers on the contact list as soon as it has been finalized and approved. The revised list will be added to this page when finalized.

Foods listed by brand:

Whole grain bread/sandwich buns, whole grain tortillas, soy milk, tofu, juice (except orange and grapefruit), goat milk, cereal, infant cereal, infant fruits and vegetables, infant meats, yogurt, whole wheat pasta.

Foods listed as Least Expensive Brand or Any Brand:

Produce (fresh, frozen, canned), beans/peas/lentils, peanut butter, fish, cheese, eggs, milk, brown rice, orange and grapefruit juice.

** The list will be updated more frequently as needed

Resources:

Approved Food List: Criteria to Evaluate an Eligible Food Item

UPC List of approved foods in Georgia (This list includes only items listed by brand)

Contact Information

Women, Infants, and Children (WIC)

2 Peachtree Street, NW

Atlanta, GA 30303

Participants should call: (800) 228-9173

Vendors should call: (866) 814-5468

Office of the Inspector General

Email Reports of Fraud, Waste & Abuse

Page last updated 1/9/2019