Rick Scott's education ad misstates Florida's test success
Gov. Rick Scott’s education ad brags that Florida is “first in the nation” for fourth-grade reading and math scores.

It’s not.

The ad, released two weeks ago as part of Scott’s campaign for U.S. Senate, also says Florida is first for eighth-grade reading.

But Massachusetts students are first in the nation, posting the highest scores on the reading and math tests given to fourth and eighth graders as part of the National Assessment of Education Progress, or NAEP, in 2017.

On those NAEP exams, sometimes called “the nation’s report card,” four states did better on the fourth-grade reading test than Florida, six states were ahead of the Sunshine State for fourth-grade math, and 24 did better in eighth-grade reading.

Florida did lead the nation as far as improvement on NAEP, with its students making strong gains between 2015 and 2017 when most of the nation was stagnant. NAEP leaders praised the state for that achievement.

But in the ad, Scott, standing in front of what looks like a classroom whiteboard, says, “Fourth-grade reading and math scores, first in the nation. Eighth-grade reading, first. … I like it when Florida’s first.”

When asked for the source of those claims, Scott’s campaign sent a link to NAEP’s website and to the press release Scott’s office sent out when the scores were released in April.

NAEP data, however, doesn’t show Florida scores are first in the nation. The governor’s office press release, headlined “Florida students lead the nation,” explained in the first paragraph that “the results show that Florida is the only state to have improved significantly” on NAEP. It did not claim Florida had top scores.

The campaign did not respond to follow-up questions about the ad.

Scott, a Republican in his second term as governor, is trying to unseat U.S. Senator Bill Nelson, a Democrat, in the November election.

lpostal@orlandosentinel.com 407-420-5273

Nation's report card: "Something very good is happening in Florida." »