State Rep. Anthony Sabatini dismisses Florida Democratic chair's call for his resignation over high school 'blackface' photo
A high school photo of Republican state Rep. Anthony Sabatini that circulated before his election became a source of controversy again Tuesday after Florida Democratic Chair Terry Rizzo called on Sabatini to resign.

The photo, of a teenage Sabatini with his face blackened, wearing a gold jewelry, sunglasses and a New York Yankees hat, was described by Rizzo as Sabatini “displaying racist behavior,” but Sabatini and a high school friend said Tuesday it was a photo of the two of them dressing as each other as a prank.

It was mailed anonymously to media in Lake County during his campaign against Democrat Cynthia Brown last fall and was written about by several websites and an Orlando Sentinel opinion column, entitled, “Lesson to be learned for young people from Florida House candidate who donned blackface in high school.”

In the wake of two prominent blackface scandals, including Florida Secretary of State Michael Ertel’s resignation in January after photos surfaced of his wearing blackface in 2005 while dressing as a Hurricane Katrina victim and Virginia Gov. Ralph Northam denying he was either a man in blackface or a man in KKK robes in a picture on his medical school yearbook page, Brown called on Sabatini to resign in a Facebook post Monday.

“I don’t care what age you are, where you grew up, what political party you belong in, this is not where we belong,” Brown wrote. “In light of the Florida Secretary of State resigning for belonging to such a disgusting racial divide (and by the way the Democratic [governor] of VA should also resign, so I am being consistent on my position), my former opponent Sabatini should resign.”

“Anthony, you cannot represent ALL of the people of our district, just as the Florida Secretary of State decided he couldn’t,” she wrote. “Do what is right for once, step down and resign.”

In a statement Tuesday, Rizzo wrote, “Gov. DeSantis did the right thing in accepting Michael Ertel's resignation – and he and Leader Jose Oliva should do the right thing and ask for the resignation of Rep. Anthony Sabatini. In calling out racist behavior Florida Democrats and Republicans should stand united.”

Sabatini, 30, R-Howey-in-the-Hills, denied the photo was racist Tuesday, saying it had been “decontextualized” from its origins as a teenage prank between two friends at Eustis High School and had “zero” in common with the Ertel and Northam scandals.

“I’m 16 years old, one of my best friends of the time was black, and we thought at the time – looking back, it was immature – it would be funny to dress as each other,” Sabatini said. “He dressed in my clothes – a Ralph Lauren polo shirt, shorts, Converse – and I dressed in his clothing. … None of us thought 14 years later any of us would be a public figure and the photo would be decontextualized.”

The Democratic Party, he said, “wants to do whatever it takes to influence [elections], including going into high school yearbook pictures of you.”

His friend, Brandon Evans, agreed with Sabatini.

“Every year at high school homecoming week, we had things like ‘80s days and celebrity days,” Evans said Tuesday. “We said, ‘I’m going to be you and you’re going to be me.’ I don’t know how it got to be seen as racial. That’s all it was.”

Sabatini, Evans said, “even had on my own personal necklace and everything.”

As for the calls for Sabatini’s resignation, “Of course I disagree with that,” Evans said.

In a statement Wednesday, Oliva also rejected Rizzo’s demand that Sabatini resign, writing, “Appearing anywhere in blackface make-up is unacceptable and Rep. Sabatini has rightfully apologized.”

“The voters of his district were aware of this photograph and of the facts behind its creation,” Oliva said. “Once those facts were known, and both individuals in the photo spoke, it became abundantly clear that Rep. Sabatini bore no racial animus. All of us are not the people we were at 16. We grow, we learn, and we realize the world is much bigger than the walls of our high school. The people of Rep. Sabatini’s district have made their choice, with full knowledge of the photograph, and that choice will be respected.”

Prior to his election as state representative, Sabatini had previously created a stir as a Eustis commissioner in 2017 when he posted on Facebook, “To any cities or counties that would like to donate their Confederate monuments to the City of Eustis, we will gladly accept and proudly display our nation’s history.”

The city later posted on its website that Sabatini’s comments “do not represent the Commission as a whole.”

Brown, who said she’s not running again for the seat after her 56-44 percent loss to Sabatini last fall, said her call for Sabatini’s resignation was not about advancing her own political interests but “just about doing the right thing.”

Regardless of Sabatini’s age, she said, “he did it.”

“I understand the excuse she’s using,” Brown said. “But it’s hateful for so many people. .... It wasn’t the ‘80s, like the governor of Virginia’s defense. This was in the 2000s.”

slemongello@orlandosentinel.com, 407-418-5920, @stevelemongello, facebook/stevelemongello