Trump International Golf Club vandalized overnight with red paint
While most people were painting Easter eggs, vandals decided to splash red paint on the Trump International Golf Club sign on Summit Boulevard Saturday night.

Workers were still attending to the sign Sunday morning, which was mostly cleaned up but still appeared to have flecks of red paint on it.

The U.S. Secret Service is leading the investigation. Palm Beach County Sheriff’s Office spokesperson Teri Barbera, and a White House spokesperson both referred requests for information to the Secret Service. A Secret Service spokesman declined to comment.

The golf club’s sign is about 7 to 10 feet from the sidewalk on Summit Boulevard in suburban West Palm Beach and there is a security camera outside, which may have caught the incident on video.

According to ABC News, two sheriff’s office vans were at the scene Saturday at about 10 p.m.

Despite the property belonging to the president, a source said those who commit acts of vandalism like the one committed Sunday would be charged with criminal mischief at the local level. It would not be a federal crime.

Trump spent about seven hours at the club Saturday, which was his second time on the golf course since arriving Thursday for Easter weekend.

This isn’t the first time that a Trump property has been vandalized since the president took office, but it is the first known incident in Palm Beach County.

In January, land on or near Trump’s golf club in Bedminster, N.J., was vandalized to resemble a graveyard showing Trump’s name, according to MyCentralJersey.com.

The same New Jersey club was also vandalized in September 2017 where a man wrote messages on the greens there and three New York Trump golf clubs, according to Bloomberg News. The vandal etched anti-Trump messages into nine greens in total across Bedminster, Ferry Point, Hudson Valley and Westchester.

Clifford Tillotson, a 61-year-old from Hawaii, was charged with third-degree criminal mischief, according to NJ.com. One of Tillotson’s alleged messages was an adaptation of a soliloquy spoken by William Shakespeare’s politically ruthless character Macbeth from the well-known tragic play. Law enforcement said Tillotson used a chemical to imprint that and other messages into the golf courses, Bloomberg reported.

Other vandals got to the Trump National Golf Club in Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif. in March 2017 when they carved “No more tigers. No more woods,” onto a green using garden tools, according to the Washington Post. The group said they did it to show the president’s “blatant disregard” for the environment, The Post reported.

In a non-golf course incident, people have defaced Trump’s Hollywood Walk of Fame star twice, according to the New York Daily News. James Lambert Otis used a sledgehammer and pickax to destroy the star about a week before the 2016 election. Otis was sentenced to three years of probation and 20 days of road maintenance work. Six months later after the star was repaired, someone else used a marker to deface it again.

Trump cam: Live view of Mar-a-Lago

Exclusive photos: Melania in Palm Beach - from fashion model to first lady