Benjamin Ginsberg
Education Georgetown University Law Center, J.D., 1982

University of Pennsylvania, A.B., 1974

Bar Admissions District of Columbia





Benjamin L. Ginsberg

Partner



Political Law

Public Policy and Lobbying

Litigation and Dispute Resolution





2550 M Street, NW

Washington, DC 20037

T: 202-457-6405 F: 202-457-6315

Benjamin Ginsberg represents numerous political parties, political campaigns, candidates, members of Congress and state legislatures, Governors, corporations, trade associations, vendors, donors and individuals participating in the political process.



In both the 2004 and 2000 election cycles, Mr. Ginsberg served as national counsel to the Bush-Cheney presidential campaign; he played a central role in the 2000 Florida recount. In 2008, he served as national counsel to the Romney for President campaign. He also represents the campaigns and leadership PACs of numerous members of the Senate and House, as well as the national party committees. He serves as counsel to the Republican Governors Association and has wide experience on the state legislative level from directing Republican redistricting efforts nationwide following the 1990 Census and being actively engaged in the 2001-2002 round of redistricting.



In addition to advising on election law issues, particularly those involving federal and state campaign finance laws, ethics rules, redistricting, communications law, and election recounts and contests, Mr. Ginsberg represents clients before Congress and state legislatures.



Before entering law school, he spent five years as a newspaper reporter at the Boston Globe, Philadelphia Evening Bulletin, The Berkshire (Mass.) Eagle, and The Riverside (Calif.) Press-Enterprise. He has been a Fellow at Harvard University’s Institute of Politics and an adjunct professor of law at the Georgetown University Law Center.



Representative Matters:

Mr. Ginsberg represents a variety of clients on Capitol Hill on a wide range of issues including appropriations, trade, broadcasting and health care.









APPEARANCES PUBLICATIONS AREAS OF PRACTICE