Kavanaugh accuser worked for pharma company that sold ‘abortion pill’ for alternative uses
Image Source: Screenshot

Prior to the late-breaking decades-old allegations of sexual misconduct that emerged against Supreme Court nominee Judge Brett Kavanaugh, the biggest issue Democrats had with the nominee were fears that he would one day vote to overturn the Roe v. Wade decision and outlaw abortion at the federal level.

With that in mind, we have to consider the possibility that ensuring the continued legal status of abortion in America is a motivating factor behind the effort to delay and derail Kavanaugh’s nomination. And Kavanaugh’s accuser appears to have worked in the past for a pharmaceutical company that produces a drug that is also used as the so-called “abortion pill.”

A report revealed that liberal California professor Christine Blasey Ford, while part of the faculty at Stanford University, did work with a pharmaceutical company known as Corcept Therapeutics between 2006 and 2011.

Mifepristone

Corcept Therapeutics was founded in 1998 by Stanford University professor Alan Schatzberg to help determine whether a drug known as mifepristone could be used to treat major depression.

He reportedly left the company in 2007 when Corcept shifted direction, but he continued to study to various uses of mifepristone.

It is unclear if Schatzberg’s theory on using mifepristone to treat major depression ever panned out, but it is known that Corcept markets one product that contains that particular drug, Korlym, which is used to treat hyperglycemia in the exceedingly rare medical condition known as Cushing’s syndrome.

But mifepristone is also contained in a drug called Mifeprex, also known as RU-486, an abortion-inducing pill, and though Korlym has only been approved by the FDA for use to treat the combination of Cushing’s syndrome and diabetes, it is nevertheless available online as an “emergency contraceptive” or “abortion pill.”

Other uses for the drug

As for Ford’s work with Corcept, she is listed in the co-author credits of at least eight studies into the use of mifepristone for other purposes.

Those studies included treatment of amnesia after electroshock therapy, treatment of psychotic depression, and prevention of weight gain in both lab rats and adult males.

It is unclear if Ford was involved in any additional studies of the uses of this particular drug, such as in the abortion-inducing pill.

It should be noted that it has been made quite clear what the official use of mifepristone is, and the company explicitly warns people not to use the drug if they are pregnant. Furthermore, it is unclear if Ford herself was ever directly involved in anything related to the use of the drug as an abortion pill.

But the close ties are rather suspicious, given the heightened state of opposition among abortion supporters against Kavanaugh. Ford’s apparent ties to a company that produces an abortion pill should be a part of the national conversation.