McDonald's Restaurants Ltd. Wages, Hourly Wage Rate
Years of Experience

For those who claim five to nine years of work experience, pay on average amounts to approximately $10.15 per hour. The greater proportion of employees (56 percent) report one to four years of experience and bring home median pay of $8.90 per hour.

Locations

When it comes to location, the highest average paycheck ($11.00 per hour) can be spotted in Mcallen, Texas; Frankfort, Ky. ($10.38), Tallahassee, Fla. (about $9.96), and Chicago, Ill. (around $9.25) are the next top-paying cities. High paychecks are not found in Philadelphia, Pa.; in fact, at $7.52 it is one of the worst-paid cities. By state, the highest pay levels are found in California, where the average McDonald's Restaurants Ltd. employee makes approximately $10.46 per hour.

Jobs

The highest paychecks go to Assistant Fast Food Managers, who earn an average about $10.78 per hour, closely trailed by Restaurant Managers ($9.99), Crew Leaders (around $8.68), and Grill Cooks ($8.36). Cashiers at McDonald's Restaurants Ltd. do not see much in the way of financial compensation and represent one of the lower-paid positions (approximately $8.16 on average) at the company.

Certifications and Degrees

Being an Environmental Protection Agency Universal Certification certainly has its perks — salaries approach around $19.00 per hour and far exceed the paychecks of those without certification. At McDonald's Restaurants Ltd., employees who hold an Associate of Applied Science (AAS) receive the highest pay at $13.00.

Skills

In this role, the best-paying skill appears to be People Management; individuals who claim it among their capabilities enjoy a higher median salary of $10.46 per hour. It's pretty common to find people here who know Customer Service; a majority consider it a key competency. Other skills in demand are Food Preparation, Cash Handling, and Cleaning.

Benefits and Perks

Around one in five workers contribute to 401(k) savings accounts sponsored by the firm. Health insurance comes as part of the deal for more than a third of workers, and nearly one in four workers report receiving dental coverage as well. Some other advantages of working at McDonald's Restaurants Ltd. are free drinks, flexible hours, a casual working environment, tuition reimbursement, and a subsidized cell phone.