Restaurant Assistant Manager Salary
Total Pay combines base annual salary or hourly wage, bonuses, profit sharing, tips, commissions, overtime pay and other forms of cash earnings, as applicable for this job. It does not include equity (stock) compensation, cash value of retirement benefits, or the value of other non-cash benefits (e.g. healthcare).

Total Pay combines base annual salary or hourly wage, bonuses, profit sharing, tips, commissions, overtime pay and other forms of cash earnings, as applicable for this job. It does not include equity (stock) compensation, cash value of retirement benefits, or the value of other non-cash benefits (e.g. healthcare).

Job Description for Restaurant Assistant Manager

A restaurant assistant manager works under the supervision of a manager in a fast food, casual dining, fine dining or other type of restaurant. The assistant manager oversees the work of restaurant employees such as cooks, servers, dishwashers and greeters. They also help handle human resources-related duties such as administering payroll, hiring and firing, and issuing employee appraisals. They also train newly hired employees and existing employees when new training is required. The manager is often in charge of monitoring inventory to make sure that all items are accounted for and that stock levels are maintained. The manager may have duties within the kitchen, and they may need the ability to develop a menu and the recipes for it.

Usually, a minimum of a high school diploma or equivalent is required for restaurant assistant manager positions; however, some jobs require a postsecondary degree in hospitality or another relevant field. Since this is a leadership position, the assistant manager generally must have substantial experience in a restaurant setting. In some positions, the assistant manager is also expected to have experience as a chef or a cook. Restaurant assistant managers must have strong customer service skills, as they must perform duties such as greeting customers and resolving any complaints. Problem solving and marketing skills are also needed to help increase sales and the effectiveness of production. (Copyright 2019 PayScale.com)

Restaurant Assistant Manager Tasks