Marc E. Elias
Marc Elias is the chair of Perkins Coie’s Political Law Group, where he is a preeminent counselor in the areas of federal and state campaign finance law, ethics, lobbying and gift rules, as well as recounts and election contests. He is also a nationally recognized authority and spearheads litigation efforts in the areas of voting rights and redistricting.

Marc’s clients include dozens of U.S. senators, governors, representatives and their campaigns. Marc served as general counsel to Hillary for America, Hillary Rodham Clinton’s presidential campaign in 2016. He served in the same role for John Kerry’s presidential campaign in 2004. His political committee clients include the Democratic National Committee, Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, Democratic Governors Associations, National Democratic Redistricting Committee, Priorities USA, Senate Majority PAC, House Majority PAC and EMILY’s List.

As a litigator, Marc has handled dozens of cases involving politics, campaign finance and voting rights. He has successfully argued four cases challenging unlawful Republican gerrymandering in the U.S. Supreme Court: Virginia House of Delegates v. Bethune-Hill, Wittman v. Personhuballah, Bethune-Hill v. Virginia State Bd. of Elections and Cooper v. Harris.

In 2019, Marc successfully represented Democratic candidate Dan McCready during an election fraud hearing that resulted in North Carolina ordering a new congressional election in NC-9—the first and only time a state has set aside a federal election as a result of fraudulent activity. In 2016, Marc successfully represented Governor Roy Cooper in the North Carolina post-election and recount process. He served in the same role for Attorney General Mark Herring in the Virginia Attorney General’s successful recount in 2013. Marc also served as lead counsel for Senator Al Franken in the 2008 Minnesota Senate election recount and contest.

Marc has represented numerous clients in public corruption and campaign finance matters before the U.S. Department of Justice, as well as before committees of both the House and Senate, and federal agencies.

Political Law Leadership

Named by Politico Magazine as one of the “50 Politicos to Watch,” Marc is frequently quoted on political law matters by the national media, and he has spoken and written extensively about both politics and political law.

He currently serves as the chair of two organizations: Democracy Forward and We the Action. He serves on the board of directors of Priorities USA and on the advisory board of Let America Vote and Access Democracy. Marc is the former co-chair of the bipartisan Committee to Modernize Voter Registration. Marc served on the American Bar Association's Standing Committee on Election Law and as an adviser to two American Law Institute projects: Principles of Government Ethics and Principles of Election Law: Resolution of Election Disputes.

Marc has taught both law and political science, including “Post Election Litigation and Advanced Election Law” at William & Mary Law School and “Modern Campaigns and Elections” at Hamilton College.