Leitch, Umholtz disappointed by death penalty vote
The legislation to abolish the death penalty approved by the Illinois House on Thursday won't make much of a difference even if it passes the Senate and is signed by the governor, according to Tazewell County State's Attorney Stewart Umholtz.

The legislation to abolish the death penalty approved by the Illinois House on Thursday won't make much of a difference even if it passes the Senate and is signed by the governor, according to Tazewell County State's Attorney Stewart Umholtz.

Capital punishment was all but abolished in 2000 when then-Gov. George Ryan announced a moratorium on executions after more than a dozen death row inmates were exonerated.

"We only had a pretend death penalty," Umholtz said. "It just won't be on the books anymore. The only change is that there is not the prospect of it being followed in the future."

But the manner in which the repeal was passed made Umholtz's stomach churn. The repeal measure came up one vote short during a 59-58 tally earlier Thursday. But a second vote succeeded, 60-54.

"Anyone that's watched the Legislature today should be sickened," he said. "I'm sure deals were made in order to flip those votes."

Rep. Patrick Verschoore, D-Milan, switched his vote to put the measure over the top the second time. Verschoore said he's vacillated on the issue since discussion about repeal began and decided to change his position because the bill's sponsor, Rep. Karen Yarbrough, D-Maywood, has helped him on legislation in the past.

A disappointed state Rep. David Leitch, R-Peoria, said that's business as usual.

"When the Democrats have the power of the chair, they can keep bills alive and get these things passed," he said.

Leitch went on to call the bill "a big mistake" because even though executions weren't being carried out, the threat helped deter crime.

"I think the threat of the death penalty is an important tool available to law enforcement to solve crimes and get suspects to talk," he said. "There are some crimes that are just so horrific that there will be circumstances where the public wishes it was still in place."

In spite of being sickened, Umholtz is trying to look at the brighter side.

"If it passes, at least the legislation will be deciding the law and not just follow the process of the governor," he said.

Since capital punishment was reinstated more than 30 years ago, Illinois has put 12 people to death but 20 have been declared wrongly condemned and released from death row.

Here is how area representatives voted:

Jehan Gordon, D-Peoria, and David Leitch, R-Peoria, voted no.

Other central Illinois legislators voting no included Keith Sommer, R-Morton; Bill Mitchell, R-Forsyth; Don Moffitt, R-Gilson; Norine Hammond, R-Macomb; Dan Brady, R-Bloomington; and Frank Mautino, D-Spring Valley.

Area lawmakers voting yes included Mike Smith, D-Canton.

Tyler Maritote can be reached at 686-3251 or tmaritote@pjstar.com. The Associated Press contributed.