Obama campaign launches mobile app

Obama for America? There's an app for that.

President Obama's Chicago-based reelection campaign launched a new app for iPhone Tuesday designed to give volunteers and voters a customized set of organizing tools and voter information, according to a preview shared with POLITICO. Campaign officials say an Android version is in the works and will be released soon.

“The campaign’s strength has always come from the millions of grassroots supporters who are organizing in their communities and talking to their neighbors about President Obama every day,” said deputy campaign manager Stephanie Cutter. “That’s why we designed our new app to help break down the distinction between online and offline organizing, giving every supporter the same opportunities to get involved that they would find in a field office.”

The new app will allow voters to find local events, report potential voter fraud, find nearby houses to canvass and donate directly to the campaign. More significantly, with the Obama campaign deeply concerned about a raft of new voter ID laws in a handful of states, the app gives voters detailed, targeted information on registration deadlines and new voting requirements.

It's the next phase in online organizing technology. Howard Dean's 2004 campaign showcased the power of the Internet for grassroots mobilization, while the 2008 campaign saw Obama and others successfully use the Internet for fundraising. Insurgent congressional Republicans in 2010 tapped into social media as a useful tool for bypassing traditional media and engaging directly with supporters. Now mobile technology is the next major campaign frontier — and one that few campaigns have yet to successfully master for messaging, organizing or fundraising purposes.

Mitt Romney's campaign was widely mocked when they rolled out their own app that misspelled "America." More significantly, that app was built around taking photos and adding a pro-Romney caption, not organizing or canvassing.

The Obama campaign has invested heavily in their data operation and online presence — recruiting top data scientists and building a huge online organizing and microtargeting operation. Indeed, the app's core strength is built on its ability to microtarget — specifically by geography. That targeting gives the campaign the ability to custom tailor messages by region, state, city, or even by block.

"Ohio residents, for example, will be able to see that the typical family from their state received $3,406 in tax cuts under President Obama," a campaign official said.

The new Obama app also syncs seamlessly with Facebook, Twitter, email and text messages so content can be shared — with the campaign hoping for viral status. It also integrates with the campaign's web-based "Dashboard" system — their own social network and online organizing tool.

Noticeably left out of this version is a call tool — a custom phone bank system that would allow volunteers to make calls for the campaign while on the go. Campaign officials worried that the phone bank script would be too tedious to use on a mobile device. The campaign's web-based Dashboard system, however, does have such a tool, allowing users to phone bank for the campaign from their couch.

A campaign official said that the app's privacy policy was in line with Apple's iTunes store, and is the same policy as the campaign's online network.

With Donovan Slack.