UIHLEIN gives IVES another $2M — NEO-NAZI on GOP primary ballot for CONGRESS — 'RACIST' ad firestorm

By Natasha Korecki (nkorecki@politico.com; @natashakorecki) and Kristen East (keast@politico.com; @kristenicoleast)

Good Monday morning, Illinois.

Story Continued Below

Whew, what a Super Bowl! Here’s video of Philly fans pouring into the streets after the Eagles’ first championship in 52 years. And there’s this elated Philly cop . And students playing brass instruments from the 5th floor to chants from the crowd: Watch Then there were the ads.

Now ... to our crazy state of politics.

THE BUZZ — We start this week with a Sun-Times story about a Holocaust denier on the cusp of claiming the GOP nomination in the 3rd congressional district. And that’s after three straight days of news over Republican primary candidate Jeanne Ives’ new ad, decried as racist and transphobic. Pretty much the least predictable headlines to come out of the blue state of Illinois.

But first, news on the money front: Conservative donor Dick Uihlein on Sunday donated another $2 million to Ives’ campaign. He previously donated $500,000. We figured more money was coming after seeing a $1 million February ad buy on Friday, and on Sunday, Ives aired a commercial $pot (a biographical ad) during the Super Bowl.

This is a huge deal for Ives, a little known state rep who has shown she can fire up the base against a deeply unpopular incumbent governor. She was without the resources to boost her name ID. Uihlein was once a Rauner donor who grew controversial last year as the top donor to Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore.

Ives’ campaign said of Uihlein’s money: “Mr. Uihlein’s commitment to a conservative reform policy revolution is humbling as is the commitment of of every donor and volunteer to our campaign," Ives said in a statement. “People doing what they can with what they have is how we win this race for the people who play by the rules and do their part to make Illinois a great place to live, work and raise a family. A state government aligned with their interests is long overdue in Illinois.”

IS A NETFLIX SERIES NEXT? Rauner’s campaign isn’t showing signs of attempting to quell an Ives insurgency over a TV campaign though it most certainly has the resources to do so. Instead, the Rauner campaign today is releasing its third ad on FBI wiretaps of J.B. Pritzker talking to then-Gov. Rod Blagojevich. The ad has Blagojevich relaying that Pritzker had said he wanted the Senate seat, which conflicts with a different ad Rauner’s running. In that ad, Pritzker says he wants to be treasurer, not U.S. senator. Previous reports indicate that Pritzker stated the appointment should go to an African American candidate.

IVES AD FIRESTORM — “A new ad that’s been denounced as anti-immigrant, “racist,” “sexist” and “transphobic,” is causing an uproar in Illinois, with leaders from both parties calling for its removal. But Republican state Rep. Jeanne Ives, whose campaign produced the ad in her primary election challenge to Gov. Bruce Rauner, is refusing to pull the spot, saying it exposes Rauner’s “betrayal” of GOP voters. The new ad mockingly thanks the governor for clearing a path in support of a series of social issues. Then it taps just about every conservative bogeyman in Illinois politics, and every lightning-rod cultural issue. “Thank you, for signing legislation that lets me use the girl’s bathroom,” says a deep-voiced actor. “Thank you, for making all Illinois families pay for my abortions,” says a woman wearing a pink hat symbolic of women’s marches.” Our story here Watch the ad

As New York Magazine observed: “The state GOP denounced [Ives’] ad, saying ‘There is no place in the Illinois Republican Party for rhetoric that attacks our fellow Illinoisans based on their race, gender or humanity.’ Unfortunately f or Illinois Republicans, a passionate anti-Semite was able to find a place on their ballot.”

AD NOT PULLED — According to our ad tracker, the controversial Ives spot aired in various state markets over the weekend. The most updated numbers we have show less than $5,000 spent with the spot appearing once in the Chicago market, four times in Peoria-Bloomington; twice in Rockford and once in the Paducah Cape Girardeau-Harrisburg-Mt Vernon market. Ives’ campaign purchased more than $1 million in TV ads for the month of February but that includes her intro spot, a biographical commercial which made a high-profile appearance during the Super Bowl on Sunday.

The person who wasn’t showing his outrage? Bruce Rauner. On Friday when reporters asked about the ad, Rauner’s campaign released a statement talking about … Mike Madigan! Even if the ad proved so controversial that some Ives supporters accused Capitol Fax’s Rich Miller of making it up when he first reported on the ad on Friday.

On Sunday, POLITICO received a statement from the Rauner camp … attributable to a spokesman.

“This TV ad has no place in Illinois,” Rauner’s campaign spokesman Will Allison said. “It just shows how unelectable Representative Ives really is.”

Ives also had this issue with which to contend — Jeanne Ives on Twitter : “We had a staffer re-tweet this message without realizing who this individual was. It has been removed. We repudiate him. Disavow any endorsement and are returning any contribution.”

Just in time for all the buzz, good and bad, Ives will appear before the City Club of Chicago today. Here's the livestream link

Ok, now let’s unpack the Nazi candidate story. Arthur Jones has run unsuccessfully for office since the 1970s, according to the Sun-Times report. This year, he may well win the primary. As the piece below explains, Republicans overlooked, or didn’t bother to recruit, in a district held by Democrat Bill Lipinski for 22 years and then his son Dan for another 13. The district is so solidly Democratic, Jones has virtually no chance of winning in the general election. The fact that he’s even on the ballot representing Republicans, however, is a black eye for the party.

— “Holocaust denier poised to claim GOP nomination in Illinois race for Congress,” by Chicago Sun-Times’ Lynn Sweet and Frank Main: “Arthur Jones — an outspoken Holocaust denier, activist anti-Semite and white supremacist — is poised to become the Republican nominee for an Illinois congressional seat representing parts of Chicago and nearby suburbs. ‘Well first of all, I’m running for Congress not the chancellor of Germany. All right. To me the Holocaust is what I said it is: It’s an international extortion racket,’ Jones told the Chicago Sun-Times. … Since the 1990s to 2016, Jones has jumped in the GOP 3rd Congressional District primary seven times, never even close to becoming a viable contender.” Story here

Welcome to the POLITICO Illinois Playbook! Please send tips, events, announcements to nkorecki@politico.com or @natashakorecki SUBSCRIBE to Illinois Playbook For more Illinois news visit: http://www.politico.com/news/illinois

CHICAGO

Don’t overlook this Sun-Times investigation into the medical examiner’s office. It’s a doozy.

— “Despite law, medical examiner investigators go to fewer than 1 in 5 death scenes," by Sun-Times' Tim Novak and Robert Herguth: “The Cook County medical examiner’s office routinely fails to send investigators to the scene of suspicious deaths, a Chicago Sun-Times investigation has found, despite being required by law to do so. Over the past three years, the medical examiner’s investigators have gone out on fewer than one in five cases. Investigators from the county agency didn’t go out, for instance, in the high-profile and contentious cases of Laquan McDonald, Quintonio LeGrier and Bettie Jones — each of them shot to death by Chicago police officers under circumstances that resulted in multimillion-dollar settlements from City Hall. The shooting of McDonald also resulted in Officer Jason Van Dyke being charged with murder. Investigators were sent to the scenes of 2,869 deaths in Chicago and suburban Cook County, according to a Sun-Times analysis of the more than 15,000 cases the medical examiner handled between August 2014 and October 2017. No one went out in the cases of 12,303 other deaths — including most homicides and accidents in the city and suburbs. During that three-year span, the office has gotten at least one new death investigation every day, records show, sometimes as many as 31.” Story here

— “There’s not much for Chicago in Trump’s infrastructure plan,” by Crain’s Chicago Business’ Greg HInz: “Though President Donald Trump cleared the low bar in his State of the Union speech—he actually smiled—he was particularly disappointing on one point. That was his big infrastructure promise, which as of now seems to be less a plan than a device to sweet-talk cities and states into taxing themselves while he claims the credit. Fast-growing areas of the country that have cash to pay for brand new roads, bridges, etc., may profit from that. Like it or not, Chicago and Illinois need to somehow catch up and get with the self-help program if they're going to get much from Trump. Are you listening, Springfield?” Story here

— “Chicago police to meet with federal, state officials to combat rise in carjackings,” by Chicago Tribune’s Elvia Malagon and Jeremy Gorner: “Officials from multiple law enforcement agencies plan to meet Monday at Chicago Police Department headquarters to hammer out details of a new task force aimed at curbing the surge of carjackings in the Chicagoland area over the past year, officials said Sunday. The task force was formally announced Sunday at the Police Department’s Shakespeare District during a news conference where Mayor Rahm Emanuel and CPD Superintendent Eddie Johnson touted the deployment of 83 new officers across the city.” Story here

— “Cook County judge facing fraud trial; could be knocked off bench,” by Chicago Sun-Times’ Jon Seidel: “There’s nothing unusual about a politician facing trial in Chicago. But in what could be a rare sight, a sitting Cook County judge is expected to fill the defendant’s chair Monday at the Dirksen Federal Courthouse. Jessica Arong O’Brien is charged in connection with an alleged $1.4 million scheme that has nothing to do with her work on the bench. The feds have said they’re unlikely to even tell the jury what O’Brien does for a living, unless she testifies. Opening statements in her trial could begin as early as Tuesday in U.S. District Judge Thomas Durkin’s courtroom, following jury selection.” Story here

— “Does Vallas have a path to victory against Emanuel?” by Chicago Sun-Times’ Fran Spielman: “Vallas’ first hurdle — now that he has established residency by buying a home in Lincoln Park — is to gather the 12,500 signatures needed to get on the ballot with enough cushion to survive an expected petition challenge. He also must raise at least $5 million to get his message out — and introduce himself to a generation of voters unfamiliar with his widely acclaimed tenure as schools CEO.” Story here

GOVERNOR’s RACE

— “In this Rauner v. Pritzker money race, the winner is Equality Illinois,” by Shia Kapos: “The applause was tepid at best when Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner and his wife, Diana, took the stage at Saturday’s Equality Illinois gala. I even heard a few boos. (That can happen after a two-hour cocktail party.) The Rauners, though, were among top-tier, platinum-level donors to the event–giving $75,000 to the organization that supports LGBT rights. Businessman Michael Sacks’ GCM Grosvenor also gave $75,000. Might Rauner have been trying to one-up his potential Democratic rival, J.B. Pritzker, who donated at least $25,000 to the gala? Who knows. His speech didn’t offer a whiff of politics.” Story here

— Photo Gallery: “Gov. Rauner, Mayor Emanuel open Equality Illinois gala,” by Windy City Times’ Matt Simonette: Story here

— “Biss’ populist play: Tax LaSalle St. and rethink Amazon HQ2,” by Crain’s Chicago Business’ Greg Hinz: “Illinois needs a graduated income tax. It needs a ‘LaSalle Street tax’ on financial trading. And it ought to think about dropping out of the expensive race to lure Amazon's HQ2. That was part of the news from Democratic gubernatorial hopeful Daniel Biss today in an appearance before Crain's editorial board in which he doubled down on his core populist message, arguing that what ails the state and its economy isn't too much spending or excessive regulation but a taxation system ‘written for an economy we don't have any more.’” Story here

— “Guest view: Minnesota thrives, Rauner fails on jobs,” by Jeff Van Wychen in the State Journal-Register: “The numbers tell a harsh story: since Gov. Bruce Rauner came to office in January 2015, Illinois has been one of only four states nationwide and the only Midwestern state to have lost population. Job growth sags at a paltry 0.7 percent — less than one‑fifth the national average — while the state’s unemployment rate surpasses the national average. Illinois’s median household income growth over the last two years ($2,700) trails the national average by $500. GDP growth limps along at about half the national average. Most strikingly, total wages in Illinois have declined since the beginning of 2015.” Story here

3RD CD

Marie Newman, who snagged some major endorsements last week in her primary race against Rep. Dan Lipinski, had a boost in fundraising over the weekend with the help of feminist icon Gloria Steinem. An event hosted by Cook County Commissioner Bridget Gainer, Jessica Scheller, Gerry Gainer and Maureen Gainer Reilly sold tickets for $100 a piece. The Sunday gathering followed a Friday fundraiser for Newman hosted by New York U.S. Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand.

6TH CD

Coalition for a Better Illinois 6th had 50 volunteers writing postcards to get out the vote in the March 20 primary. This is Rep. Peter Roskam’s district, one where Dems think they have a shot in November. Pic

STATE

— “AG candidate says Speaker Madigan once thought he was ‘wearing a wire,’” by Chicago Tribune’s Rick Pearson: “A Democratic state lawmaker from Lake County said Sunday that he believes House Speaker Michael Madigan once thought he was ‘wearing a wire’ during a meeting between the two. A Madigan spokesman said he didn’t have any information to verify that state Rep. Scott Drury’s story was ‘accurate.’ Drury has long been at odds with Madigan, who also is the state Democratic Party chairman. The former federal prosecutor was the only Democrat who did not vote for Madigan for speaker in the current General Assembly.” Story here

— “Land of Lincoln governor goofs Honest Abe quote,” by WBEZ’s Dave McKinney: “As Illinois Gov. Bruce Rauner built toward the crescendo of his State of the State address on Wednesday, he implored lawmakers to cut taxes and spending to ensure a more “prosperous future.” To drive home his point, he ripped out a page from Speechwriting 101 for Illinois politicians. He quoted Honest Abe. ‘Abraham Lincoln once said: ‘The best way to predict the future is to create it,’’ said the Republican governor. But there’s a problem. Lincoln never said that, according to three top Lincoln scholars.” Story here

— “Editorial: Protect Lake Michigan as Foxconn builds in Wisconsin,” by Chicago Sun-Times Editorial Board: “Maybe it’s time to run up one of those marine warning flags on behalf of Lake Michigan. An effort to speed construction of a Foxconn complex in Wisconsin is opening a dangerous crack in an important eight-state law designed to protect Lake Michigan and the other Great Lakes. Officials in the other states, beginning with Illinois, should do all they can to ensure the Foxconn project doesn’t weaken the 2008 law, which is called the Great Lakes Compact. Without a strong law, more hazardous pollutants could find their way into the lakes, more water could be diverted out of the lakes, and the lakes’ future could be imperiled.” Story here

NATION

— “As FBI took a year to pursue the Nassar case, dozens say they were molested,” by The New York Times’ Dan Barry, Serge F. Kovaleski and Juliet Macur: Story here

— “Inside the FBI: Anger, worry, work — and fears of last damage,” by The Washington Post’s Devlin Barrett and Matt Zapotosky: Story here

— “Former CIA Director Brennan says Nunes ‘abused his office,’” by CNN’s Aileen Graef: Story here

Department of Corrections: An item in the Friday, Feb. 2 newsletter misidentified Marc Levine; he is chairman of the Illinois State Board of Investment. He authored an Op-Ed in the Wall-Street Journal about why Illinois got out of hedge fund investments. Read here

Where’s Rahm? No schedule available.

Where’s Rauner? No public events.

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/2lQswbh ...New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ...Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX

Want to make an impact? POLITICO Illinois has a variety of solutions available for partners looking to reach and activate the most influential people in the Land of Lincoln. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Seeking to increase brand awareness amongst this key audience? Share your message with our influential readers to foster engagement and drive action. Contact Jesse Shapiro to find out how: [jshapiro@politico.com] jshapiro@politico.com.



Follow us on Twitter Shia Kapos @shiakapos

Follow Us