FBI says it interviewed shooting suspect about terror ties
FBI assistant special agent in charge Ron Hopper answers questions from members of the media. | AP Photo/Phelan M. Ebenhack FBI says it interviewed shooting suspect about terror ties Investigation continues into assault that killed 49.

In the worst mass-shooting in U.S. history, a suspected terrorist who had been investigated twice by the FBI in recent years stormed a popular gay nightclub in Orlando, shot and killed at least 49 people and injured as many as 53 others before he was gunned down early Sunday in an intense firefight with police, authorities said.

Authorities identified the shooter as Omar Mateen, a 29-year-old son of Afghan immigrants who was born in New York.

Story Continued Below

FBI special-agent-in-charge Ron Hopper told reporters that Mateen had been interviewed twice in 2013 after he made comments to co-workers about potential ties to terror groups, and another time in 2014.

Mateen was interviewed in 2014 because he had links to a man named Moner Mohammad Abu-Salha, an American suicide bomber who earlier that year drove a truck full of explosives into a government building in Syria. Abu-Salha was from Indian River County, which borders St. Lucie County where Mateen lived. Hopper said Mateen had contact with Abu-Salha, but no “substantive relationship” was found.

Just before his bloody rampage on Sunday Mateen called 911 to proclaim “allegiance to the leader of the Islamic State,” Hopper said.

Last week, Mateen legally purchased the pistol and AR-15-style semiautomatic rifle that he used on Sunday morning, according to an Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms agent, Trevor Velinor. Mateen, a concealed-weapons permit holder in Florida, worked in the security industry. He first registered to vote in 2006 in Florida, but skipped the elections that year. A registered Democrat, he voted in the March 15 presidential primary.

Mateen’s father, Mir Seddique, told NBC News on Sunday that “this has nothing to do with religion” and that his son was anti-gay.

“We were in Downtown Miami, Bayside, people were playing music. And he saw two men kissing each other in front of his wife and kid and he got very angry,” Seddique told the network. “They were kissing each other and touching each other and he said, 'Look at that. In front of my son they are doing that.' And then we were in the men's bathroom and men were kissing each other.”

Seddique's son changed his name in 2006 from Omar Mir Seddique to Omar Mir Seddique Mateen, NBC first reported. The reasons for the name change were unclear. Seddiqe said the family is "in shock like the whole country."

But Seddique’s religious beliefs started to become scrutinized later Sunday as the Washington Post reported that he once hosted the “Durand Jirga” TV show, broadcast from California and available on YouTube, in which he discusses Afghan politics in the Dari language. In one episode, the paper reported, Seddique appeared to praise the Taliban while denouncing Pakistan.

“Our brothers in Waziristan, our warrior brothers in [the] Taliban movement and national Afghan Taliban are rising up … Inshallah the Durand Line issue will be solved soon,” Seddique said, refering the Durand Line that was drawn in 1893 and ultimately divided up ethnic Pashtuns between India and Pakistan, once the nation was established in 1947.

The shooting at Pulse Orlando occurred at the height of Pride Month and just after Gay Days in Disney World. Mateen drove about 120 miles to get there from his Fort Pierce apartment. He was shot and killed after SWAT teams stormed the nightclub to rescue hostages at 5 a.m. Sunday morning. Gunfire initially erupted in the club at about 2 a.m., officials said.

Orlando Police Chief John Mina said the suspect also might have been armed with a “some type of device on him.”

A spokeswoman for Mateen's employer, G4S, said he had worked for the security company since Sept. 10, 2007, and had been working at a gated retirement community. "Mateen underwent company screening and background checks when he was recruited in 2007 and the check revealed nothing of concern," the spokeswoman, Monica Lewman-Garcia, said in a written statement. "His screening was repeated in 2013 with no findings." The company is cooperating with the investigation, the spokeswoman said.

A former co-worker of Mateen’s, Daniel Gilroy, told Florida Today that he “wasn’t surprised” by Mateen’s actions. From 2014 to 2015, Gilroy told the paper, he worked security at the south gate at the PGA Village development where Mateen worked a later shift and frequently made violent, homophobic and racist comments.

"I quit because everything he said was toxic," Gilroy told the publication, "and the company wouldn't do anything. This guy was unhinged and unstable. He talked of killing people."

Hours after the tragedy, Gov. Rick Scott promptly declared a state of emergency as local, state and national officials continued their investigation and began to update the grim body count. The death total surpasses the 32 who died in the 2007 shooting on the Virginia Tech campus, and the 28 who died in the 2012 Sandy Hook elementary school shooting.

“My prayers are with the victims’ families & all those affected by the shooting in Orlando,” Scott tweeted. “We will devote every resource available to assist.”

In the aftermath of the attack a partisan divide emerged among Florida's congressional and legislative delegations. Democrats urged the need to pass gun control measures — specifically, limiting high-volume magazines — and Republicans spoke more about the potential threat of radical Islam.

U.S. Sen. Bill Nelson said, “I have checked with intelligence staff and they do believe there is some connection to ISIS. But I must say that is not official.” His Republican counterpart in the Senate, Marco Rubio, sits on the Select Committee on Intelligence and suggested in a CNN interview that Mateen might have at least been inspired by radical Islam.

One Republican official in another state, Texas Lt. Gov Dan Patrick, ignited a related controversy on Sunday morning by tweeting a photo with a quote from Galatians 6:7 that read, "Do not be deceived: God cannot be mocked. A man reaps what he sows." The blowback on Twitter was fierce, and Patrick deleted the tweet.

"This is reprehensible," said former Florida Democratic Party chairman Bob Poe, who is running for the newly drawn 10th congressional district where the shooting happened. Poe, who is gay, made news Friday by announcing he is a longtime HIV survivor.

"Hate speech is hate speech," Poe said, drawing a parallel between Patrick's statement and those who would be inspired to violence or bias against gay people. "Any fanaticism is dangerous."

One of Poe’s Democratic rivals for the seat, state Sen. Geraldine Thompson, already represents Orlando and said at a news conference that lawmakers need to consider more gun-safety measures. A third candidate for the district is former Orlando Police Chief Val Demings. Her husband, Orange County Sheriff Jeffrey Demings, said his agency views the attack as “a domestic terror incident.”

"This was an act of terror and hate," President Barack Obama said later Sunday, offering sympathy for the victims and support for the investigation.

At The Center in Orlando, which provides HIV testing and is a hub for the LGBT community, officials opened the doors Sunday morning and put out a call for grief counselors and therapists to donate services, Rob Domenico, a board director of The Center, told POLITICO Florida.

"What makes our LGBTQ community unique is we have a pretty unified community," Domenico said. "We're in Pride month. We just had Gay Days at Disney and we're united with an accepting straight community. But unfortunately, some people are threatened by that."

Earlier Sunday, Domenico expressed displeasure with the "ridiculous" ban on sexually active gay men from donating blood. Still, Central Floridians streamed to local blood banks and lines of donors formed around the block at one facility.

As the community mourned and officials gathered more information, Rubio cautioned that this type of attack could be the work of a solo gunman who may or may not have coordinated with an organized terror group.

“Basically the use of a handgun to storm a night club and start shooting people — it doesn’t take a tremendous amount of coordination,” he said. “You don’t need a phone call from Afghanistan or an email from Syria to tell you to go do this.”

Rubio also noted that radical Islamists have a history of brutal violence against gays.

“We’ve seen it’s punishable by death. We’ve seen some horrifying pronouncements and things that they’ve done,” he said. “So if this crime … is one inspired by radical Islamic ideology, it is quite frankly not surprising that they would target this community in this horrifying way.”

Florida Democrat Rep. Alcee Hastings of Miramar said that he has no confidence Congress will take any action on gun control.

"One thing I can guarantee you is that Congress will do nothing, not a damn thing, after this horrible shooting. If Congress couldn't do anything after Sandy Hook, when all those innocent children, were killed, this unfortunately will not change minds in Congress."

Other politicians issued comments on social media, as news of the mass shooting dominated the news on a morning generally reserved for talk shows.

“Words cannot express the horror, pain and sadness that we feel about this terrible loss,” Democrat Alan Grayson, an Orlando congressman also running for U.S. Senate, said in a statement. “I commend the Orlando police for their heroic efforts to save the lives of those who could be saved.”

Democratic Rep. Patrick Murphy, Grayson's top primary opponent, said on Facebook that Orlando is "stronger than this senseless, despicable act of hatred and violence.

Republican state Rep. Neil Combee received some criticism on Twitter after he was early to suggest that the attack was a “Radical Islamic terrorist attack.” Combee pointed out that ISIS and its supporters have called on Muslims to escalate attacks in the United States; one report earlier this month indicated Floridians may have been targeted — especially those who live on the Treasure Coast where Mateen lived.

After several people tweeted back at Combee that the suggestion was premature, he did not back down, but clarified his statement.

“For the record, I am pissed off that 20 of our friends & neighbors were slaughtered & leaders refuse to acknowledge genuine threats,” he tweeted before the official death count rose.