House Ethics Committee will not charge Rep. Maxine Waters with any violations - John Bresnahan
In February, all five Republicans on the Ethics Committee took the unprecedented step of recusing themselves from the case, a first in the panel’s 45-year history. California Rep. Linda Sanchez (Calif.), ranking Democrat on the committee, also recused herself. Goodlatte and Rep. John Yarmuth (D-Ky.) took over as acting chairman and ranking member, respectively, for the Waters case alone.

Waters is alleged to have improperly intervened on behalf of a minority bank, OneUnited, where Sidney Williams, her husband, had served on the board of directors and held a large block of stock. Williams is a former NFL player and U.S. ambassador.

Text Size -

+

reset

OneUnited, like some other minority owned banks, had invested heavily in Fannie Mae stock. Due to the dramatic decline in the U.S. real estate market, the federal government placed Fannie Mae in conservatorship in Sept. 2008, wiping out the bank’s investment.

Kevin Cohee, CEO of OneUnited and a Waters supporter, sought the California Democrat’s help in setting up a meeting with the Treasury Department to seek federal aid. Waters then personally contacted then-Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson to coordinate a meeting. During the session with Treasury officials, Cohee asked for $50 million in emergency funding.

Paulson then contacted Waters to ask why only officials from OneUnited attended the Treasury meeting.

Rep. Barney Frank (D-Mass.), then-chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, told Waters she “should stay out of it” with regards to any help given to OneUnited.

OneUnited and other minority banks did eventually receive $12 million in federal funds as part of the government bailout of the financial services industry.

News reports in early 2009 over Waters’s actions on behalf of OneUnited — and her husband’s stock holdings in the bank — triggered a probe by the Office of Congressional Ethics. In July 2009, OCE recommended the Ethics Committee empanel a special investigative subcommittee to look into the matter after it concluded Waters may have violated House rules.

The Ethics Committee voted in the summer of 2010 to charge both Waters and Moore with three violations. Waters then asked for an ethics “trial” before the committee.

But the Ethics Committee, then chaired by Rep. Zoe Lofgren (D-Calif.), canceled the “trial” for Waters in Nov. 2010. In Dec. 2010, POLITICO revealed that two top aides on the panel overseeing the Waters probe were suspended in the midst of a bitter fight between Lofgren and Rep. Jo Bonner (R-Ala.), who is now chairman. When Republicans moved to allow the two ex-staffers — Morgan Kim and Stacy Sovereign — to return to the panel, Lofgren refused.

In July 2011, POLITICO disclosed leaked internal memos from the Ethics Committee, raising questions about how the case was being handled.

Following that POLITICO report, Martin, a former Justice Department prosecutor, was appointed to complete the case. Initially hired on a six-month, $500,000 contract, Martin has been wrestling with the matter ever since. Martin said during Friday’s hearing that he conducted interviews with more than 40 witnesses and reviewed 150,000-plus pages of documents during his probe.