A tale of two hurricanes: Scott's different responses to power outages
A worker removes a fallen tree from a power line as crew try to restore power lost in areas effected by Hurricane Matthew. | AP Photo/Eric Gay A tale of two hurricanes: Scott's different responses to power outages

TALLAHASSEE — Nearly 20 percent of utility customers in three Florida counties remained without power on Monday, three days after Hurricane Matthew lashed the Atlantic Coast, about the same percentage that was without power in Leon County three days after Hurricane Hermine hit last month.

Yet Gov. Rick Scott has played a much different public role in the two storms.

Story Continued Below

Scott on Monday held a private telephone call with utility executives, unlike the publicly televised meetings in Tallahassee with local officials during which he expressed his frustration with the pace of power restoration.

That led Tallahassee Mayor Andrew Gillum, a Democrat, to call the meetings a "sideshow." He said Tallahassee was approaching 90 percent power restoration when the governor was expressing his frustration.

Lobbyist Barney Bishop said Monday the differences in Scott's involvement may be due to the Hurricane Matthew hitting somewhere other than the state's Capitol city — and the response being outside of the public eye.

"I think it (Hurricane Hermine response) was more political than it could have been or should have been," Bishop said, describing the conflicts in response to Hermine.

Scott hasn't publicly criticized the response in Duval County, where 20 percent of Jacksonville's municipal utility customers were without power on Monday. Jacksonville is led by Mayor Lenny Curry, a former Republican Party of Florida executive under Scott.

The governor held no public briefings on Monday and a reporter was denied a request to call into the call with utilities. Asked whether the governor is frustrated by the pace of power restoration and why he isn't holding public meetings, a Scott spokeswoman on Monday only said that the governor wants restoration as quickly as possible and is making sure the utilities "know what resources are available."

Scott said Saturday during a briefing in Nassau County that, "I'm going to be here until people get back."

"I want them back to work," he said. "I want businesses open. I want people back to school and I want people in their homes and I want them to have power."

The governor's office also has downplayed the remaining outages by distributing updates with misleading numbers.

An update Monday listed the number of customers in nine counties without power. Those 169,252 customers represented "a 2 percent outage," the update said.

But the 2 percent represents the portion without power of the more than 10 million power customers statewide, including many in areas that were not affected by Hurricane Matthew.

The percentage without power within those nine counties affected by Hurricane Matthew was 9.9 percent, according to data posted on the Division of Emergency Management web site.

And in three counties — Duval, Flagler and Volusia — 19 percent, or nearly one in five homes and businesses, still was without power on Monday.

By Monday night, the number of customers without power was reduced to 120,373, or 7 percent in the nine counties and nearly 14 percent in Duval, Flagler and Volusia.

Tallahassee had restored power to nearly 90 percent of its customers three days after Hurricane Hermine, according to Gillum, when Scott told city officials he was frustrated by the pace of restoration.

"I'm almost at a loss for words at how some of this has gone," Gillum told the governor.

"I know some of you won't like it," Scott responded. "But my goal is I'm going to push as hard as possible to get power back as fast as I can. If that bothers people, I'm sorry."

Barry Moline, of the Florida Municipal Electric Association, said Monday that there seemed to be more cooperation among utilities in responding to Matthew than there has been in the past, and he credited Scott with prodding them during the Hermine response.

"The governor was responsible for doing that, I believe," Moline said. "His heart was in the right place in Tallahassee. This time, we worked together and did it better."

Bishop, who as chairman of the Citizens for Responsible Spending in Tallahassee appointed a task force to review the response to Hurricane Hermine, said the difference in the Matthew response could be that meetings between the governor and local utility officials were not held in public.

"I think those things (political disputes) have always been happening," Bishop said. "We just weren't privy to it because the press wasn't involved."

The governor's Oct. 10. Hurricane Matthew response update can be viewed here: http://bit.ly/2e8vDIe

The power outage report issued on the morning of Oct. 10 can be viewed here: http://bit.ly/2d8fEE7

The power outage report issued the evening of Oct. 19 can be viewed here: http://bit.ly/2drImAB