SAUER subject of Lake County probe — WRIGLEY joins the pot biz — A BLUHM donates to RAUNER— Politics meets MURDER in a WBEZ exclusive

By Shia Kapos (skapos@politico.com; @shiakapos) with Adrienne Hurst (ahurst@politico.com; @adriennehurst)

Good Monday morning, Illinois.

Story Continued Below

THE BUZZ: The Lake County state’s attorney’s office is investigating the claim that disgraced state Rep. Nick Sauer posted nude photos of his ex on Instagram. “We’re overseeing the investigation and working with Chicago Police,” Lake County State’s Attorney Michael Nerheim said Sunday.

The victim in the case filed a complaint with the Office of the Legislative Inspector General, which forwarded it to Lake County authorities, according to Nerheim. CPD says the case is being turned over to officials in Lake County, since that’s where Sauer lives.

Sauer, who was wrapping up his first term in office, resigned last week after POLITICO’s exclusive story detailed his ex-girlfriend’s complaint. Sauer has been seeking re-election but is expected to drop out of the race.

The allegations stunned the political community, as Sauer’s image on paper and on Facebook and Twitter had appeared squeaky-clean. He’s since taken down his Twitter and Facebook pages.

MORE BUZZ: Billionaire William “Beau” Wrigley Jr. joins the list of Chicagoans getting involved in the medical marijuana business. The heir to the chewing-gum empire has been named chairman of the board of Surterra Wellnes s , a medical marijuana dispensing company based in Florida.

Wrigley moved to the Sunshine State after Mars bought the Wrigley Co. in 2008, but he remains a name on Chicago’s civic scene. “I am thrilled to join the Surterra team and help drive their mission to build a best-in-class cannabis healthcare business,” he said in a statement announcing his move to Surterra. The announcement follows his private company investing $65 million into Surterra.

Wrigley also has been a donor to Illinois political campaigns for years. He gave $35,300 to Bruce Rauner in his first run for governor.

Other Chicago-centric names in the pot industry:

Pete Kadens and Ben Kovler founded GTI, a private marijuana company that just went public a few months ago. Kovler is CEO and Kadens has moved to help with strategy while also serving on the board. Interestingly, Wes Moore, the CEO of the Robin Hood poverty-fighting organization in New York, is also on the board. Kadens and Kovler have both donated to political campaigns over the years. Kadens most recently has donated to Lori Lightfoot’s mayoral race.

Bob Morgan, who’s running for state representative in Highland Park, is the previous director of the Illinois Medical Cannabis Program and now has a legal practice at Much Shelist , which represents cannabis companies, among others. George Archos, the owner of Wildberry restaurants across the city, is CEO of Ataraxia , a medical marijuana cultivation center in Albion, Ill. He donated to Rauner’s campaign in 2014. Mindy Segal, the famous pastry chef and owner of Hot Chocolate, has partnered with Cresco Labs to produce edible products. Scott Mandell, the founder of Enjoy Life Foods, is CEO of Cannabistry Labs .

And there’s Joby Pritzker, another heir to the Hyatt fortune —his cousin is gubernatorial candidate J.B. Pritzker. Joby (who lives in California) is board chairman of the Marijuana Policy Project , the largest U.S. organization focused on changing federal law to allow states to determine their own marijuana policies.

STILL MORE BUZZ: It’s politics meets murder in this story from WBEZ: “Illinois House Speaker Michael Madigan’s political organization is again on the defensive -- this time over possible links to an accused killer who was involved in a Democratic push to unseat the state’s top House Republican,” WBEZ writes in a blockbuster by Dave McKinney and Tony Arnold. Politics and murder “came together in a southwest suburban legislative campaign to topple House Minority Leader Jim Durkin, one of Gov. Bruce Rauner’s top allies.” Story here

CAMPAIGNS

— A Bluhm Donation: Chicago hedge-fund manager Andrew Bluhm has donated $50,000 to Gov. Bruce Rauner’s re-election campaign, according to the state board of elections. This is curious given Bluhm’s dad is billionaire Neil Bluhm, an A-list real-estate developer — he’s behind the 900 North Michigan complex and the Four Seasons in Chicago, among other developments. The senior Bluhm is also the money behind Rivers Casino in Des Plaines as well as casinos in Pennsylvania. And he was a major donor to Barack Obama’s campaigns. This election season, he’s finance chair for Kwame Raoul, the Democratic state senator who’s running for Illinois attorney general.

— Crowded dance floor: Two more candidates are joining the already competitive aldermanic race for the 47th Ward. State filings show Heather Way Kitzes, the manager of government and neighborhood relations for the Chicago Cubs, and Angie Maloney, a Chicago Public Schools teacher, have joined the crowded race. They’ll face mayoral aide Michael Negron and women’s activist Eileen Dordek, among others. Here’s more on that contest from last week’s Playbook.

— Politifact: Pritzker called Illinois’ workforce the nation’s most educated. He’s wrong, by Better Government Association’s Kiannah Sepeda-Miller: “[J.B.] Pritzker’s praise for the educational prowess of Illinois’ workforce is not entirely out of left field, but it falls well short of the numbers.” Story here

— Opinion: Democrats face big job in matching Proft’s messaging, by Rich Miller for the Sun-Times: “I use Google to automatically track news stories published about every contested legislative race in the state, and for weeks now, maybe 90 percent of the coverage of all those candidates is coming from just a single information source: Dan Proft,” the conservative activist and radio talk show host who operates about 40 news websites, from the Lake County Gazette, to Rock Island Today to the Carbondale Reporter. “They all run stories with a decided tilt toward Proft’s favored Republican candidates, who are pro-life, anti-union and pro-gun.” Story here

— GOP attorney general hopeful declares independence from Rauner, by WJBC's Howard Packowitz: “Visiting the McLean County Fair Friday night, Erika Harold said she has many disagreements with the Republican governor, including his signing into a law a bill expanding taxpayer support for abortions to include women on Medicaid and state employee insurance. 'I support legalizing marijuana for adult recreational use. There are a host of other things that we disagree upon,' Harold said. ... Harold’s Democratic opponent, State Sen. Kwame Raoul, recently received the endorsement of former President Barack Obama.” Story here

CHICAGO

— Fed Up Residents on South, West Sides Fight City Hall Over Influx of Polluting Industries, by Better Government Association’s Brett Chase: “In an unprecedented effort, a coalition of neighborhood activists from Little Village as well as neighborhoods on the South and Southeast sides are demanding the city implement so-called “environmental justice-based reforms,” which would alter how officials make city-wide decisions about which areas should house most industrial and manufacturing businesses.” Story here

— 63 shot, 10 dead in Chicago since Friday, by ABC7 staff: “We know that some of these incidents were targeted and are related to gang conflicts in those areas," said Chicago Police Chief of Patrol Fred Waller at a press conference Sunday afternoon.” Story here

— Obama museum director wants your 2008 campaign artifacts and oral history, by Sun-Times' Lynn Sweet: "Though the Obama Presidential Center museum won’t be open for years, work on exhibits has started, with museum director Louise Bernard putting out the call on Saturday for people to contribute artifacts and do-it-yourself 'oral histories' from the 2008 campaign." Also, Illinois celebrated its first annual “Barack Obama Day” on Saturday, the former president’s birthday. Story here

AROUND THE COLLARS

— He’s a superstar pastor. She worked for him and ways he groped her repeatedly, by the New York Times’ Laurie Goodstein: A former employee at Willow Creek Community Church in South Barrington speaks publicly for the first time about alleged abuse by the mega-church’s pastor, Rev. Bill Hybels. It started in 1986 with a back rub. “The incidents later escalated to one occasion of oral sex…(the victim) said she was mortified and determined to stay silent.” Story here

Details

— Teaching pastor resigns over Willow Creek’s handling of allegations against Bill Hybels, by Tribune’s Manya Brachear Pashman: “The lead teaching pastor of Willow Creek Community Church announced his resignation from the South Barrington megachurch Sunday, saying he could no longer serve there with integrity. Steve Carter, who took over as lead teaching pastor in April when Bill Hybels stepped down from the helm of the church he founded 42 years ago, said he was ‘horrified’ by allegations reported Sunday by The New York Times that Hybels had sexually harassed his former executive assistant for two years.” Story here



STATE

— School sex-ed classes to teach about assault, consent under new state law, by Tribune's Monique Garcia: "Sex education courses for students in grades 6 through 12 will be expanded to include additional instruction about sexual harassment in the workplace and on college campuses under legislation Gov. Bruce Rauner signed into law Friday.” Story here

NEWSY TWEETS

— Rudy Giuliani, the presidential adviser and former New York City mayor, tweeted about Chicago on Sunday. Like someone else we know who flubs at tweeting, Giuliani stumbled. “Chicago murders are direct result of one party Democratic rule for decades. Policing genius Jerry McCarthy can do for Chicago what I did for NYC. He was one of the architects of Compstat. Slashed homicides over 70%. Tens of thousands of lives saved.” As you know, the former police chief is Garry. Minutes later, Giuliani followed with another tweet: “Let’s get on board for Jerry McCarthy.” Finally, he got McCarthy’s name right only to misspell Mayor Emanuel’s name: “Give Garry McCarthy your support @Garry4Chicago . Tomorrow I will get you information to contribute. MAKE CHICAGO SAFE AGAIN! He can do a lot better than Mayor Emmanuel who is fiddling while Chicago burns.”

NATION

— Trump says Don Jr. wanted dirt on Clinton from Russian lawyer, by POLITICO's Nancy Cook: Story here

— Democrats’ 2020 presidential fight gets an early dress rehearsal, by POLITICO's David Siders: Story here

— The real lesson Trump learned from Charlottesville, by POLITICO's Annie Karni: Story here

— Dayne Walling Flipped the Switch That Set Off the Flint Water Crisis. Now, He’s Trying to Make a Comeback, by Edward McClelland for POLITICO Magazine: Story here

BIRTHDAYS: Best wishes to Joan DeBoer. She is Ray LaHood’s longtime chief of staff. She worked with him when he was secretary of the Department of Transportation and now they’re both at DLA Piper.

WHERE’S RAHM: No public events today.

WHERE’S BRUCE: No public events today.

JUST RELEASED: View the latest POLITICO/AARP poll to better understand Arizona voters over 50, a voting bloc poised to shape the midterm election outcome. Get up to speed on priority issues for Hispanic voters age 50+, who will help determine whether Arizona turns blue or stays red.

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/2lQswbh ...New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ...Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v …ILLINOIS PLAYBOOK http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX

Want to make an impact? POLITICO Illinois has a variety of solutions available for partners looking to reach and activate the most influential people in the Land of Lincoln. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Seeking to increase brand awareness amongst this key audience? Share your message with our influential readers to foster engagement and drive action. Contact Jesse Shapiro to find out how: [jshapiro@politico.com] jshapiro@politico.com