Gwen Graham says it's 'appalling' if Scott was told about sinkhole — or if he wasn't
Rep. Gwen Graham. | AP Photo/Steve Cannon Gwen Graham says it's 'appalling' if Scott was told about sinkhole — or if he wasn't

TALLAHASSEE — U. S. Rep. Gwen Graham is again blasting the state over its handling of a sinkhole at a Polk County phosphate plant, this time over a report that Gov. Rick Scott wasn't told that contaminated water flushed into the aquifer.

“I don’t know which is worse," Graham, a Democrat from Tallahassee, said in a statement Thursday. "Either Gov. Rick Scott knew about the sinkhole and didn’t inform the public, or leadership at the Department of Environmental Protection is so irresponsible they didn’t alert the governor to a potential public health disaster."

Story Continued Below

A sinkhole at the Mosaic Co. phosphate fertilizer plant in Mulberry may have dumped at least 215 million gallons of contaminated water into the Floridan Aquifer, according to the Tampa Bay Times. DEP was told on Aug. 28 but the public wasn't notified for nearly a month.

Scott on Monday directed DEP to issue an emergency rule requiring the public, local governments, and the department, to be notified within 24 hours by all responsible parties after a pollution incident. WFLA in Orlando on Wednesday quoted the governor's office as saying that Scott wasn't notified of the sinkhole until Sept. 16.

During a tour of the plant on Tuesday, Scott also said he wouldn't fire DEP Secretary Jon Steverson over the incident.

“Well, we’re in the middle of an ongoing investigation," Scott said, according to WFLA. "I’m not going to fire Secretary Steverson based on anything I know today; he followed the law."

Graham, who is considering a bid for governor in 2018, said she is expanding a public records request made last week to include all electronic communication concerning the sinkhole sent to and from the governor’s office.

Graham said both scenarios — that the governor wasn't told or that he knew but didn't tell the public — "are appalling" and added that "the people of Florida deserve full accountability.”

DEP said last week the closest drinking water wells are three miles from the sinkhole site and there was no indication of a threat to those wells.

A Mosaic official on Thursday said there was still no evidence that of contamination leaving groundwater at the plant site or affecting nearby drinking water wells. The company also said that it was not apparent until Sept. 6 that the sinkhole had opened, which is nine days after the water loss was reported to DEP.

The governor's office did respond directly to Graham's criticism, but emphasized his directive this week to require earlier public notification of pollution incidents.