State documents: Gillum records tied to ‘active criminal investigation’
The public records exemption cited by the department for not releasing details to POLITICO relates to records tied to an “active criminal intelligence information and active criminal investigative information.” | AP Photo State documents: Gillum records tied to ‘active criminal investigation’

TALLAHASSEE — Driving records related to Democratic gubernatorial nominee Andrew Gillum are tied to an “active criminal investigation” and can’t be released unredacted by the state, according to an audit housed with the Florida Department of Highway and Motor Vehicles.

POLITICO requested a listing of the number of times Gillum’s record has been accessed by governments or law enforcement agencies. The listing shows Gillum’s records have been accessed 106 times, but a vast majority were redacted by the department, and no specific information could be provided.

Story Continued Below

The records, which span 2014 to 2018, are related to the state’s Driver and Vehicle Information Database, which includes information related to a range of information on a person’s driver history. The database can be accessed by law enforcement agencies and local governments.

“Reasons agencies need access may include performing investigations or gathering information as part of their official duties,” said Beth Frady, a DHSMV spokeswoman.

The public records exemption cited by the department for not releasing details to POLITICO relates to records tied to an “active criminal intelligence information and active criminal investigative information.”

“In accordance with Florida law, active criminal intelligence information and active investigative information are exempt from public record,” Frady said when asked for additional information.

Gillum, who is mayor of Tallahassee, has long been dogged by an FBI investigation into the city’s Community Redevelopment Agency. Gillum has not been publicly accused of any wrongdoing as part of that probe and has said publicly that agents have told him he is not the target of the investigation. He has, however, on more than one occasion been directly tied the man now believed to be an undercover FBI agent who was leading the investigation.

"This public record doesn’t show anything of substance, and as we’ve said, the Mayor is not under investigation. Government agencies frequently cite this statute when any information is redacted," Barry Richard, an attorney for Gillum said by email.

That includes an August 2016 boat ride in New York Harbor that, unknown to Gillum, included two federal agents. Others on the boat included Adam Corey, a lobbyist and longtime Gillum ally, who also orchestrated meetings between Gillum and Mike Miller, the person believed to be sued by the FBI agent investigating the city’s CRA.

Because of the records exemption, DMHSV could not give any information regarding who accessed the records or who is conducting any potential investigation, so it’s unclear if it’s related to the FBI probe.

Gillum is running against former three-term congressman Ron DeSantis, who has used the FBI probe and Gillum’s trips with undercover FBI agents as a political battering ram.

“There’s huge problems when you govern that way, when you‘re on junkets with undercover FBI agents, when you’re the subject of a major investigation involving pay to play and involving corruption,” DeSantis said at a Tampa-area event earlier this week, according to the Tampa Bay Times.

Like Republican groups, DeSantis said Gillum is under investigation. But there has been nothing released publicly to show Gillum is the subject of the probe.