A history of legislative pay raises in New York
AP Photo A history of legislative pay raises in New York

ALBANY — Over the past two centuries, the process of raising the salaries for state legislators has become increasingly removed from the direct feedback of New York residents.

For most of the state’s history, voters needed to approve every increase in lawmakers’ salaries. It wasn't until after World War II that legislators were given the power to vote themselves raises. On the first few occasions they did so, they debated these raises as part of regular legislative business and many publicly defended the benefits of a generously compensated Legislature.

Story Continued Below

But as the decades passed, lawmakers increasingly passed bills to raise their salary as far in advance of the next election as possible to reduce the likelihood of voter backlash.

Last year, the Legislature created a compensation commission. Its members, who were appointed by the governor, chief judge and legislative leaders, are deliberating a potential pay increase that would automatically take effect unless the law is changed by the end of the year. The commission will repeat its work every four years.

Lawmakers have been paid since the state Constitution drafted in 1821 set their salary at $3 per day. While the initial draft required that any changes be made by amendments, some participants at the convention that wrote this constitution argued that legislators should be free to determine their own pay and submitted new language that would allow this.

Oneida attorney Ezekial Bacon, however, argued that debates over pay raises were simply the “hobby-horse of ambitious demagogues, and peddling politicians” who would publicly oppose higher wages while gladly accepting them.

“It was mortifying and degrading to see how a little question of this character was often managed” by those campaigning for office, he argued. Delegates agreed with him, voting down the new language, 39-63. For well over a century after that, pay raises were left to amendment.

Voters were periodically willing to back these amendments.

The 1846 state Constitution added a mileage reimbursement that those travelling to Albany could collect, and a constitutional commission established by Gov. John Hoffman in 1872 raised legislators’ compensation to $1,500, beginning in 1875.

“[F]or a little over three months of actual work,” the New York Times wrote at the time, “[it] is certainly enough to pay all legitimate expenses … The man who takes a bribe after getting the benefit of the liberal salary now provided, cannot certainly plead his necessities in extenuation of his offense … The session of 1875 ought to be a bad one for lobbyists.”

While those lawmakers who have been bold enough to speak on the topic today have repeatedly bemoaned the fact that it has been over 17 years since their $79,500 pay has been been raised, the $1,500 established in the 1870s remained unchanged for over a half-century.

The 1894 constitutional convention seemed ready to recommend an increase, to $3,000, but backed down when delegates realized a raise, coupled with a planned increase in the number of legislators, would have put the state on the hook for a then-whopping $600,000 per year. Two decades later, another constitutional convention recommended an increase to $2,500, but the constitution that was drafted was rejected by voters.

Lawmakers weren’t shy about saying they needed to be paid more.

“The state has us fellows working here for money that would hardly pay a street cleaner,” senator and Tammany boss Big Tim Sullivan griped during an unrelated Finance Committee meeting in 1909.

“A lot of the fellows seem to be pretty well satisfied with the honor of being in the Legislature,” replied the chair.

“Honor nothing,” Sullivan retorted. “A legislator can’t feed his family on honor. Does the State of New York want to have us fellows stay here and starve?”

The raise to $2,500 a year finally passed as part of a massive package of amendments promoted by Gov. Al Smith in 1927, which included measures that gave the executive significant budgetary powers and let New York City borrow to finance subway construction.

Extenuating circumstances guaranteed this salary remained unchanged for another two decades. In 1932, for example, the Legislature provoked the rage of the teachers union by lowering government workers’ pay in an attempt to keep Depression-ravaged New York City solvent.

It appears, however, that New York lawmakers never made a serious attempt to lower their own salaries. In fact, they've never done so, unlike legislators in the other states who have lowered theirs during economic hard times.

When discussions began in Albany shortly before the Great Recession to raise their current salary, New York legislators’ pay ranked third nationally behind California and Michigan. Since then, California lawmakers have had their salaries lowered from $116,208 to $95,291 and Michigan’s legislators cut their pay by 10 percent.

After the conclusion of events like the Great Depression and World War II that made it politically impossible to ask for higher wages, legislators promptly sought another increase. This time, however, they did so in a way that would reduce the likelihood of future stagnations. A constitutional amendment that was sent to voters in 1947 removed references to specific salaries from the state law and made it the prerogative of the Legislature to set their own wages, provided that any changes not take effect until the next session.

More than 61 percent of voters approved that measure, according to results printed in the 1948 Legislative Manual, but support wasn’t consistent throughout the state. It was backed by 71 percent of people in New York City and its suburbs, but received only 39 percent of the vote upstate.

(Whether due to economic or political reasons, that geographic split has remained constant throughout most of New York’s history. In February, for example, the Siena Research institute asked voters whether lawmakers should get a pay raise if they enacted ethics reforms; New York City residents said yes by a 50 percent to 48 percent margin, while only 34 percent of upstate residents agreed.)

Legislators made frequent use of their newfound ability to increase their salaries. In 1948, they doubled their pay to $5,000. They increased it to $7,500 in 1954, to $10,000 in 1961, and to $15,000 in 1966.

During periods economic prosperity, these increases didn't face much opposition.

“It is generally believed that fair compensation increases length of average tenure in Legislatures,” the Times editorialized before the 1954 bill passed. “Better pay may also reduce temptations and improve the quality of candidates for office.”

This argument is still used by those who back pay raises.

“I’d like the legislators to be well-enough rewarded that they’ll stick around,” said Assembly appointee Roman Hedges at a recent meeting of the current compensation commission.

There’s not much recent evidence, however, that there's a strong correlation between salary and tenure.

There hadn’t been a pay raise in the decade preceding the class of lawmakers who were in office in 2015, but the average experience of Assembly members rose from 9.95 years to 10.23. Tenure in the Senate slid from 12.02 years to 10.16 years, but this hardly seems like it was driven by dissatisfaction over salary; most of the healthy senators who left during this time did so because of electoral defeats or scandal.

When the Legislature began to consider another pay raise in the early 1970s, it created a commission tasked with determining appropriate compensation levels. Unlike the current commission, this earlier one was tasked only with making recommendations for appropriate salary levels that needed to be approved by a new law. (This new law eventually raised salaries from $15,000 to $23,500, a level slightly below the final recommendation of $25,000).

It also recommended the creation of a new commission that has striking resemblances to the one now operating. It would consist of members appointed by the governor, legislative leaders and chief judge, and its quadrennial recommendations would become law “unless disapproved by the Legislature by concurrent resolution.”

“Under the present system, compensation decisions are all made by the Legislature in a highly charged atmosphere,” a 1972 report says. “The legislators are put in the awkward position of passing on their own salaries and fringe benefits, and judges have the unattractive alternatives of watching their salaries erode or facing the temptation of lobbying covertly.”

After the raise to $23,500 was passed in 1973, a bill was approved in 1979 that increased salaries to $32,960. Another was passed in 1984 that raised salaries to $43,000.

The 1984 pay hike was notable because it passed in December. Most of the previous bills granting raises were passed with little consideration for timing: Of the first four that passed after the enactment of the amendment that made salary a purely legislative issue, three were voted on in election years. By dealing with the issue in the immediate aftermath of an election, lawmakers were able to maximize the time voters would have to forget that incumbents seeking another term had increased their pay.

The December 1984 vote so novel that a challenge to its legality made its way to the Court of Appeals, which found it was permissible.

“I know one thing that offends people is the way we do this after election,” Assembly minority leader Clarence Reppleyea said at the time. “But politicians aren’t any more anxious to commit suicide than anyone else, and if you’re going to walk the plank you might as well do it in shallow water.”

Lawmakers raised their pay from $43,000 to $57,500 in 1987. This increase was explicitly linked by Gov. Mario Cuomo to an ethics reform package that required lawmakers to disclose some details about their outside employment and limit the types of work they could perform for clients.

This wasn’t the first time the topics had been linked: In 1979, Gov. Hugh Carey attempted a similar combination, though the Legislature passed a bill before an agreement on reform was made. While it’s likely that many of the earlier bills dealing with salaries were signed as a result of backroom-deals between governors and legislative leaders, this sort of trading had become fully public.

Horse-trading reached its zenith in 1998, when base pay was raised to its current level of $79,500. (Now, as in the past, lawmakers have been able to collect things like leadership bonuses and travel reimbursements that are in addition to their base pay). The 1998 increase was coupled with language allowing the creation of New York’s first charter schools, a program benefiting small dairy farmers, and an agreement to withhold legislators’ salaries in years the budget isn’t passed on time.

For those who have argued for a compensation commission like the one that’s currently operating, one of the benefits has been that it makes it more likely salaries will be considered on their own merits and not coupled with an array of other issues.

But notably, a recommended hike from the commission needs the approval of appointees from each of the three branches of government, leaving open the potential that recommendations can be negotiated in a broader conversation that involve issues beyond just a lawmaker’s base pay. And in recent meetings, the governor’s appointees have returned to the issue of outside income.

“It is a full-time job, it should be a full-time job,” Cuomo appointee Mitra Hormozi said in July. “Members of the Legislature work hard. They should be compensated for full-time, and take out all of the temptation or appearance of conflicts by making themselves full-time. And so I really am stuck as to why I would recommend or vote to recommend increasing their part-time salaries. Because that’ll just keep them placated and happy and there’ll be no impetus to change the system. We can’t change the system, but I firmly believe the system needs to change.”