Scott wants cops to 'impound' voting machines, Democrats call him a dictator
Scott wants law enforcement to "impound and preserve" voting machines while they are not being used. | Joe Raedle/Getty Images Scott wants cops to 'impound' voting machines, Democrats call him a dictator

TALLAHASSEE — Gov. Rick Scott wants recount efforts in Palm Beach and Broward counties handled like a crime scene, arguing in court filings on Sunday that past election mishaps in those counties warrant the involvement of law enforcement.

His U.S. Senate campaign’s latest legal efforts have sparked intensified sniping between Republicans, who want voting machines in counties with histories of election problems protected, and Democrats, who say Scott is acting like a “Latin American dictator.”

Story Continued Below

Scott asserts that election officials in Palm Beach and Broward counties, both at the epicenter of Florida’s nationally watched midterm recounts, can’t be trusted with voting equipment in large part because of past election woes associated with Broward County Supervisor of Elections Brenda Snipes and Palm Beach County Supervisor of Elections Susan Bucher.

The two officials are playing a big role in recounts involving races for state agriculture commissioner, governor and Senate, in which Scott currently leads Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson by roughly 12,000 votes out of more than 8 million cast. A round of machine recounts that include the Senate and governor’s races is supposed to be done by a Thursday deadline, but Bucher said late Sunday Palm Beach County might not make it, which puts into questions what would happen to remaining uncounted ballots.

Scott wants law enforcement to "impound and preserve" voting machines while they are not being used.

“As long as the Supervisor of Elections has unsupervised, unaccountable, and unfettered access to the ballot boxes, she will be able to destroy evidence of any errors, accidents, or unlawful conduct — making it nearly impossible for an aggrieved party to prosecute their claims or discover later what has occurred in the electoral process,” the complaint states.

The complaint relies in part on the embattled resumes of both supervisors. Most recently, Snipes was found in violation of state and federal law in May for destroying ballots tied to the 2016 reelection of Democratic Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz. Bucher has had fewer instances of negative headlines, but earlier this week her office lost a court fight with Scott’s campaign and the National Republican Senate Committee over the release of public records. Snipes also was found in violation of public record laws after Scott filed a similar lawsuit against her office.

Scott’s campaign also filed a separate lawsuit saying that ballots counted in Broward County after noon on Saturday are illegal. The suit says that's a violation of a state law that says ballot returns needed to be returned at that time.

Scott’s campaign says this is an obvious read of state law, while Nelson’s camp says it’s a misread of the law and amounts to Scott suing “to invalidate lawful ballots counted yesterday in Broward County.”

In a response to Scott’s lawsuit filed around 9 p.m. Sunday, Snipes’ attorneys argue that only 25 ballots were counted during a canvassing board meeting after the noon deadline, and that the recount has made the issue “moot.” They said ballots after the noon deadline are not invalid.

“Plaintiff has invented a false deadline for completing canvass of ballots where none in fact exists,” read the response. “The first unofficial results are just that — i.e., unofficial.”

Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi, a Republican, also stepped into the fray on Sunday, sending a letter to the Florida Department of Law Enforcement critical of the agency for not investigating voter fraud based on claims from the Department of State, the Scott administration’s top election agency, that there was no voter fraud.

During a political event late Thursday night, Scott asked FDLE to investigate Broward and Palm Beach counties, but one day later, FDLE said there were no allegations of voter fraud to investigate. Bondi says she is not satisfied with that answer.

In her letter to FDLE Commissioner Rick Swearingen, whom Scott helped put in place in 2015, Bondi in part relied on the court rulings earlier this week against Palm Beach and Broward counties in the public records lawsuits.

“It is incumbent upon you, as commissioner of the Florida Department of Law Enforcement, to investigate whether these documented irregularities constitute incompetence or intentional malfeasance and outright fraud,” Bondi wrote.

She added that FDLE’s duty “is not limited to investigating allegations made by the secretary of state.”

The push for law enforcement to secure voting machines and invalidate ballots has Florida Democrats casting Scott as dictator trying to seize control of Florida’s election process.

“In suing to seize ballots and impound voting machines, Rick Scott is doing his best to impersonate Latin American dictators who have overthrown democracies in Venezuela and Cuba,” Florida Democratic Party Executive Director Juan Peñalosa said in a statement. “The governor is using his position to consolidate power by cutting at the very core of Democracy.”

Firing back on Twitter, Scott adviser Chris Hartline said Peñalosa needed to “cut down on the Red Bull.”

“We requested that ballots and voting machines be protected when not in use,” he tweeted. “The only reason not to protect the integrity of the ballots and the voting machines is if you are actively promoting or hoping for fraud.”