The day the Assembly said no to Sheldon Silver
Silver. | AP Photo/Mike Groll The day the Assembly said no to Sheldon Silver

ALBANY—The sun had set and soft flurries blanketed the Capitol by the time the Assembly Democrats emerged from a private discussion and announced that Sheldon Silver was through.

“He must resign,” said Assemblyman Brian Kavanagh, a Democrat from the East Side of Manhattan, of the often-inscrutable man who had run the chamber for 21 years. “If the speaker does not make that decision, he should understand that he's lost the confidence of a majority of our conference.”

Story Continued Below

Kavanagh spoke to a crush of journalists on the Capitol's third floor that had clogged the marble hallways by the Democrats' suite of offices since Silver arrived Monday morning. He and several of his colleagues said there was no consensus as to who would come next. Members will re-convene at the Capitol at noon on Tuesday, although they are not scheduled to gavel into a formal session.

Following the conference's decision, Silver stayed another two hours in his private office just off the chamber's floor, huddling with his most senior lieutenants as Assemblyman Herman (Denny) Farrell read the newspaper at a nearby desk. Silver said he had not told anyone he was resigning, and said he would attend the conference to pick his successor.

Referring to the federal corruption charges that precipitated the conference's decision to heave him over—and to reject summarily a plan that would have empowered five senior members to run the chamber while Silver retained the speaker title—he said he would be “exonerated,” but was his cryptic self when asked if he would heed the call to step aside.

“I am the speaker,” Silver said. “I'm not fighting. Do I look like I'm fighting? I'm standing. And I'm going to be standing for a long time. … There's a large conference that has to make a determination.”

Several scenarios were floated to replace him, but in the five days since Silver was charged by federal prosecutors with trading official favors for $6 million in bribes that he disguised as legal fees, no individual had amassed the 76 votes needed to become speaker.

Late Monday, people following the jockeying said majority leader Joe Morelle—who, by the chamber's rules, becomes acting speaker if Silver resigns—and Carl Heastie, the Bronx County Democratic Chairman, were top contenders.

"There were lots of different opinions from one end of the spectrum to the other," said Assemblyman Jeffrion Aubry of Queens, the Assembly's speaker pro tempore. "The middle is that we are all concerned about the effective management of our responsibility as the Assembly."

Kavanagh said that the process was moving forward as quickly as possible, and Morelle said he would work to arrange an interim leader.

Silver's ouster will be a seismic event in Albany.

Major state business is conducted in private negotiations between Governor Andrew Cuomo and leaders of each legislative chamber. Silver, 70, has been at the center of renewing rent regulations for the last 20 years, increasing the minimum wage and extending pre-kindergarten in New York City. During the reign of Governor George Pataki, the Lower East Side liberal single-handedly carried the standard for the state's Democrats, working to steer millions to infrastructure and other projects in New York City while blocking Republican attempts to roll back rent regulations.

The announcement of the conference's decision came five hours after the Democratic members were first scheduled to meet behind closed doors, and seven hours after they were scheduled to start deliberating. Not since the State Senate was crippled by a month-long coup in 2009, or the shocking resignation of Eliot Spitzer in 2007 had the Capitol descended into such spectacle.

Silver, whose gravely voice and Entish mien have been Capitol staples for three decades, said little to the public or the press on Monday, even as cameras stalked his every move. Armed state police officers, unusually, were posted at the doors.

Normally anonymous legislators—and one chamber aide who returned time and again with vegetable and cheese platters—were besieged by a crush of cameras as they exited elevators and attempted to scurry into a conference area that, for the day, was closed to reporters.

"Where's the red carpet?" Assemblyman Daniel O'Donnell, who represents Morningside Heights, asked while gesturing dramatically.

He did not break stride as reporters shouted to ask whether Silver should resign, simply saying, "I'm forming that opinion right now.”

As Assemblywoman Amy Paulin of Scarsdale, who earlier that day led a bloc of 17 suburban Democrats in opposition to Silver's speaker proposal, addressed reporters, an elevator disgorged several of the chamber's 44 Republican members, including Joe Borelli and Ray Walter. They laughed, holding Tom Abinanti—another Westchester Democrat—in something between a headlock and a hug. A reporter shushed them, and Borelli chuckled under his breath.

The parade of members stretched over two hours. Eventually, Jose Rivera, a former Bronx Democratic leader, declared there would be “white smoke” soon. A cart containing the speaker's briefcase, coat and fedora was wheeled into the chamber by an aide.

Silver had pitched his plan to cede some power, but retain the legal trappings of his post, late Sunday. It would have created a ruling committee of senior members representing four city boroughs and upstate—Morelle, Heastie, Farrell, Cathy Nolan of Queens and Joe Lentol of Brooklyn.

Almost immediately, there was blowback against the plan. Longtime Assembly members were angry they weren't consulted about the plan, hearing details when news first broke on Sunday night. They and other lobbyists questioned how it would work, particularly with closed-door negotiating sessions over the State Budget.

At a press conference Monday on the coming snowstorm, Governor Andrew Cuomo—by then reflecting sentiment in the Assembly, rather than driving it—said he has “never” seen “management by committee” work well.

A regularly scheduled Monday meeting of the Black, Puerto Rican, Hispanic and Asian legislative caucus quickly turned into a forum for grievances, according to legislators who attended.

Farrell, a longtime Silver contemporary who would have been part of the leadership klatch, defended the proposal as most other members raged against it.

Chief among them was Harlem's Keith Wright, two people in the meeting said, who issued a statement calling on Silver to step down just minutes before he entered the room. One member, who asked not to be identified, made mimed slitting his throat when asked if Silver would remain in his post.

Most of the members wouldn't address reporters when they left the room, but Farrell could be overheard when the door opened for people to enter and exit. He used the phrases “cop a plea rather than go to trial” and “which I didn't hear from the press or anyone.”

Upon exiting, he reiterated his support for Silver.

At the same time, seventeen members representing suburban areas met in the office of Paulin, and emerged saying they'd formed a new caucus. They were angry their interests weren't represented in the proposed leadership group, Paulin later said, and believed it would lead to a “chaotic” situation.

The list of members who called on Silver to resign gradually grew during the day. Wright met with the speaker in his office in the Legislative Office Building, along with Aubry.

“We're in a period where different things are happening almost every minute, and so I can't describe to you all those things because even I don't know all those things,” Aubry said.

Kavanagh huddled behind glass doors with an eclectic mix of newer and reform-minded members, periodically teasing reporters that he was about to make an announcement, then announcing he would make his point—whatever it was—privately.

The conference originally scheduled for 1:45 p.m. started in earnest when Silver entered at 4:47 p.m. He stayed for roughly 40 minutes, made his case, then retreated to his private office about 50 yards away.

Session was canceled around 6:30 p.m., according to Assemblyman Mickey Kearns, a Buffalo Democrat who has long opposed Silver's tenure.

Democrats are now scheduled to convene again on February 2, using the bad weather and Silver's legal problems to cancel two session days since the charges against him were first announced.

Silver's original proposal for a five-members leadership committee was reportedly pared over the course of discussion to a proposal in which Farrell and Morelle would jointly step in for Silver during budget negotiations. That, too, fizzled.

Morelle said members were interested in an interim arrangement that hopefully would not involve a forcible ouster of Silver.

“I shared with him what the comments were,” Morelle said. “He's going to have to internalize it and make a decision.”

—additional reporting by Bill Mahoney