The political sway of Florida's 1.5M voting felons is up for grabs, experts say
People convicted of murder or felony sex offenses will remain subject to a lengthy review process implemented by Gov. Rick Scott in early 2011. | Getty The political sway of Florida's 1.5M voting felons is up for grabs, experts say

TALLAHASSEE — A Florida constitutional amendment that will restore voting rights to roughly 1.5 million Floridians with felony convictions may have a significant impact on future elections in the Sunshine State — but it's far from clear which party will benefit most.

The ballot question passed with more than 64 percent of the vote, and even heavier support in highly populated Democratic strongholds like Broward County, where criminal justice reforms might be seen as an easier sell. But it also received 55 percent of the vote in Collier and Lee counties, which make up the deepest red corner of the state. The amendment only needed 60 percent of the vote to pass.

Story Continued Below

Allison DeFoor, one of the campaign organizer's behind the amendment, said that many observers connect the disproportionate number of blacks facing criminal conviction with the racial makeup of the state’s eligible felons. For instance, the NAACP has reported that blacks were five times as likely to be incarcerated as whites. But a 2016 report by the Washington-based Sentencing Project found that African Americans make up only 28 percent of the population eligible for the restoration of voting rights in Florida.

“Most people think they’re black and they’ll vote Democrat,” said DeFoor, who is the founding chairman of the Project on Accountable Justice at Florida State University. “But no, that’s not the case.”

Florida's statewide races were mostly won by Republicans on Tuesday night.

DeFoor said that the majority of felons who have had their rights restored in Florida registered as independent or Republican.

“The dirty little secret of all of this is the research I saw is that they tend to register Republican or independent,” he said.

The amendment guarantees the automatic restoration of voting rights for almost anyone with a felony conviction who has completed the terms of a criminal sentence. People convicted of murder or felony sex offenses will remain subject to a lengthy review process implemented by Gov. Rick Scott in early 2011.

Florida Rights Restoration Coalition Political Director Neil Volz orchestrated the collection of the 766,200 petition signatures that were required to make the ballot. He said people he met during the petition process who wanted their rights restored hadn’t given a political party any thought.

“The truth is, the answer is always the same,” Volz said. “They think they’re not allowed to be a Republican or a Democrat — I’m not allowed to sit in that seat and have that type of perspective.”

Volz has been a Republican for 25 years and resides in Fort Myers, which is in Republican-rich Lee County. He was a congressional staffer-turned $500-an-hour lobbyist in Washington when he was arrested by the FBI as it investigated a 2006 corruption scandal involving former U.S. Rep. Bob Ney. He was convicted of felony conspiracy and sentenced to probation.

“This petition process was the first chance for people to start talking about this issue,” Volz said. “You tell them that 70 percent of the people who would become ‘returning citizens’ as we say and they’re blown away."

“Most people have this vision of what a felon looks like and they didn’t ever know someone like a librarian may be one of them,” he said.

Florida previously offered automatic restoration of voting rights under former Gov. Charlie Crist, but Scott replaced that program with his own review process in March 2011. Tallahassee federal court Judge Mark Walker ruled in February of this year that Scott’s process violated the First Amendment, but that opinion was given a temporary stay by the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Atlanta.

“If any one of these citizens wishes to earn back their fundamental right to vote, they must plod through a gauntlet of constitutionally infirm hurdles,” Walker wrote in his ruling. “No more.”

More than 22,000 people await review by the state Clemency Board, which includes Scott, state Attorney General Pam Bondi, Agriculture Commissioner Adam Putnam and Chief Financial Officer Jimmy Patronis. The board meets four times a year in the state Capitol and applicants regularly travel to Tallahassee from across the state to plead their cases. Nicole Porter, advocacy director at the Sentencing Project, said felons whose crimes were too serious to qualify for Amendment 4 are still subject to Scott’s process.

Porter also said no data exists that indicates the 1.5 million eligible felons — about 8 percent of the state’s total voting population — will boost the ranks of a political party one way or another.

“There’s no data or report that has told anyone how disenfranchised people will vote,” Porter said. “There’s nothing to say if they’ll register to vote in the first place.”

Volz said the assumption that blacks made up most of the felon population roots back to the racial undertones of this year’s midterm election in Florida, which carried over from the 2016 presidential election won by President Donald Trump.

“This goes back to the Jim Crow days when everything was just assumed to be fact,” Volz said. “And this is why this phase of the amendment, we’re going to talk to each other and learn who might be getting another chance to vote.”