Racial disparities persist in New York City marijuana arrests
While marijuana arrests have dropped significantly since the mayor took office, 86 percent of the people arrested for marijuana possession in the fifth degree during 2017 were people of color. | Getty Racial disparities persist in New York City marijuana arrests

Black and brown New Yorkers continue to face marijuana arrests at rates nearly 10 times those of whites, despite early promises from Mayor Bill de Blasio to close the racial disparity.

While marijuana arrests have dropped significantly since the mayor took office, 86 percent of the people arrested for marijuana possession in the fifth degree during 2017 were people of color; 48 percent were black and 38 percent were Hispanic. Only 9 percent were white.

Story Continued Below

This is almost the same disparity as in 2016. The disproportionate number persists despite research that shows black and whites use marijuana in roughly the same rates.

Peter Donald, a spokesman for the NYPD said enforcement mirrors where the NYPD receives complaints or observes illegal behavior.

“We have an obligation — as the police — to be responsive. That’s our job. If we didn’t respond to complaints, like 911 calls, 311 calls, or individual contacts from the community, we would be rightfully called to task,” he said in an email.

Donald provided so-called heat maps showing complaints for marijuana and arrests for marijuana in 2014 and where they are concentrated throughout the city. However, Donald did not provide more recent data or the underlying data used to create the map, so it could not be analyzed for racial disparity.

When de Blasio campaigned for mayor he said the clear racial bias in arrests for low-level possession of marijuana was “unjust and wrong.”

More recently, he attacked U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions’ decision to crack down on legalized marijuana.

“Jeff Sessions’ vendetta against legalized marijuana is an attack on minority communities. We know what the war on drugs does to communities of color. This is a step backward,” he said on Twitter .

But the mayor, ever careful to defer to the NYPD in law enforcement strategy, later clarified he was not making an argument to legalize marijuana — rather, he was making an argument to protect states’ rights.

When it comes to recreational marijuana, the mayor is still iffy.

"I remain skeptical but willing to study,” he said recently. “I don’t think we’re going to find that it’s an ideal situation, but at the same time we need to see what’s working and what’s not so we can make an honest assessment."

That position puts him at odds with many fellow progressives, most notably Sen. Bernie Sanders, who said he would support legalization in his home state of Vermont.

Melissa Moore, New York deputy state director for the Drug Policy Alliance, said de Blasio’s pushback against the federal government on marijuana policy rings hollow.

“Mayor de Blasio has been quick to push back against AG Sessions on marijuana enforcement, but hasn’t taken concrete action to end racially disparate arrests in his hometown,” she said.

While there remain racial disparities in New York, overall enforcement for low level marijuana possession has dropped precipitously since 2013. In 2017, arrests were similar to numbers from 2016. There were 17,880 arrests for low-level marijuana possession in New York City in 2017, just 1 percent less than in 2016, but 38 percent less than in 2013, the last year of former Mayor Michael Bloomberg’s administration.

De Blasio has repeatedly claimed that that he’s ended low-level marijuana possession arrests. The NYPD no longer arrests someone based solely on possession charges. Instead, the thousands of arrests each year are for smoking in public, according to the city.

However, neither the mayor’s office nor the NYPD would say for sure that every single arrest is for smoking in public or how many of the arrests are for smoking and how many are for possession without smoking.

“The City made initial progress reducing arrests for marijuana but that has clearly slowed,” said Redmond Haskins, spokesman at The Legal Aid Society. “These arrests compromise access to student loans, housing and other benefits, and in the era of Trump, can lead to deportation. City Hall must do better.”

As arrests have gone down, summonses for low-level marijuana possession have gone up. There were 21,024 summonses in 2017, according to a report by WNYC, for unlawful possession of marijuana, 1 percent more than in 2016 and 58 percent more than in 2013.

If low-level marijuana enforcement is analyzed as the sum of arrests and summonses for unlawful possession and criminal possession in the fifth degree, than enforcement is roughly the same in 2017 as it was in 2016, but 14 percent higher than in 2015 (and less than in 2013 and 2014).

Austin Finan, a spokesman for de Blasio defended the policy.

“Arrest and summons data fluctuates from year to year. What’s important is the broader trend that shows a dramatic shift away from arrests in favor of summonses since 2013, proving this administration’s commitment to enhancing fairness without sacrificing safety or responsiveness to community concerns," he said in a statement.

This article contains charts that can only be seen online. If you are reading this in your inbox, click on the link in the alert at the bottom of the email to view the article with graphics.