De Blasio on stop-and-frisk: 'We changed it intensely'
Mayor Bill de Blasio. | Getty De Blasio on stop-and-frisk: 'We changed it intensely'

Responding to a POLITICO New York report that cast doubt on his claim that he reduced the New York Police Department's use of stop-and-frisk from its peak in 2011 — two years before he took office — Mayor Bill de Blasio said in a radio interview Wednesday, “We changed it intensely.”

“When [former police] commissioner [Bill] Bratton and I came in, we drove down the unconstitutional stop-and-frisk deeply,” de Blasio said on WNYC’s “Brian Lehrer Show.”

Story Continued Below

In a fund-raising email sent Tuesday night, de Blasio wrote, “Not many people know precisely how much we have reduced the use of stop-and-frisk in New York City” from its peak in 2011, before stating the answer was 97 percent.

“I promised to fix it and we have,” de Blasio wrote in the email.

According to the POLITICO report, stops dropped by 94 percent between the first three months of 2012 and the last three months of 2013, when de Blasio was public advocate and a candidate for mayor in which he featured stop-and-frisk as one of his key issues.

Asked about the report, de Blasio said, “I don't think the facts ... are accurate,” though the administration did not provide data supporting the mayor's claim. A City Hall spokesman said the mayor objected to the notion he was unfairly taking credit for achievements that occurred under his predecessor.



The story relied on data supplied by the NYPD and published on the New York Civil Liberties Union's website.

According to the data, NYPD officers recorded 203,500 stop-and-frisk encounters during the first three months of 2012. By the last three months of 2013, the figure had dropped to 12,497, a reduction of 94 percent. The drop has continued since de Blasio entered City Hall. Between April and June of this year, the most recent data available, there were 3,580 stops.

De Blasio supporters correctly note that he made reducing stop-and-frisk a cornerstone of his mayoral campaign. (Other candidates for mayor, to varying degrees, also said they wanted to curb its use.) So de Blasio could make the case that some of the steep decline in the use of stop-and-frisk under Bloomberg coincided with his criticism of the tactic.

But another contributing factor to the decline of stop-and-frisk came not from City Hall or 1 Police Plaza, but from the courts.

In early 2008, the Center for Constitutional Rights filed a lawsuit on behalf of four plaintiffs who claimed the city’s stop-and-frisk policies were racially biased. The case wound its way through the federal court system until August 2011, when then-U.S. District Court Judge Judge Shira A. Scheindlin ruled in favor of the city on a number of the individual claims by the plaintiffs, but said that the issue of constitutional violations was still a valid one.

The initial decision occurred during the middle of the third quarter of 2011. NYPD data shows stops spiked to an all-time high six months later, during the first quarter of 2012. Beginning with the period between April and June 2012, the first in a series of big drops occured. This time period corresponds to the decision by Scheindlin to grant the parties in the case class status, significantly broadening the potential impact of the case and the legal exposure that the city now faced.

Almost immediately after the ruling, then-police commissioner Ray Kelly wrote a letter to the City Council announcing new policies to decrease the frequency with which stops were being used by police.

By the time Scheindlin ruled in August 2013 that the NYPD had, in fact, been guilty of racially profiling those it stopped, and therefore was in violation of the Constitution, stops were at their lowest levels in almost a decade. By the end of 2013 — around the time de Blasio was elected — stops would be down nearly 94 percent.

Critics have noted that de Blasio did not live up to his campaign promise of reducing the racial disparity of who is stopped.

Robert Gangi, director of the Police Reform Organizing Project, said in an interview that the NYPD's focus on low-level, quatliy-of-life crimes "is quota-driven," and "marked by a stark, racial bias."

At the peak of stop-and frisk, in 2011, 53 percent of the people stopped were black; 34 percent were Latino and 9 percent were white. In 2012, those percentages were relatively unchanged: 55 percent were black, 32 percent were Latino and 10 percent were white. The numbers have remained relatively unchanged, through the first half of this year, when 53 percent of those stopped were black, 30 percent were Latino and 11 percent were white.

"Black and Latino New Yorkers, young people of color, homeless New Yorkers and others remain disproportionately targeted by stop-and-frisk and broken windows policing ...," Mark Winston Griffith, executive director of Brooklyn Movement Center, on behalf of Communities United for Police Reform, said in a statement. "Reductions in the overall number of stops did occur at the end of the Bloomberg administration and have continued during the de Blasio administration, because a growing community movement used legislation, litigation and grassroots organizing to build a groundswell that moved the needle."

The POLITICO article also noted that de Blasio's focus on stop-and-frisk comes amid criticism from the left over portions of his public safety agenda, like continued opposition to a bill outlawing chokeholds and refusal to release police disciplinary information.

In the radio interview, de Blasio defended his record and said people who wanted changes to the criminal justice system should be pleased with what he has accomplished, including new de-escalation training for officers, bias training for every officer in the department, fewer complaints about the police filed to the Civilian Complaint Review Board (which itself has been revamped); plans to start using body cameras and the existence of the city's first-ever inspector general for the NYPD.

"I think folks that want reform, should look at all that," the mayor said. "All the things that they said they had wanted are actually happening."