Manchin: I'll help GOP 'repair' Obamacare
Sen. Joe Manchin said he contacted GOP leaders to offer his help to "repair" Obamacare. | Getty Manchin: I'll help GOP 'repair' Obamacare

West Virginia Sen. Joe Manchin said Thursday that he has contacted Republican leaders offering to help bring fellow Democrats on board for fixes to Obamacare that he portrayed as "repair" of the existing system rather than the GOP-touted replacement.

Manchin has told GOP leaders that he's "happy to sit down with you to see if we can find a pathway forward," he told his home state's MetroNews radio station on Thursday. Before his election in 2010, Manchin added, Democrats passed Obamacare "with no bipartisan support. Last night, my Republican friends and colleagues, with no Democrats, voted 51 [to 48] to throw it out. To fix it, it's going to take 60."

Story Continued Below

As a new member of Senate Democratic leadership, Manchin could face a political minefield in working to secure support among other moderate members of the minority for Obamacare talks with Republicans.

Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) told progressive activists earlier this week after Democrats held the floor late into the night defending Obamacare that "not a single Democrat is negotiating" with the GOP.

Yet Manchin is not alone among moderate Democrats willing to help Trump and Republicans craft a replacement, though all are united against Obamacare repeal.

Republicans are struggling to firm up their timeframe for repealing and replacing the health care law as Donald Trump pressures them to do so as fast as possible.

"If you don’t have agreement with at least eight or 10 Democrats" on changes to Obamacare, Manchin told MetroNews, "it will be easy to try to throw it out" but "almost impossible" to replace the law.

Manchin added that he is aligned with Trump in insisting on repeal and replacement occurring in rapid succession. The West Virginian said he joined his party in opposing a budget blueprint that passed in the wee hours of Thursday morning, setting the stage for the GOP's repeal plan, because "I am not going to vote to throw everybody off" health plans without a clear timeline in place for what comes next.