Ivanka's lawyer, a Democrat, defends herself
Attorney Jamie Gorelick had just finished vetting potential Cabinet secretaries for Hillary Clinton — and raising money for the failed 2016 Democratic nominee — when Jared Kushner called her last year, seeking legal counsel.

Gorelick, who served as deputy attorney general under President Bill Clinton and a former member of the 9/11 Commission, was recommended to Kushner by former News Corp. executive Joel Klein, who now serves as chief strategy officer at Oscar, the health insurance company co-founded by Kushner’s younger brother, Josh. Klein told Jared Kushner he needed a real lawyer to sort through nepotism and conflict-of-interest concerns that could bar him from working in the White House for his father-in-law, President Donald Trump.

Story Continued Below

“He said that Jared was a good person, and that he thought he would be a good influence on the administration,” Gorelick said in an interview Thursday afternoon, sitting in a sunny conference room at her law firm, Wilmer Hale.

Gorelick, widely rumored to have been Hillary Clinton’s front-runner for attorney general, hesitated before agreeing to represent someone who served as the de facto campaign manager for a candidate who encouraged chants of "Lock Her Up" at rallies.

“At the time, I was grieving for Hillary Clinton,” she said. “This was not the transition I was contemplating working on — at all. And I didn’t know Jared Kushner. And I did think twice about it.”

Since signing on with Kushner, Gorelick has been in the spotlight for lending credibility to his efforts to comply with federal ethics laws — as well as those of his wife, Ivanka, also a Gorelick client.

It has been an uncomfortable position for a dyed-in-the-wool Democrat to assume, and Gorelick has been shocked by the vitriol that has been hurled in her direction.

“Hey Jamie Gorelick, you’ve just poured that ‘Complicit’ perfume on yourself. #Ivanka,” top Democratic consultant Hilary Rosen, also a former Clinton surrogate and a partner at SKDKnickerbocker, tweeted, in reference to a “Saturday Night Live” sketch about an Ivanka Trump-branded scent called “Complicit.”

Gorelick sees herself as part of a time-honored Washington tradition of well-respected lawyers representing clients from the opposite party. Two of President Bill Clinton’s chiefs of staff, Mack McLarty and Erskine Bowles, turned to Arthur Culvahouse, former White House counsel under Ronald Reagan, to oversee their ethics arrangements, as did members of President Barack Obama’s administration.

In hiring Gorelick, Ivanka Trump and Kushner — two expats from Midtown Manhattan, who are part of an administration trying to upend all of Washington’s norms — are simply following that old D.C. playbook, buying themselves the patina of a former Clinton Justice department official vouching for their good names.

But Gorelick is testing whether that norm still holds true in Trump’s Washington. Many former Clinton diehards have branded themselves as “the resistance” and view any effort to work with advisers close to the president as an obscene attempt to “normalize” a politically abnormal president. For this liberal crowd, Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner — branded as the moderates of Trump’s world — are viewed as extensions of the president, just operating under more glamorous, and therefore dangerous, facades.

Earlier this week, Gorelick vouched for Ivanka Trump’s ability to work as a de facto full-time White House adviser — complete with a security clearance, a West Wing office, and a government-issued phone — without formally becoming a government employee. Under the unprecedented arrangement, the first daughter will only voluntarily submit herself to ethics laws, without taking an oath of office that would subject her to disclosure and other requirements.

Gorelick also maintains that it would be impossible for Ivanka Trump to sell her eponymous fashion and jewelry line, because the buyer would be able to use her name — acknowledging there’s no way to create a setup for the first daughter that would be free of conflict of interest.

“The swirl of money and conflicts is unprecedented and their arrangements are not curing it," said Robert Weissman, president of the nonprofit Public Citizen. “That Ivanka Trump has branded her company with her name is a complicating factor, and it should be, for her, not for the American people. Looking at [Gorelick’s] comments saying it doesn’t work for Ivanka to sell off the company — well, then maybe it doesn’t work for her to be in government.”

Even inside the Republican Party, the bipartisan spirit of the Washington power lawyer scene is being tested. “Some of my Republican friends who are ‘Never Trumpers’ are not particularly happy that I wound up doing the vice-presidential vetting,” Culvahouse conceded. “But the question is: Do you want him to fail, or do you want good people to get in? Is President Trump better served with Kushner and Ivanka serving with him in the White House? Absolutely he is.”

Gorelick is of the same mind as Culvahouse: She believes in pushing good people into government, even if she disagrees with the man at the top. She admitted the criticism from Democrats bothers her — especially Rosen’s tweet, which was forwarded to her.

“I was shocked by that,” she said, adding sarcastically, “it must be that Hilary has never taken a client on, whose values and principles she didn’t entirely agree with. Really? There is something that has been so polarizing about this administration that it does make it harder to do what I would consider a normal lawyer’s job to be.”

Rosen, in response, said she doesn’t “wish [Gorelick] or Ivanka any ill will. ... But there is widespread distaste for how the president has meshed his and his family’s business interests, and good lawyering doesn’t fix that problem.”

In Gorelick’s worldview, however, she believes that it does. “I don’t pass my clients through a 100 percent values alignment litmus test,” she said. “If people want to come to me and get good, principled, ethical advice, and they want to follow it, then I will take them on as a client. I don’t need to take on clients if I don’t want to spend my time with them. There is a voluntary piece of this. But I encourage people to serve.”

Along with Kushner and Ivanka Trump, Gorelick represented former Exxon CEO Rex Tillerson in his confirmation and vetting process to become secretary of state. She said she has not spoken to the Clintons about her new clients.

She dodged the question, though, of whether there are people she would not represent. If White House chief strategist Steve Bannon, who represents the most extreme end of Trump’s administration, asked for her help, would she offer it? “Good luck to you, but I’m not going there,” Gorelick said. “In general, I have really pressed people who have had the opportunity to go into this administration to go in. A lot of people do not want to go in. But we have one government, elections have consequences, we should not want the government to fail.”

For Gorelick, there is some cosmic irony to representing members of the Trump administration, late in her career. In her first job out of Harvard Law School, her firm at the time was representing Richard Nixon in the Supreme Court. “I was a very progressive young woman, and I had never expected to represent Richard Nixon,” she said. “This is an interesting bookend.”





Jamie Gorelick sees herself as part of a time-honored Washington tradition of well-respected lawyers representing clients from the opposite party. | M. Scott Mahaskey/POLITICO

Gorelick might be new to taking hits from the Hilary Rosens of the world, but she has long been a bête noir of the right — she’s a recurring villain on conservative talk radio, where Rush Limbaugh for years has falsely blamed her for instituting a “wall” between law enforcement and intelligence agencies when she served in the Justice Department, making it easier for the lead 9/11 hijacker to enter the country. And Gorelick drew criticism from both the left and the right when it was revealed she received $26 million from Fannie Mae before the mortgage giant was bailed out by the government.

“They make things up,” she said. “They say I caused 9/11, and that I caused the financial crisis. I know there are people that say that, but no legitimate person has ever said that. I ignore it. I've had criticism come at me from different directions, pretty much my whole career.”

And for all the flak she’s getting from the left, it’s Gorelick’s reputation in conservative circles that made her a surprising hire to Trump loyalists. “If Jared and Ivanka had asked my opinion, I'd say great, find a Democrat lawyer,” said one longtime Trump loyalist. “If they said, it’s Jamie Gorelick, I’d say, great, find a different one.”

Gorelick is also in the odd position of working concurrently for clients who are members of the Trump administration, as well as individuals fighting his policies.

As part of her pro bono work, Gorelick recently filed a brief on behalf of immigrant women who have been the subjects of of gender-based violence, seeking the court in San Francisco to understand the implications of Trump’s immigration ban on their lives and communities. She also serves as an outside adviser to the liberal Center for American Progress, which has been fighting against Trump’s health care overhaul.

Gorelick said she flags some of those outside issues she is working on to Kushner and Ivanka Trump. “I’m not going to lobby them for any client, but if there are issues that I know they care about that are percolating, I would send it to them, and I have,” she said. “It’s possible to become extremely isolated in the White House. I think people like that need to hear from outside sources.”

POLITICO Influence Intelligence and analysis on lobbying — weekday mornings, in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Longtime Gorelick friends, like President Barack Obama’s former ethics czar, Norm Eisen, have criticized her read of the anti-nepotism statute, which Gorelick said does not bar Kushner from serving as a senior adviser in the White House. And they have vocally disagreed with her decision that Ivanka Trump could voluntarily submit herself to government ethics rules, when she is serving as a de facto full-time government employee in everything but title.

But Eisen said that despite his legal disagreement, he thinks Gorelick’s involvement is good in that it’s pushing top members of the Trump administration in the right direction. “It’s consistent with our profession to represent your clients zealously, but at the same time, push them as far as they will go in the direction of what is right,” he said. “The thing that distinguishes really great lawyers — starting with John Adams, who famously represented a British redcoat — is that you take on tough clients and you do the best for them. I think Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump have fared much better in the public eye because of Jamie’s work.”

Gorelick said separating Kushner from his real estate company took up most of her time in December and January and that his financial disclosure form will show that he still retains sizable assets.

“I like hard and interesting problems, and I have certainly had them in this representation," she said. “The Kushner Cos. is really a series of dozens and dozens and dozens of individual buildings and their own corporate structure. Extricating him from each one of those was extremely difficult.”

But she said Kushner gave her carte blanche to make it work. “His view was, ‘Do what needs to be done.’ There are a lot of assets left and he will have to recuse himself on quite a few issues.”

Months after getting involved with the people closest to the man she tried to help defeat, Gorelick said Klein's assessment of Kushner has held up. “I don’t have much insight as to what he is doing inside on a daily basis,” she said, “but he does seem like a good person.”