Roy Moore: Allegations are 'absolutely false'
As he did last week, Roy Moore argued that the story was "a political manuever" and "has nothing to do with reality." | Hal Yeager/AP Photo Roy Moore: Allegations are 'absolutely false' He added: 'I never did what she said I did. I don't even know the woman.'

Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore on Monday night offered a fresh denial he acted inappropriately with teenagers, denying allegations made by a fifth woman who said he assaulted her when she was a minor.

"I want to make it perfectly clear, the people of Alabama know me, they know my character, they know what I've stood for in the political world for over 40 years. And I can tell you without hesitation this is absolutely false," Moore told reporters without taking questions.

Story Continued Below

He added: "I never did what she said I did. I don't even know the woman. I don't know anything about her. I don't even know where the restaurant is or was."

Brenda Nelson is the fifth woman to come forward alleging that Moore initiated contact with her when she was a teenager and he was over 30, then serving as the Etowah County district attorney. Nelson appeared Monday in a press conference in New York City with her attorney Gloria Allred. She alleged Moore forced himself on her in a car behind the restaurant where she was employed at age 16 as a waitress in Gadsden, Alabama.

Sign up here for POLITICO Huddle A daily play-by-play of congressional news in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

In his brief statement, Moore referenced his lead in the upcoming special election for the Senate seat vacated by Attorney General Jeff Sessions. As he did last week, Moore argued that the story was "a political maneuver" and "has nothing to do with reality."

Moore's wife Kayla spoke as well.

"I've been married to this man for 32 years. We've been together for 33 all-together," she said. "He has never one time lifted a finger to me ... he's Godly. He's loving, and everybody in this community knows it."

"These things are false, and it's ugly, it's the ugliest politics that I've ever been in in my life," she added.

Although Moore maintained that he did not know Brenda Nelson, during her Monday press conference, Allred presented Nelson's 1977 high school yearbook, signed by “Roy Moore, D.A.”