CBO: Obamacare mandate repeal would cut deficit by $338 billion
The open enrollment period to sign up for a health plan under the Affordable Care Act started Nov. 1 and runs until Dec. 15. | Joe Raedle/Getty Images CBO: Obamacare mandate repeal would cut deficit by $338 billion But it would also leave 13 million more uninsured.

Repealing Obamacare’s individual mandate would save the government $338 billion over a decade and result in 13 million more uninsured Americans in 2027, according to a new CBO score.

Congressional Republicans are considering axing Obamacare’s requirement that most Americans obtain health coverage as part of a tax reform package, although there is resistance from GOP leaders who fear the provision would be rejected in the Senate because it would also mean millions in coverage losses and revive the partisan debate on the rest of the Affordable Care Act.

Story Continued Below

The CBO score was based on prior legislative text to repeal the mandate, not on new language related to tax reform.

The new analysis finds that repealing the mandate would not have as big of an impact as the estimates CBO made nearly a year ago. A December 2016 CBO analysis found that undoing the mandate would reduce the budget deficit by $416 billion over nearly a decade and result in 15 million more uninsured Americans in 2026 than under current law.

POLITICO Pulse newsletter Get the latest on the health care fight, every weekday morning — in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

CBO attributed the difference to expectations that the public reaction to mandate repeal would evolve more slowly than prior estimates. CBO has also made methodological changes to how it analyzes the mandate, but the agency said that work is not yet complete and was not fully incorporated in this score.

CBO and the Joint Committee on Taxation “expect to complete and publish an estimate including and explaining the revisions at some point after the current budget reconciliation process is complete or along with a future update to the baseline,” CBO wrote.

Repealing the mandate or merely not fining people for noncompliance — as the Trump administration has floated — would have the same effect. The government would lose money — about $31 billion over a decade — from the lost fines, but it would make money from spending less on Medicaid and on Obamacare's subsidies to help people buy insurance.

Average insurance premiums in the non-group market would increase by about 10 percent in most years, but the markets would continue to be stable, CBO predicted.