DNC raises $67 million in 2017, half of RNC’s haul
The total is slightly ahead of the Democratic National Committee's haul in 2013 and 2015, the previous off-years when Democrats had the benefit of a president from their party in the White House. | John Shinkle/POLITICO DNC raises $67 million in 2017, half of RNC’s haul The Democratic National Committee saw a fundraising uptick, but is not close to keeping pace with its GOP counterpart.

The Democratic National Committee will report raising $5.2 million in December, bringing its total 2017 fundraising to $67 million, according to paperwork that will be filed Wednesday.

That figure includes $1.2 million raised by the Democratic Grassroots Victory Fund, a joint fundraising committee between the national and state parties launched in October, and over $30 million in grass-roots donations —averaging $21 dollars each — overall.

Story Continued Below

The total is slightly ahead of the party's haul in 2013 and 2015, the previous off-years when Democrats had the benefit of a president from their party in the White House. It's far behind the behind the $108 million that the DNC raised in 2011, however.

It also badly trails the Republican National Committee, which raised $11.1 million in December for a 2017 total of $132.5 million.

The RNC has $38.8 million cash on hand. The DNC will report $6.5 million cash on hand, but its debt is now $6.2 million.

Obama did one fundraiser for the DNC last year, but is planning on doing more in the year ahead.

The DNC saw a late uptick in contributions after last fall's statewide wins in Virginia and Alabama. Its fundraising report comes amid Democratic optimism about a wave in this year’s midterms but anxiety that it lacks the operational structure to take advantage. What's more, some officials fear they won't have the money needed to build up that structure this year or ahead of the 2020 presidential race.

POLITICO Playbook newsletter Sign up today to receive the #1-rated newsletter in politics Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

It also comes on the heels of the surprise departure of DNC CEO Jess O’Connell, announced on Monday. She has been a top leader of the DNC, integral to its fundraising and rebuilding efforts.

DNC chair Tom Perez will now have to conduct a replacement search amid the pressure of the election year and his ongoing reboot of the organization, which remains riven by lingering divisions from the 2016 presidential primary.

“Rebuilding the Democratic Party has been no easy task,” said DNC press secretary Michael Tyler, “but that’s exactly what we’re doing due to the grass-roots enthusiasm of Democratic donors and activists across the country who propelled us to victory in 2017.”