Trump donates first-quarter 2018 salary to VA
President Donald Trump has donated his $100,000 quarterly salary to a different government agency every three months. | Evan Vucci/AP Photo Trump donates first-quarter 2018 salary to VA

President Donald Trump will donate his salary for the first quarter of 2018 to the Department of Veterans Affairs, the White House announced Thursday.

Acting VA Secretary Robert Wilkie said at a press briefing that the money would go toward caregiver support programs, including mental health, peer support, research, education, training and financial aid.

Story Continued Below

“The president’s gift underscores his promise to do all that he can for veterans, which includes supporting those who care for our veterans — not just those of us at VA, but the husbands, the wives, the families and the community caregivers who are out there, day in and day out, making life easier for those who have borne the battle,” Wilkie said.

Trump has donated his $100,000 quarterly salary to a different government agency every three months — most recently to the Department of Transportation for infrastructure projects.

His donation to the VA comes at a rocky moment for the agency. Trump fired Secretary David Shulkin in late March. Nearly a month later, Trump’s replacement pick, Rear Adm. Ronny Jackson, withdrew after allegations that the White House doctor had built a toxic work environment and over-prescribed pills.

Breaking News Alerts Get breaking news when it happens — in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

No new VA secretary nominee has been announced.

Wilkie highlighted the passage in the House on Wednesday of a bill that would allow more private health care alternatives in the Veterans Choice Program.

“This is long-awaited legislation that our veterans have been waiting in anticipation of,” Wilkie said. “We urge the Senate to take up the House bill and give it to President Trump, hopefully before Memorial Day.”

Trump has repeatedly urged support for the bill. “Congrats to the House for passing the VA MISSION Act yesterday,” he tweeted Thursday. “Without this funding our veterans will be forced to stand in never ending lines in order to receive care. Putting politics over our veterans care is UNACCEPTABLE.”