Trump criticizes DOJ for not pushing SCOTUS on Arizona driver’s license case
“Department of Justice should have urged the Supreme Court to at least hear the Drivers License case on illegal immigrants in Arizona," President Donald Trump wrote on Twitter. | Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images Trump criticizes DOJ for not pushing SCOTUS on Arizona driver’s license case

President Donald Trump on Wednesday criticized his Department of Justice for not pushing the Supreme Court to hear an appeal brought by the state of Arizona, which was seeking to overturn a judge’s ruling that it must issue driver’s licenses to undocumented immigrants who registered with the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program.

Without commenting, the Supreme Court on Monday opted against hearing Arizona’s appeal. Bloomberg reported Monday that the Trump administration had urged the Supreme Court not to hear the appeal because issues in the case "have been overtaken by events."

Story Continued Below

“Department of Justice should have urged the Supreme Court to at least hear the Drivers License case on illegal immigrants in Arizona. I agree with @LouDobbs. Should have sought review,” Trump wrote on Twitter, citing Fox Business Network host Lou Dobbs.

The case rejected Monday by the Supreme Court dates back to former President Barack Obama’s original implementation of the DACA program, which shielded undocumented immigrants brought to the U.S. as children from deportation and issued them work permits. Arizona’s Republican-led government responded by refusing to issue driver’s licenses to DACA recipients with work permits, a step that was overturned last year by the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.

Playbook Power Briefing Sign up for our must-read newsletter on what's driving the afternoon in Washington. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Trump has regularly lashed out at the Department of Justice through his first 14 months in office, especially as it relates to the ongoing investigation into allegations of collusion between his 2016 campaign and the Russian government’s efforts to interfere in that year’s presidential election.

The president has characterized Attorney General Jeff Sessions, who has recused himself from all investigations related to the 2016 campaign, as “beleaguered,” and attacked the Russia investigation led by special counsel Robert Mueller as a “witch hunt.”