California poised to require medication abortion on state college campuses
Abortion rights supporters argue that the regimen of mifepristone has a strong safety record with few reports of serious side effects or deaths. | Getty California poised to require medication abortion on state college campuses

California legislators are set to plunge into an election-year debate over abortion access, taking up a bill that would make the state the first in the nation to mandate public universities offer medication abortion as part of basic student health services.

The measure, which passed the state Senate in January, would expand abortion rights at a time when some other states are enacting new restrictions on the procedure. The bill on Wednesday came before a key Assembly committee, which decided to determine by the end of next week whether it will move to the floor. The Assembly would have to clear the measure by Aug. 31 for it to reach Gov. Jerry Brown's desk.

Story Continued Below

But concerns over safety and additional government mandates could yet scuttle the effort.

The bill pivots around non-surgical abortion, namely a set of two pills typically taken less than 10 weeks into a pregnancy, that would become a required health service on the 34 University of California and California State University campuses by 2022.

Campus health centers commonly offer basic primary care and reproductive health services, including access to birth control, emergency contraception and screenings for cervical cancer and sexually transmitted diseases. Under the bill, the upfront costs to provide medication abortion on campuses would be privately funded.

Democratic state Sen. Connie Leyva, the author of CA SB320 (17R), said it’s important for college students to have timely access to the medication because delays may force them to undergo more invasive surgical procedures. “No woman makes this choice lightly ... but when you need it, you need to have access,” she said.

The bill's prospects are far from certain, even in a liberal state like California with strong abortion rights protections. Many of the concerns have centered on making sure the campus health centers have the proper equipment, personnel and safety measures.

California Playbook newsletter Our must-read briefing on politics and government in the Golden State. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Anti-abortion groups like Students for Life of America charge that medication abortion is traumatic and dangerous, exposing young women to potentially life-threatening side effects and forcing them to undergo an induced miscarriage in their dorm room or shared bathroom facilities. The first pill is typically taken at the clinic, but the second drug is given to the patient to take unsupervised at home.

“Abortion harms student success, both mentally and physically, and brings danger to campus,” Anna Arend, Northern California regional coordinator for the group, said earlier this year.

Abortion rights supporters argue that the regimen of mifepristone, the brand-name drug Mifeprex, followed by the drug misoprostol 24 to 48 hours later, has a strong safety record with few reports of serious side effects or deaths, especially when compared to complications from surgical abortions.

More than three million women in the United States had medication abortions since the FDA approved the drugs for this purpose in 2000, now accounting for about a third of all pregnancy terminations.

Medication abortion is not to be confused with the morning-after or “Plan B” pill, which is distributed at many college health centers throughout the country (including through a vending machine at one UC campus).

About 500 students at California public universities seek medication abortions every month, and many have to travel significant distances, according to a recent study.

“This is the population [and] age range of people who have the highest rate of abortion,” said Daniel Grossman, professor of obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive sciences at UC San Francisco. “This is a simple procedure that can be offered by primary care doctors or nurse practitioners on campus. By pushing the UCs and CSUs to do that, California would be recognizing that this should be a part of basic health care.”

But there are reasons medication abortion has been limited to only a few campuses, such as the University of Illinois at Chicago, which has made it available since 2006. The Chicago program does not rely on student health fees, or any university or state funding.

Providers who administer mifepristone, made by Danco Laboratories, have to register with the distributor and undergo training to become certified. They also have to be able to accurately date the patient's pregnancy, which may require an ultrasound machine.

Some student health centers are staffed only by a nurse, and lack the necessary equipment. The bill’s long lead time — it wouldn’t kick in until Jan. 1, 2022 — gives the California campuses time to prepare. Neither university system has taken a position on the bill.

The bill doesn't rely on taxpayer funding. The Women’s Foundation of California, Tara Health Foundation and several private donors have created a fund to provide each campus health center with a grant up to $200,000 to purchase equipment, pay for training services and cover other costs. Separate $200,000 grants will be available to the two university systems to create 24-hour medical advice lines, telemedicine services and systems to bill insurance and Medi-Cal for the service.

The mandate and attendant equipment and staffing requirements may make it difficult for other states or university systems to duplicate the envisioned effort, health experts say.

"Most states have abortion restrictions on the books that make it difficult to make abortion services available,” said Elizabeth Nash, senior state issues manager at the Guttmacher Institute, a research organization that supports abortion rights.

Adiba Khan, a recent UC Berkeley graduate, began advocating for medication abortion on campus after hearing of several classmates who couldn't get timely care because the drugs weren't easily available.

Khan, who now works as a campus organizer with the Women’s Foundation, has lobbied state lawmakers, some of whom have concerns, particularly about the burden of mandates on the universities and the potential for ongoing costs.

Khan has received no indication from Brown’s office about whether he would approve or veto the measure. Her pitch is for lawmakers to take a stand in turbulent times.

“Trying to spread access, especially at a time when Roe v. Wade could be overturned and abortion right could be obsolete is progressive, affirmative and bold,” she said.