Drug overdoses and suicides fuel drop in U.S. life expectancy
Researchers and public health experts say the current drop in overall life expectancy has been fueled by the drug crisis and lack of access to mental health care. | Rick Bowmer, File/AP Photo Health Care Drug overdoses and suicides fuel drop in U.S. life expectancy

Life expectancy in the United States declined again last year amid the twin scourges of opioid addiction and an unrelenting rise in suicides.

Three reports by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released Thursday paint an increasingly grim picture of mortality in the United States, with life expectancy dropping, overall death rates increasing and mortality from drug addiction and suicide rising fast among young adults. It was the third year in a row that life expectancy had either fallen or stayed flat — the first three-year stretch since the flu pandemic a century ago.

Story Continued Below

"Life expectancy gives us a snapshot of the Nation’s overall health and these sobering statistics are a wakeup call that we are losing too many Americans, too early and too often, to conditions that are preventable," CDC Director Robert Redfield said in a statement, adding that "we must all work together to reverse this trend and help ensure that all Americans live longer and healthier lives.”

Americans who were born in 2017 are expected to live 78.6 years, a decrease of 0.1 from 2016. A deeper, one-year decrease was recorded in 2015. In 2016, life expectancy was unchanged, according to updated data — creating three years with none of the gains that modern America has typically experienced.

The last one-year decline was in 1993, the height of the AIDS epidemic.

Morning eHealth A daily report on the intersection of health care and technology — in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Researchers and public health experts say the current drop in overall life expectancy has been fueled by the drug crisis and lack of access to mental health care.

The Trump administration, Congress and states have invested billions of new dollars to combat the opioid crisis, and expand access to treatment for both mental health and addiction, and though preliminary numbers for 2018 have shown a potential slowdown in fatal overdoses, the death toll is still mounting.

More than 70,000 people died of a drug overdose in 2017, the highest number on record and 9.6 percent more than the previous year, according to the final mortality data. The highest death rates were among ages 35 and 44, followed closely by ages 25 to 34. Overdose deaths involving prescription opioids and heroin stayed the same as 2016, while fatalities involving fentanyl and certain other synthetic opioids increased 45 percent.

Although the U.S. has struggled with a drug crisis for years, overdoses have only recently become a major driver of the overall mortality rate because decreases in other causes of death, like heart disease, have leveled off after long-term declines.

"In those previous years, the increase in overdose deaths offset the declines in heart disease, but now those have flattened out so that's no longer the case," said Bob Anderson, chief of the Mortality Statistics Branch at the CDC's National Center for Health Statistics.

He said another reason that overdoses as well as suicide are dramatically affecting life expectancy is that they tend to affect younger populations, and deaths among younger people have a larger impact on total life expectancy than deaths among older people.

Roughly 47,173 people, or 14 per 100,000, died by suicide in 2017 — a rate increase of 3.7 percent in one year and 33 percent since 1999. The CDC says suicides increased roughly 2 percent per year, on average, from 2006 to 2017. Suicide rates in rural areas were nearly double those in urban areas, according to the CDC.

“The new data indicate that the tragedy associated with drug overdoses and suicide is far from over and that, in fact, we haven’t begun to turn the corner yet,” said John Auerbach, president and CEO of the Trust for America’s Health, adding that the increases in deaths related to drugs and suicide are “staggering and an indication that much more is needed.”

Death rates overall climbed 0.4 percent from 2016 to 2017 — with 731 deaths per 100,000 people recorded last year. Heart disease, cancer and unintentional injuries (including accidental drug overdose) remained the leading causes of death in the United States, followed closely by suicide, which was the second-leading cause of death for ages 10 to 34.

Deaths from influenza and pneumonia increased the most in 2017, in the wake of a deadly flu season. Unintentional injuries had the next greatest year-over-year increase, likely due to the opioid crisis. Mortality from suicide, diabetes and Alzheimer’s also rose significantly.

Death rates among adults 25 to 34 experienced the highest uptick in death rates last year; they decreased among ages 45 to 54.

"We're a developed nation with vast resources," CDC's Anderson said. "There’s no reason we should be seeing life expectancy drop, this shouldn’t be happening."



This article tagged under: CDC

Life

Suicides

Death

Opioids