Criminal justice reform bill still alive as McConnell deliberates
“We’re trying to figure out how to proceed on it. We’re still trying to figure that out," Sen. Mitch McConnell said of the criminal justice reform proposal. | Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images Congress Criminal justice reform bill still alive as McConnell deliberates

Chuck Grassley and other advocates of criminal justice reform are desperately trying to sway Mitch McConnell to stay longer in December to finish their bill. And McConnell isn't ruling it out.

The Senate Judiciary Committee chairman said he's still waiting on an official word from the majority leader on whether he will provide floor time to take up a measure that has drawn heated opposition from some Senate Republicans despite earning President Donald Trump's endorsement.

Story Continued Below

But the Iowa Republican said the bipartisan bill could be done "very fast," despite concerns from Republican leaders that the bill could take nearly a week to finish and eat up limited space on the calendar.

McConnell said the Senate GOP is still deliberating on whether to move forward, though he left the door open in a brief Thursday interview.

“We’re trying to figure out how to proceed on it. We’re still trying to figure that out," the Kentucky Republican said.

Sign up here for POLITICO Huddle A daily play-by-play of congressional news in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

McConnell has said his top priorities are passing the farm bill, confirming judges and funding the government. Though advocates are optimistic McConnell will keep the Senate in session longer, a spokesman said there are no schedule announcements at this time.

Meanwhile, even as a bipartisan group of senators is still working on coming up with a new agreement to win more co-sponsors and the support of the National Sheriffs' Association, a Justice Department draft began circulating on Thursday that rewrites a number of key provisions.

The draft, obtained by POLITICO, would still allow many federal inmates to earn time credits and obtain supervised release but would bar people convicted of violent crimes and major drug-trafficking crimes. It would also increase penalties for attacking police officers and fentanyl dealers, a key concern of law enforcement groups and senators from states hit by the opioid crisis.

But the White House pushed back quickly against the draft, reiterating Trump's call for the criminal justice bill to get a vote this year.

"The president has endorsed the Senate compromise on the First Step Act, and the White House is not circulating any other version,” White House deputy press secretary Hogan Gidley said. “All reporting to the contrary is false. The White House is committed to passing this legislation in the lame duck."

One person working in favor of criminal justice reform also slammed the draft as reflecting the efforts of a "rogue DOJ official who always hated the bill." Democrats and Republicans have been working to overcome objections from Republican senators, but "this is not what is being considered," the person said.

Grassley said Thursday afternoon that the bill's sponsors are continuing to look at potential changes that would bring the bill further in line with some law enforcement groups' preferences, but indicated that no new version was agreed upon.

The DOJ didn't respond to a request for comment.

Senate Minority Whip Dick Durbin (D-Ill.) said supporters are considering excluding people from sentencing reforms that committed arson, certain drug crimes and "taking care of the sheriffs' concerns" about sex crimes.

Sen. Tom Cotton (R-Ark.) raised public alarms this week over what he described as provisions of the bill that could allow some sex offenders to earn time credits that could allow them early release from prison, arguing those criminals should be excluded from the bill's changes. Cotton and a handful of other Republican senators have been unwilling to allow a quick vote on the bill, called the First Step Act.

Cotton has pointed to the criminal justice bill's inclusion of some sex-related offenders in its provisions allowing extra time credits leading toward early release. But the legislation's backers counter that current law already allows those offenders to earn credits, and that the bill also gives the Bureau of Prisons ultimate power to determine which categories of inmates are low-risk enough to be eligible.

BOP technical guidance obtained by POLITICO indicates that sex-related offenses, as well as deportable alien status, are "the two most common public-safety factors" that would bump up inmates' level of risk — and their related eligibility for time credits under the criminal justice bill.