Shelby push for harbor money adds to disaster aid impasse
Sen. Richard Shelby (R-Ala.) is pressing for money in the disaster aid bill for harbor maintenance funds that would benefit Alabama. | J. Scott Applewhite/AP Photo congress Shelby push for harbor money adds to disaster aid impasse

A parochial push from Senate Appropriations Chairman Richard Shelby is one of several factors complicating already-stalled negotiations on a disaster relief package.

Shelby is pressing for language in the disaster aid bill that would free up more money for harbor maintenance funds — something that would be a boon to harbors and ports in his home state of Alabama.

Story Continued Below

Shelby has long-sought to unlock billions in user fees for harbor maintenance that Congress has declined to appropriate and has sought to attach a provision to spending bills in recent months.

But the proposal has been met with bipartisan opposition as well as resistance from the White House.

“We would like that,” Shelby said, when asked whether he was trying to include the harbor maintenance proposal in the disaster aid package. “That would be for the nation... This is not borrowed money. It’s infrastructure for all the ports and dams.”

POLITICO Playbook newsletter Sign up today to receive the #1-rated newsletter in politics Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

The Alabama Republican added that he and his Democratic counterpart on the committee, Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont, “are still talking” on disaster aid.

The push for the harbor maintenance trust fund provision is one of several sticking points holding up the finalization of a multi-billion dollar disaster aid bill. The biggest snag has been over how much money to allocate to Puerto Rico, which was hit by two hurricanes in 2017. President Donald Trump has complained to Senate Republicans that the island has received too much money.

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said Tuesday he’d like to see the disaster bill get done before Memorial Day recess.

Trump is headed to a rally in Florida Wednesday evening where he is expected to blast Democrats for holding up disaster aid. Prior to the rally, Trump tweeted “we’ve given, and are giving, billions of $$$ for the devastation caused by Hurricane Michael. Even though the Dems are totally in our way (they don’t want money to go there) we’re getting it done!”

Differences between the House’s disaster aid bill and the Senate’s plan are also an issue, and a new White House request for $4.5 billion to address the surge of Central American migrants at the border could potentially be in the mix as well.

A senior administration official blasted the push for to unlock money for harbor maintenance, saying, “There’s no need for this. They can spend the fees collected to fund what’s needed for harbor maintenance now.”

Shelby’s office disagrees.

"Every time we do a disaster package, we realize that we are unable to meet Corps needs," said Shelby spokeswoman Blair Taylor. "This provision would free up more of the Corps’ budget to focus on these needs, helping nearly every state."

Democrats are also not enthused about adding harbor maintenance to the discussions. A senior Democratic aide said that Democrats in disaster aid negotiations “have maintained that extraneous controversial matters, like the harbor maintenance trust fund, should be excluded.”

The impasse over disaster aid negotiations comes as the House prepares to vote Friday on a new relief package. Democrats and Republicans were divided Wednesday over whether to include any funding for the border in the legislation.

Rep. Tom Cole (R-Okla.) said he has no problem with it but doubted it could get through the Senate or the House.

“I don’t believe in holding people that are living through legitimate disasters — I mean we have wildfires, to hurricane victims — those people need the help now,” Cole said. “This has taken months and frankly we should’ve gotten it done when we were in the majority in my opinion.”

Rep. David Price (D-N.C.) expressed strong opposition to the idea.

“Border security, good or bad, we can consider in due course,” he said. “But this is not the time to be adding extraneous elements to disaster relief. That’s a very bad idea.”

Shelby also signaled that he was not inclined to push for the new Homeland Security money.

“There are a lot of things, suggestions going about,” Shelby said, when asked about the possibility of adding spending for the border. “My preference would be to stay strictly on disaster but sometimes things are added to it.”

Sarah Ferris contributed to this report.