McMaster: ‘Incontrovertible’ evidence of Russian interference in election
U.S. National Security Adviser H.R. McMaster delivers a speech at the 2018 Munich Security Conference on February 17 | Sebastian Widmann/Getty Images McMaster: ‘Incontrovertible’ evidence of Russian interference in election Moscow may change tack because its strategy is not working, US national security adviser says.

The evidence against Russians charged with interfering in the U.S. election is “incontrovertible,” but Moscow may rethink its strategy of trying to undermine Western democracies, U.S. National Security Adviser H.R. McMaster said Saturday.

On Friday U.S. special counsel Robert Mueller charged 13 Russian nationals and three Russian entities with an illegal “information warfare” scheme to disrupt the 2016 presidential election and assist the candidacy of President Donald Trump. Russian officials including Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov dismissed the allegations, but McMaster said the case against Moscow was clear.

"As you can see with FBI indictment, the evidence is incontrovertible and available in the public domain," he said at the Munich Security Conference, one of the biggest annual gatherings of security and defense policymakers and experts. "Whereas in the past it was difficult to attribute … now this is in the arena of law enforcement investigation, it’s going to be very apparent to everyone."

He said Russia’s attempts to “pit Western societies against each other” have failed and ended up “uniting all of our polities against Russia.” Moscow will therefore have to reevaluate what it’s doing as “it’s just not working,” he said.

"It’s quite difficult to pass bipartisan legislation across our parties at the moment, except in one case, which is sanctions against Russia, where the vote was 98-2," McMaster said. "That was made possible mainly by Russia itself and Russians themselves in engaging in this campaign of political subversion."

McMaster was responding to a question from the audience at the conference about a potential Russia-U.S. cyber dialogue.

“I’m surprised there are any Russia cyber experts available based on how active most of them have been in undermining our democracies in the West,” McMaster said. “We’d love to have a cyber dialogue when Russia is sincere about curtailing its sophisticated form of espionage.”

“I think that day will be coming because we’re becoming more and more adept at tracing the origins of this espionage and subversion.”