Organizing for Action pitches help for Democrats
Organizing for Action is looking to help Georgia Senate candidate Michelle Nunn, marking the first time that President Barack Obama’s political arm has explicitly crossed into Democratic politics.

Several political operatives and potential donors told POLITICO that OFA Executive Director Jon Carson made the pitch to help Nunn in various discussions this spring.

OFA Chairman Jim Messina has also held discussions with the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee about mobilizing Obama supporters in Republican-held districts in races the party hopes will be competitive, according to a Democratic official.

(Also on POLITICO: OFA embraces tea party blueprint)

It’s a dramatic step for the group, founded in January, to help promote the president’s agenda. OFA says it’s not endorsing specific candidates or participating in “electoral politics,” but by telling donors that its work will directly help Democratic candidates, OFA is jumping over a partisan boundary it previously had said it wouldn’t cross.

Exactly how OFA will assist candidates has yet to be determined, according to people who have spoken with Carson. But former Georgia Gov. Roy Barnes said they talked about ways to help Nunn.

“We did talk about her race,” Barnes said. “It was about helping her and everybody here. We need [OFA] to become involved in registering people who are now turning to us. That includes white women, Hispanics and, of course, African-Americans. I was encouraging him to become more and more involved. I told him, ‘Y’all ought to get involved in this race.’”

(PHOTOS: Senators up for election in 2014)

Barnes declined say how Carson responded. “I won’t get into the details of a private conversation,” he said.

OFA spokeswoman Katie Hogan said the group “is not coordinating on targeted districts with the DCCC” and isn’t working on any specific race.

“Organizing for Action does not participate in electoral politics. We are not partisan,” Hogan said. “We are an issue advocacy group that works on the agenda the American people voted for in 2012 from a better bargain for the middle class to the comprehensive immigration reform that will grow our economy.”

OFA sees its role to help create a generation of community leaders and organizers, and Carson has often spoken about the effect that organizing and training can have outside OFA and that the group’s volunteers are likely to work on a range of activities, including possible future campaigns, especially if they feel passionately about a candidate. Hogan said OFA will not register voters.

(Also on POLITICO: Michelle Nunn announces Senate run)

Meanwhile, two people interviewed by POLITICO subsequently asked to be removed from the story after receiving a phone call from Carson.

The group has thus far focused on public education and organizing campaigns surrounding issues including climate change, gun control and immigration. But a detour — however slight — into politics is something that appeals to donors more interested in winning elections than holding rallies.

“To some Georgia donors, saying, ‘We’re going to be here for Michelle Nunn,’ that’s more persuasive than, ‘We’re going to come down here and promote immigration reform,’” said Chris Carpenter, a Georgia Democratic operative who met with Carson in Atlanta this spring.

OFA said it would be active in districts where it will compete, driving up negatives on congressional Republicans through next summer, a Democratic official said, adding that no specific states or districts have been chosen.

(Also on POLITICO: Michelle Nunn meets with Obama)

“The single best thing they can do for Democratic prospects in 2014 is to organize critically important communities in [a] targeted district and focusing them on what the Republican member does,” the official said.

OFA earlier this year pledged to avoid any hint of partisan activity.

“Neither OFA nor its chapters will be involved in any way in elections or partisan political activity,” the group wrote on its website in February. “Its exclusive purpose is public policy advocacy and development, and in particular, both enactment of President Obama’s legislative agenda and the identification and advancement of other goals for progressive change at the state and local level.”

Any OFA activities will be limited by its status as a 501(c)(4) social welfare organization — the type of groups at the center of investigations into how and why the Internal Revenue Service probed their political activities. OFA has yet to file its 501(c)(4) application, and it is not legally required to, but it is treated as such under the law.

The social welfare status hasn’t stopped similar groups — such as the Koch brothers-backed Americans for Prosperity and Karl Rove’s Crossroads GPS — from playing big in campaigns. It’s legal so long as they don’t explicitly endorse candidates and stick to voter registration and other “educational” activities.

“They should be careful,” said Lisa Gilbert of Public Citizen. “What you can’t do is cross the line into advocating for or against candidates. They are straddling the line with the way they are organized, and they need to be careful that they stick to issue work.”

As a prelude to a 2014 push, OFA is launching so-called Action August events to focus attention on congressional Republicans who oppose Obama’s agenda on the environment, the economy, immigration and gun control. OFA hopes to drive supporters to town hall sessions during the recess in the group’s effort to borrow the tea party’s 2010 blueprint.

OFA’s fundraising has already picked up. It raised $8.2 million between April and June, including $500,000 in donations from two Democratic megadonors: Chicago media mogul Fred Eychaner and biotech entrepreneur David Shaw.

Attracting cash from big donors has the potential to fulfill a prophecy some Democrats worried about earlier this year — that OFA, representing Obama, would divert cash from more traditional groups such as the Democratic National Committee, Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee and DCCC.

Carson’s meetings with Georgia donors, fundraisers, operatives and Nunn political allies — including Atlanta Mayor Kasim Reed and Stacey Abrams, minority leader of the Georgia Assembly — were aimed at raising money for OFA, according to people who attended. But Nunn’s candidacy was not far from the surface.

Outside Georgia, OFA donors said their conversations with Carson touched on making Democratic gains in 2014 races.

“There’s going to be some focus [on] races where they can make a difference in getting people who care about the issues to come out and vote,” said former South Carolina Democratic Party Chairman Dick Harpootlian, who gave $10,000 to OFA.

Of the stated difference OFA said it will keep between issue advocacy and election, Harpootlian said: “I don’t know how you can separate them.”

The Georgians who met with Carson pitched Nunn’s race as a chance to build a Democratic network in a state that hasn’t elected a Democrat statewide since 2006. The state party apparatus is in shambles — there is currently no chairman or executive director, and Obama did not contest it in 2012 after mounting a brief effort in 2008.

“It’s worth it for everybody to make the investment for Michelle’s campaign and use it to carry over for the permanent infrastructure in 2016,” said state Sen. Jason Carter, the grandson of the former president who is close with Nunn. “There’s a lot of upside potential in Georgia. You get a lot more bang for your buck here because now, you’ve got somebody to pull the train.”

The Nunn race also provides an opportunity for Obama’s OFA supporters to direct their energies to another election rather than the perpetual gridlock the president faces in Washington.

“It provides folks an opportunity to get engaged, to get energized, to contribute to something that could be a big deal — to pick up one of the two open seats in the country. In that sense, it provides a decent opportunity for us,” said Justin Tanner, an Atlanta-based Obama 2012 National Finance Committee member, who met with Carson.

Nunn’s campaign, now focused on raising enough money to mount a competitive race next year, said it has no discussions with Carson or OFA, though Barnes and Reed are among Nunn’s honorary chairmen. The campaign’s actual chairman, Gordon Giffin, said he’s not aware of anything that OFA might be able to do on its behalf.

Ironically, Nunn’s camp may not welcome help that comes with the Obama imprimatur as she tries to define herself as a moderate Democrat who is not reflexively loyal to the president.

“Whatever effort is ongoing, I know nothing about, and I haven’t paid much attention to the state party or anything else,” Giffin said. “We’re trying to stand up a Senate campaign, and I’m not looking at a lot of other sort of collateral activities at this point.”

For Nunn — daughter of former Sen. Sam Nunn — to win, she will need to drive up minority turnout and do better than the 20 percent of the white vote that Barnes got when he sought to retake his old office in 2010. And Obama’s team has long eyed Georgia as a state ripe for Democrats. Obama won 47 percent of the vote in 2008 and 45 percent in 2012 despite not competing.

“Anytime you have a group that wants to organize and register voters — obviously you want to get voters that are more inclined to vote for you — they’ll probably be organizing a lot of suburban women and non-white voters around the state and younger voters,” said Keith Mason, an Atlanta attorney who worked in the Clinton White House and as chief of staff to former Gov. Zell Miller.

Tarini Parti contributed to this report.