Scott-O-Meter: Eliminate Florida's corporate income tax over 7 years
Scott-O-Meter Eliminate Florida's corporate income tax over 7 years

"Eliminate Florida's corporate income tax over seven years. Fully phasing out the corporate income tax over time will have a large positive benefit for Florida's economy while having a minimal impact on state revenues. Total state tax revenues will benefit from the dynamic economic growth created by the corporate income-tax phaseout."



Updates

With Legislature wary of bigger exemptions, Scott proposes $770 million tax cut for businesses

Legislature balks at exemption increase for second straight year

Scott fails to get Legislature on board with exempting more businesses from corporate income tax

Gov. Rick Scott's effort to steadily eliminate the state's corporate income tax took a hit during the 2013 legislative session. The proposal, SB 562 and HB 401, failed to get any traction among lawmakers in 2013. Scott, meanwhile, did not do much to push what was once a campaign priority and included in his budget recommendations. His press office declined to elaborate when we asked why. "The Legislature failed to act on this recommendation,” said spokesman John Tupps. The measure, which received just one committee vote between the two chambers, would have increased the exemption for the corporate income tax from $50,000 to $75,000. Expanding the exemption would have spared 2,000 more businesses from paying the tax, Scott has said. The history: As a Capitol n00b, Scott called on legislators to slice the corporate income tax rate from 5.5 percent to 3 percent, with the rest of it being phased out through 2018. That did not work out. So Scott settled on a roundabout way of doing it: relieving businesses of paying the tax by upping the amount of income exempt from the tax. In his first year, Scott lobbied to exempt the first $25,000 worth of taxable income, up from $5,000. In 2012, he got the Legislature to raise the exemption to $50,000. In all, the changes spared more than 12,000 Florida businesses from paying the corporate income tax. The tax comprises about 9 percent, or $2 billion, of the state's general revenue, according to the Department of Revenue. Scott told the state real estate agents group that raising the exemption to $75,000 would benefit about 2,000 businesses, according to the Tampa Bay Times/Miami Herald. Scott's press team has said the new exemption would mean 80 percent of Florida businesses would be exempt from paying the tax. The lawmakers who sponsored the proposal said there was support for it in the Legislature, but it didn't hold up to other pro-business priorities. Rep. Ross Spano, R-Dover, said there was not enough room for the measure in the budget "because it came with an approximate $20 million fiscal impact." In the Senate, leaders were supportive but felt like they were just looking to spread their wings, said Sen. Dorothy Hukill, R-Port Orange. "Some people that I spoke to felt like we had been in this arena before,” Hukill said. But the Legislature was still business-friendly, she said, pointing to the compromise between Scott and lawmakers granting a three-year exemption on sales taxes on manufacturing equipment. To a Democrat, the Legislature's slow-down on corporate income taxes and consideration of ending a 26-year insurance industry tax break was welcome. "It gives me hope that there's a little bit of a shift in philosophy,” said Sen. Jeff Clemens, D-Lake Worth, the only member who voted against Hukill's bill. "It seems like for the last several years we"ve continued to give corporate tax breaks while the average working person got nothing.” So where does this leave Scott's promise to eliminate the corporate income tax? After two years of exempting businesses from the tax, the Legislature halted Scott's progress by refusing to consider legislation that would have relieved more businesses. We rate this pledge Stalled. Sources: The Florida Current, "Lawmakers grow skeptical of tax breaks, incentives,” April 22, 2013 Florida Department of Revenue, 2013 Tax Handbook, May 9, 2013 Interview with Sen. Jeff Clemens, May 10, 2013 Interview with Sen. Dorothy Hukill, May 10, 2013 Email interview with Rep. Ross Spano, May 10, 2013 Interview with John Tupps, Gov. Rick Scott spokesman, May 10, 2013

Scott wants to exempt more businesses from corporate tax

Under Scott, fewer businesses pay corporate income taxes

No legislative will to make Scott's big corporate tax cuts

Gov. Rick Scott presented a 2011-12 budget to lawmakers on Feb. 7, 2011, that cut the corporate income tax rate from 5.5 to 3 percent, the first step in his plan to phase out the business tax entirely over seven years.



But when the Legislature finally passed its budget on May 7, it was unwilling to make the deep cuts needed elsewhere in the budget to cover the $459 million in corporate tax relief. The final budget that Scott will sign or veto includes no corporate tax rate reduction.



Instead, it includes only a $30 million reduction, created not by rate cuts but by expanding the current exemption for the corporate tax. The budget expands the current exemption for businesses from $5,000 in taxes they owe to $25,000. House Speaker Dean Cannon says the expansion of the exemption reduces the 30,000 businesses that pay the tax by about half.



The change represents less than 1/10th of the cut Scott had sought.



Cannon and Senate President Mike Haridopolos maintained from the start of the session that it would be difficult to find the cost savings needed to cut the corporate income tax rate.



"As I've talked to so many members and, more importantly, business leaders across the state, they feel that stability is more important than reducing a 5.5 percent corporate tax rate," Haridopolos said on May 1. "My stance has been and will continue to be that the most important thing is to show budget discipline by spending less."



The Legislature did include $210 million in property tax cuts in its budget by reducing the taxing authority of local water management districts.



"By eliminating the corporate income tax for nearly half of the Florida businesses who pay it, we are working with our partners in the Senate and Gov. Scott to make our common goal of private-sector job creation a reality," Cannon said in a statement on May 5. "I share Gov. Scott's desire to reduce and hopefully eliminate the corporate income tax. As we work to attract new businesses to locate and encourage existing businesses to expand in our state, today's legislation is a great first step and a sure signal that Florida is open for business."



But on eliminating corporate taxes, Scott will have to wait until next year to try again. We rate this promise Stalled. Sources: St. Petersburg Times, "Haridopolos: Scott's corporate tax cut dead in Senate," May 1, 2011



Palm Beach Post, "Scott satisfied with Florida budget compromise giving him a sixth of tax cuts he wanted," May 3, 2011



Rick Scott, "Eliminate Florida's Corporate Income Tax Over Seven Years," accessed May 6, 2011



Dean Cannon press release, May 5, 2011

Scott proposes reducing corporate tax rate