Will Steel Tariffs put U.S. Jobs at Risk?
International Trade

Will Steel Tariffs put U.S. Jobs at Risk?

The Issue:

Jobs in U.S. industries that use steel or inputs made of steel outnumber those involved in the production of steel by roughly 80 to 1.

The Facts:

What this Means: The Trump Administration has until April to decide whether to implement the recommendations to restrict or tax steel imports. The Commerce Department made the recommendations under a seldom-used legislative provision, Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, which allows trade interventions in the interests of national security. However, a recent memo from the Secretary of Defense reports that U.S. military requirements for steel (and aluminum) represent only three percent of U.S. production and expresses continuing concern that the two options involving global tariffs or quotas could have a “negative impact on our key allies.” At the same time, past experience shows trade restrictions on steel will raise costs for manufacturers that rely on steel as a direct or indirect input into production. Across many states, the number of jobs adversely affected in these steel-using industries could far exceed any steel jobs saved. Past experience also shows that unilateral action like Section 232 tariffs will invite retaliation — the Bush-era steel tariffs led many countries to target politically sensitive U.S. exports like Florida oranges and North Carolina textiles. China has already threatened to retaliate against agricultural goods such as soybeans (for which China is the largest U.S. export market) and EU officials have reportedly begun drafting possible measures aimed at Kentucky bourbon and Wisconsin dairy products. It is also unlikely that a unilateral U.S. tariff will provoke an end to production subsidies and other interventions in foreign countries. The root problem, global overcapacity in steel production, is best addressed through multilateral efforts like the OECD Global Forum on Steel Excess Capacity, which the United States helped pioneer in 2016, and has likely led to some cuts in production and capacity. But the current Administration did not send the United States Trade Representative or any Senate-confirmed representative to the recent Ministerial meeting of the Global Forum on Steel, weakening prospects for progress.

(Click here for a larger interactive version with state-specific estimates. Map updated March 3, 2018)The U.S. Department of Commerce announced recommendations on February 16, 2018 to impose heavy tariffs or quotas on foreign producers of steel. The proposed tariffs are taxes on imported steel. The quotas would put caps on the volume of imported steel. Either type of measure would raise the price of steel in the United States. This could help domestic steel producers, but it would harm U. S. manufacturing industries that use steel and products made of steel as inputs. Tariffs and quotas are often presented as trading off domestic producer gains against consumer losses, but because steel is an input into so many other products, the measures more likely will trade off jobs saved in steel industry against job losses in other manufacturing industries. The losses could be substantial because the number of jobs in U.S. industries that use steel or inputs made of steel outnumber the number of jobs involved in the production of steel by roughly 80 to 1. For this reason, these trade recommendations raise concerns among many manufacturing companies.