India to resist Japan and South Korea's push for patent legislation at RCEP
NEW DELHI: India will resist a push by Japan and South Korea for stringent patent legislation at the eighth round of negotiations for Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), according to a senior official.Ten ASEAN countries and their freetrade agreement partners--Australia, China, India, Japan, Korea and New Zealand--are currently holding the eight round of talks in Kyoto and hope to create an Asian free-trade block—RCEP— by the year end. The negotiations seeks to include goods, services, investments, competition and intellectual property New Delhi has maintained that its intellectual property rights regime is WTO compliant and will not talk beyond its global commitments made under Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). India, instead, is pushing for protection of traditional knowledge. As per the draft text submissions, Japan and South Korea have proposed provisions beyond the WTO, such as patent term extensions, data exclusivity and lowering of the patentability criteria.The current round of negotiations will conclude on June 13. The negotiations saw protests from public health activists and the civil society, cautioning about the adverse impact of such IP provisions on accessibility of low-cost medicines in developing countries."If accepted, these provisions would extend monopoly protection beyond what is required," said Loon Gangte of a civil society group-DNP+ and International Treatment Preparedness Coalition- South Asia. Japan and Korea have the backing of Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and Singapore and other fellow countries in the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP), which is another proposed regional free trade agreement under which these countries are negotiating with the US. Korea has, in its draft text, said that the patent term must be adjusted to compensate for unreasonable delays in granting the patent. "An unreasonable delay shall at least include a delay in the issuance of the patent of more than four years from the date of filing of the application...," it has proposed. "We are clear about our red lines in the negotiation and we are not going to talk beyond TRIPS," the Indian official said.Japan, on the other hand, is pushing for patents to be granted for incremental innovations, even when they don't show any improved efficacy over an existing invention. Section 3(d) of India's patent law forbids patenting of incremental innovations called 'evergreening'. This clause was also upheld by the SC in 2013 when it turned down Swiss drug innovator Novartis' plea for patenting its cancer drug Glivec.