Fox News: Pearson World History Pro-Islam, Anti-Christian
(Editor: World History, published by Pearson, Prentice Hall gained was criticized in The Citizens for National Security (CFNS) 2012 report as one of 25 Florida textbooks to contain egregious examples of pro-Islamic, anti-Christian, anti-Jewish bias. The Report Card www.thereportcard.org has written several articles about Islamic bias in public school textbook. The Palm Beach County School District forced Pearson to re-write the sections under discussion. Other Florida Counties, like Clay, St. Johns and Brevard continue to use World History. Versions of World History are widely used throughout the United States. Last night, Fox News Todd Starnes reported the story. The full CFNS report co-authored by William Korach and Dr. William Saxton is available at no cost at www.cfns.us )

By Todd Starnes

A world history book used in an Advanced Placement class is under review by a Florida school board over allegations it favors Islam at the expense of Christianity and Judaism.

State Rep. Ritch Workman told Fox News the Prentice World History textbook rewrites Islamic history and presents a biased version of the Muslim faith.

“The book has a 36-page chapter on Islam but no chapters on Christianity or Judaism,” Workman said. “It’s remarkably one-sided.”

The textbook is being used in an Advanced Placement class in Brevard County schools. The book is on a state-approved list and has been used in the school system for the past three years without any complaints.

Workman said he received a copy of the book and he said it’s clear the authors “make a very obvious attempt not to insult Islam by reshaping history.”

“If you don’t see it from the eyes of a parent, kids are going to take this book as gospel and believe that Christians and Jews were murderous barbarians and thank God the Muslims came along and the world is great,” he said.

For example, Workman said a reference to Mohammed and his armies taking over Medina states, “people happily accepted Islam as their way of life.”

“It leaves out that tens of thousands of Jews and non-believers were massacred by Mohammed’s armies,” he said. “It’s a blatant deception.”

The book indicates that Jesus proclaimed himself to be the Messiah while stating as fact that Mohammed is a prophet, Workman said. Students are also given lessons on the Koran and the five pillars of Islam. The

“They don’t do that for Christianity,” he said. “That is offensive to me.”

School board member Amy Kneessy told Fox News she has similar concerns.

“Some of the descriptions of the battles use the word ‘massacre’ when it’s a Christian battle and ‘takeover’ when it’s a Muslim battle,” she said. “In young minds, massacre paints a very different visual picture than a takeover or occupation – when in fact both battles were very bloody.”

Kneessy said she’s also concerned that the book devotes an entire chapter to Islam.

“I don’t want revisionist history,” she said. “History is history.”

Pearson, the publisher of the textbook, confirmed there is a chapter titled, “Muslim Civilizations.”

“Pearson and its authors adhere to the highest editorial standards when creating course materials, which undergo a rigorous review process,” Pearson spokeswoman Susan Aspey told Fox News. “A review of the book shows there is balanced attention given to the beliefs of Islam, Judaism and Christianity.”

However, Workman said that statement is “patently unfair and untrue.”

“They hired a Muslim cleric to write the Muslim section,” he said. “The publisher told me.”

Aspey said that’s not correct.

She said “academic experts did review the content, but they did not write it or edit i