Energy & Environmental Analysis > Research Staff
Research Staff

Principal Technical Leader

Technical Executive

Dr. Geoffrey J. Blanford is a leading expert on integrated assessment and energy economy modeling. His research activities include development of analytical tools such as the MERGE model and the US-REGEN model with applications including electricity markets, end-use electrification, and international climate policy. Dr. Blanford is a Technical Executive and Program Manager for Energy and Climate Policy Analysis with the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) in Palo Alto, CA, where he has worked since 2006. He was a lead author for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fifth Assessment Report and serves as co-director of the International Energy Workshop (IEW). He holds a B.A. in mathematics from Yale University, a M.S. in operations research from Columbia University, and a Ph.D. in management science and engineering from Stanford University. Recent Publications Bistline, J.E. and G.J. Blanford, 2016. More than one arrow in the quiver: Why "100% Renewables" misses the mark. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

Blanford, G.J, J.H. Merrick, and D. Young, 2014. A Clean Energy Standard Analysis with the US-REGEN Model. The Energy Journal 35, pp 137-164,

Blanford, G.J, E. Kriegler, and M. Tavoni, 2014. Harmonization vs. Fragmentation: An Overview of Climate Policy Scenarios in EMF27. Climatic Change 123, pp 383-396.

Senior Program Manager

Dr. Francisco C. de la Chesnaye is the Senior Program Manager for the Energy and Environmental Analysis Group at the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). His current research portfolio covers both domestic and international climate change issues. On domestic issues, his work focuses on modeling of the U.S. energy system, in particular the electric power sector, to evaluate the possible transformation of the system under alternative policies. On international issues, Dr. de la Chesnaye's work focuses on analyzing post-2012 global climate change policies. In addition to his research at EPRI, Dr. de la Chesnaye has served on various external expert panels, including EPA’s Scientific Advisory Board panel on Economy-Wide Modeling, 2015-2017; lead author on the 2014 U.S. Climate Assessment’s Mitigation chapter; National Academies of Sciences report that evaluated the "Effects of Provisions in the Internal Revenue Code on U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions" in 2013; National Academies Panel 2010 report titled "Limiting the Magnitude of Future Climate Change"; and a lead author for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) Fourth Assessment Report in 2017. Prior to joining EPRI, Dr. de la Chesnaye was the Chief Climate Economist at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Dr. de la Chesnaye earned a bachelor’s degree in Economics from Norwich University, the Military College of Vermont, a master’s degree in Environmental Science from Johns Hopkins University, a master’s degree in Economics from American University, and a doctorate in Public Policy from the University of Maryland. Recent Publications Bistline, J. E. and F. de la Chesnaye, 2017, Banking on Banking: Does ‘When’ Flexibility Mask the Costs of Stringent Climate Policy? Climatic Change, pp 1–14.

Strasser, A., M.J. Myers, P. Parenteau, H.R. Smith, S. Spina, and F. de la Chesnaye, 2015. "The Legal Implications of EPA’s Clean Power Plant Rulemaking", Energy Symposium Proceedings. Vermont Journal of Environmental Law, Book 2, Volume 17

Murray, Brian C, Maureen L. Cropper, Francisco C. de la Chesnaye, and John M. Reilly, 2014. How Effective are US Renewable Energy Subsidies in Cutting Greenhouse Gases? American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 2014, 104(5): 1–8

Technical Executive

Adam Diamant is a Technical Executive in the Energy and Environmental Analysis Group at the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). Mr. Diamant manages EPRI's Integrated Portfolio Planning and Market Analysis program, and its Natural Gas Interest Group. Mr. Diamant also manages EPRI’s Electric Generation Expansion Analysis (EGEAS) software used widely to conduct production cost and capacity expansion modeling in the United States and internationally. He also provides analytic support for EPRI's climate change related research programs. Mr. Diamant's research focuses on the interactions between natural gas and coal markets and electricity markets, and key emerging issues in long-term, integrated resource planning for electric companies. His climate-related research focuses on the development of international greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions trading and GHG emissions offsets programs. His research develops information and improves analytic methods that electric companies and others can use to make strategic decisions in response to the ongoing evolution of fuel and electric power markets and climate policies. Mr. Diamant formerly was a Project Manager at EPRI Solutions, Inc.—EPRI's application consulting subsidiary—where he managed ecological asset management projects. He has worked in the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in the Executive Office of the President of the United States, where he was responsible for oversight of all of the regulatory programs of the U.S. Department of the Interior and the U.S. Forest Service. Mr. Diamant earned a bachelor's degree from the University of California, Berkeley and a master’s degree in Public Policy from the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University. He has received several professional awards recognizing his outstanding performance at OMB and EPRI, and he is a past recipient of a Presidential Management Internship. Recent Publications Diamant, A., Young, D., and Wan, Y., 2016. REGEN Scenarios Analysis: Understanding Key Factors That May Impact Future Electricity Generation, EPRI Report 3002005839.

Diamant, A., Young, D., Holmes C., Pabi, S., and Bistline, J., 2016. Quantifying Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions Associated with Large-Scale End-Use Energy Efficiency Projects, EPRI Report 3002005589.

Kahrl, F., Ryan, N. and Diamant, A, 2015. Integrating Distributed Energy Resources into Electricity Resource Planning: Current Practices and Emerging Issues. EPRI Report 3002005838.

Principal Technical Leader

Project Operations Coordinator

Sydney Duarte is a Project Operations Coordinator for the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) providing direct support to the Energy and Environmental Analysis Group. She focuses on business support for multiple R&D projects and also supports the EPRI’s sustainability, electromagnetic fields, radio-frequency health assessment, and safety programs. Prior to joining the Energy and Environmental Analysis Group, Ms. Duarte worked on research projects related to Nondestructive Evaluation and Performance Demonstration Initiative in EPRI’s Nuclear Sector.

Engineer/Scientist II

Laura Fischer is an Engineer/Scientist II in the Energy and Environmental Analysis Research Group at the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). At EPRI she supports research projects on climate impacts, resiliency, and integrated assessment in relation to the electric power sector. Prior to EPRI, Laura was an ORISE Fellow with the Climate Change Adaptation staff at the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), where she researched the impact of climate change on EPA programs and identified adaptation strategies being implemented to mitigate these impacts. Laura’s initial interest in climate impacts and resiliency emerged from her experience working in preparedness and disaster services for the American Red Cross of Alaska. Laura holds a Master of Science in Environmental Change and Management from the University of Oxford and a Bachelor of Arts in Government from Georgetown University. Her dissertation at Oxford explored the relevance of extreme weather event attribution to long-term planning for disaster risk reduction.

Director, Strategic Analysis, Safety, and Sustainability

William F. Gould is Director of Strategic Analysis, Safety, and Sustainability at the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), where he leads EPRI’s Energy and Environmental Analysis Group a team of nationally and globally renowned engineers, scientists, and economists. This team provides thought leadership, insights, and analyses on a wide range of energy and environmental issues. Prior to joining EPRI, Mr. Gould was the Large Business Market Manager for New Jersey-based Public Service Electric & Gas Company, where he directed activities associated with varied needs of the utility’s 2,500 top electricity users. He began his career at Consolidated Edison Company of New York, Inc., where he managed the Enlightened Energy program, a commercial and industrial energy efficiency program. Mr. Gould has been an adjunct professor for Lehigh University's Energy Systems Engineering graduate program since 2009 where he teaches the Energy Generation course. Mr. Gould earned a bachelor's degree in Mechanical Engineering from Carnegie-Mellon University and a master's in Energy Management from the New York Institute of Technology, where he earned the Energy Management award for excellence in the field.

Senior Technical Leader

Dr. Nils Johnson is a Senior Technical Leader in the Energy and Environmental Analysis Group at the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). He applies expertise in techno-economic analysis, operations research, and geographic information systems (GIS) to identify insights and strategies regarding future energy systems. His current research areas include understanding the implications of state and federal policies for energy transitions, assessing the roles of emerging technologies including intermittent renewables and carbon capture and storage (CCS), and exploring the implications of increased electrification. Before joining EPRI, he worked in the Energy Program at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Austria. At IIASA, Dr. Johnson examined the implications of delayed climate policy for energy transitions, renewable energy integration challenges, and integrated strategies for managing water, energy, and land resources. He holds a Bachelor of Arts in Political Science from Haverford College, a Master of Environmental Management and a Master of Forestry from Duke University, and a doctorate in Transportation Technology and Policy from the University of California at Davis, specializing in energy systems analysis. Recent Publications Sanchez, D.L., N. Johnson, S. McCoy, P.A. Turner, and K.J. Mach. 2018. Near-term Deployment of Carbon Capture and Sequestration from Biorefineries in the United States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), 201719695.

McPherson, M., N. Johnson, and M. Strubegger. 2018. The Role of Electricity Storage and Hydrogen Technologies in Enabling Global Low-carbon Energy Transitions. Applied Energy, 216: 649-661.

Johnson N., M. Strubegger, M. McPherson, S.C. Parkinson, V. Krey, and P. Sullivan. 2017. A Reduced-form Approach for Representing the Impacts of Wind and Solar PV Deployment on the Structure and Operation of the Electricity System. Energy Economics, 64: 651-664.

Kyle, P., N. Johnson, E. Davies, D.L. Bijl, I. Mouratiadou, M. Bevione, L. Drouet, S. Fujimori, Y. Liu, and M. Hejazi. 2016. Setting the System Boundaries of “Energy for Water” for Integrated Modeling. Environmental Science and Technology, 50(17): 8930-8931.

Johnson, N., V. Krey, D. McCollum, S. Rao, K. Riahi, and J. Rogelj. 2015. Stranded on a Low-carbon Planet: Implications of Climate Policy for the Phase-out of Coal-based Power Plants. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 90 (Part A): 89-102.

Senior Technical Leader

Clarence Lyons is a Senior Technical Leader at the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). He leads EPRI's Engineering and Economic Guide for Power System and Storage Technologies program that is dedicated to developing current and projected cost and performance data for power generation and storage resources to support utility planning functions. The program provides critical assessments of current and emerging technologies. In this role, Mr. Lyons collaborates with technical experts to synthesize and integrate credible and consistent cost and performance information on conventional and advanced power generation and storage technologies. Before joining EPRI, Mr. Lyons worked as a Lead Project Engineer at Southern Company where he managed multiple conceptual phase coal to biomass conversion projects, including developing detailed technical modifications and project cost estimates. Prior to that, he worked in various capacities supporting strategy development and project execution for environment compliance projects. Mr. Lyons earned a bachelor’s degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of Alabama, master’s degree in Business Administration from the University of Alabama-Birmingham, and a certificate in Construction Management from The University of Alabama-Birmingham. He is also a graduate of the E4 Carolinas Energy Leadership program Recent Publications Maxson, A., Booras, G., Dillan, D., Lyons, C., Minear, E., ter Schure, A., and others, 2016. Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) for Power Generation and Storage Technologies: 2016 Topics. EPRI Report 3002008947.

Goldstein, H., Gogineni, B., Myhre, R., Lyons, C, 2015., Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) for Power Generation and Storage Technology Options: 2015 Topics. EPRI Report 3002006280.

Technical Assessment Guide (TAG©) for Power Generation and Storage Technologies. EPRI, Palo Alto, CA: 2016. 3002008947.

Technical Executive

Dr. Steve Rose is a Senior Research Economist and Technical Executive in the Energy and Environmental Analysis Group at the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). His research focuses on long-term modeling of energy systems and climate change drivers, mitigation, and potential risks. Dr. Rose serves on the U.S. National Academy of Sciences’ committee on modeling the social cost of carbon, the U.S. Carbon Cycle Science Program Carbon Cycle Scientific Steering Group, and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s Science Advisory Board panel on Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Biogenic Sources. He also co-chairs the bioenergy modeling subgroup of Stanford University’s Energy Modeling Forum. Dr. Rose’s was a lead author for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Fifth and Fourth Assessment Reports, and the U.S. National Climate Assessment. His research and publications include long-run climate management strategy and policy design, climate change risks and responses, the marginal costs of climate change, mitigation institutions, investment risks and incentives, and the role of bioenergy and land use in long-term climate management, including the economics of REDD+ and agricultural productivity. Dr. Rose earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in Economics from the University of Wisconsin-Madison and a doctorate in Economics from Cornell University. Recent Publications Rose, S and J. Bistline, 2016. Applying the Social Cost of Carbon: Technical Considerations. EPRI Report 3002004659.

Rose, S., 2016. Estimating Benefits of Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Public Utilities Fortnightly (August): 52-55.

Expert Committee Member, National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2016. Assessment of Approaches to Updating the Social Cost of Carbon: Phase 1 Report on a Near-Term Update. Committee on Assessing Approaches to Updating the Social Cost of Carbon, Board on Environmental Change and Society. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/21898.

Senior Technical Leader

Dr. Nidhi R. Santen is a Senior Technical Leader in the Energy and Environmental Analysis Research Group at the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). Her research areas include electricity sector resource planning, investment decision-making under uncertainty, and the impact of environmental and technology policies on the evolution of the power system. Before joining EPRI, Dr. Santen worked for the MIT Energy Initiative, where she focused on low-carbon electricity infrastructure planning; electricity market design; and hybrid modeling to link economy-wide modeling tools with engineering-based power system modeling tools. Dr. Santen also pursued a postdoctoral research fellowship with the Energy Technology Innovation Policy research group at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government, where she improved how uncertainty and technology change are represented within energy planning models. Dr. Santen also worked as a consultant with the Cambridge, Massachusetts-based electricity planning and environmental policy consulting firm, Synapse Energy Economics; a research consultant for the National Academy of Sciences; an environmental analyst in the Air Permits Section of CPS Energy of San Antonio, Texas; and as either a staff member or research intern in a range of non-profit energy and environmental organizations in Texas and Washington, D.C., She holds a Bachelor of Arts with highest distinction in Geography from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; a joint Master of Public Affairs/Master of Environmental Science in Atmospheric Science and Environmental Policy from Indiana University-Bloomington; and a doctorate in Engineering Systems from MIT. Recent Publications Santen, N.R., Webster, M.D., Popp, D., and Perez-Arriaga, I., 2017. "Inter-temporal R&D and capital investment portfolios for the electricity industry’s low carbon future." The Energy Journal Vol. 38(5).

Webster, M., Fisher-Vanden, K., Popp, D., and Santen, N., 2017. "Should we give up after Solyndra? Optimal technology R&D portfolios under uncertainty." Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists. (forthcoming)

Santen, N.R. and Diaz Anadon, L., 2016. "Balancing solar PV deployment and RD&D: A comprehensive framework for managing innovation uncertainty in electricity technology investment planning." Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 60: 560-569.

Technical Leader

Dr. John Taber is a Technical Leader in the Energy and Environmental Analysis Research Group at the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). His research areas include the impact of environmental policies on the evolution of the power system, modeling state policy in electricity system planning, and the interaction of markets and grid resiliency and reliability. Before joining EPRI, Dr. Taber worked for the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission as an Economist in the Office of Energy Policy and Innovation, where he focused on quantitative analysis of recent and proposed policy changes, especially those involving ancillary service markets, RTO/ISO seams, non-economic offer parameters, and capacity markets. Dr. Taber has also served as an adjunct professor at the University of Maryland, College Park and Georgetown University, teaching classes in Energy Policy. He holds a Bachelor of Science in Physics and a Bachelor of Arts in Economics from the Ohio State University and a Master’s of Science and a doctorate in Applied Economics and Management from Cornell University, specializing in energy and environmental economics. Recent Publications Ho, Ben, John Taber, Gregory Poe, Antonio Bento. "The Effects of Moral Licensing and Moral Cleansing in Contingent Valuation and Laboratory Experiments on Willingness to Pay to Reduce Negative Externalities." Environmental and Resource Economics June 2016 64(2),317-340

Shawhan, Daniel, John Taber, di Shi, Ray Zimmerman, Jubo Yan, Charles Marquet, Yingying Qi, Biao Mao, Richard Schuler, William Schulze, Daniel Tylavsky, "Does a Detailed Model of the Electricity Grid Matter? Estimating the Impacts of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative." Resource and Energy Economics January 2014 36(1), 191-207.

Schmitt, Todd, Bradley Rickard, John Taber. "Consumer Valuation of Environmentally Friendly Production Practices in Wines, Considering Asymmetric Information and Sensory Effects." Journal of Agricultural Economics November 2012 64(2), 483-504.

Principal Technical Executive

Dr. Thomas Wilson is a Principal Technical Executive in Strategic Analysis, Safety, and Sustainability at the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). His research activities focus on a variety of climate-related issues: costs of alternative policies and the role of technology R&D in potentially reducing these costs, exploring mechanisms for allowing flexibility in domestic and international climate policies and their interactions with regulatory approaches, and providing information and methods to help electric utilities make decisions in the face of climate policy uncertainty. Dr. Wilson joined EPRI in as a Project Manager in the Risk Analysis program in the Environment Sector, where his activities focused on risk management for a variety of environmental issues (e.g., global climate change, acidic deposition, electromagnetic fields, air toxics, and non-combustion wastes), and decision support methodologies (e.g., technology choice, siting, and making decisions involving multiple objectives and multiple stakeholders). Before joining EPRI, Dr. Wilson worked at ICF Incorporated, Stanford's Energy Modeling Forum and International Energy Program, and Brookhaven National Laboratory. He earned a bachelor’s degree in Statistics from the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill and master’s and doctoral degrees in Operations Research from Stanford University. Recent Publications Rose, S.K. D. Turner, G. Blanford, J. Bistline, F. de la Chesnaye, and T. Wilson, 2014. Understanding the Social Cost of Carbon: A Technical Assessment. EPRI Report 3002004657.

Hibbard, K., Wilson, T. Averyt, K. Harriss, R., Newmark, R., Rose, S., Shevliakova, E., Tidwell, V., 2014: Ch. 10: Energy, Water, and Land Use. Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third National Climate Assessment, J. M. Melillo, Terese Richmond, and G. W. Yohe, Eds., U.S. Global Change Research Program.

Contributing Author, 2014. Drivers, Trends and Mitigation (Chapter 5), Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Fifth Assessment Report, Mitigation Working Group (Working Group III), Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

Principal Project Manager