Florida Division of Elections
Search for Filed Campaign Documents Campaign documents include qualifying documents, correspondence, audits and Florida Elections Commission activity on file with the Division of Elections.

About Campaign Finance Reporting By Florida law, campaigns and committees are required to disclose detailed financial records of campaign contributions and expenditures. This page explains Who must file reports; What must be disclosed; and what limits apply.

Candidates and political organizations must file certain campaign reports throughout the election cycle. This page includes helpful information on the electronic filing of campaign reports.

About the Campaign Finance Database Candidates and Committees file their financial reports with the FDOS, Division of Elections. This information is then entered into a database for the public: this page gives detailed information on the Database. Data from this database can be queried from 4 different areas:

Contribution Records Choose this option to query campaign contribution records.



Expenditure Records Choose this option to query campaign expenditure records.



Other Distributions Records Choose this option to query other campaign distribution records.



Fund Transfers Records Choose this option to query fund transfer records.

Political Committees and Parties Search this Database for information on Campaign Finance activity for Committees and Parties, also available in this database is addresses, chairman, treasurer, deputy treasurer and registered agent for each Committee or Party.

About Campaign Finance Report Items Information on this page explains the campaign finance report items and results columns on queries created from the contribution and the expenditure records.

This includes reporting calendars for political committees, candidates and state executive committees.

Public Campaign Finance The Election Campaign Financing Act took effect on January 1, 1987 and provides for matching contributions received by candidates for governor and cabinet offices. As provided for in Chapter 106, Florida Statutes, distribution of funds to candidates accepting public campaign financing is administered by the Florida Department of State (FDOS), Division of Elections. Data tables showing matching funds distributed to candidates in the 1994, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2006 Elections.