60 Plus Launches $3.5 Million Ad Campaign
Group highlights Independent Payment Advisory Board’s unchecked power

ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA – The 60 Plus Association, nationally recognized as the conservative alternative to the liberal AARP, today launched a new ad campaign that highlights healthcare reform’s impact on America’s seniors, including the creation of the Independent Payment Advisory Board (IPAB). The $3.5 million campaign includes television and online advertising that begins on March 12 in Florida, Michigan, Ohio, Montana and Missouri, targeting five Senate Democrats.

“Congress can’t allow bureaucratic number crunchers to decide what is ‘necessary’ for your health,” said music legend Pat Boone, National Spokesman for the 60 Plus Association. “No politician – especially an unelected, unaccountable bureaucrat – should have the power to deny seniors the care we deserve.”

Acting like a Medicare IRS, IPAB is a 15-member bureaucratic council that will dictate what constitutes “necessary care” for Medicare recipients as a means to cut costs beyond the half-trillion dollars that was already eliminated through Obama’s government takeover of healthcare. The Board’s so-called recommendations can be fully enacted without Congressional action, allowing them to autonomously ration care for seniors.

“The Independent Payment Advisory Board must be abolished,” said Jim Martin, Chairman and Founder of 60 Plus. “After cutting $500 billion from Medicare, the Obama’s healthcare bill will create a Medicare IRS that will deny seniors access to the care we need. When bureaucracy like this is introduced, Americans lose. And in healthcare, losing is unacceptable.”

Watch the ads:

The transcript below targets Senator Bill Nelson (D-FL). The other four targets are: Senators Debbie Stabenow (D-MI); Sherrod Brown (D-OH); Jon Tester (D-MT) and Claire McCaskill (D-MO).

– TRANSCRIPT –

PAT BOONE:

Hi friend, I’m Pat Boone. Last year, a lot of promises were made regarding health care reform, but America’s seniors knew forcing a bill through Congress when Americans overwhelmingly opposed it would be disastrous. And we were right.

NARRATOR:

President Obama’s health care law cuts $500 billion from Medicare to pay for a new government program. And it creates a board of 15 unelected, unaccountable bureaucrats. It’s like a Medicare IRS with the power to cut Medicare even more.

PAT BOONE:

This IPAB board can ration care and deny certain Medicare treatments so Washington can fund more wasteful spending. Your choices could be limited and you may not be able to keep your own doctor.

Medicare will be bankrupt in nine years, but Washington politicians, like Bill Nelson, are ignoring the problem, putting their own re-elections first.

Call Senator Nelson. Urge him to support real Medicare reform and protect our seniors. Tell him unaccountable bureaucrats should never have the power to deny you the care you deserve.

###