Trump-O-Meter: Take no salary
Trump-O-Meter Take no salary "If I'm elected president, I'm accepting no salary."



Updates

Trump donates second-quarter salary to SBA

President Donald Trump shakes hands with Acting Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert Wilkie, during an event on prison reform in the East Room of the White House May 18, 2018, in Washington. (AP)

Trump donates first-quarter salary to VA

President Donald Trump continued acting on his campaign promise to take no salary by donating his presidential paycheck to the Veterans Administration in May. Trump spokeswoman Sarah Huckabee Sanders announced Trump's latest donation of his quarterly salary in a briefing with reporters May 17. "In keeping with his campaign pledge, the president donates his salary on a quarterly basis to further important projects. Today, the president is proud to donate his 2018 first-quarter salary to the Department of Veterans Affairs to support their caregiver programs," she said. Acting Secretary of Veterans Affairs Robert Wilkie said that the money will go toward "caregiver support in the form of mental health and peer support programs, financial aid, education training, and research." (The next day Trump announced he would nominate Wilkie to the permanent post.) Trump has donated his quarterly salary to various federal departments and projects including to the National Parks Service to restore battlefields, the Department of Education for children's camps and the Department of Health and Human Services for a public awareness campaign about the dangers of opioid addiction and the Department of Transportation for infrastructure projects. During the campaign, Trump repeatedly promised to forgo the $400,000 paycheck. "As far as salary is concerned, I won't take even one dollar," Trump said in a Q&A Twitter session in September 2015. "I am totally giving up my salary if I become president." We will keep watching to see if Trump continues to donate his salary, but for now we rate this In the Works. Sources: White House, Press Briefing, May 17, 2018 White House, Press Briefing, Feb. 13, 2018 White House, Press Briefing, Nov. 30, 2017 White House, Press Briefing, April 3, 2017 Army Times, "Trump donates his presidential paycheck to VA caregivers," May 17, 2018

White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders, right, hands Education Secretary Betsy DeVos, left, a check signed by President Donald Trump in the Brady Press Briefing room of the White House in Washington, Wednesday, July 26, 2017. (AP)

Trump donates salary for second consecutive quarter

For the second quarter in a row, President Donald Trump declined to take a salary and opted instead to gift the quarterly installment to a government entity, this time to the Department of Education. At a White House press briefing, press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders presented a check for $100,000 to Education Secretary Betsy DeVos. DeVos said the funding would go toward hosting a camp for science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) students at the Department of Education. "We want to encourage as many children as possible to explore STEM fields in the hope that many develop a passion for these fields," DeVos said. Trump donated his first quarter salary of about $78,000 to the National Park Service. Sanders said the first quarter funds went toward restoring two projects at a national battlefield. She added that additional donations brought the total first quarter gift to over $260,000. Trump's donations are consistent with the billionaire businessman's campaign pledge to forgo a salary if elected. Until the policy becomes a permanent fixture of Trump's presidency, we're rating Trump's promise In the Works. Sources: White House press briefing, July 26, 2017

White House press secretary Sean Spicer (right) gives Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke (left) the first-quarter earnings of President Donald Trump as Harpers Ferry National Historical Park Superindendent Tyrone Brandyburg looks on. (Mark Wilson/Getty Images)

President donates first-quarter pay to National Park Service

President Donald Trump has found a recipient for his presidential salary -- at least the portion he earned between January 20 and March 31, 2017. At the White House press briefing on April 3, press secretary Sean Spicer announced that Trump would be donating his full first-quarter, pre-tax earnings of $78,333 to the National Park Service. "The President has spoken with counsel and made the decision to donate his first-quarter salary, in total, to a government entity, and he has chosen this quarter to donate it to the National Park Service," Spicer said. Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke was at the podium to accept a check for that amount. "I am thrilled at the President's decision to donate the check he did today," Zinke said. He said the agency will use it to support "the infrastructure on our nation's battlefields. We're about $100 (million) or $229 million behind in deferred maintenance on our battlefields alone, and that's on our 25 national battlefields. And we're excited about that opportunity." This gesture is consistent with the pledge the billionaire businessman made during the campaign -- that "if I'm elected president, I'm accepting no salary." However, we are not yet rating this a Promise Kept until it becomes clear that this is going to become a permanent policy while he's in office. For now, we rate the promise In the Works. Sources: White House, press briefing by Sean Spicer, April 3, 2017 Reuters, "Trump donates first-quarter salary to National Park Service," April 3, 2017

Trump's staff is trying to figure out logistics of presidential pay

The government owes Donald Trump. Right about now, the 45th president is due to receive his first paycheck, part of a $400,000 annual salary delivered in monthly installments. But the billionaire said during the campaign that he wouldn't take the pay. Is he backsliding on a promise? The White House says no, but things are more complicated. "He is required to get a paycheck but will be giving it back to (the) treasury or donating," spokeswoman Sarah Huckabee Sanders said in email, adding that the staff was trying to determine the legal process to do so. She declined to answer several inquiries into whether Trump has gotten a paycheck already, which would be about $33,333. In addition to the $400,000, a president is afforded a $50,000 expense account. "I won't take even one dollar," Trump declared in September 2015. "I am totally giving up my salary if I become president." He can't do that. Article II of the Constitution requires a president to be paid: "The President shall, at stated times, receive for his services, a compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive within that period any other emolument from the United States, or any of them." So Trump tweaked his promise. He now says he'll accept $1 — and it has added to his populist appeal. Trump supporters say the move deserves more attention especially now as his travel costs have dominated headlines. Trump's visits to his Palm Beach estate, Mar-a-Lago, have cost taxpayers an estimated $10 million already. Trump wouldn't be the first president to give away his pay. John F. Kennedy, also a wealthy man when he took office, donated his to charity. Herbert Hoover, also rich, gave his away as well. Florida Gov. Rick Scott, a multimillionaire, eschewed the $130,000 salary. In a way, Trump is like George Washington. The nation's first president said he would not take pay for the job, just as he had as commander of the Continental Army. "When I was first honored with a call into the service of my country, then on the eve of an arduous struggle for its liberties, the light in which I contemplated my duty required that I should renounce every pecuniary compensation," Washington said in his inaugural address of 1789. "From this resolution I have in no instance departed." But Congress pointed to a higher power: the Constitution. We'll be monitoring what happens with Trump's efforts not to take a salary. For now, we rate this promise In the Works. Sources: Tampa Bay Times, As Trump is learning, it's not so easy to reject the president's paycheck, Feb. 24, 2016

He might have to take $1