Trump-O-Meter: Build a wall, and make Mexico pay for it
Trump-O-Meter Build a wall, and make Mexico pay for it "I would build a great wall, and nobody builds walls better than me, believe me, and I’ll build them very inexpensively. I will build a great great wall on our southern border and I’ll have Mexico pay for that wall."

Build a wall, and make Mexico pay for it

PolitiFact is tracking the promises of President Donald Trump. See them all at PolitiFact.com.

Updates

Donald Trump stalls on promise to build a wall, have Mexico pay for it

President Donald Trump remains committed to building a border wall with Mexico, but he hasn't been able to get the money to do it. And Mexico doesn't seem poised to pay for it, either. The federal government is in a partial shutdown because Trump says he won't sign any spending bill that doesn't include $5.7 billion to build the wall. Democrats in Congress are unwilling to vote for a bill providing that money. Even though Trump is demanding billions for the wall from U.S. taxpayers, he's also contending that the wall will be paid for through a renegotiated trade deal that hasn't yet cleared U.S. Congress. It also needs final legislative approval from Mexico and Canada, the two other countries party to the agreement. Trade experts have pushed back against Trump's false claims that the renegotiated North American Free Trade Agreement (renamed by Trump as the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement) will pay for the wall. Trump claims that the United States will see added revenue from the potential deal. But even if U.S. tax revenue increases in response to increased revenues of U.S. firms, Congress would still need to allocate that money for the wall. Trump so far has failed to secure that wall money from Congress. The Trump administration earlier received about $1.6 billion from Congress for border barriers. But that money wasn't used to build any new wall. Conditions for the money said it could only be for designs previously used, such as fencing. As the government is in a partial shutdown over Trump's demand for money for the border wall, he's said that the wall doesn't have to be concrete, that it could be a barrier of steel slats. But he's also said that a concrete option remains. Several factors remain unknown: whether Trump and Congress will agree on funding for a border wall, how much that funding would be, and what kind of wall would be built. As matters stand, Mexico has not paid for a wall. Congress has not appropriated money for a wall. Fencing is being built or has been completed at the southwest border. But not a wall. Trump's promise to build a border wall and have Mexico pay for it has not been fulfilled, and the government is in shutdown as the fight continues. We rate this as Stalled. Sources: PolitiFact, No, Mexico isn't paying for border wall through USMCA trade deal, despite Donald Trump's claims, Jan. 4, 2019 PolitiFact, Fact-checking Trump, Pelosi and Schumer's White House fight over the border wall, shutdown, Dec. 11, 2018

Donald Trump secures about $1.6 billion for border barriers

President Donald Trump has secured $1.57 billion for barriers along the southwest border — advancing his promise to secure the border but falling significantly short of his desired $25 billion for a wall. "We funded the initial down payment of $1.6 billion," Trump said March 23 after signing a $1.3 trillion omnibus spending bill into law. "We are going to be starting work literally on Monday on not only on some new wall, not enough, but we are working on that very quickly. But also fixing existing walls and existing acceptable fences." The funds, however, won't be used to construct any of the wall prototypes standing in California near the U.S.-Mexico border, which Trump toured earlier this month. The designated funds, the bill said, "shall only be available for operationally effective designs deployed as of the date of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2017, (Public Law 115–31), such as currently deployed steel bollard designs, that prioritize agent safety." U.S. Customs and Border Protection told PolitiFact on March 13, 2018, that the wall prototypes were still being evaluated. The bill Trump signed specifically called for: • $251 million for approximately 14 miles of secondary fencing along the southwest border in the San Diego sector; • $445 million for 25 miles of primary pedestrian levee fencing along the southwest border in the Rio Grande Valley Sector; • $196 million for primary pedestrian fencing along the southwest border in the Rio Grande Valley Sector; • $445 million for replacement of existing primary pedestrian fencing along the southwest border; • $38 million for border barrier planning and design; and • $196 million for acquisition and deployment of border security technology Earlier in the day, Trump threatened to veto the bill because it did not fully fund his long-promised border wall. "I am considering a VETO of the Omnibus Spending Bill based on the fact that the 800,000 plus DACA recipients have been totally abandoned by the Democrats (not even mentioned in Bill) and the BORDER WALL, which is desperately needed for our National Defense, is not fully funded," Trump tweeted. Trump described the $1.6 billion as "a short-term funding." The funds will be used to secure the border through fencing. It's still unclear which wall prototype will be used for the wall, which Mexico still says it's not paying for, despite Trump's promise. For now, we continue to rate Trump's promise to build a wall and make Mexico pay for it as In the Works. Sources: House.gov, Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2018 Twitter, @realdonaldtrump tweet, March 23, 2018

Donald Trump requests Congress $18 billion for border barriers

Prototypes under construction for U.S.-Mexico border wall

Construction of eight border wall prototypes is under way as the Department of Homeland Security seeks to advance President Donald Trump's landmark promise. The construction includes four concrete wall prototypes and four prototypes using "other materials." Construction began Sept. 26 in San Diego, Calif., close to the U.S.-Mexico border. The prototypes are expected to be finished near the end of October. The prototypes will be designed to deter illegal immigration in the area where they are constructed and be between 18 to 30 feet high, U.S. Customs and Border Protection said in a Sept. 26 news release. "Moving forward with the prototypes enables us to continue to incorporate all the tools necessary to secure our border," Ronald Vitiello, CBP acting deputy commissioner, said in the news release. In an August press conference announcing contracts awarded for concrete prototypes, Vitiello said officials will examine the prototypes' aesthetics, how penetrable and resistant they are to tampering, and their anti-scaling or anti-climb features. Those contracts ranged from just under $400,000 to just under $500,000. "There's still a lot to do, right. We are going to build four prototypes for concrete and then we are going to build four other materials, and then we are going to make decisions about which is most appropriate for which location," Vitiello said. Evaluation of prototypes will take 30 to 60 days, he said. Congress approved $20 million to start wall planning and to award for the construction of the prototypes, CBP spokesman Roger Maier told PolitiFact. Companies building concrete border wall prototypes include the following: • Caddell Construction Co., (DE), LLC, Montgomery, Ala. • Fisher Sand & Gravel Co., DBA Fisher Industries, Tempe, Ariz. • Texas Sterling Construction Co., Houston • W. G. Yates & Sons Construction Co., Philadelphia, Miss. Companies building border wall prototypes with other materials: • Caddell Construction Co., (DE), LLC, Montgomery, Ala. • KWR Construction, Inc., Sierra Vista, Ariz. • ELTA North America Inc., Annapolis Junction, Md. • W. G. Yates & Sons Construction Co., Philadelphia, Miss. It remains uncertain where funding will come from for a more extensive border wall. Mexico continues to say it will not pay the costs, and Democrats in Congress have also resisted funding the construction. Still, with the prototypes' construction, the Trump administration is moving forward on the promise. For now, we continue to rate Trump's pledge In the Works. Sources: U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Construction Begins on Wall Prototypes, Sept. 26, 2017 U.S. Customs and Border Protection, CBP Awards Contracts for Border Wall Prototypes, Aug. 31, 2017 U.S. Customs and Border Protection, CBP Awards Contracts for "Other Materials" Border Wall Prototypes, Sept. 7, 2017 YouTube, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Press Briefing - CBP Announces Contract Awards for Wall Prototypes, Aug. 31, 2017 Email interview, U.S. Customs and Border Protection spokesman Roger Maier, Sept. 29, 2017



President Donald Trump after signing an executive action that will order the construction of a border wall. Jan. 25, 2017. (Doug Mills/The New York Times)

Trump ties wall funding to government shutdown

House Appropriations Committee approves funding for border security

Trump’s 2018 budget requests $1.6 billion for border security

President Donald Trump is asking Congress for $44.1 billion for the Department of Homeland Security for fiscal year 2018, including $1.6 billion to secure 74 miles along the U.S.-Mexico border. The requested $1.6 billion would cover: • 32 miles of new border wall construction along the Rio Grande Valley sector; • 28 miles of new levee wall along the Rio Grande Valley sector; and, • 14 miles of new border wall to replace existing secondary fence in the San Diego sector. Fiscal year 2018 runs from Oct. 1, 2017 to Sept. 30, 2018. Homeland Security officials said on May 23 they are doing a sector-by-sector border analysis and getting feedback from Border Patrol to identify the areas of most need. DHS Secretary John Kelly told Congress on April 5 that it's "unlikely that we will build a wall or physical barrier from sea to shining sea," but that he's committed to putting it up in areas recommended by agents on the ground. In some parts of the nearly 2,000-mile U.S.-Mexico border, building a concrete wall may be problematic due to rough terrain conditions. "The president knows that I'm looking at every variation on the theme and I have no doubt when I go back to him and say, 'You know, boss, wall makes sense here, fencing -- high-tech fencing -- makes sense over here, technology makes sense over here,' I have no doubt that he will go tell me to do it," Kelly told a Senate committee in April. It's up to Congress whether Trump will get the requested border security funding for fiscal year 2018. In the meantime, his promise to build a wall and make Mexico pay for it remains In the Works. Sources: Department of Homeland Security, FY 2018 Budget in Brief, May 2017 CNN, Kelly: No border wall 'from sea to shining sea', April 5, 2017 CQ, Transcript DHS Secretary John Kelly Senate hearing, April 5, 2017

DHS Secretary directs planning, design, construction of border wall

Department of Homeland Security John Kelly issued a memo Feb. 20 directing an agency within his department, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, to move forward on Trump's executive order to build a wall along the southern border. "Consistent with the president's executive order, the will of Congress and the need to secure the border in the national interest, CBP, in consultation with the appropriate executive departments and agencies, and nongovernmental entities having relevant expertise -- and using materials originating in the United States to the maximum extent permitted by law -- shall immediately begin planning, design, construction and maintenance of a wall," the memo said. Kelly's memo also called for the use of technology, patrol and access roads to gain operational control of the border. Kelly directed the Under Secretary for Management and CBP commissioner to allocate all sources of available funding for the planning, design, construction and maintenance of the wall and for other security measures. They were also instructed to develop project-specific congressional budget requests for the current and subsequent fiscal years. In a Q&A posted on DHS website, the department says it has identified locations near El Paso, Texas; Tucson, Ariz.; and El Centro, Calif., for wall construction because "fence or old brittle landing-mat fencing are no longer effective." Border Patrol is also assessing priority areas where a wall or similar physical barriers can be built, the department said. New DHS information advances Trump's promise to build a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border. Pending wall construction, we continue to rate this promise In the Works. Sources: Department of Homeland Security, Memo on border security executive order, Feb. 20, 2017 Department of Homeland Security, Q&A: DHS Implementation of the Executive Order on Border Security and Immigration Enforcement, Feb. 21, 2017

Trump's executive order to build border wall is a start

President Donald Trump has signed an executive order to push forward one of his biggest campaign promises: build a wall along the border with Mexico. The executive order signed Jan. 25, five days after Trump's inauguration, instructs departments and agencies to "deploy all lawful means" to secure the southern border, prevent further illegal immigration and to send immigrants in the country illegally back to their countries. The order sets forth Trump's policy to secure the border "through the immediate construction of a physical wall," to prevent drug trafficking and terrorism. It directs the secretary of homeland security to: "In accordance with existing law, including the Secure Fence Act and IIRIRA, take all appropriate steps to immediately plan, design, and construct a physical wall along the southern border, using appropriate materials and technology to most effectively achieve complete operational control of the southern border." The order defines "wall" as "a contiguous, physical wall or other similarly secure, contiguous, and impassable physical barrier." It also asks the department to identify and allocate sources of federal funds for the planning, design, and construction of the physical wall, and to prepare congressional budget requests for the current and upcoming fiscal years. In an interview with ABC News' David Muir aired Jan. 25, Trump said wall construction would start in months. At a press briefing, Trump's press secretary Sean Spicer said plans for the wall will kick off with funding already available, and that Trump will work with Congress for additional funding. "There are a lot of funding mechanisms that can be used," Spicer said. "At this point, his goal was to get the project started as quickly as possible using existing funds and resources that the department currently has, and then to move forward and work with Congress on an appropriation schedule." Spicer also affirmed the president's plan to have Mexico pay back for the wall, saying it would happen "one way or another." "A nation without borders is not a nation. Beginning today, the United States of America gets back control of its borders, gets back its borders," Trump said Jan. 25 at the Department of Homeland Security. On Jan. 23, Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto issued 10 objectives his government will seek in negotiations with the United States, among them opposition to a wall. "While Mexico recognizes the rights of every sovereign nation to guarantee its security, Mexico does not believe in walls," Peña Nieto said. There are 702 miles of fencing along the nearly 2,000-mile U.S.-Mexico border. The fencing includes 652 miles of primary fencing, 36 miles of secondary fencing and 14 miles of tertiary fencing, according to U.S. Customs and Border Protection. "If Congress acts to fund the construction of Trump's border wall and spares no expense, then it could be done very quickly," said Alex Nowrasteh, an immigration expert at the libertarian Cato Institute. "However, previous government attempts to build fences were behind schedule and over budget." Other experts have told us it could take years to build a border wall. Trump's pledge is to build a wall and have Mexico cover the costs. While Trump is moving forward on his promise, the wall is yet to be built and Mexico has not provided funds. We rate this promise, In the Works. Sources: Email exchange, Steven Cheung, Jan. 25, 2017 WhiteHouse.gov, Executive Order: Border Security and Immigration Enforcement Improvements, Jan. 25, 2017 ABC News, President Trump Tells ABC News' David Muir: Construction of Border Wall Will Begin in 'Months', Jan. 25, 2017 Email exchange, Alex Nowrasteh, an immigration expert at the libertarian Cato Institute, Jan. 25, 2017 Mexican government website, Mexican president's 10 objectives for negotiations with United States, Jan. 23, 2017

Wall is coming, Trump promises