McCain Continues His “Green” Tour « FOX Embeds « FOXNews.com
North Bend, WA–

Senator John McCain continued his “green” tour of the Northwest today with a stop in North Bend, Washington. He was clear that he wants to be seen as a progressive when it comes to curbing climate change, “I will be a President of the United States for the environment. I have a long record of advocacy for our environment and I’m proud of that.”

The presumptive Republican nominee stressed many of the points in his speech on global warming yesterday, such as the importance of cap and trade, the reduction of greenhouse gases, and the link between stalling climate change and protecting America’s national security.

McCain made a clean break with President Bush on the issue of the environment. He was not shy in describing his conflicts with the administration on this issue:

“The President and I have disagreed on this issue for many years. It isn’t a recent disagreement. Beginning in 2002 or 2003 I held hearings as chairman of the commerce committee and I took great exception to the testimony by administration officials on this issue,” He told reporters, “So there’s a long-standing, significant, deep, and strong differences on this issue between myself and the administration. . .”

The Arizona senator said he would be a better protector for the environment than either of his Democratic rivals because his proposal is “doable” and he has been involved in the issue for many years, “They have never, to my knowledge, been involved in legislation, or hearings, nor engagement on this issue. I have a long history,” McCain said, “I traveled around the world and seen the impacts of climate change on the world. I’ve held hearings beginning back after the 2000 presidential campaign.”

The Obama campaign was quick to respond hitting McCain with his own words, “While Barack Obama has brought Republicans and Democrats together around plans to raise our fuel standards and invest in renewable energy, John McCain’s ‘long history’ involves opposing countless measures to invest in renewable fuels and alternative energy technology.”

McCain also said that no matter who might get upset–even if it is his Republican colleagues– that his job as president would be to do what is best for the country and the environment, “I have made some Republicans mad in the past. And I may make them mad now. But my job is to do what I know is best for this nation, particularly where our environment is concerned,” McCain continued, “I believe we can get the majority of Republicans, Democrats, and others in America to join together in this effort.”

In an environmental roundtable he held at an education center overlooking the picturesque Cascade foothills, he gave a dig at some of those colleagues saying to local environmental leaders, “We still have a few geezers we have to convince.”

McCain also went on a walk around the Cedar Watershed–where he spoke with reporters and the roundtable was held. Despite the cold rain, he went on a “mini-hike” and was given a tour of some of the environmental damage the area has gone through due to global warming.