Burns, Anthony, The Trial of (1854)
Burns had been enslaved to Charles F. Suttle, a shopkeeper and sheriff in Alexandria who also served a term in the General Assembly (1849–1850). Suttle appointed William Brent of Falmouth for the purpose of hiring Burns out to others in Richmond. Early in 1854, Burns had been hired out to a Richmond pharmacist named Millspaugh. Finding that he had insufficient work to keep Burns fully occupied, Millspaugh entered into an illegal arrangement with Burns whereby the slave was allowed to work for others in return for paying Millspaugh a percentage of his earnings. After using his relative freedom to save money and make contacts, Burns stowed away on a ship bound for Boston early in February 1854. After arriving in Boston, he worked as a cook and a window-cleaner before finding long-term employment in a clothing store.

While in Boston, Burns wrote a letter to one of his brothers, who remained enslaved in Richmond. Seeking to keep his whereabouts secret, Burns had the letter postmarked in Canada; however, he carelessly dated it at Boston. The letter was intercepted by his brother's master, who then conveyed it to Suttle.

With the evidence of Burns's location in hand, Suttle first asserted his claim to recover the erstwhile slave in the state circuit court for Alexandria County , Virginia. On May 16, the court produced a transcript describing Burns and declaring that Suttle had provided "satisfactory proof" that Burns did in fact owe service to Suttle. By obtaining this order, Suttle hoped to put himself in position to take advantage of section 10 of the Fugitive Slave Act, which provided that in a proceeding seeking the rendition of an alleged escaped slave, such a transcript would be "full and conclusive evidence of the fact of escape, and that the service or labor of the person escaping is due to the party in such record mentioned."

Armed with the court document, Suttle, accompanied by William Brent, set off for Boston, where on May 24, 1854, he presented the document to Edward Greely Loring, a Massachusetts probate judge who also served as a commissioner of the local federal district court. Loring then ordered that Burns be arrested and held for a hearing to determine whether he was in fact subject to rendition under the terms of the Fugitive Slave Act. That evening, federal officials seized Burns and brought him to the Boston courthouse, where he was detained until the proceedings were completed. While there, Suttle confronted him, asking why he had run away.

Burns replied, "I fell asleep on board the vessel where I worked and, before I woke up, she set sail and carried me off."

"Haven't I always treated you well, Tony?" Suttle asked. "Haven't I always given you money when you needed?"

Burns stated, "You have always given me twelve and one-half cents once a year."

Burns's responses provided Suttle with evidence that Burns recognized his master and had been enslaved to him in Virginia.