Bipartisan Ratepayer Protection Act Introduced, Committee to Vote Tomorrow
WASHINGTON, DC – Energy and Power Subcommittee Chairman Ed Whitfield (R-KY), Rep. Sanford Bishop (D-GA), Rep. Morgan Griffith (R-VA), and Rep. Collin Peterson (D-MN) today introduced H.R. 2042, the Ratepayer Protection Act. The bipartisan legislation would empower states to protect families and businesses from electricity rate increases, reduced electric reliability, and other harmful effects of EPA’s proposed 111(d) rule for existing power plants, referred to by the agency as its Clean Power Plan. The Energy and Commerce Committee will vote on the legislation tomorrow. Click HERE for more information.

“EPA’s plan could increase electricity rates significantly, including by 15 percent or more in many communities. For middle and low income families or those living on fixed incomes, any rate increase could pose major problems,” said Whitfield. “The Ratepayer Protection Act enables states to protect their citizens from rate shock and other damaging consequences of EPA’s overreach.”

“Georgia has reduced CO2 emissions without federal regulation, and so I have issues with the EPA’s so called Clean Power Plan, a heavy handed approach that would increase retail electricity prices across the nation and could cost ratepayers tens of billions of dollars,” said Bishop. “We owe a duty to our constituents and to the entire American people to make sure that our nation’s economic competitiveness is not subject to the whims of one overreaching federal agency.”

“The regulatory agency that sets electric rates in Virginia and determines what electric companies can charge said it is ‘extremely unlikely that either electric rates or bills in Virginia will go down’ as a result of EPA’s proposed 111(d) rule,” said Griffith. “But American families, businesses, and manufacturers deserve stability and security. The Ratepayer Protection Act is a practical proposal to safeguard ratepayers from additional strain until it is determined whether EPA has the authority to issue this rule.”

“Keeping electricity rates affordable is important not just for Minnesota families but also a key component to keeping business internationally competitive. Through this legislation, EPA’s proposed rule will not go into effect until we are confident consumers won’t feel the negative effects of increased rates,” said Peterson.

To view a summary of the bill, click HERE.

To view a section by section of the bill, click HERE.

###