Farsnews
Defense

Iran Fires 2 Ballistic Missiles at Targets 1400km in Distance

TEHRAN (FNA)- The Islamic Revolution Guards Corps (IRGC) on Wednesday fired 2 home-made 'Qadr H' ballistic missiles from the Eastern Alborz Mountains at a target in Iran's Southeastern Makran seashore some 1400km away.

The missiles were fired on the sidelines of the main stage of the ongoing IRGC drills in Central Iran and various parts of the country.

One missile had a message written on it that said in Hebrew: "Israel should be wiped off the Earth".

Qadr is a 2000km-range, liquid-fuel and ballistic missile which can reach territories as far as Israel.

The missile can carry different types of ‘Blast’ and ‘MRV’ (Multiple Reentry Vehicle) payloads to destroy a range of targets. The new version of Qadr H can be launched from mobile platforms or silos in different positions and can escape missile defense shields due to their radar-evading capability.

A Multiple Reentry Vehicle payload for a ballistic missile deploys multiple warheads in a pattern against a single target. (As opposed to Multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle, which deploys multiple warheads against multiple targets.) The advantage of an MRV over a single warhead is that the damage produced in the center of the pattern is far greater than the damage possible from any single warhead in the MRV cluster, this makes for an efficient area attack weapon. Also, the sheer number of Warheads make interception by Anti-ballistic missiles unlikely.

Improved warhead designs allow smaller warheads for a given yield, while better electronics and guidance systems allowed greater accuracy. As a result MIRV technology has proven more attractive than MRV for advanced nations. Because of the larger amount of nuclear material consumed by MRVs and MIRVs, single warhead missiles are more attractive for nations with less advanced technology. The United States deployed an MRV payload on the Polaris A-3. The Soviet Union deployed MRVs on the SS-9 Mod 4 ICBM.

The IRGC began the main stage of its ballistic missile exercises on Tuesday.

Called 'Eqtedar-e Velayat', the command, tactical and special exercises are being conducted in the presence of IRGC Commander Major General Mohammad Ali Jafari as well as Commander of IRGC Aerospace Force Brigadier General Amir Ali Hajizadeh.

The drills are meant to test advanced missile defense systems as well as showcase the deterrence power and the clout of the IRGC forces in defending the country's territorial integrity against foreign threats.

The maneuvers are being held in different geographical locations, using ballistic missiles fired from silos.

In relevant remarks on Tuesday, General Jafari said the IRGC's missile firings during the drills underway in Central Iran are a firm response to the embargoes against Iran's missile defense program.

"Our enemies have realized that broader sanctions and security pressures have had little impact on our capabilities. That's why they now seek to confine us in the missile field through economic sanctions," General Jafari said on the sidelines of the main stage of the IRGC missile drills.

He said defense power and national security is Iran's redline and non-negotiable, adding that the ballistic missile firings proved the IRGC's silos are operational.

He further noted that "the security of Iran is the security of the region, and we will do our utmost to ensure our country's security."

"It is the enemies of the Islamic Revolution and regional security that should be afraid of the IRGC missiles," he added.