College & University Presidents Call for U.S. to Uphold and Continue DACA
Story Date:

UPDATE 9/5/17 - College and university presidents who would like to sign the statement below should contact SupportDACA@pomona.edu.

Higher education leaders cite “moral imperative” and “national necessity” in supporting Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals.

More than 700 college and university presidents from public and private institutions across the U.S. have signed the statement offering to meet with U.S. leaders on the issue. Signatories are listed below and the list will be updated on an ongoing basis.

The presidents are urging business, civic, religious and non-profit sectors to join them in supporting DACA and undocumented immigrant students.

Statement in Support of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) Program and our Undocumented Immigrant Students

The core mission of higher education is the advancement of knowledge, people, and society. As educational leaders, we are committed to upholding free inquiry and education in our colleges and universities, and to providing the opportunity for all our students to pursue their learning and life goals.

Since the advent of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program in 2012, we have seen the critical benefits of this program for our students, and the highly positive impacts on our institutions and communities. DACA beneficiaries on our campuses have been exemplary student scholars and student leaders, working across campus and in the community. With DACA, our students and alumni have been able to pursue opportunities in business, education, high tech, and the non-profit sector; they have gone to medical school, law school, and graduate schools in numerous disciplines. They are actively contributing to their local communities and economies.

To our country’s leaders we say that DACA should be upheld, continued, and expanded. We are prepared to meet with you to present our case. This is both a moral imperative and a national necessity. America needs talent – and these students, who have been raised and educated in the United States, are already part of our national community. They represent what is best about America, and as scholars and leaders they are essential to the future.

We call on our colleagues and other leaders across the business, civic, religious, and non-profit sectors to join with us in this urgent matter.

Signatures