Public Opinion Poll 2015
Should Poland help less developed countries?

According to the results of a public opinion poll[1] two thirds of Poles (65%) believe that Poland should support the development of less developed countries. Three times fewer respondents (22%) oppose to this. 13% of respondents were unable to take a clear stance as regards the provision of such aid. The belief that Poland should support the development of less developed countries prevails in all social and demographic groups. A particularly high level of acceptance was reported by people with higher education (80%, compared to 59% in the case people with primary education, and it was greater among rural residents (71%) compared to people living in towns and cities (62%). Another observation is that the greater interest in politics, the more widespread acceptance of the provision of aid by our country.

On what grounds do Polish people shape their opinion on the provision of development aid?

The respondents show a rather low level of knowledge about development aid – only one third of them reported that they had come across information concerning aid provided by Poland to other countries within 2-3 months preceding the survey. A significant difference should be noted, however, between the situation in this regard in 2014 and that in 2015: the percentage of people aware of aid activities carried out by Poland for the benefit of other countries – among those who are not interested in politics at all – increased by 10 pp, among those rather uninterested – by 6 pp, among those moderately interested – by 10 pp, and among those very interested – by as much as 26 pp, i.e. it almost doubled.

Respondents who had come across information concerning aid provided by Poland for the benefit of other countries indicated television as the main source of such knowledge (89%). The Internet turned out to be the second important source of such information and was indicated by three and a half fewer people (24%). Other major channels of obtaining information about aid activities carried out by Poland for the benefit of other countries included the radio (16%). Information on aid provided by Poland which the respondents came across most often concerned primarily support for refugees (56%).

How willing are we to provide financial support in less affluent countries?

Half of the respondents (52%) believe that given our capacities, Poland allocates sufficient funds for development aid for less affluent countries. Among those reporting objections, 12% claim that we spend too much on development aid, while 10% think that the funds we spend on it are insufficient.

Almost three fifths of Poles (57%) do not object to allocating a portion of their taxes by the government for development aid for less affluent countries. One third of the respondents (33%) agreed that this could be 6 PLN a month, while 5% expressed their consent for allocating greater amounts for this purpose.

The higher the education level, the better financial situation and the stronger conviction of the need for Poland to support the development of less developed countries, the more widespread acceptance for allocating a portion of taxes paid by Polish citizens for development aid for less affluent countries.

How can Polish people help to support developing countries?

According to the respondents the development of less developed countries is hampered by three major obstacles: problems with access to drinking water (50%), armed conflicts and other domestic conflicts, as well as contagious diseases, including HIV and AIDS (45% each). These were followed by inability to produce sufficient quantities of food (30%) and illiteracy (27%).

When asked about the areas in which Poland has the most to offer to less affluent countries, the respondents indicated first education (46%). We also highly value the competence of our doctors, nurses and midwives – 38% of the respondents believe that medical aid is an area in which we are able to support less affluent countries. The same percentages (23%) of the respondents indicated support aimed at facilitating economic growth and at the prevention of crises and post-conflict reconstruction, 19% of the respondents indicated infrastructural development, 18% - support for democratic reforms and environmental protection, while the fewest respondents indicated agricultural development.

When asked how Poland could support the development of poorer countries, most Poles again opted for the idea of allowing students from those countries to study in Poland (37%: this percentage is by 7 points higher than one year ago).

Where and how should development aid from Poland be sent?

According to the survey Polish people believe that aid granted by our country should be provided to African and Middle East countries (e.g. Ethiopia, Kenya, Palestine, Tanzania – 42%) and to our eastern neighbours – Ukraine and Belarus (40%). Definitely fewer people indicated former Soviet republics (e.g. Moldova, Georgia, Armenia – 16%) and Asian countries (such as Burma/Myanmar and Laos – 14%).

The most important channels of distribution of financial aid granted by Poland to support less developed countries, most favoured by the respondents, are related not with institutions established in the countries covered by aid, but with specialist international organizations (49%) and our domestic companies and NGOs (47%).

[1] Results of the public opinion poll on Polish development cooperation conducted by the TNS Polska between 27 November - 2 December 2015 on a representative sample of 1,014 residents of Poland aged 15 and higher.