Baldwin offers few answers on VA drug report
Tammy Baldwin (Photo: .)

Sen. Tammy Baldwin is coming under fire from Republicans for her inaction on alleged over-medication at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Tomah after she received a report detailing the problem last summer and was repeatedly urged by a whistleblower to help veterans at the center.

The Wisconsin State Assembly chair and vice chair of the Committee on Veterans and Military Affairs sent a letter to the Madison Democrat this week asking whether she read the report, and what she did to address the issues it identified during the more than four months between receiving it and publication of a news report earlier this month that a veteran suffered a fatal overdose at the facility.

"It is disturbing that no actions were taken and, as a result, our veterans suffered," wrote Chairman Rep. Ken Skowronski, R-Franklin, and Vice Chair Rep. Nancy Vander Meer, R-Tomah.

RELATED: Sen. Baldwin had VA report for months

The demand for answers followed a Gannett Wisconsin Media story Tuesday that revealed Baldwin received the inspection report Aug. 29 but didn't call for an investigation of prescription practices until after the Center for Investigative Reporting reported Jan. 8 that a 35-year-old Marine Corps vet died in August as an inpatient from "mixed drug toxicity."

The report by the VA inspector general found that two practitioners at the center were among the highest prescribers of opiates in a multistate region — at "considerable variance" with most opioid prescribers, raising "potentially serious concerns."

Baldwin's office said Wednesday she plans to respond to the legislators. An aide declined to say whether she read the inspection report when she received it and why her office did not act on it, aside from sharing it with a constituent. Her office has also not responded to questions about the whistleblower's pleas for her to act.

RELATED: Baldwin asks for report

RELATED: Baldwin gets report

Former Tomah VA employee Ryan Honl found out in early November that Baldwin had the inspection report – which had not been made public or given to any other member of Congress. Honl repeatedly emailed Baldwin aide Mike Helbick asking that she act on it – by bringing the issues in the report to public attention, by calling for an investigation, by pushing colleagues on the Veterans Affairs committee to take action.

RELATED: Honi email to Helbick

"When will Senator Baldwin say 'enough is enough' and push for better treatment of our veterans and a better culture free of intimidation and retaliation in Tomah and VA wide for those who whistleblow?" he wrote when she hadn't acted publicly by Dec. 2.

This week, Honl, a Gulf War vet and West Point graduate, said he was disturbed that Baldwin didn't act publicly until this month and is even more angry she still won't talk about his pleas.

He said she should admit she made a mistake by not acting on his requests.

"There are two kinds of people in this world: the kind that screw up, take responsibility for it, fix it, and move on. Then there are the Tammy Baldwins," Honl said. "She might as well be running the Tomah VA. Cut from the same cloth."

Skowronski said in an interview Wednesday that he wants to know why Baldwin didn't act on Honl's requests.

"I think that is despicable to have a matter that is very serious -- and to have any matter -- that would cross a senators' desk and not be investigated by herself or her staff," he said. "I just hope we can get to the answers to this and make sure this does not happen again, and there's much more due diligence to a matter of that seriousness."

Contact dslack@usatoday.com. Follow @donovanslack

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1BHL8v1