Poughkeepsie council fails to soften mayor's 16.5 percent tax increase
CLOSE

Buy Photo The "Poughkeepsie" sign located on the Arterial east of the Mid-Hudson Bridge.. (Photo: Patrick Oehler/Poughkeepsie Journal)Buy Photo

Property taxes in the City of Poughkeepsie will increase 16.5 percent in 2017 after an effort by the Common Council to soften that hike failed to survive the mayor's veto.

In a 4-4 vote Monday night, council members did not muster the minimum six votes needed to override Mayor Rob Rolison's veto of their amended proposal that would have set the increase at 13.5 percent.

As a result, the Republican mayor's $85.1 million spending plan will generate $23.2 million in property tax revenue and boost spending 2.35 percent.

The vote ended a two-month period during which a need to ensure predictable revenues for a cash-strapped city was debated against the need to preserve affordable home-ownership and city services.

Council Chairman Christopher Petsas, D-1st Ward, said he was "taken aback" that three Democrats — Mike Young (2nd Ward), Ann Perry (5th Ward) and Matthew McNamara (8th Ward) — joined the council's only Republican, Lee Klein of the 4th Ward, in voting against the veto override.

"I thought we, as a Democratic majority, had the votes to override," Petsas said. "I'm disappointed that some minds were changed at the last minute. But that is every person’s prerogative."

During Monday's session, Perry said she did not approve of either budget proposal.

McNamara said the mayor's plan "put us on better financial footing going forward."

Young voiced concerns about "speculative revenues" used by prior administrations during the budget process. Those forecasts later were criticized as being unrealistic by the state comptroller.

"It was a good sign that these council members agreed that the days of the speculative budgets and unreliable revenue streams are over," Rolison said Tuesday. "They sent a clear message that they are not going along with that."

Rolison's budget also puts the city on a path to have bus service taken over by Dutchess County in June. The Common Council's budget had proposed increasing revenues by raising bus fares 50 cents.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-4341. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

McNamara said the plan would not have saved the city's system.

On Tuesday, Petsas said it would have extended it "another month or two."

Petsas said the city could have eased the property tax burden through other revenue-generating measures, such as being more aggressive in the enforcement of code violations.

Petsas announced he will step down as the council's chairman, citing his belief in term limits and a need to spend time tending to personal matters.

"I totally enjoyed working with the city staff and administration," he said Tuesday. "It was an experience like no other."

A new chairman will be chosen at the Jan. 2 re-organizational meeting.

John Ferro: 845-437-4816, jferro@poughkeepsiejournal.com, Twitter: @PoJoEnviro

Read or Share this story: http://pojonews.co/2icG9Lq