Dutchess County 2018 budget passes with bipartisan nod
CLOSE Marcus Molinaro, the Duchess County executive, delivers his closing statement during his 2018 budget address in the Legislative Chambers of the Duchess County Office Building in Poughkeepsie, Oct. 31, 2017. Mark Vergari/Poughkeepsie Journal

Buy Photo Marcus Molinaro, the Duchess County executive, delivers his 2018 budget address in the Legislative Chambers of the Duchess County Office Building in Poughkeepsie, Oct. 31, 2017. (Photo: Mark Vergari/Poughkeepsie Journal)Buy Photo

Dutchess County Executive Marc Molinaro’s proposed 2018 budget passed on Thursday night with a 24-1 bipartisan vote by the county legislature.

The $480 million budget represents a 2.8 percent spending increase, and forecasts growth in the sales tax collected by the county, among other areas of economic growth.

Highlights of the 2018 budget are a reduction of property tax levy for a fourth consecutive year, and property tax rate cut for the third year in a row. The property tax levy decreased to $106.3 million from $106.5 million in 2017, and the property rate of $3.54 is a cut from $3.58 in 2017.

BUDGET PROPOSAL: County budget focuses on tax cuts, youth and addiction services

YOUTH: 2018 county budget focuses on youth

PROPERTY TAXES: 2018 county budget cuts property taxes

The budget also includes a boost in funding to youth services, and addiction and mental health services, including efforts to tackle the continued opioid crisis with resources including a crisis stabilization center.

The final step in the budget process is the adoption of the property tax levy on Dec. 18 at the county legislature’s board meeting.

There is no reduction in programs and services, according to the county.

Molinaro said he was pleased with the budget process and the budget itself, calling it a “culmination of several years of relationship” with the legislature and county service providers.

Molinaro continued: “The budget review process went very well, and the legislature was considerate and thoughtful in their review. They offered several amendments that we agree and support.”

The budget has been amended since Molinaro presented the plan on Oct. 31 before an audience of county officials and community leaders.

Key amendments included:

A $100,000 capital match to Poughkeepsie-based Family Partnership Center, which will be used to replace a boiler. The county is also a tenant at the center’s Hamilton Street headquarters.

The county signed a year-long $25,000 contract with the Mid-Hudson Civic Center to serve as an emergency shelter. Molinaro said the move was in part triggered by the recent Rip Van Winkle House crisis in which residents were displaced by heating and water issues.

The Veterans Support Housing is getting an additional $65,000 in funding, bringing the total to $100,000.

Legislators said they were overall pleased with the 2018 budget, which starts on the first of the year.

Dale Borchert, chair of the Dutchess County Legislature, said he's happy that county services haven’t been cut although the county's workforce has been reduced over the years.

“Our services were maintained and we’ve improved some of our services with that smaller headcount and we were able to save some costs,” said Borchert, noting services for homeless youth and those in foster care and constructing a new $192 million county law enforcement center and jail.

Legislator Barbara Jeter-Jackson, who represents the City of Poughkeepsie and pushed for the amendments to the Family Partnership Center and the Mid-Hudson Civic Center called the facilities, “vital in the City for so many of our residents.”

Read or Share this story: http://pojonews.co/2B37w84

Amy Wu: 845-451-4529, awu@poughkeepsiejournal.com, Twitter: @wu_PoJo