Dutchess ended 2016 with strong finances, $10 million surplus: Report
CLOSE Dutchess County Executive Marc Molinaro spoke with the Poughkeepsie Journal about a wide variety of topics affecting the county. Alex H. Wagner/Poughkeepsie Journal

Dutchess County Webkey (Photo: Journal File)

Dutchess County demonstrated strong finances in 2016, with more revenues than expenditures and an audited general fund balance of $59.9 million, according to a year-end report.

The report was conducted for the county by the independent auditing firm Drescher & Malecki and submitted to the New York State Comptroller, as required by state law. It concluded the county acquired general fund revenues of $433 million in 2016 compared to $423 million in expenses, adding up to a $10 million surplus, according to a release from the county announcing the report.

Additionally, Dutchess scored a perfect 0 percent on the New York State Comptroller’s Office annual Fiscal Stress Monitoring System test.

GRANT: Dutchess County drug prevention program receives $125,000 grant

COMPTROLLER: Comptroller candidates spar on audits, taxes, bus takeover at forum

POSITION: Dutchess ended 2016 in positive financial position: Report

The system, developed in 2012, analyzes local governments across the state and serves as an early warning of fiscal stress. A score of 44.9 percent or less indicates fiscal health, and Dutchess has steadily improved its rating since it received a 41.3 percent for 2012-2013.

“Over the past several years, we have made tremendous strides in stabilizing and strengthening our county finances,” County Executive Marc Molinaro said in the release. “As a result, we have been able to repeatedly reduce taxes for residents and businesses, expand our services and programs and shrink our long term bond debt.”

Dutchess’ 2016 general fund balance of $59.9 million represents almost 14 percent of its general fund revenues, exceeding a common benchmark of stability, 10 percent, according to the report.

The rebuilding of the fund balance over the past several years has led to the creation of the Taxpayer Protection Fund, which advocates for lower tax rates and includes a Capital Set Aside fund to reduce indebtedness. The county will set aside $16.5 million to provide the fund over the next several years, according to Journal archives.

The fund has led to lower tax property rates for county residents and businesses, according to the release, and the Capital Set Aside helped the county reduce its bond payable by more than 17 percent in 2016.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-4341. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

County Comptroller James Coughlan, in the release, said continued steady finances are the result of “careful scrutiny of expenses, maximizing revenue opportunities, internal control and operating efficiencies, and overall commitment to fiscal stability.”

“We must remain vigilant in this commitment as there are always unknown financial variables, such as shifting federal and state mandates, that can dramatically change the fiscal landscape,” he said. “Following best fiscal practices, we can be prepared for sudden changes and continue to ensure stability.”

Jack Howland: jhowland@poughkeepsiejournal.com, 845-437-4870, Twitter: @jhowl04

Read or Share this story: http://pojonews.co/2yMmytP