Brindisi talks policy at American Legion town hall
CLOSE New York State Assemblyman Anthony Brindisi will challenge Republican Rep. Claudia Tenney for the 22nd Congressional District seat. The election is in fall 2018. Hannah Schwarz / Staff Video

Buy Photo Attendees at Assemblyman Anthony Brindisi's May 21 town hall listen as he speaks. (Photo: Hannah Schwarz / Staff Photo)Buy Photo

Standing on a stage at American Legion Post 1645, a white, square and unassuming building off Robinson Street in Binghamton, State Assemblyman Anthony Brindisi breaks it to the crowd that he doesn't support an assault weapons ban.

It's a political nonstarter — Republicans won't go for it, says Brindisi, the Democratic candidate running against Congresswoman Claudia Tenney in New York's 22nd congressional district.

"This is a conversation where the extremes get in the way," he says. "When it comes to guns, I think I stand where the majority of Americans stand. I'm someone who supports the Second Amendment. But I'm also someone who supports expanding background checks."

MEMORIAL DAY SALE: Get breaking news with pressconnects' special deal for new subscribers

And schools, he says, need better security and more mental health services.

It's clear that some people in the room aren't going to hear the answer they want.

The town hall moves on. Next question: What to do about all the students who come to Binghamton for the university, but leave when they're looking for jobs?

And so it went, running the policy gamut for an hour and a half, all but five minutes of that a question and answer session.

Brindisi, whose town hall Monday night was his second in Binghamton in three weeks, spoke about healthcare coverage, prescription drug prices, the Republican tax reform bill, corporate behemoths, New York's energy grid and Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA).

Buy Photo Assemblyman Anthony Brindisi speaks at a town hall at American Legion Post 1645 on May 21. (Photo: Hannah Schwarz / Staff Photo)

But he stayed away, just like he did at a May 3 town hall at Binghamton University, from talk about some of the more headline-grabbing news: the special counsel's investigation into whether the Trump campaign worked with Russia to influence the election, Trump's payment to porn star Stormy Daniels, and the investigation into Trump personal attorney Michael Cohen.

That town hall was hosted by the Binghamton University College Democrats, Students for Brindisi and Generation Vote, a non-profit aimed at mobilizing young progressives.

More: At town hall, Anthony Brindisi criticizes Claudia Tenney, stays mum on Trump

When, on Monday night, he did mention national figures (Betsy DeVos), it was to criticize their policy track records (not holding student loan companies accountable).

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-253-5343. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Like at the BU town hall, he struck a centrist tone, explaining he thought it was more politically feasible to fix aspects of the Affordable Care Act than to pass single-payer healthcare. He entertained the idea of work requirements for those on SNAP ("we can have a discussion about that"), and said he'd be willing to support a wall along areas of the border as part of a comprehensive immigration reform compromise.

Elsewhere, he gave less ground.

"I am 100 percent against what the FCC just did by repealing net neutrality," he said, shortly before arguing for a constitutional amendment to get "dark money out of politics." (He acknowledged this was a "long shot.")

The Cook Political Report has listed the race as one of 24 "toss up" races across the country.

Follow @HannahRSchwarz on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: https://press.sn/2LjppSb