Court says mur­der re­trial can pro­ceed

A rul­ing clar­i­fies that Pa­trick Evans could face the death penalty.

Tampa Bay Times - 2017-02-21 - Local - BY LAURA C. MOREL Times Staff Writer

The Florida Supreme Court ruled Mon­day that the re­trial of a for­mer Ja­bil ex­ec­u­tive charged with killing his es­tranged wife and her friend can move for­ward.

Pa­trick Evans’ case came to a halt last year af­ter the state’s high­est court ruled that only unan­i­mous ju­ries can sen­tence de­fen­dants to death and that the cur­rent law re­quir­ing a 10-2 jury vote for the death penalty can’t be ap­plied to pend­ing tri­als.

Pinel­las-Pasco Cir­cuit Judge Joseph Bu­lone ruled in Oc­to­ber that the trial could go for­ward as long as ju­rors were told that, if Evans was con­victed of the mur­ders, all 12 of them must vote unan­i­mously to send Evans to death row.

Evans’ at­tor­neys from the Pinel­las-Pasco Pub­lic De­fender’s Of­fice dis­agreed and filed an emer­gency pe­ti­tion with the Florida Supreme Court.

“It is not a court’s job to write

the law,” the pe­ti­tion reads. “There can­not be a fair trial when there is not a con­sti­tu­tional law in place to fol­low.”

In the opin­ion re­leased Mon­day, the jus­tices ex­plained that even though the cur­rent death penalty statute needs to be re­vised, most of the law “can be con­strued con­sti­tu­tion­ally and oth­er­wise be validly ap­plied to pend­ing pros­e­cu­tions” as long as the jury unan­i­mously finds the de­fen­dant can be sen­tenced to death.

In a sep­a­rate rul­ing, the state court said a mo­tion seek­ing clar­i­fi­ca­tion on the au­thor­ity of trial courts to ap­ply the cur­rent law to pend­ing pros­e­cu­tions was “de­nied as moot” and re­ferred to their opin­ion in the Evans case.

“This de­ci­sion pro­vides our courts with the clar­i­fi­ca­tion needed to pro­ceed with mur­der cases in which the death penalty is sought,” At­tor­ney Gen­eral Pam Bondi said in a state­ment Mon­day.

Last month, the court re­scinded an opin­ion in the Perry vs. Florida case af­ter it ac­ci­den­tally pub­lished an or­der that said prose­cu­tors could not seek death sentences un­der the cur­rent law.

The State Leg­is­la­ture is ex­pected to pass a new statute this ses­sion.

Five jus­tices con­curred with Mon­day’s Evans opin­ion. Chief Jus­tice Jorge Labarga wrote that the “un­con­sti­tu­tional por­tion” of the cur­rent law that re­quires a 10-2 vote can be “sep­a­rated from the rest” of the statute.

Two jus­tices dis­sented in part. Although Jus­tice Bar­bara J. Pari­ente agreed that the trial phase of a death penalty case could move for­ward, she dis­agrees with hav­ing sentences im­posed with­out a re­vised law. Jus­tice Peggy A. Quince con­curred.

“What re­mains un­cer­tain is whether ad­di­tional ap­pel­late is­sues will be cre­ated by penalty phase pro­ceed­ings con­ducted with­out ben­e­fit of a new statute,” Pari­ente wrote.

Be­fore his ar­rest, Evans was a Ja­bil vice pres­i­dent earn­ing a six­fig­ure salary and was mar­ried to El­iz­a­beth Evans, a sales di­rec­tor. She later filed for di­vorce. On Dec. 20, 2008, she went on a date with a co-worker, Ger­ald Tay­lor. Later that day, au­thor­i­ties said, Evans con­fronted them in­side her Gulf­port condo and shot them dead.

In 2011, a jury con­victed him on two counts of first-de­gree mur­der. The next year, a cir­cuit judge sen­tenced him to death.

But in Novem­ber 2015, the Florida Supreme Court over­turned his con­vic­tion, cit­ing er­rors in a de­tec­tive’s tes­ti­mony and crit­i­ciz­ing a pros­e­cu­tor’s re­marks.

A hear­ing to set a new trial date is sched­uled for this morn­ing.