Ju­di­cial prin­ci­ple, at odds with law

Aramis Ay­ala’s move to es­chew the death penalty is con­sis­tent with her char­ac­ter, back­ers say.

Tampa Bay Times - 2017-03-26 - Front Page - BY BEN MONT­GOMERY Times Staff Writer

OR­LANDO — When Aramis Ay­ala be­gan cam­paign­ing for state at­tor­ney in this Cen­tral Florida district last year, so few peo­ple knew her that she handed out cards in­form­ing vot­ers how to pro­nounce her name.

While she’d worked for eight years as a pub­lic de­fender and nearly two years in the Or­lando state at­tor­ney’s of­fice, she was a po­lit­i­cal novice seek­ing pub­lic of­fice for the first time. She wor­ried about name recog­ni­tion in a race against her boss, who had swept into of­fice in 2012 thanks in part to his high-pro­file role in the in­fa­mous Casey An­thony trial. The Michi­gan na­tive didn’t even live in Or­ange or Osce­ola coun­ties; she promised to move into the district.

Now, af­ter up­set­ting pop­u­lar Demo­crat Jeff Ash­ton in the pri­maries, af­ter clinch­ing the district’s top law en­force­ment job in an un­op­posed gen­eral elec­tion, and af­ter be­com­ing Florida’s first black state at­tor­ney, she shocked the coun­try by an­nounc­ing she wouldn’t pur­sue the death penalty in cap­i­tal mur­der cases.

“I have de­ter­mined that do­ing so is not in the best in­ter­est of the com­mu­nity or the best in­ter­est of jus­tice,” she said March 16, a view she had not ex­pressed pub­licly dur­ing her cam­paign.

The de­ci­sion has her in an on­go­ing le­gal fight with the gov­er­nor and prompted the Florida House speaker to say he’d start im­peach­ment pro­ceed­ings against her if he could.

It also has Florid­i­ans wondering who she is.

The news­pa­pers are calling her “em­bat­tled,” but many here who know Ay­ala, 42, say her de­ci­sion hasn’t sur­prised them. They say she is do­ing what no one be­fore has been brave enough to do in a jus­tice sys­tem they view as racially im­bal­anced.

“She’s just what the com­mu­nity needed,” said Alisia Adam­son Profit, who worked with Ay­ala in the pub­lic de­fender’s of­fice in Or­lando. “It’s so cool to have a state at­tor­ney who has also been a pub­lic de­fender . . . . I think you get a dif­fer­ent ex­pe­ri­ence deal­ing with the vic­tims, the fam­i­lies, the de­fen­dants as a pub­lic de­fender. You re­ally learn to re­spect each side when you get in that place.”

Stok­ing the con­tro­versy: The an­nounce­ment came as Ay­ala’s of­fice was han­dling the case of Markeith Loyd, who is ac­cused of killing his preg­nant ex-girl­friend and a po­lice of­fi­cer try­ing to cap­ture him in De­cem­ber, then avoid­ing a po­lice man­hunt for nine days.

Gov. Rick Scott asked Ay­ala to re­cuse her­self from the Loyd case, but she re­fused. He then re­as­signed the case to an­other state at­tor­ney, cit­ing a state law that al­lows the gov­er­nor to ap­point a dif­fer­ent pros­e­cu­tor if there is a “good and suf­fi­cient rea­son.”

Be­sides the gov­er­nor, she has faced crit­i­cism from po­lice unions, pros­e­cu­tors, and even a Semi­nole County Clerk of Courts em­ployee who com­mented on Face­book that “she should be tarred and feath­ered if not hung from a tree.”

At­tor­ney Gen­eral Pam Bondi called the po­si­tion “dan­ger­ous” and “a ne­glect of duty.” The two pre­vi­ous Or­lando state at­tor­neys blasted the move. Ash­ton, in an in­ter­view with the Or­lando Sentinel, said Ay­ala seemed ex­cited to try her first cap­i­tal mur­der case when she worked for him as a pros­e­cu­tor in 2015. David Lewis Payne, who au­thor­i­ties said ab­ducted his ex-girl­friend, put her in the trunk of her car then killed her, has yet to go to trial. On March 16, Ay­ala filed a no­tice of in­tent not to seek the death penalty in that case.

And af­ter her an­nounce­ment, 19 of Florida’s 20 state at­tor­neys re­buked Ay­ala in a state­ment.

But Ay­ala’s bold — some say “his­toric” — move is con­sis­tent with her char­ac­ter, say those who know her.

“We fi­nally have an elected of­fi­cial who’s not afraid to do what’s right,” said T.J. Le­ga­cyCole, a com­mu­nity ac­tivist and founder of a group called Or­ange County Black Voice.

“She’s a breath of fresh air,” said civil rights at­tor­ney Natalie Jack­son. “She’s one of the strong­est women I know.”

“We are in sup­port of her and we def­i­nitely are not in sup­port of what the gov­er­nor is do­ing,” said Bev­er­lye Col­son Neal, pres­i­dent of the Or­ange County branch of the NAACP, who de­scribed Scott’s move as a slight. “He didn’t have good or suf­fi­cient rea­sons. He never even lis­tened to her. He just out­right dis­re­garded her.”

Ay­ala, who leads an of­fice with more than 155 pros­e­cu­tors who han­dle about 100,000 cases a year in the state’s third-largest district, earned her bach­e­lor’s de­gree from the Univer­sity of Michi­gan, her master’s from the Univer­sity of Cen­tral Florida and her law de­gree from the Univer­sity of Detroit-Mercy School of Law. She then joined the pub­lic de­fender’s of­fice in Or­lando, though few of her cases made head­lines or even a men­tion in the lo­cal pa­pers.

She ran for state at­tor­ney on the prom­ise she would bring back the do­mes­tic vi­o­lence unit and im­prove re­la­tions be­tween law en­force­ment and the com­mu­nity.

Friends say her eight years as a pub­lic de­fender broad­ened her em­pa­thy and un­der­stand­ing of a sys­tem many view as un­fair to­ward mi­nori­ties. They point to the fact that nearly 39 per­cent of the 381 death row in­mates are black, while blacks make up about 17 per­cent of the state’s pop­u­la­tion.

In the race for state at­tor­ney, Ay­ala raised about $50,000 in cam­paign con­tri­bu­tions, not even half of the $112,000 raised by Ash­ton, ac­cord­ing to state records. But the fi­nan­cial wild card was lib­eral bil­lion­aire Ge­orge Soros, who sup­ported sev­eral pro­gres­sive state at­tor­ney can­di­dates around the coun­try. Soros poured $1.4 mil­lion into a po­lit­i­cal ac­tion com­mit­tee set up to sup­port Ay­ala and ham­per Ash­ton. One ad lauded her “plan to re­move bias” from the crim­i­nal jus­tice sys­tem and her be­lief “in one stan­dard of jus­tice for all.”

The bar­rage of ads worked. Ay­ala dom­i­nated the AfricanAmer­i­can vote, win­ning eight of ev­ery 10 votes where non­white reg­is­tered Democrats were the ma­jor­ity, ac­cord­ing to an Or­lando Sentinel anal­y­sis of voter reg­is­tra­tion rolls. She cap­tured nearly 57 per­cent of the 81,801 votes cast in the pri­mary. She eas­ily de­feated a write-in chal­lenger in the gen­eral elec­tion.

While she’s re­ceived sup­port from the NAACP and the Florida Leg­isla­tive Black Cau­cus, which on Thurs­day called for Scott to re­scind his ex­ec­u­tive or­der that trans­ferred the case, her friends say her de­ci­sion was based on re­search, not race.

They pointed to stud­ies that show the death penalty is not a crime de­ter­rent, costs the state more than im­pris­on­ing de­fen­dants for life and doesn’t pro­vide clo­sure for vic­tims’ fam­i­lies.

“I am pro­hib­ited from mak­ing the sever­ity of sen­tences the in­dex of my ef­fec­tive­ness,” Ay­ala told reporters the day of her an­nounce­ment. “Pun­ish­ment is most ef­fec­tive when it hap­pens con­sis­tently and swiftly. Nei­ther de­scribe the death penalty in this state.” She added that vi­o­lent of­fend­ers “will never con­tinue to drain re­sources from this state with decades of ap­peals.”

“Ev­ery­thing is based off pol­icy,” said Ca­mara Wil­liams, an Or­lando lawyer who met Ay­ala at Florida A&M Col­lege of Law, where she has taught. “It comes down to mak­ing the best de­ci­sion with her, not the de­ci­sion that’s based on what’s pop­u­lar.”

In fact, many think her de­ci­sion could harm her po­lit­i­cal fu­ture.

“It’s not a strate­gic po­lit­i­cal move,” Legacy-Cole said. “That’s not her strong­est point.” But, he said, stand­ing up to the power struc­ture is some­thing that could win even wider sup­port be­yond the black com­mu­nity.

Ay­ala, who wasn’t avail­able for an in­ter­view with the Tampa Bay Times, is a mother of two and has been mar­ried since 2009 to David Ay­ala, whose crim­i­nal past was used against her in ad­ver­tise­ments dur­ing the cam­paign. They met in 2007, and their first date was to his Lake­land church for Sun­day ser­vices. Soon af­ter meet­ing, David told her of his run-ins with the law as a child, where he learned to sell drugs in ju­ve­nile de­ten­tion. He was later ar­rested in New York and Penn­syl­va­nia and served seven years in pri­son for drug con­spir­acy and coun­ter­feit­ing checks. Af­ter pri­son, he earned an as­so­ci­ate’s de­gree in busi­ness ad­min­is­tra­tion from Va­len­cia Com­mu­nity Col­lege, worked at an in­ter­na­tional telecom­mu­ni­ca­tions com­pany and was cer­ti­fied in per­sonal train­ing and ex­er­cise ther­apy.

Ay­ala said her hus­band’s ex­pe­ri­ence in the sys­tem shaped her opin­ion.

“David’s past has given me per­spec­tives into our jus­tice sys­tem that my op­po­nent has never had,” Ay­ala said dur­ing the cam­paign.

Those who know Ay­ala are con­fi­dent she’ll weather the po­lit­i­cal storm. Sev­eral said she is a cancer sur­vivor and is used to deal­ing with stress. They said they hoped the knee-jerk re­sponse to her de­ci­sion would give way to a more thought­ful de­bate about the flaws in the death penalty in a court cir­cuit with a pop­u­la­tion of about 1.6 mil­lion peo­ple.

“Peo­ple don’t know her,” said Wil­liams. “So it’s very hurt­ful for us to watch this.”

“If you know her, you’re not sur­prised,” Adam­son Profit said. “She comes in, as­sesses the sit­u­a­tion, masters it, then takes a lead­er­ship role.”

On Thurs­day, Florida House Speaker Richard Cor­co­ran called on the gov­er­nor to sus­pend Ay­ala and spoke of leg­is­la­tion that would al­low law­mak­ers to im­peach state at­tor­neys.

“You can bet your bot­tom dol­lar, if we could get that bill passed and it was law right now, we would ab­so­lutely start im­peach­ment pro­ceed­ings on that pros­e­cu­tor,” said Cor­co­ran, R-Lake­land.

Would she give up her po­si­tion un­der in­tense pres­sure? Jack­son doesn’t think so.

“I don’t see her wa­ver­ing on this,” she said.

“Pun­ish­ment is most ef­fec­tive when it hap­pens con­sis­tently and swiftly. Nei­ther de­scribe the death penalty in this state.” Or­ange-Osce­ola State At­tor­ney Aramis Ay­ala, in her an­nounce­ment to reporters that she would no longer seek the death penalty

Ay­ala’s death-penalty views weren’t known when she ran for state at­tor­ney.

Or­lando Sentinel Or­ange/Osce­ola State At­tor­ney Aramis Ay­ala chats with State At­tor­ney Brad King, who rep­re­sents a re­gion that in­cludes Her­nando County. King was ap­pointed to take over the Markeith Loyd case.