Breaking Down Mass Incarceration in the 2010 Census: State-by-State Incarceration Rates by Race/Ethnicity

Briefing by Leah Sakala

May 28, 2014

Overview

Over the last four decades, the United States has undertaken a national project of over criminalization that has put more than two million people behind bars at any given time, and brought the U.S. incarceration rate far beyond that of any other nation in the world. A closer look at which communities are most heavily impacted by mass incarceration reveals stark racial and ethnic disparities in U.S. incarceration rates in every region of the country.

Nationally, according to the U.S. Census, Blacks are incarcerated five times more than Whites1 are, and Hispanics are nearly twice as likely to be incarcerated as Whites:

The racial and ethnic make-up of incarcerated populations is dramatically different from that of the U.S. as a whole.2 Race/Ethnicity % of US population % of U.S.

incarcerated population National incarceration rate

(per 100,000) White (non-Hispanic) 64% 39% 450 per 100,000 Hispanic 16% 19% 831 per 100,000 Black 13% 40% 2,306 per 100,000

Social science research has time and again come to the robust conclusion that exposure to the criminal justice system has profound and intergenerational negative effects on communities that experience disproportionate incarceration rates.3 It is imperative that we are able to measure the extent to which the criminal justice system disparately impacts our communities.

Until 2006, researchers, advocates, and policymakers could rely on state-level race and ethnicity incarceration rate data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics "Prisons and Jails at Midyear" series.4 Unfortunately, these state-level statistics have not been updated in eight years.5 This report endeavors to meet this data need to the extent possible with existing data by using 2010 U.S. Census counts to measure each state's incarceration rates by race and ethnicity. This report accompanies a web database of graphs and statistics with incarceration rates by race and ethnicity data for all 50 U.S. states.

Methodology and data notes

Using Summary File 1 data from the 2010 Census, we calculated for each state 1) the incarcerated and non-incarcerated portions of the people in that state of a given race or ethnicity and 2) an incarceration rate for each single-race category, and for Hispanic populations. Both calculations compare the state's total population6 with the prison, jail, and detention center population that the Census Bureau counted in "Correctional facilities for adults."7

Several specific data notes particularly merit attention here:

The Census Bureau's correctional facility data includes individuals incarcerated in federal prisons and detention centers as well as in state and local facilities. 8

The figures in this report only reflect individuals in local, state, or federal custody, and do not include the nearly five million people on probation or parole. 9

Finally, while the Bureau of Justice statistics reports produced until 2006 only included data on three racial and ethnic categories — Black, White and Hispanic — using Census Bureau data allows us to also report data on Native American and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander populations in states where that is applicable.

Conclusion

Ideally, of course, every state would collect and publish data for every racial and ethnic group incarcerated in the prisons, jails and other correctional facilities in that state’s jurisdiction.10 In addition, we hope that the Bureau of Justice Statistics will soon resume its data series with state-by-state total incarceration rates for Whites, Hispanics, and Blacks. Data supplied both by an individual state and by the Bureau of Justice Statistics would avoid being skewed by federal prison counts, as discussed in footnote 8. But until we have the benefit of these updated figures, the Census Bureau's data collection presented in this analysis is a useful starting point for state-level evaluations of the disparate impacts of criminal justice policy decisions.

Additional graphs

The graphs made for this briefing are included in our profiles for each state:

and are available individually from this list:

Alabama

Alaska

Arizona

Arkansas

California

Colorado

Connecticut

Delaware

Florida

Georgia

Hawaii

Idaho

Illinois

Indiana

Iowa

Kansas

Kentucky

Louisiana

Maine

Maryland

Massachusetts

Michigan

Minnesota

Mississippi

Missouri

Montana

Nebraska

Nevada

New Hampshire

New Jersey

New Mexico

New York

North Carolina

North Dakota

Ohio

Oklahoma

Oregon

Pennsylvania

Rhode Island

South Carolina

South Dakota

Tennessee

Texas

Utah

Vermont

Virginia

Washington

West Virginia

Wisconsin

Wyoming

United States