VA and Marijuana – What Veterans need to know

Several states in the U.S. have approved the use of marijuana for medical and/or recreational use. Veterans should know that federal law classifies marijuana as a Schedule One Controlled Substance. This makes it illegal in the eyes of the federal government.

The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs is required to follow all federal laws including those regarding marijuana. As long as the Food and Drug Administration classifies marijuana as Schedule I VA health care providers may not recommend it or assist Veterans to obtain it.

Veteran participation in state marijuana programs does not affect eligibility for VA care and services. VA providers can and do discuss marijuana use with Veterans as part of comprehensive care planning, and adjust treatment plans as necessary.

Some things Veteran need to know about marijuana and the VA:

Veterans will not be denied VA benefits because of marijuana use.

Veterans are encouraged to discuss marijuana use with their VA providers.

VA health care providers will record marijuana use in the Veteran's VA medical record in order to have the information available in treatment planning. As with all clinical information, this is part of the confidential medical record and protected under patient privacy and confidentiality laws and regulations.

VA clinicians may not recommend medical marijuana.

VA clinicians may only prescribe medications that have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for medical use. At present most products containing tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), cannabidiol (CBD), or other cannabinoids are not approved for this purpose by the FDA.

VA clinicians may not complete paperwork/forms required for Veteran patients to participate in state-approved marijuana programs.

VA pharmacies may not fill prescriptions for medical marijuana.

VA will not pay for medical marijuana prescriptions from any source.

VA scientists may conduct research on marijuana benefits and risks, and potential for abuse, under regulatory approval.

The use or possession of marijuana is prohibited at all VA medical centers, locations and grounds. When you are on VA grounds it is federal law that is in force, not the laws of the state.

Veterans who are VA employees are subject to drug testing under the terms of employment.

View the full directive ”Access to VHA Clinical Programs for Veterans Participating in State-Approved Marijuana Programs (73 KB, PDF).” (VHA Directive 1315)

To send a secure email, use VA's Ask a Question - IRIS (a secure website contracted to VA). Please do not include personal data or information.