Journalists shower Hillary Clinton with campaign cash
Or consider the curious case of another New York Times journalist, Ruth La Ferla.

Federal records show the long-time fashion reporter gave Clinton’s campaign $250 in December.

Except La Ferla says she didn’t make the contribution. No way, no how.

“I don't involve myself with political campaigns of any sort, not only because I work at the Times but because I am utterly indifferent to their outcome,” La Ferla wrote in an email. “It's a mystery to me why my name is on that document … It does indeed appear that the Clinton campaign made an error.”

Clinton campaign spokesman Josh Schwerin was equally mystified: “This is the first we are hearing of this discrepancy, and so we are looking into this. If we find that an error or anything improper occurred, we will certainly take the appropriate steps to remedy it.”

The Clinton campaign — or any campaign — has several options for contributions it fears are illegal or otherwise doesn’t want: give the money back, donate the money to charity or disgorge it to the U.S. Treasury, which will add it to the federal government’s general fund

Don’t trust the liberal media?

About 28 percent of journalists say they affiliate with the Democratic Party, 7 percent the Republican Party and 14 percent an “other” party, according to a 2014 study by Indiana University-Bloomington professors Lars Willnat and David H. Weaver.

The rest of journalists — more than 50 percent — say they’re not affiliated with any political party.

Barbara Hough Roda, executive editor of LNP, the largest news organization based in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, said she wants her reporters to act without favor to any political party and for the public to indeed perceive her newsroom as independent.

But LNP has no formal policy prohibiting journalists from making political contributions, freeing LNP sportswriter Paula Wolf, who did not return a request for comment, to give money to Clinton’s campaign, as she did to the tune of more than $300.

Will LNP consider revising its policy after the 2016 election?

“I believe we will,” Roda said. “My preference would be that we err on the side of caution, so it would probably behoove us to take a look at this again.”

Nussbaum, the New Yorker television critic, has already instituted a new personal policy for making political campaign contributions.

“I'm not planning to contribute money in the future,” she said.

A version of this story was published by the Columbia Journalism Review.