"Bush's Budget Vetoes Make for a Confusing State Picture" - The Florida Times Union, June 1, 2000
Uh, could we get a clarification here, please?

For the second year in a row, Gov. Jeb Bush has used his veto power to slice $300 million or so from the Legislature-approved budget.

When announcing his intentions, Bush said that people, especially legislators who got their turkeys approved during the legislative session, shouldn't be surprised.

"I didn't come up here to be a big spending liberal," Bush declared.

That's where it gets confusing.

Bush's mighty budget ax only chopped off the slightest sliver of the state's budget. I know that the $313 million Bush vetoed sounds like real money to regular folks, but in state budget terms, it's chicken feed.

The $313 million amounts to only about six-tenths of 1 percent of the $51 billion budget. And even with those cuts, the state's spending will increase almost 7 percent over last year's. That hefty jump comes at a time when inflation is at historically low levels.

Bush is right about one thing. He certainly isn't a liberal, but if that's not big spending, what is?

Doubly confusing, if Bush wants to protect the state's taxpayers as he says, are things that Bush didn't veto.

Bush huffed and puffed and said for the umpteenth time that he set his veto sights on projects that didn't go through the proper review. Whether a project survived had nothing to do with friendships or politics, he said.

Yet, Bush left untouched $50 million the Legislature approved to start a new medical school at Florida State University, the alma mater of House Speaker John Thrasher, Bush's friend and political ally, even though the Legislature dumped the proposal last year as a bad idea and the state's Board of Regents continues to insist the school isn't needed.

Bush also let stand several million dollars to start up two new law schools, as if the state needs any more lawyers.

Hey, Mr. I'm-not-a-big-spender, those three schools of dubious value will cost taxpayers millions of dollars a year for years to come. …