[MEDIA STATEMENT] Marriage Equality Reaches Supreme Court
MEDIA STATEMENT

March 27, 2013, Contact [email protected]

Marriage Equality Reaches Supreme Court

The following statement can be attributed to Nadine Smith, executive director for Equality Florida:

--

This is a watershed moment in the life of our nation. While we will not know their decision until June, it appears the United States Supreme Court is poised to end the federal ban that strips gay married couples of equal status and consequently denies us more than 1000 federal protections for families. If observers are correct, gay married couples including my wife and I will not be faced with tax forms that require us to lie and deny the existence of our spouse. The financial penalties imposed because we are considered legal strangers can cost us more than $300,000 compared with married heterosexual couples over a lifetime. In a stroke, this financial burden will be erased. We hold out the hope that the court will go further and "protect the minority from the tyranny of the majority " by striking down all state anti-gay marriage bans.

Regardless of the court's decision, America has fundamentally shifted in these last days. Every time we have an honest conversation about our lives and expose the injury that discrimination inflicts on us, our loved ones, our friends, and our children, Americans move quickly and decisively to support Equality.

This will be remembered as the moment when our allies stood up like never before. Every movement for Equality and social justice has required that those in the majority eventually stand with those of the minority. Today, that is happening. Elected leaders and corporations are speaking out. Family members, co-workers, friends and neighbors are wearing red, coming out as allies on Facebook and finally demanding that our leaders stand with us to guarantee the security and recognition for our families that every family deserves.

Equality Florida is the largest civil rights organization dedicated to securing full equality for Florida's lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community.

-30-