Report: Mexico Providing Professional Charter Buses for Migrant Caravan
Amidst the news of the swelling migrant caravan heading toward the United States border come disturbing reports of the migrants getting state-funded help from Mexico.

According to Fox News, the migrants are being loaded onto professional charter buses being provided by the Mexican government in order to expedite some of the migrants to the border.

“Something new that’s developing here,” said Fox News reporter Griff Jenkins. “We’ve seen the 5,000 strong caravan walking to the border but now they’re waiting for a ride to the border. This is the first time I have seen an organized bus operation from the state of Oaxaca actually getting volunteer buses to put people … on them and take them to their next location.”

Jenkins is seen showing multiple buses as migrants board

Fox News reporter traveling with migrant caravan shocked to discover professional charter busses – provided by Mexico – loading migrants up to drive them closer to US border. Begs the question once again: Who is paying for this? How is this happening?https://t.co/IhFC9avclF pic.twitter.com/Thj13T47xe — Benny (@bennyjohnson) October 30, 2018

According to Jenkins, this is a switch up from the previous policy from Mexico of trying to dissuade the migrants from pressing forward, however, it would appear that the actual towns are now helping load and transport migrants.

“That’s very significant now because these towns continue to help them,” said Jenkins. “When we began this way back a week or so – Mexican police were trying to dissuade them from going across the Guatemala-Mexico border. At least some of the towns are assisting them to make their way.”

This news comes on the heels of a second, more violent caravan clashing with Mexican police using more forceful tactics to push their way through Mexico.

Trump has increased the number of soldiers going to the border from 800 to 5,000 in light of the increasing migrant numbers. What the soldiers are going to do once the migrants reach the border is still not clear, but if the violent clashes from some groups are any indication, we can expect something like a battle between U.S. troops and the migrants.

(h/t: Daily Caller)