(PDF) Undocumented Immigrants as Perceived Criminal Threat: A Test of the Minority Threat Perspective
A TEST OF THE MINORITY THREAT PERSPECTIVE 767

Fifth, this study highlights perceptions of the relative size of the undocu-

mented immigrant population as a salient predictor that helps to explain

variations in perceived criminal threat from undocumented immigrants.

This ﬁnding, however, must be interpreted with caution because, when

based on cross-sectional data, causal ordering must be assumed. Based

on the logic and reasoning intimated by the minority threat perspective

(Semyonov et al., 2004: 691), this study assumed that the perceived size of

the undocumented immigrant population affects perceived criminal threat,

but the opposite causal ordering is not implausible. For example, respon-

dents who feel more threatened by undocumented immigrants may be more

likely to perceive them as composing a large share of the population. This

possibility may operate simultaneously with the causal ordering assumed

in this study. To test this possibility, a nonrecursive model was estimated,

treating sex and education as instrumental variables. This nonrecursive

model suggests that perceptions of undocumented immigrants as a criminal

threat do not signiﬁcantly predict the perceived size of the undocumented

immigrant population. Future research should further and fully explore

the possibility that perceptions of minority population size and perceptions

of minority threat simultaneously affect each other. Not the least, future

research also may want to examine the effects of objective and perceptual

measures of community context on perceptions of undocumented immi-

grants using data collected from other geographical areas. The general-

izability of the ﬁndings from this study may be limited because the data

were collected from four Southwest states. However, the demonstrated

validity of the minority threat perspective in a variety of contexts suggests

that the explanatory power of models testing this framework is in no way

restricted by geography (see e.g., Quillian, 1995; Stults and Baumer, 2007).

Whether replication of the current study using data collected from other ge-

ographic areas would produce consistent results remains an open empirical

question.

From a policy perspective, perceptions that immigrants, especially un-

documented immigrants, are related to more crime have largely dominated

the national and local debate over immigration. Although a large body

of empirical research ﬁnds no evidence to support such perceptions, they

have persisted among the public and have exerted a signiﬁcant inﬂuence

on immigration policies and practices (Martinez, 2006; Rumbaut, 2008).

After Governor Jan Brewer of Arizona signed the Support Our Law En-

forcement and Safe Neighborhoods Act into law in 2010, an increasing

number of states are considering following Arizona’s lead. For example,

in 2011, Alabama vaulted past Arizona with the most restrictive law in

the nation against undocumented immigration. These tough immigration

laws and policies are aimed at addressing public perceptions of immigrant

criminality by distributing limited resources, especially in the public safety