(PDF) The Risks of Operational Militarization: Increased Conflict Against Militarized Police
            

DE GRUYTER   

and what type of call they were responding to when the assault occurred, with what weapon w as used for the

assault, and if there was bodily injury as a result of the assault. As research is mixed on type of call being the

most dangerous (Ellis, Choi & Blaus, 1993; Hirschel, Dean & Lumb, 1994; S tanford & Mowry , 1990), this analysis

takes a summation of assaults on all possible call categories within a given state-month. Since research argues

that aggravated assaults are far less likely to be underreported (Kaminski, Jeﬀeris & Gu, 2003; Marg arita, 1980),

we reduced our analysis to examining only those assaults in which an injury was reported.

3.3.2 Independent variables

3.3.2.1 Purchases of material and operational militarization

As the 1033 program oﬀered items at reduced cost, equipment transfers will be counted by quantity bought.

This present research will be analyzing the militarization of police through two speciﬁc indicators of police mil-

itarization – of material and of operational (Kraska, 2007). Material militarization refers to visible qualities of

militarization – weapons, body armor , and militar y clothing. Operational militarization is deﬁned as “ patterns

of activity modeled after the military such as in the areas of intelligence, supervision, handling high-risk situa-

tions, or war-making/rest oration ” (Kraska, 2007, p. 3) and therefore includes sonar , radar, photography , bomb

kits, disaster relief, and communication-based devices. In short, operational militarization should encompass

all purchases that assist in surveillance or high-risk scenarios.

Equipment needs time to ship, unload, be trained, and potentially for it be noticed b y the public. T o account

for this delay in eﬀect, all equipment purchases will be lagged 6 months in time. This will control for direc-

tionality – purchases 6 months prior are being used to predict contemporary assaults. Because the equipment

comes with a “ use it or lose it ” attachment (Walker , 2014), one can assume that the equipment has been used

at least once (and therefore, should hav e an eﬀect) and stays with the department and can be considered stock-

piled over time. Sensitivity analysis will be check ed at 3 and 12 month lagged eﬀects to substantiate any results

from the proceeding analyses (Bove & Ga vrilova, 2017; W ickes, 2015).

3.4 Analytic strategy

We impro ve on prior research (Bov e & Gavrilova, 2017; Harris et al., 2017) by using cross-time negativ e bi-

nomial regression model with state and month ﬁxed eﬀects (Dietz et al., 2003) to predict assaults on oﬀicers

and purchases by the state. Negativ e binomial regressions were chosen, in comparison to instrumented panels

(Harris et al., 2017) or linear regression (Bove & Ga vrilova, 2017), due to the nature of the dependent variable.

The dependent variable of interest (assaults on oﬀicers) is a highly negativ ely skewed discrete count variable

with overdispersion, ha ving a variance 162 times larger than the mean. Our choice of using month-level eﬀects,

instead of year -level eﬀects (Bov e & Gavrilova, 2017; Harris et al., 2017), allows f or a more nuanced approach to

these eﬀects and provides us with more power to justify our results with the increase in observations per state.

And, as stated in Analytic Sample, since crime has a seasonal, inter-tem poral pattern within the year , using a

month level analysis allows us a more nuanced examination of the results.

The negative binomial model includes an exposure variable in order to account f or the fact that diﬀerent

states may ha ve a diﬀerent amount of face-time with citizens, which w ould increase the risk of being assaulted.

In all models, we use the violent crime rate as the exposure variable within the negative binomial model. States

with higher crime rates should hav e higher volumes of calls, higher v olume of interactions with citizens, and

more opportunity to expose citizens to their militarized equipment. Exposure variables adjust the dependent

variable to become a rate of ev ents (assaults) per unit exposure (crime).

We run three models. The ﬁrst model will be the number of assaults with injury police oﬀicers in state i

at time t as predicted by 6-month prior purchases of both material and operational militarization equipment.

Notably , purchases are not lost at the next month, but states continually acquire more equipment. A more

meaningful measure of purchases is the cumulative summation of purchases for each state i at time t , which

will be the second model, scaled to every 100 purchases. The coeﬀicients represent change in predicted assaults

for every one hundred additional units of militarized equipment purchased since 1992, the ﬁrst year in which

the dataset reports purchases. The third model will add a quadratic term to each purchase category to examine

if there are nonlinear marginal eﬀects over time. All control and exposure v ariables will be used in all three

models, along with state and month ﬁxed eﬀects.

5

Brought to you by | University of Saskatchewan

Authenticated

Download Date | 8/8/17 6:53 PM