(PDF) The Off-Farm Occupations of U.S. Farm Operators and Their Spouses
United States Department of Agriculture

A report summary fr om the Economic Researc h Service

ERS is a primary source

of economic research and

analysis from the U.S.

Department of Agriculture,

providing timely informa-

tion on economic and policy

issues related to agriculture,

food, the environment,and

rural America. www .ers.usda.gov

Jason P. Brown

Jeremy G. Weber

The Off-Farm Occupations

of U.S. Farm Operators

and Their Spouses

Economic

Research

Service

Economic

Information

Bulletin

Number 117

September 2013

United States De pa rt me nt of Ag ricultur e

September 2013

Find the full report at

www.ers.usda.go v/

publications/eib-eco-

nomic-information-

bulletin/eib-117.aspx

What Is the Issu e?

Because of the broad deﬁnition o f a farm—which includes n umerous small operations that produce

little or no agricultural commodities in any given year—most f arm households earn all of their

income from nonfarm sources. How ever , ev en those operating farms with substantial production

often have s igniﬁcant nonfarm income. Most nonf arm income, in tur n, comes from off- farm jobs.

Since farm household inco me has increased more than the income of the typical U.S. househo ld

over the last 1 5 years, based largel y on higher nonfarm incomes, a clos er examination of what

farm operators and their spouses do to ear n their nonfarm income is warranted. A re there comple -

mentarities between what farm househol d members do on and off the farm that could explain past

income trends? Looking forward, as the skills demanded and nur tured on the far m change with

evo lving technolo gies, particularly on larger farms, how will the opportunities and compensation for

off- farm jobs change for f arm operators and their spouses? Prior research has shown the importance

of distinguishing between what people “ make” (industry) v ersus what they “ do” (occup ation). This

report describes the most common occupations and industries of off -farm wage and salary jobs held

by the operators of family farms and their spouses.

What Did the Study F ind?

Most farm househol ds (91 percen t) hav e at least one f amily member working at an off- farm

job. Of farm operators and their spouses with off -farm jobs, 3 5. 9 percent held pro fessi onal and

management occupatio ns in 201 0. This is higher than for metropolitan area workers in general

(3 1 .6 percent) o r for nonmetropolitan wor kers (25.3 perce nt). Operators of larger farms and

their spouses reported the highest shares of management and profess ional occupations in their

off- farm jobs, suggesting that they ha ve a high capaci ty to apply their know ledge and skills

from managing a sizeable farm operation to other areas of emplo yment.

• Farm operators and their spouses are more likely than other workers to ha ve managemen t

and professi onal off- farm occupations.

• Management and profess ional occupations paid hi gher wages on a verage than other occupatio ns.

For farm operators, management occupati ons paid $7 an hour more (on av erage) than the next

highest paying occupati on (sales and ofﬁce su pport), and nearly doubl e that paid by service occu -

pations or those in production, transportation, and materials moving. Althou gh the wage differ -

ences are more modest for spo uses, management occupa tions still paid them 21 percent m ore

than the next highest paying occupati on.

• Professional and management occu pations were m ost commonly hel d by operators and spouses

with a college edu cation. For them, 56 .2 percent of operators and 60. 6 percent of spouses had a

Jason P . Bro wn and Je rem y G. W ebe r

The Off-Farm Occupations of U .S. F arm

Operators and Their Spouses