World Population Prospects, the 2012 Revision
Topic Data File Description

Infant and children Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) Probability of dying between birth and exact age 1. It is expressed as average annual deaths per 1,000 births.

Infant and children Under-five Mortality (5q0) Probability of dying between birth and exact age 5. It is expressed as average annual deaths per 1,000 births.

Overall Crude Death Rate (CDR) Number of deaths over a given period divided by the person-years lived by the population over that period. It is expressed as average annual number of deaths per 1,000 population.

Overall Deaths - Both Sexes Number of deaths over a given period. Refers to five-year periods running from 1 July to 30 June of the initial and final years. Data are presented in thousands.

Overall Deaths - Male Number of male deaths over a given period. Refers to five-year periods running from 1 July to 30 June of the initial and final years. Data are presented in thousands.

Overall Deaths - Female Number of female deaths over a given period. Refers to five-year periods running from 1 July to 30 June of the initial and final years. Data are presented in thousands.

Age composition Deaths by Age Groups - Both Sexes Number of deaths by five-year age groups. Data are presented in thousands.

Age composition Deaths by Age Groups - Male Number of male deaths by five-year age groups. Data are presented in thousands.

Age composition Deaths by Age Groups - Female Number of female deaths by five-year age groups. Data are presented in thousands.

Age composition Deaths by Broad Age Groups - Both Sexes Number of deaths by broad age groups. Data are presented in thousands.

Age composition Deaths by Broad Age Groups - Male Number of male deaths by broad age groups. Data are presented in thousands.

Age composition Deaths by Broad Age Groups - Female Number of female deaths by broad age groups. Data are presented in thousands.

Age composition Percentage of Deaths by Broad Age Groups - Both Sexes Percentage of total deaths by broad age groups. Data are presented in thousands.

Age composition Percentage of Male Deaths by Broad Age Groups Percentage of female deaths by broad age groups. Data are presented in thousands.

Age composition Percentage of Female Deaths by Broad Age Groups Percentage of male deaths by broad age groups. Data are presented in thousands.

Summary indices Life Expectancy at Birth (e0) - Both Sexes The average number of years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of individuals who would be subject during all their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Summary indices Life Expectancy at Birth (e0) - Male The average number of years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of males who would be subject during all their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Summary indices Life Expectancy at Birth (e0) - Female The average number of years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of females who would be subject during all their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Summary indices 40q0 - Both Sexes Mortality before age 40: Probability of Dying between Age 0 and Age 40 (40q0) - Both Sexes. It is expressed as deaths under age 40 per 1,000 live births.

Summary indices 40q0 - Male Mortality before age 40: Probability of Dying between Age 0 and Age 40 (40q0) - Male. It is expressed as deaths under age 40 per 1,000 live births.

Summary indices 40q0 - Female Mortality before age 40: Probability of Dying between Age 0 and Age 40 (40q0) - Female. It is expressed as deaths under age 40 per 1,000 live births.

Summary indices 60q0 - Both Sexes Mortality before age 60: Probability of Dying between Age 0 and Age 60 (60q0) - Both Sexes. It is expressed as deaths under age 60 per 1,000 live births.

Summary indices 60q0 - Male Mortality before age 60: Probability of Dying between Age 0 and Age 60 (60q0) - Male. It is expressed as deaths under age 60 per 1,000 live births.

Summary indices 60q0 - Female Mortality before age 60: Probability of Dying between Age 0 and Age 60 (60q0) - Female. It is expressed as deaths under age 60 per 1,000 live births.

Summary indices 35q15 - Both Sexes Adult Mortality: Probability of Dying between Age 15 and Age 50 (35q15) - Both Sexes. It is expressed deaths under age 50 per 1,000 alive at age 15.

Summary indices 35q15 - Male Adult Mortality: Probability of Dying between Age 15 and Age 50 (35q15) - Male. It is expressed deaths under age 50 per 1,000 alive at age 15.

Summary indices 35q15 - Female Adult Mortality: Probability of Dying between Age 15 and Age 50 (35q15) - Female. It is expressed deaths under age 50 per 1,000 alive at age 15.

Summary indices 45q15 - Both Sexes Adult Mortality: Probability of Dying between Age 15 and Age 60 (45q15) - Both Sexes. It is expressed deaths under age 60 per 1,000 alive at age 15.

Summary indices 45q15 - Male Adult Mortality: Probability of Dying between Age 15 and Age 60 (45q15) - Male. It is expressed deaths under age 60 per 1,000 alive at age 15.

Summary indices 45q15 - Female Adult Mortality: Probability of Dying between Age 15 and Age 60 (45q15) - Female. It is expressed deaths under age 60 per 1,000 alive at age 15.

Summary indices Life Expectancy at Age 15 (e15) - Both Sexes The average number of remaining years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of individuals alive at age 15 who would be subject during the remaining of their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Summary indices Life Expectancy at Age 15 (e15) - Male The average number of remaining years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of males alive at age 15 who would be subject during the remaining of their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Summary indices Life Expectancy at Age 15 (e15) - Female The average number of remaining years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of females alive at age 15 who would be subject during the remaining of their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Summary indices Life Expectancy at Age 60 (e60) - Both Sexes The average number of remaining years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of individuals alive at age 60 who would be subject during the remaining of their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Summary indices Life Expectancy at Age 60 (e60) - Male The average number of remaining years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of males alive at age 60 who would be subject during the remaining of their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Summary indices Life Expectancy at Age 60 (e60) - Female The average number of remaining years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of females alive at age 60 who would be subject during the remaining of their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Summary indices Life Expectancy at Age 80 (e80) - Both Sexes The average number of remaining years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of individuals alive at age 80 who would be subject during the remaining of their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Summary indices Life Expectancy at Age 80 (e80) - Male The average number of remaining years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of males alive at age 80 who would be subject during the remaining of their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Summary indices Life Expectancy at Age 80 (e80) - Female The average number of remaining years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of females alive at age 80 who would be subject during the remaining of their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Life tables Life table survivors (lx) at exact age x - Both Sexes Number of survivors by age for a hypothetical cohort of 100,000 newborns who would be subject during all their lives to the mortality rates of a given period.

Life tables Life table survivors (lx) at exact age x - Male Number of survivors by age for a hypothetical cohort of 100,000 male newborns who would be subject during all their lives to the mortality rates of a given period.

Life tables Life table survivors (lx) at exact age x - Female Number of survivors by age for a hypothetical cohort of 100,000 female newborns who would be subject during all their lives to the mortality rates of a given period.

Life tables Life Expectancy at exact age x (ex) - Both Sexes The average number of remaining years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of individuals alive at age x who would be subject during the remaining of their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Life tables Life Expectancy at exact age x (ex) - Male The average number of remaining years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of males alive at age x who would be subject during the remaining of their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Life tables Life Expectancy at exact age x (ex) - female The average number of remaining years of life expected by a hypothetical cohort of females alive at age x who would be subject during the remaining of their lives to the mortality rates of a given period. It is expressed as years.

Life tables Abridged life tables - Both sexes Abridged life tables up to age 85 for both sexes providing a set of values showing the mortality experience of a hypothetical group of infants born at the same time and subject throughout their lifetime to the specific mortality rates of a given period. The following series are provided: age specific mortality rates (mx), probabilities of dying (qx), probabilities of surviving (px), number surviving (lx), number dying (dx), number of person-years lived (Lx), survivorship ratios (Sx), cumulative stationary population (Tx), average remaining life expectancy (ex) and average number of years lived (ax).

Life tables Abridged life tables - Male Abridged life tables up to age 85 for male providing a set of values showing the mortality experience of a hypothetical group of infants born at the same time and subject throughout their lifetime to the specific mortality rates of a given period. The following series are provided: age specific mortality rates (mx), probabilities of dying (qx), probabilities of surviving (px), number surviving (lx), number dying (dx), number of person-years lived (Lx), survivorship ratios (Sx), cumulative stationary population (Tx), average remaining life expectancy (ex) and average number of years lived (ax).