Heller's tax bill a corporate giveaway: Rosen
CLOSE President Donald Trump has signed into law a $1.5 trillion tax overhaul package. Time

Jacky Rosen, president of Congregation Ner Tamid in Henderson, announced on Tuesday her congressional campaign. (Photo: Photo provided)

I support middle class tax cuts, because I know more money in your pocket makes a real difference for your family. I grew up in a working-class family, waiting tables to help put myself through college and then again when I first started my career working in technology. When I came home from a shift, I’d put my tip money into envelopes until there was enough to pay my rent — so I knew every day how hard I had to work to make ends meet.

That’s why I wanted Congress and the White House to work together on bipartisan tax reform. As a member of the Problem Solvers Caucus in the House, I believed overhauling our tax system was an opportunity for both parties to do right by Nevada families and deliver a simpler, fairer tax code for those who need it most.

But that’s not what happened.

Another view: Thousands of Nevadans already benefiting from tax cuts: Heller

More: NARAL backs Rosen over Heller in Senate race: Mello Roberson

More: How to submit an opinion column or letter to the editor

In my view, the tax bill that Senator Dean Heller and Republicans in Congress passed gives away trillions of dollars to corporations and doesn’t do enough to help hardworking Nevadans. By 2027, 83 percent of the bill’s benefits will flow to the wealthiest 1 percent of Americans. Big oil and gas companies and Wall Street banks are getting a massive windfall. While big pharmaceutical companies are busy using their tax savings to do $50 billion in stock buybacks, our seniors are struggling to afford sky-high prescription drug prices. Health insurance giants could reap billions more in profits, but they’re keeping that money instead of using it to bring down your monthly premiums.

I applaud the companies who did reward their workers with bonuses and raises, but more of this money should be going directly into regular people’s pockets. If Senator Heller and Republicans had really wanted to give a tax cut to working families, why not give them a bigger, permanent tax cut directly instead of relying on trickle-down economics?

This tax bill also wasn’t paid for — it adds more than $1 trillion to the national debt, and it’s already draining federal revenue. And of course, no sooner had this bill passed than House Speaker Paul Ryan was talking about how our debt will have to be paid for with cuts to programs vital to Nevadans, like Medicare and Social Security.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-970-7366. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Will Senator Heller join the chorus trying to pay for this corporate giveaway by slashing these critical programs? If his voting history of cutting Medicare is any indication, the answer is yes.

The other major problem with this tax bill is that it spikes the cost of health care for many Nevadans. Nonpartisan experts estimate that eliminating the Affordable Care Act’s requirement to have health insurance will hike monthly premiums by an extra 10 percent most years over the next decade for people on the individual exchange. Millions of working families across the country are likely to have their tax cut more than wiped out by higher health care costs.

I understand why Senator Heller is trying his best to mislead voters into supporting this fiscally irresponsible mess. First of all, it helps his wealthy out-of-state campaign donors like the Koch brothers, who surely will spend millions on his behalf this year.

But most importantly, he is desperate to distract voters from the fact that he stood next to Governor Brian Sandoval and promised he would oppose the GOP’s efforts to take away health care coverage for hundreds of thousands of Nevadans.

Then, as we all know, he bowed to political pressure from President Trump and Sen. Mitch McConnell. He supported partisan health care repeal plans that would make health care more expensive, undermine protections for people with pre-existing conditions, gut Medicaid funding and cause hundreds of thousands of Nevadans to lose their health insurance. Heller repeatedly embraced reckless bills that our Republican governor opposed because they were terrible for our state.

Just days after he caved on health care, Senator Heller had his payoff: a McConnell-linked super PAC publicly promised to spend millions of dollars to help get him re-elected to the Senate. The latest reward was a tweet from the president himself.

Whether it’s tax reform or health care, Senator Heller has shown he can’t be trusted to be an independent voice standing up for our state. As your next senator, I’ll always make decisions based on what’s best for hardworking Nevada families.

Rep. Jacky Rosen (D-Nev.) is a candidate for U.S. Senate. She currently serves Nevada’s third congressional district.

Read or Share this story: https://www.rgj.com/story/opinion/voices/2018/03/27/hellers-tax-bill-corporate-giveaway-rosen/460816002/