Judge Moore's Position on National Issues
Judge Roy Moore's Position on National Issues

Economy

Lower taxes, smaller government, and less spending will reduce the deficit and enable economic growth and a truly "stimulated" economy.

I believe in the reduction of taxes at all levels, and a need to reform the tax system by studying and implementing a "flat tax" or a "fair tax," which is a tax on goods and services purchased instead of a tax on income.

To paraphrase an old saying, the only two things in life that are certain are death and taxes, but the truth is we are being taxed to death while our businesses are failing and our economy continues to suffer.

We must return American manufacturing to our Country by rescinding unfair "free trade" agreements which have severely damaged our economy through loss of jobs and skill development. The phrase "Made in America" should mean something again.

We should cut the deficit and balance the budget using accurate data unlike budget projections used by past administrations.

Constitution

As a former Judge and Chief Justice of the Alabama Supreme Court, I know that the Constitution of the United States is the Supreme Law of the Land and all officials, state and federal, Legislative, Executive, and Judicial are bound thereby. All actions of state and federal officials must conform to the Constitution which should only be changed by amendments of the people, not decisions of activist judges. I support impeachment of judges and justices who knowingly and intentionally violate that principle.

Separation of Powers, Checks and Balances, States' Rights, and our Bill of Rights are integral parts of the Constitution which we must observe.

Immigration

We must stop the flow of illegal aliens across both our northern and southern borders. Open borders are a threat to our national security and to our economy.

We must allow willing states (like Arizona) to protect the health, safety, and welfare of their citizens, and use our own military to protect our border. If a wall is our only option, then we should build it immediately.

Health Care

We do not need socialized medicine which will ultimately lead to loss of quality and affordability of heath care, as well as a loss of access to the latest medical technology. Obamacare should be completely repealed as soon as possible.

Businesses should receive tax credits for employee health care coverage, and health insurance should be available between the states for competition and quality care.

Churches and charitable organizations should be encouraged to help the needy and poor.

Military

As a former military officer, Vietnam veteran, and graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point, I believe in a strong military defense, and I will be a vocal advocate for the men and women who now serve in the Armed Forces.

More funding should be available to develop a missile defense system and to provide our Navy, Air Force, Army, Marines, and Coast Guard with the most modern technology including weapon systems.

Homosexuality should be against military policy as was the law prior to Bill Clinton.

We should not be entangled in foreign wars merely at the whim and caprice of a President.

Energy

To gain independence from foreign oil, we need to foster development of our own natural resources involving nuclear, solar, wind, and fossil fuels. Coal mining and oil drilling should be encouraged, subject only to reasonable regulations.

Education

The federal government should not hamper the educational systems of the states as there is no authority for federal involvement under the Constitution.

Programs like "Common Core" should be eliminated, and the development of educational programs returned to the people under state authority.

Competition between the states and freedom of various educational structures should be available to parents who are charged with the responsibility to teach their children.

Charter schools, vouchers, tax credits, home schooling, Christian schools, and technical training should be encouraged.

Foreign Affairs

America should serve as a good example to other nations.

We must treat sovereign nations as we would want to be treated and stand with allies to protect and preserve our national security.

Respect for our strength is the best defense. "Walk softly and carry a big stick" is and should be our guide.

We should not be subject to UN control and direction and should not rely on, or support, UN treaties like LOST (Law of the Sea Treaty) and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Such treaties only undermine our sovereignty as a nation, as does the very presence of the United Nations on our soil.

We must maintain a strong nuclear defense and not rely on nuclear reduction treaties which leave us vulnerable to foreign powers. We must remember that Israel is the United States' most important ally and partner in the Middle East and should reject agreements or policies that undermine Israel's security. We should pass the Taylor Force Act and move the U.S. Embassy to Jerusalem.

Family

As a husband, father, and grandfather, I know the importance of the future we leave to our posterity.

A strong family based on marriage between one man and one woman is and should remain our only guide and model. I oppose abortion, same-sex marriage, civil unions, and all other threats to the traditional family order.

Federal funding for Planned Parenthood or any form of abortion should be stopped.

We must remain a moral and virtuous people, "One Nation under God." I support freedom of worship and the recognition of that God upon Whom we have always relied in peace and war.