Governor Jeb Bush Urges Education Reforms to Close the Hispanic Achievement Gap

College and Career Pathways College and Career Pathways Rigorous academic standards, such as the Common Core State Standards, will prepare students for college and careers. The Foundation supports policies that set high academic standards and provide rigorous preparatory courses and dual-enrollment options for students.

En español.

TALLAHASSEE, Fla. — As Americans mark the beginning of National Hispanic Heritage Month, the Foundation for Excellence in Education (@ExcelinEd), founded and chaired by former Florida Governor Jeb Bush, is urging education leaders across the nation to focus on closing the Hispanic achievement gap and continuing to improve educational outcomes for all students.

This year, America’s schools are projected to reach a demographic milestone: For the first time, the overall number of Hispanic, Black, and Asian students in public K-12 schools is expected to surpass the number of white students (Ed Week). By 2023, it is projected that 30 percent of the nation’s students will be Hispanic (NCES). As demographics shift, America will see communities and schools transitioning to a majority of minority students and their success is inextricably linked to the success of our nation.

Former Florida Governor Jeb Bush, Chairman and Founder of ExcelinEd, made the following statement:

“The future of our nation will depend on the education children in the U.S. receive today, including our 12.5 million Hispanic students. Every family aspires to achieve the American dream, and success in our nation should never be determined by demography. It’s critical, now more than ever, to ensure every child sitting in a U.S. classroom is prepared for the increasingly competitive 21st century global economy.

“Florida, with one of the fastest growing Hispanic populations, has proven through student-centered reforms we can, and will, close the achievement gap nationwide. Over the last 15 years, Florida implemented a suite of policies that expanded school choices, opened access to the best teachers and courses, and held schools accountable by transparently measuring student learning.

“Today, Florida’s Hispanic fourth graders outperform their peers in reading in every state by nearly two grade levels. In addition, Florida has eliminated the gap between Hispanic students and their counterparts taking and successfully completing AP courses and exams.

“We know all children can learn. It’s our responsibility as Americans to be unwavering in our pursuit to give every family the opportunity to thrive, starting with an equal chance at educational success.”

Patricia Levesque, CEO for ExcelinEd made the following statement:

“In an era of rising high school completion and college attendance, Hispanic children have made large gains, but disparities remain. At ExcelinEd, we believe closing the achievement gap must be a national priority. This can only be done when bold state leaders, passionate teachers and energized parents and communities come to together to put students at the center of learning.

“We must continue our work to close the achievement gap once and for all. We encourage leaders across the nation to join us on our pursuit to give every child in this nation a quality education.

“Our schools should be equipping every child with the academic knowledge and skills needed to succeed in life. Our organization assists states across the nation in adopting and implementing reform policies that will help every Hispanic student succeed. By increasing rigor in classrooms, advancing school choice options and implementing meaningful accountability systems, more and more students are prepared for college and the workforce. But there is still work to be done.”

Florida: The State where Hispanic Students are Leading the Nation

In Florida, 30% of students are Hispanic (FLDOE), and that number is rapidly rising. In 1999, under the leadership of Governor Jeb Bush, the Sunshine State adopted policies and practices that reorganized education around student achievement, and Hispanic students are now outperforming their peers:

The graduation rate for Florida’s Hispanic students has increased more than 20 percentage points since 2004, from 54.6 percent to 74.9 percent in 2013. (FLDOE)

In Florida, more than 7,000 more Hispanic graduates achieved a passing score on an AP exam in 2013 than in 2003. (2013 AP Report to the Nation)

Florida has eliminated the gap between Hispanic students and white students taking and successfully completing AP courses and exams. (2013 AP Report to the Nation)

Closing the Achievement Gap across the U.S.: Hispanic Student Achievement on the Rise

Hispanics are making impressive gains in education across the nation, proving that all students can learn if given the opportunity:

Hispanic students in New Mexico schools rank No. 1 in the nation for their participation and success on AP tests, which are aimed at preparing students for college and allow them to skip certain introductory college courses. (College Board)

schools rank No. 1 in the nation for their participation and success on AP tests, which are aimed at preparing students for college and allow them to skip certain introductory college courses. (College Board) Nearly half of Hispanic students in New Mexico who graduated last year took an AP class – the highest percentage in the nation. (2013 AP Report to the Nation)

who graduated last year took an AP class – the highest percentage in the nation. (2013 AP Report to the Nation) In eight years, Georgia reduced the Hispanic achievement gap by approximately two-times the national average. (American Legislative Exchange Council Report Card)

reduced the Hispanic achievement gap by approximately two-times the national average. (American Legislative Exchange Council Report Card) In 2011-2012, the latest year for graduation rates reported by the United States Department of Education, Texas had a Hispanic graduation rate of 84 percent, more than 10 percent higher than the national average at 73 percent. (US Data Express)

had a Hispanic graduation rate of 84 percent, more than 10 percent higher than the national average at 73 percent. (US Data Express) Texas placed second, after New Mexico, for the highest percentage of the class of 2013 scoring a 3 or better on an AP exam during high school. (AP)

Each year, Americans observe National Hispanic Heritage Month from September 15 to October 15, by celebrating the histories, cultures and contributions of American citizens whose ancestors came from Spain, Mexico, the Caribbean and Central and South America. The observation started in 1968 as Hispanic Heritage Week under President Lyndon Johnson and was expanded by President Ronald Reagan in 1988 to cover a 30-day period starting on September 15 and ending on October 15. It was enacted into law on August 17, 1988, on the approval of Public Law 100-402. To read more visit http://hispanicheritagemonth.gov/.