BROWN CONTINUES ‘MAKING ENERGY AFFORDABLE’ TOUR AT ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSION WITH SEACOAST RESIDENTS
NEWINGTON - As part of the “Making Energy Affordable” tour, Scott Brown hosted a roundtable discussion with Seacoast residents to discuss the impacts of high-energy costs on homeowners and businesses. Yesterday, Brown unveiled an affordable energy plan to decrease costs and move our country toward energy independence, without supporting a national energy tax that is set to kill thousands of jobs and increase energy prices across the board.

“Every dollar hardworking parents can save at the pump is a dollar they can save to support their family and plan for retirement,” said Brown. “Heading into another busy summer, Granite Staters remain frustrated with high energy costs and are ready for some relief. I support an all of the above approach to make energy more affordable for New Hampshire, without passing Senator Shaheen’s national energy tax that is set to kill thousands of jobs and raise gas prices up to 20 cents per gallon.”

Brown’s plan calls for an “all of the above” energy approach to explore affordable energy solutions, expand biofuel production and develop safe nuclear energy. During the roundtable, Seacoast residents expressed frustration with high fuel prices and home heating bills affecting family budgets. They remain frustrated with Washington gridlock and burdensome regulations hurting small businesses and threatening economic development.

“My husband and I commute over an hour each day, and high prices at the pump keep hitting our wallets hard and making it difficult to save money for our family. New Hampshire is ready for a change and I appreciate Scott Brown listening to our concerns and offering commonsense solutions that can start reducing the cost of energy and solving problems,” said Danielle Maxwell of Rye.



Yesterday, Brown stopped at the Waterhouse Country Store, a gas station in Windham, to talk with motorists and local residents about high prices at the pump that continue to burden New Hampshire families. He will continue to tour businesses and meet with homeowners to address a variety of energy challenges affecting our state.



Click here to read the white paper.