Penn Strategy Memo 3-19-07
WEEKLY STRATEGIC REVIEW ON HILLARY CLINTON FOR PRESIDENT CAMPAIGN To: Senator Clinton From: Mark Penn Date: March 19, 2007 ‘We are maintaining our position as the frontrunner, while support for our opponent appears to have leveled off. There were four polls in the last week, and only one ~ Time Magazine -- showed the primary loser at 8 points with Gore ~ though not because we lost any votes, but because Obama gained with independents. The other three polls— CNN, Gallup and AP-IPSOS ~- showed us with 15- to 20-point leads, and essentially no change in this race at all. Our unfavorables have increased from their highs; ‘Obama now has the highest favorable across the board while we have the highest favorable with Democrats, and we have the highest Very Favorable with Democrats with a wide margin. Our base is solid ~his votes are not, and fall off at the slightest additional information, Tonight's polling was: Multi-way: HRC 37 / Obama 21 / Gore 13 / Edwards 10 Without Gore: HRC 39 / Obama 25 / Edwards 11 3-Way: HRC 42 / Obama 26 / Edwards 19 2-Way: HRC 47 / Obama 39 This was a half sample; itis not final. What do | believe? All front runners have the frontrunner-itis we are experiencing. The media ceaselessly tore at Gore, making fun of his internet claims, his poor speaking style, and his problems with Clinton. | doubt Gore got a single word of good publicity no matter what he did, and he had some of the same forces against him, with the Republicans realizing he was the nominee and the left promoting Bradley. Ina typical race against Edwards, this would be nothing new or different. He would get the blogosphere, there would be the appearance of a challenge, and he would lose. ‘And this is a very different race from what Bill Clinton had in 1992. Bill Clinton was able to go forward with 1996 in New Hampshire. Clinton was the insurgent. There was no clear front runner. And we had no internet. This is closest to what Dean got going last time ~ the rise of students, columnists, internet donors, and fame, He seemed to have an unstoppable magic last time, that was never as big as it seemed for the reason that he represented only the left. Here, Obama is being allowed to represent both the left and the right.Perhaps the single most important finding in Gallup poll is that 2/3 of our voters were strong supporters, and only 1/3 of Obama’s supporters were strong supporters. And in fact in the poll | am running, just the slightest negative drops Obama's support by 10 points. We are gaining a base with women Democrats and non-college voters, and he is gaining with white, college-educated voters, especially men ‘and the rich. (With a profile ike this, itis not hard to see why talking to the donors if often a chore.) What holds him up? Authenticity Left/Right appeal Black New and fresh What could hold him back? Lack of Experience Lack of American roots Removed from working man/woman Phony/Just another politician Putting Edi ir Mes jet ready for the contrast when the race is join ‘The easiest thing for us to do is what he is doing — hit messages of the day that clearly have some edge against him without mentioning it Experience: Here we can just sharpen the lines we use. itis a complex and dangerous world out there. Its perhaps the most precarious international situation since the start of WWiI, with hidden enemies and fractured alliances. tt is an economy reeling from Uncertain global competition. This is no time for rookies. No time for rhetoric. Itis.a time for experienced leadership that can get results. That is who lam and what | have to offer. Start an audience responsive riff—what is it going to take to get it done? Experience!Lack of American Roots Al of these articles about his boyhood in Indonesia and his life in Hawaii are geared towards showing his background is diverse, multicultural and putting that in a new light. Save it for 2050. It also exposes a very strong weakness for him — his roots to basic American values and culture are at best limited. | cannot imagine America electing a president during a time of war who is not at his center fundamentally American in his thinking and in his values. He told the people of NH yesterday he has a Kansas accent because his mother was from there. His mother lived in many states as far as we can tell = but this is an example of the nonsense he uses to cover this up. How could we give some life to this contrast without turning negative: Every speech should contain the line you were born in the middle of America to the middle class in the middle of the last century. And talk about the basic bargain as about the deeply American values you ‘grew up with, learned as a child and that drive you today. Values of fairness, compassion, responsibility, giving back. Let’s explicitly own “American” in our programs, the speeches and the values. He doesn’t. Make this a new American Century, the American Strategic Energy fund. Let's use our logo to make some flags we can give out. Let’s add flag symbols to the backgrounds. We are never going to say anything about his background - we have to show the value of ours when it comes to making decisions, understanding the needs of most Americans ~ the invisible Americans. Phony Perhaps what is holding him up more than anything else is his questionable honesty. There are four pieces of info we have so far that challenge his honesty 1. His simple Iraq statements and votes. In tonight's poll, only 11% thought he had voted for any war funding. This is like Lazio and Gingrich ~ people seriously have no idea of the basics on him, ‘and he has been allowed to get away with murder here. Forgetting about the convention quotes for a moment, he voted against an end date just a year ago, and almost no one guessed that. Forget about the 2002 vote; what about the 2005 and 2006 votes? 2. He voted “present” 112 times in the state legislature, almost always on hot button issues like abortion, sexual predators and others. In the poll, this greatly undermined his appeal. Did you ever vote present on an important bill in the Senate?