State OIG FOIA Request
August 19, 2016 Page 2 1.

All records concerning, mentioning, or relating to the State

Department’s

implementation of the recommendations made in the following OIG reports: a.

Management Alert (Contract File Management Deficiencies), MA-A-0002, issued March 20, 2014; b.

Audit of the Contract Closeout Process for Contracts Supporting the U.S. Mission in Iraq, AUD-MERO-14-06, issued December 2013; and c.

Audit of the Administration and Oversight of Contracts and Grants within the Bureau of African Affairs, AUD-CG-14-31, issued August 2014. 2.

Copies of the three investigative reports referenced in the March 2014 Management Alert.

Request for a Public Interest Fee Waiver

CoA Institute r equests a waiver of any and all applicable fees. FOIA and applicable regulations provide that the agenc y shall furnish requested records without or at reduced ch arge

if “disclosure of the information is in the public interest because it is likely to contribute

significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the government and is not primarily in the commercial interest

of the requester.”

6

In this case,

the requested records unquestionably shed light on the “operations or activities of the government,” namely the Department’s

inadequate management of contracts worth over $6 billion. Whether the Department is mai ntaining complete contract files, which minimizes the risk of fraud and inefficient use of tax payer funds, is of interest to the public.

7

Moreover, the public has a significant interest in k nowing whether the Department implemented the recommendations the OIG made i n its previous reports. G

iven the OIG’s finding that the Department’s deficient contract management

practices

“create

[]

significant financial risk”

for the government, the requested records will further inform the public about the resolution of contract management problems within the Department of State. CoA Institute has both the intent and ability to ma ke the results of this request available to a reasonably broad public audience thr ough various media. Its st aff has significant experience and expertise in government oversight, investigative reporting, and federal public interest litigation. These professionals will analyze the information res ponsive to this request, use their editorial skills to turn raw materials into a distinct work, and share the resulting analysis with the

public, whether through the Institute’s regularly published online newslet ter, memoranda,

6

5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(A)(iii); 22 C.F.R. § 171.16(a);

see also Cause of A ction v. Fed. Trad e Comm’n

, 799 F.3d 1108, 1115-19 (D.C. Cir. 2015) (discussing proper application of public-interest fee waiver test).

7

See, e.g.

, Adam Kredo,

State Dept. Misplaced $6B under Hillary Clinton: IG Report

, W

ASHINGTON

T

IMES