3-29-17 “the Wrongdoing of Others” Judge Gorsuch and Judicial Activism
beyond just calling "balls and strikes." While an appellate judge normally votes to affirm or reverse, there are a few instances where an appellate judge has the discretion to move beyond the umpire role. In these i nstances, to extend the analogy, a judge chooses to go up in the booth and become a color commentator. How and when a judge chooses to do this tells you something about his philosophy. Despite his championing of originalism over activism, Judge Gorsuch has chosen to step away from the umpire's box in cases of great importance. Those choices demonstrate a firm streak of activism about particular kinds of cases

—

those dealing with the rights of women to exercise autonomy in making choices about their own health care. One area where an appellate judge's behavior is voluntary, moving beyond the simple "affirm" or "reverse" decision, is in the issuance of a concurring opinion. A dissenting opinion is less discretionary

—

if you think the majority has made the wrong call about the validity of a lower court ruli ng, your duty is to dissent and explain why. But a concurring opinion is more revealing. You agree with the majority opinion and how the case is resolved. But you decide to separately write an opinion to emphasize a point that you find particularly important, a point that the majority does not embrace. In a significant 2013 case,

Hobby Lobby v. Sebelius

, Judge Gorsuch joined an en banc Tenth Circuit opinion allowing a company to assert a claim under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act against the contraception mandate contained in the Affordable Care Act. The majority opinion allowed the claim to go forward, finding that the closely held company could seek the protection of the Act. This ruling was upheld by the United States Supreme Court. Judge Gorsuch decided to write a separate concurring opinion. The majority cleared the path for Hobby Lobby to challenge the contr aception mandate. Judge Gorsuch went further to allow the family owning the company (not just the company itself) to also challenge the law. To non-lawyers, the distinction between a corporation and the individuals owning it may seem technical, but in law the distinction is profound. By incorporating their company, the Green family had obtained critical protections, including a protection of their personal assets from liability for act ions of the company. And, since the individual members w ere not the

“employer”

of the Hobby Lobby employees, they had no individual duty toward the employees under the Act. But despite the Green

family’s

decision to separate their own assets and l egal personae from the company, Judge Gorsuch stretched to opine that the Green family members should also be able to bring suit to block Hobby Lobby employees from having access to contraception. The opening lines of the

Judge’s

concurrence are blunt, gratuitous and revealing: All of us face the problem of complicity. All of us must answer for ourselves whether and to what degree we are willing to be involved in the wrongdoing of others. Consider the phrase

—

"the wrongdoing of

others.”