U.S. Immigration And Customs Enforcement
Statement of John P. Torres Deputy Assistant Director Smuggling & Public Safety U.S.

Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) Department of Homeland Security

House Judiciary Committee Subcommittee on Immigration, Border Security, and Claims

May 18, 2004

MR. CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS OF THE SUBCOMMITTEE, thank you for the opportunity to

address you about the efforts on the part of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement

(ICE) to combat criminal organizations engaged in human smuggling and trafficking.

As the largest investigative arm of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), ICE is

responsible for identifying and shutting down vulnerabilities in the nation's border,

economic, transportation, and infrastructure security. Our agency seeks to prevent terrorist

acts and criminal activity by targeting the people, money, and materials that support

terrorist and criminal organizations.

In that mission, we recognize that human smuggling and trafficking into the United States

constitute a significant risk to national security and public safety. We know that

these smuggling and trafficking pipelines serve as a conduit for undocumented aliens and

criminals seeking entry to the United States. However, they could just as easily be exploited

by terrorist and extremist organizations seeking to gain entry into the United States in order

to carry out their own destructive schemes.

I would initially like to provide an important clarification and necessary distinction between

the terms "humansmuggling" and "trafficking." Human smuggling and trafficking, while

sharing certain elements and attributes and in some cases overlapping, are distinctively

different offenses. Both practices encompass the organized and illicit movement of men,

women, or children across or within national borders. In some respects, human trafficking

may be regarded simply as an aggravated form of human smuggling. Human trafficking,

specifically what U.S. law defines as "severe forms of trafficking in persons," typically

involves force, fraud or coercion, and occurs for the purpose of forced labor or commercial

sexual exploitation.Smuggling and trafficking also differ with regard to the time frame of

the offense. Human smugglingorganizations typically generate short- term profits based on

smuggled migrants. On the other hand, trafficking organizations frequently look to generate

both short- term and long-term profits by forcing their victims into forced labor or

commercial sexual exploitation arrangements.

The United States is a primary target destination for smugglers and traffickers, which

means that literally tens of thousands of men, women and children are entering this nation

illegally each year--undocumented, undetected and unprotected. This international criminal

market is extraordinarily lucrative, generating an estimated $9.5 billion in profit for criminal

organizations worldwide. In many cases, these profits fuel additional criminal enterprises,

such as the trafficking of drugs, weapons, or other contraband, or the funds are laundered

and invested in legitimate business enterprises. These untraced profits feed organized crime

activities, undermining governmental action and the rule of law, while allowing these

criminal networks to grow stronger, more resilient, and more dangerous.

I would like to emphasize that our concern with human smuggling and trafficking goes far

beyond matters of security and law enforcement. There is another critical dimension.3 to

this issue- -the real cost in human suffering and exploitation that too often accompanies this

criminal practice, posing a moral challenge here in the U.S. and across the globe.

In May 2003, police dis covered dozens of undocumented aliens-- men, women, and

children--locked in a hot, airless tractor- trailer outside Victoria, Texas. The trailer, originally

bound for Houston, had been unhitched and abandoned 175 miles from the Mexico border in

a botched smuggling job. In the hours that followed, the victims grew more and more

desperate for air-- scraping at the insulation in the doors and beating their way through the

taillights in a futile effort to escape. Ultimately, 19 people died in that trailer, including a

seven year-old boy. It was the deadliest case of human smuggling in the United States in

fifteen years.

Or consider the situation that developed in Arizona last year. The rapid influx

of smuggling organizations into Phoenix and the surrounding area brought indiscriminate

kidnapping of groups of undocumented aliens, along with shootings and highway

carjackings of smuggling loads. These lawless actions represent a new level of criminal

behavior and savage violence. In October 2003, ICE Agents and Phoenix Police Officers

rescued ten undocumented aliens who had been held hostage by smugglers. The smugglers

had raped three women, and during negotiations with undercover agents, they threatened

to rape a nine-year-old child and sever the hands and feet of another smuggled alien.

Ultimately, five defendants were arrested and prosecuted for kidnapping and hostage-taking

violations.

As these cases illustrate, smugglers and traffickers show a shockingly callous disregard for

the lives in their charge. In too many cases, the victims flee poverty or abuse, only to be

forced to travel in squalid conditions without adequate food, water, or air. Arriving at their

destinations, they are frequently subject to brutal violence, forced labor, and sexual

exploitation. Smuggling and trafficking all too often lead the way to cruelty, slavery, and

servitude--assaults on basic freedoms and human dignity.

ICE strategic goals are to dismantle the criminal and terrorist organizations that smuggle or

traffic in people; to strip away their assets and profit incentive; and to work with our allied

DHS components to attack these organizations from a variety of angles. One of the agency's

most effective weapons is our Office of Investigations, which applies a vast array of

investigative methodologies in the fight against both criminal and terrorist organizations as

well as the infrastructure that supports their activities in the United States and around the

world.

ICE's brings to bear all of our authorities, expertise, and resources -- including the

application of smuggling, trafficking and money laundering statutes and the identification

and seizure of assets and criminal proceeds - in the fight against human smuggling and

trafficking. Moreover, as part of ICE's "Cornerstone" economic security initiative, our

financial investigators identify and shut down the methods that smugglers, traffickers, and

other criminal and terrorist organizations use to exploit financial systems to earn, move,

and store their criminal proceeds.

Our specialized investigative teams are prepared to respond to critical smuggling incidents as

swiftly as possible. Smuggling and trafficking cases are complex, so our teams of agents

have specialized skills --investigators, language specialists, financial investigators, forensic

investigators, and others. This helps us deploy our resources more readily when an incident

occurs, whether it is at the border, at a maritime port, or in the interior.

ICE's strategy, combined authorities, and innovative methodologies have proven effective.

In the Victoria, Texas, case, ICE worked closely with other DHS components, local law

enforcement, and intelligence and enforcement agencies in Mexico and Guatemala. Our

unique combination of investigative tools allowed us to follow the money, pinpoint the

conspirators, and bring them to justice. In one month's period, ICE's coordinated approach

led to the arrest and prosecution of 14 defendants in the United States and abroad.

This success was the foundation for a new model for fighting smuggling, which we've now

taken to Arizona. ICE assembled a task force known as "Operation ICE Storm" to combat

violent crime in the Phoenix metropolitan area. We brought our expertise in immigration,

customs, and money laundering investigations into a partnership with other stakeholders at

the Arizona border. Since we launched ICE Storm, we've prosecuted more than 190

defendants for human smuggling, kidnapping, money laundering, and weapons and drug

violations. We've seized over 100 weapons and over $5.2 million. Every time we confiscate

an assault weapon or cash from these criminal organizations, and every time we trace back

and shut down one of their funding streams, we make it harder for these criminal to

conduct business. Furthermore, our efforts are producing additional positive results. For

example, the Phoenix Police Department credits ICE Storm with a 17 percent decline in

homicides and an 82 percent decline in migrant related kidnappings in the final quarter of

2003.

We're building on ICE Storm's success with DHS' Arizona Border Control initiative, in which

the vigorous application of money laundering and other federal and state statutes is

depriving smuggling organizations of the criminal proceeds, disrupting their operations and

decimating their organizational hierarchies in the United States and abroad. ICE is also

working to address the exploitative dimension of human trafficking. A disturbingly large

number of trafficking cases center on women and children forced into prostitution and

sexual slavery. In virtually all of these cases, the victims have been promised jobs,

marriages, or other new opportunities, only to find themselves trapped in a web of

exploitation and abuse.

We've stepped up our investigations of these exploitative practices and we're getting

results. In January, a man in McAllen, Texas, who headed a sex slavery ring at the border,

was sentenced to 23 years in prison. In New Jersey last summer, we uncovered a

prostitution ring that trafficked in Mexican girls, who were lured to the United States only to

be forced into sexual slavery. Two of the ringleaders were sentenced to 18 years in federal

prison. In New York City, our investigators uncovered a trafficking network that recruited

South Korean women, promising them jobs as hostesses but forcing them to work as

prostitutes. These traffickers, and a great many others, are off the streets and out of

business.

As in smuggling, ICE is employing innovative methodologies to combat human trafficking.

ICE is working closely with the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department

of Justice and various Non-Governmental Organizations to assist victims of trafficking. Our

departments recently launched a trafficking initiative in Philadelphia, Atlanta and Phoenix

that employs a task force configuration with state and local law enforcement agencies

attacking on multiple fronts the criminal organizations and infrastructure that engage and

support these crimes. Furthermore since March of 2002, in close coordination with our

partners at U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, ICE has provided 371 victims of

trafficking with "T" visas enabling the victims to remain in the United States, without fear of

removal, to assist law enforcement in dismantling these trafficking networks. In the last

three years, the Department of Homeland Security, and the former INS, has provided over

70 training sessions with prosecutors, local law enforcement and victim advocates to

educate them about trafficking issues.

Human smuggling and trafficking take place within a complex global environment of political

and economic relationships between countries and peoples. ICE's strategy, therefore,

emphasizes the crucial role of liaison, technical assistance, information-sharing and

diplomatic initiatives with government officials and law enforcement agencies in source and

transit countries to dismantle criminal organizations.

Within that conceptual framework, the Departments of Homeland Security, State and

Justice, as well as intelligence agencies, are updating the Human Smuggling and Trafficking

Center to synthesize intelligence, law enforcement and other information to bring more

effective international action against human smugglers, traffickers of persons, and criminals

facilitating terrorists' clandestine travel.

ICE, functioning as the lead agency, facilitates the participation of federal stakeholders and

provides a mechanism to foster greater integration and overall effectiveness to the U.S.

Government's enforcement, intelligence, and diplomatic efforts, and promotes similar efforts

by foreign governments and international organizations.

Smuggling and trafficking are by definition international crimes, which is why ICE is prepared

to take that fight abroad. We've developed a full spectrum of investigation and enforcement

to confront the problem at every point--in source and transit countries, on the seas, at our

nation's borders and ports, and in the U.S. interior. In U.S. embassies throughout the world,

we have a network of ICE attaches, who are working with their counterparts in foreign law

enforcement agencies to better coordinate investigations and communication, and to follow

the money and seize the millions of dollars in profits flowing from these organizations. We're

integrating our government's intelligence and enforcement efforts, and we're mobilizing

other governments and international organizations, in the fight against

human smuggling and trafficking.

In conclusion, smuggling and trafficking in human beings are not at all new practices-- they

are criminal methods with a long history. What is new is the sophistication of criminal

organizations that benefit from the speed and efficiency of today's telecommunications,

transportation, and financial networks. What is new is the security threat we face today, in

which terrorists will employ any method and exploit any vulnerability to strike at our

country and people. What is new is the war we are fighting against these criminals and

terrorists, and the tactics, tools, and strategies we must bring to bear to defeat them. ICE is

dedicated and committed to this mission. We look forward to working with this Committee

in our efforts to save lives and secure our national interests. I hope my remarks today have

been helpful and informative. I thank you for inviting me and I will be glad to answer any

questions you may have at this time.