Monday's air quality is the worst this century — and Tuesday's not much better Seattle's air quality dips to "very unhealthy" as smoke blankets city

A snapshot of the smoke above the Pacific Northwest on August 21, 2018. A snapshot of the smoke above the Pacific Northwest on August 21, 2018. Photo: National Weather Service Photo: National Weather Service Image 1 of / 19 Caption Close Monday's air quality is the worst this century — and Tuesday's not much better 1 / 19 Back to Gallery

Monday's air quality was the worst for Seattle this century. And Tuesday isn't looking much better.

The air quality index (AQI) readings reached 186 on Monday, and ash started falling in some areas. By the end of the day, more and more places west of the Cascades were classified as having "very unhealthy" air.

On Tuesday morning, everywhere in Puget Sound except Bellevue and Auburn were rated "very unhealthy." In Lake Forest Park, the air quality rating even went as low as "hazardous," as of 7:45 a.m.

As of 1:30 p.m. more spots were reporting as "unhealthy," though there were plenty of "very unhealthy" areas as well.

Meanwhile, Seattle's AQI was 180, which topped the list for worst air quality in the world on AirVisual. The city was followed by Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (178) and then Portland (172).

Of course, that's nothing compared to Eastern Washington, where the highest AQI in Chelan read 411, well into hazardous territory, and (thanks to local wildfires) showing no signs of slowing down.

Tuesday's forecast showed more winds out of the east, carrying with them more smoke from wildfires on the east side of the Cascades. A transition was expected for Wednesday, with Cliff Mass saying there would be an "onshore, marine push beginning that evening," making for air that would be much better on Thursday.

On the bright side, the smoke kept the temperatures down in the state today. Although Seattle was originally forecasted for the high-80s, the National Weather Service is now calling for temperatures 8 to 10 degrees cooler.

Of course, with those cooler temperatures comes "another round of smoke from the wildfires in north Central Washington and British Columbia," which will make sure the thick smoke is part of skyline until Wednesday at least.

Another round of #smoke from the wildfires in north central Washington and British Columbia is expected to impact the area this afternoon. This will keep smoke thick, at least through Wednesday. Smoke conditions at: https://t.co/cgLa9sAQBQ #WAwx pic.twitter.com/cgJHU5SS7u — NWS Seattle (@NWSSeattle) August 21, 2018

In case you're wondering: Yes, Beijing's air was way better than ours once again, at 56, or "moderate." Craig Kenworthy, Puget Sound Clean Air Agency executive director, told SeattleMet that Beijing tends to have its worst weather days in the winter, whereas ours are apparently going to come every August.

"I can safely say that it's the worst widespread pollution we've seen in the last 20 years," Kenworthy told PubliCola. "(And) climate change is going to increase the likelihood of this happening."

One experimental computer model's depiction of smoke over the next 24 hours. Overall, air quality will remain an issue with many starting off the day in the "unhealthy" category. Some improvement is possible through the day for some. #wawx #idwx #orwx #cawx #nvwx pic.twitter.com/FL56ZAEcuw — NWS Spokane (@NWSSpokane) August 21, 2018

Though sensitive groups — people over 65, those who are pregnant, kids, or folks who have lung disease, heart disease, stroke or asthma — are still more at risk, in smoke like this everyone is susceptible to breathing problems in the smoke.

RELATED: How harmful is it to breathe the wildfire smoke blanketing Seattle?

Health problems may include coughing or trouble breathing, itchy or stinging eyes, irritated sinuses, headaches, asthma attacks, chest pain, or fast heartbeat. Officials recommend that everyone take precautions by staying inside with doors and windows shut, setting air conditioners to "recirculation" (in order to avoid outside air), and limiting physical labor.

If you must go outside, the Puget Sound Clean Air Agency recommends buying a N95 or N100 rated mask to help protect from the air pollution.

An air quality alert was still in effect for Eastern Washington, as well as King, Kitsap, Pierce and Snohomish counties.

SeattlePI reporter Zosha Millman can be reached at zoshamillman@seattlepi.com. Follow Zosha on Twitter at @zosham. Find more from Zosha here on her author page.