UNITED STATES

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

Washington, D.C. 20549

SCHEDULE 14A

Proxy Statement Pursuant to Section 14(a) of the Securities

Exchange Act of 1934 (Amendment No. )

Filed by the Registrant Filed by a Party other than the Registrant

Check the appropriate box: Preliminary Proxy Statement CONFIDENTIAL, FOR USE OF THE COMMISSION ONLY (AS PERMITTED BY RULE 14a-6(e)(2)) Definitive Proxy Statement Definitive Additional Materials Soliciting Material Pursuant to §240.14a-12

Walmart Inc.

(Name of Registrant as Specified In Its Charter)

(Name of Person(s) Filing Proxy Statement, if other than the Registrant)

Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box): No fee required. Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14a-6(i)(1) and 0-11. (1) Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies: (2) Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies: (3) Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange Act Rule 0-11

(set forth the amount on which the filing fee is calculated and state how it was determined): (4) Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction: (5) Total fee paid: Fee paid previously with preliminary materials. Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and identify the filing for which the offsetting fee was paid previously. Identify the previous filing by registration statement number, or the Form or Schedule and the date of its filing. (1) Amount Previously Paid: (2) Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.: (3) Filing Party: (4) Date Filed:

Notice of

2018 Annual

Shareholders’

Meeting Wednesday, May 30, 2018 John Q. Hammons Center

Rogers, Arkansas

OUR BELIEFS

Since Sam Walton founded our company, it always

has been a values-based, ethically led organization. Our beliefs

and values guide our decisions and our leadership.

Act with RESPECT for INTEGRITY the Individual We act with the highest level of integrity

by being honest, fair and objective, while

operating in compliance with all laws and

our policies. We value every associate, own the

work we do, and communicate by

listening and sharing ideas. SERVICE Striving for to our Customers EXCELLENCE We’re here to serve customers,

support each other, and give to

our local communities. We work as a team and model

positive examples while we innovate

and improve every day.

Dear Fellow Shareholders:

We are pleased to invite you to attend Walmart’s 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting on May 30, 2018 at 10:00 a.m. Central Time, and to our Associates/Shareholders Celebration Event on June 1, 2018 at 8:00 a.m. Central Time. If you plan to attend either or both of these events, please see pages 95-96 for admission requirements. For those unable to join in person, both events will be webcast at http://stock.walmart.com.

From Our Chairman In fiscal 2018, we continued to accelerate our transformation, guided by four key objectives: ○ Make every day easier for busy families; ○ Change how we work; ○ Deliver results and operate with discipline; and ○ Be the most trusted retailer. We made significant progress on all four fronts this past year. We’re continuing to accelerate innovation and leverage technology to save our customers both money and time. We’ve continued to invest in our associates’ pay, benefits, tools, and training, which results in a better experience for our customers. We’ve lowered prices and reduced inventory in stores. And we are engaging in the communities we serve to create shared value. Your Board continues to play a key role in overseeing our ongoing transformation. We are committed to thoughtful Board succession planning, and have added six new directors in the past five years. This refreshment has resulted in a Board with a broad mix of skills and diversity in backgrounds and perspectives. I firmly believe that your Board is a strategic asset for Walmart, and I’m excited about the future. Thank you for your investment in Walmart and your continued support. I look forward to seeing many of you at our Annual Shareholders’ Meeting or our celebration for Associates and Shareholders. Regardless of whether you are able to attend our Annual Shareholders’ Meeting in person, your vote is important and I encourage you to vote as described on page 96. Sincerely, Gregory B. Penner Chairman

From Our Lead Independent Director As Walmart continues its transformation to better serve our customers seamlessly, we are committed to continuously enhancing our Board governance to align with our strategy. We’ve brought fresh and diverse perspectives to the Board by recruiting new independent directors with strong backgrounds in technology, eCommerce, and finance and accounting. We’ve also engaged a third-party consulting firm to help us further develop our long-term Board succession plan and a pipeline of future director candidates. And we recently amended our bylaws to adopt a proxy access provision. Our Compensation and Management Development Committee is committed to ensuring that our compensation program continues to support the transformation of our business. To this end, we made important changes to our executive compensation program, which you can read about in the CD&A beginning on page 39. These changes were informed by our ongoing and extensive engagement with our institutional shareholders, whose views are always important to us. This past year, we engaged with shareholders representing approximately 450 million shares to hear their perspectives on our strategy, governance, compensation, and other topics. After 12 years of service, I will now be retiring from the Board at our upcoming 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting in accordance with our term limits. It has been a privilege to serve this great company and you, our shareholders. I am confident that I leave your company in great hands to win the future of retail. Sincerely, Dr. James I. Cash, Jr. Lead Independent Director





Letter to Shareholders • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 3

Notice of 2018 Annual

Shareholders’ Meeting

How To Cast Your Vote (PAGE 96) INTERNET CALL MOBILE DEVICE MAIL IN PERSON www.proxyvote.com 1-800-690-6903 Scan the QR code on your proxy card, notice of internet availability of proxy materials, or voting instruction form Mail your signed proxy card or voting instruction form Wednesday, May 30, 2018

10:00 a.m., Central Time

John Q. Hammons Center

3303 S. Pinnacle Hills Parkway

Rogers, AR 72758

Items of Business Board

Recommendation Reference

Page 1. To elect as directors the 11 nominees identified in this proxy statement; FOR 10 2. To vote on a non-binding, advisory resolution to approve the compensation of Walmart’s named executive officers; FOR 38 3. To ratify the appointment of Ernst & Young LLP as the company’s independent accountants for the fiscal year ending January 31, 2019; FOR 82 4. To vote on the 2 shareholder proposals described in the accompanying proxy statement, if properly presented at the meeting; and AGAINST each

Shareholder Proposal 87 5. To transact any other business properly brought before the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting. 101

Annual Shareholders’ Meeting Wednesday, May 30, 2018 10:00 a.m., Central Time John Q. Hammons Center

3303 S. Pinnacle Hills Parkway

Rogers, Arkansas 72758 Associate/Shareholder Celebration Friday, June 1, 2018 8:00 a.m., Central Time Bud Walton Arena

University of Arkansas Campus

Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701

How to Attend the Meeting 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting If you plan to attend the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting in person, please see pages 95-96 for admission requirements. 2018 Associate/Shareholder Celebration If you plan to attend the 2018 Associate/Shareholder Celebration, please see pages 95-96 for admission requirements.

The record date for the meeting is April 6, 2018. This means that you are entitled to receive notice of the meeting and vote your Shares at the meeting if you were a shareholder of record as of the close of business on April 6, 2018. April 20, 2018 By Order of the Board of Directors, Rachel Brand Executive Vice President, Global Governance and Corporate Secretary





The proxy statement and our Annual Report to Shareholders for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2018, are available in the “Investors” section of our corporate website at http://stock.walmart.com/annual-reports.

4 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement

Table of Contents





Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 5

Proxy Summary Annual Shareholders’ Meeting Wednesday, May 30, 2018

10:00 a.m., Central Time John Q. Hammons Center

3303 S. Pinnacle Hills Parkway

Rogers, Arkansas 72758

You have received these proxy materials because the Board is soliciting your proxy to vote your Shares at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting. This summary highlights information contained elsewhere in this proxy statement. This summary does not contain all of the information that you should consider, and you should read the entire proxy statement carefully before voting. Page references (“XX”) are supplied to help you find further information in this proxy statement. Please refer to the Table of Abbreviations on page 102 for the meaning of certain terms used in this summary and the rest of this proxy statement. This proxy statement and the related proxy materials were first released to shareholders and made available on the internet on April 20, 2018.

If you are unable to attend in person, you can view a live webcast of the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting at http://stock.walmart.com .

Items of Business Board

Recommendation Ref. Pages 1. To elect as directors the 11 nominees identified in this proxy statement; FOR 10 2. To vote on a non-binding, advisory resolution to approve the compensation of Walmart’s named executive officers; FOR 38 3. To ratify the appointment of Ernst & Young LLP as the company’s independent accountants for the fiscal year ending January 31, 2019; and FOR 82 4. To vote on the 2 shareholder proposals described in the accompanying proxy statement, if properly presented at the meeting. AGAINST each

Shareholder Proposal 87

In addition, shareholders may be asked to consider and vote on any other business properly brought before the meeting.

6 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Proxy Summary

Board Nominee Overview

Our Board nominees bring a variety of backgrounds, qualifications, skills and experiences that contribute to a well-rounded Board uniquely positioned to effectively guide our strategy and oversee our operations in a rapidly evolving retail industry.

Proxy Summary • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 7

Our Director Nominees

7 of our 11 Board nominees are independent, all members of the Audit Committee, the CMDC, and the NGC are independent, and our key committee chairs are independent. Our Board has separated the roles of Chairman and CEO, and we have a robust Lead Independent Director role. Despite their significant Share ownership, only three members of the Walton family are Board members.

Key Committee Membership Chair l Member Name/Age Experience Director

Since Principal Occupation Independent Other Pubic

Company Boards Audit Compensation

& Management

Development Nominating & Governance Strategic Planning & Finance Technology & eCommerce Steve Easterbrook

(50) • Senior Leadership • Brand Management • Global/International • Retail • Finance/Accounting Nominee CEO, McDonald’s Corporation l 1 Tim Flynn

(61) • Senior Leadership • Global/International • Finance/Accounting • Regulatory/Legal 2012 Retired Chairman and CEO, KPMG l 3 l Sarah Friar

(45) • Senior Leadership • Global/International • Finance/Accounting • Technology/eCommerce 2018 CFO, Square, Inc. l 1 l l Carla Harris

(55) • Senior Leadership • Global/Internationa l • Finance/Accounting • Regulatory/Legal 2017 Vice Chairman, Wealth Management, Managing Director and Head of Multicultural Client Strategy, Morgan Stanley l 0 l l Tom Horton

(56) • Senior Leadership • Global/International • Finance/Accounting • Regulatory/Legal 2014 Senior Advisor, Warburg Pincus LLC, and retired Chairman and CEO, AMR Corporation l 1 l l Marissa Mayer

(42) • Senior Leadership • Global/International • Technology/eCommerce • Marketing/Brand Management 2012 Co-founder, Lumi Labs, Inc. and Former President and CEO, Yahoo! Inc. l 0 l l Doug McMillon

(51) • Senior Leadership • Retail • Global/International • Technology/eCommerce 2013 President and CEO, Walmart 0 Greg Penner

(48)

(Board Chairman) • Senior Leadership • Retail • Global/International • Technology/eCommerce • Finance/Accounting 2008 Chairman, Walmart and Partner, Madrone Capital Partners 0 Steve Reinemund

(70) • Senior Leadership • Global/International • Marketing/Brand Management 2010 Retired Dean of Business, Wake Forest University, and retired Chairman and CEO, PepsiCo., Inc. l 2 l l Rob Walton

(73) • Senior Leadership • Retail • Global/International • Regulatory/Legal 1978 Retired Chairman, Walmart 0 l Steuart Walton

(36) • Retail • Global/International • Regulatory/Legal 2016 Founder and Chair, RZC Investments 0 l

8 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Proxy Summary

Corporate Governance Highlights (PAGES 20-37) • Majority Independent Board • Separate Chair and CEO • Lead Independent Director • Robust Board Evaluations • Extensive Shareholder Engagement • Proxy Access • Shareholder Right to Call Special Meetings • Independent Key Committee Chairs • No Poison Pill • No Supermajority Voting Requirements • Board Oversight of Political and Social Engagement • Annual Election of All Directors • Majority Voting for Director Elections • Board-Level Risk Oversight • Commitment to Board Refreshment and Succession Planning • Focus on Succession Planning • Board Oversight of Company Strategy • Robust Stock Ownership Guidelines • No Hedging and Restrictions on Pledging • No Employment Agreements with Executives • No Change-in-Control Provisions Compensation Aligned

with Performance (PAGES 39-64) Our executive compensation program is heavily based on performance and aligned with our strategy. More than 75% of our CEO’s fiscal 2018 total direct compensation was based on metrics related to operating income, sales, and ROI, which are aligned with our strategy and important indicators of retail performance. The chart below illustrates the alignment between our CEO’s realized pay and TSR over the last three fiscal years: CEO Realized Pay (1) Realized pay includes base salary, annual incentive earned for the fiscal year shown, restricted stock vested in the fiscal year shown, and performance equity with a performance period ending during the fiscal year shown. Restricted stock and performance equity is valued using the closing price of Walmart stock on the last trading day prior to the vesting date. (2) TSR illustrates the total shareholder return on Walmart common stock during the three fiscal years ending January 31, 2018, assuming $100 was invested on the first day of fiscal 2016 and assuming reinvestment of all dividends.

Proxy Summary • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 9

Proposal No. 1

Election of Directors

Director Skills Criteria and Qualifications

What am I voting on?

You are voting to elect each nominee named below as a director of the company for a one-year term. If you return your proxy, your proxy holder will vote your Shares FOR the election of each Board nominee named below unless you instruct otherwise. If the shareholders elect all the director nominees named in this proxy statement at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting, Walmart will have 11 directors. Each director nominee named in this proxy statement has consented to act as a director of Walmart if elected. If a nominee becomes unwilling or unable to serve as a director, your proxy holder will have the authority to vote your Shares for any substitute candidate nominated by the Board, or the Board may decrease the size of the Board.

What qualifications do the Nominating and Governance Committee and the Board consider when selecting candidates for nomination?

At Walmart, we believe an effective Board should be made up of individuals who collectively provide an appropriate balance of distinguished leadership, diverse perspectives, strategic skill sets, and professional experience relevant to our business and strategic objectives.

The Nominating and Governance Committee (NGC) selects potential candidates on the basis of: outstanding achievement in their professional careers; broad experience and wisdom; personal and professional integrity; ability to make independent, analytical inquiries; experience and understanding of the business environment; willingness and ability to devote adequate time to Board duties; and such other experience, attributes, and skills that the NGC determines qualify candidates for service on the Board.

The NGC also considers whether a potential candidate satisfies the independence and other requirements for service on the Board and its committees, as set forth in the NYSE Listed Company Rules and the SEC’s rules. Additional information regarding qualifications for service on the Board and the nomination process for director candidates is set forth in the NGC’s charter and our Corporate Governance Guidelines, which are available on the Corporate Governance page of our website at http://stock.walmart.com/investors/corporate-governance/governance-documents.

Director Skills Criteria:

Walmart is moving with speed to better serve our customers and pursue our key objectives of making every day easier for busy families, changing how we work, delivering results and operating with discipline, and being the most trusted retailer. Depending on the current composition of the Board and Board committees and expected future turnover on our Board, the NGC generally seeks director candidates with experience, skills, or background in one or more of the following areas:

STRATEGY GOVERNANCE LEADERSHIP DIVERSITY Retail Global or International Regulatory, Legal, or

Risk Management Senior Leadership Diversity Technology or

eCommerce Marketing or Brand

Management Finance, Accounting, or

Financial Reporting

10 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Proposal No. 1: Election of Directors

Strategy Retail Experience As the world’s largest retailer, we seek directors who possess an understanding of financial, operational, and strategic issues facing large retail companies. Technology or eCommerce Experience In order to deliver on our strategy to be the first retailer to offer customers a seamless shopping experience at scale, we seek directors who can provide advice and guidance based on their experiences in eCommerce or related industries such as digital, mobile, or consumer internet. Global or International Business Experience As a global organization, directors with broad international exposure provide useful business and cultural perspectives, and we seek directors with experience at multinational companies or in international markets. Marketing or Brand Management Experience Directors with relevant experience in consumer marketing or brand management, especially on a global basis, provide important insights to our Board.





Leadership Senior Leadership Experience Directors who have served in relevant senior leadership positions bring unique experience and perspective. We seek directors who have demonstrated expertise in governance, strategy, development, and execution.





Governance Finance, Accounting, or Financial Reporting Experience We value an understanding of finance and financial reporting processes because of the importance our company places on accurate financial reporting and robust financial controls and compliance. We also seek to have multiple directors who qualify as audit committee financial experts. Regulatory, Legal, or Risk Management Experience Our company’s business requires compliance with a variety of regulatory requirements across a number of federal, state, and international jurisdictions. Our Board values the insights of directors who have experience advising or working at companies in regulated industries, and it benefits from the perspectives of directors with governmental, public policy, legal, and risk management experience and expertise.





Diversity Board Diversity Diversity and inclusion are values embedded in our culture and fundamental to our business. We believe that a board comprised of directors with diverse backgrounds, experiences, and perspectives improves the dialogue and decision-making in the board room and contributes to overall Board effectiveness. The Board assesses the effectiveness of its approach to Board diversity as part of the Board and committee evaluation process.





Proposal No. 1: Election of Directors • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 11

Summary of Director Nominee Qualifications and Experience

The chart below identifies the balance of skills and qualifications each director nominee brings to the Board. The fact that a particular skill or qualification is not designated does not mean the director nominee does not possess that particular attribute. Rather, the skills and qualifications noted below are those reviewed by the NGC and the Board in making nomination decisions and as part of the Board succession planning process. We believe the combination of the skills and qualifications shown below demonstrates how our Board is well positioned to provide effective oversight and strategic advice to our management.

Leadership Strategy Governance Director Nominee Senior Leadership Retail Global or

International

Business Technology or

eCommerce Marketing

or Brand

Management Finance,

Accounting,

or Financial

Reporting Regulatory,

Legal, or Risk

Management Steve Easterbrook l l l l l Tim Flynn l l l l Sarah Friar l l l l Carla Harris l l l l Tom Horton l l l l Marissa Mayer l l l l Doug McMillon l l l l Greg Penner l l l l l Steve Reinemund l l l Rob Walton l l l l Steuart Walton l l l TOTAL 10 5 11 4 3 6 5

12 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Proposal No. 1: Election of Directors

Director Nominees for 2018

Who are the 2018 director nominees?

Based on the recommendation of the NGC, the Board has nominated the following candidates for election as directors at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting. The information provided below includes, for each nominee, his or her age, principal occupation and employment during the past five years, the year in which he or she first became a director of Walmart, each Board committee on which he or she currently serves, whether he or she is independent, and directorships of other public companies held by each nominee during the past five years.

FOR The Board recommends that shareholders vote FOR each of the nominees named below for election to the Board.

Stephen J. Easterbrook

Independent Nominee Joined the Board: Nominee

Age: 50 Board Committees

• N/A Other Current Public

Company Directorships

McDonald’s Corporation





Mr. Easterbrook has been the President and CEO and a member of the board of directors of McDonald’s Corporation since March 2015. Prior to this appointment, he served in various senior leadership positions with McDonald’s including as Senior Executive Vice President and Global Chief Brand Officer from June 2013 to February 2015. From September 2012 through May 2013, Mr. Easterbrook served as the Chief Executive Officer of Wagamama Limited, a Japanese-inspired restaurant chain, and from September 2011 to September 2012, he served as the Chief Executive Officer of PizzaExpress Limited, a casual dining company

in the United Kingdom. From December 2010 to September 2011, he held the position of President, McDonald’s Europe. Prior to that, Mr. Easterbrook served in a number of roles with McDonald’s over the course of 18 years having joined McDonald’s as a financial reporting manager in London in 1993. He is a Chartered Accountant and serves as a Visiting Fellow at Oxford University Centre for Corporate Reputation. He also serves on the board of directors of Catalyst Inc., a global nonprofit organization that promotes inclusive workplaces for women, and on the board of trustees for Ronald McDonald House Charities.





SKILLS AND

QUALIFICATIONS



Mr. Easterbrook brings broad expertise in marketing and brand management developed during more than 20 years of experience with the world’s largest restaurant company with retail locations in 100 countries and more than 25 years of service in the restaurant industry. Our board would benefit from the valuable insights and perspective Mr. Easterbrook has developed during his extensive career with a large global company with restaurant locations in over 100 countries. Mr. Easterbrook’s experiences in executive leadership positions at McDonald’s and his expertise as a Chartered Accountant would bring valuable and broad perspective and insights to the Board.

Proposal No. 1: Election of Directors • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 13

Timothy P. Flynn Independent Director Joined the Board: 2012

Age: 61 Board Committees

• Audit (Chair)

• SPFC Other Current Public

Company Directorships

JPMorgan Chase & Co.

Alcoa Corporation

UnitedHealth Group Incorporated





Mr. Flynn was the Chairman of KPMG International (“KPMG”), a global professional services organization that provides audit, tax, and advisory services, from 2007 until his retirement in October 2011. From 2005 until 2010, he served as Chairman and from 2005 to 2008 as CEO of KPMG LLP in the U.S., the largest individual member firm of KPMG. Prior to serving as Chairman and CEO of KPMG LLP, Mr. Flynn was Vice Chairman, Audit and Risk Advisory Services, with operating responsibility for Audit, Risk Advisory and Financial Advisory Services practices. Mr. Flynn joined the boards of Alcoa Corporation in November 2016 and UnitedHealth Group Incorporated in January 2017. He also has served as a member

of the board of directors of JPMorgan Chase & Co. since 2012. He previously served as a member of the board of directors of The Chubb Corporation from September 2013 until its acquisition in January 2016. He previously served as a trustee of the Financial Accounting Standards Board, a member of the World Economic Forum’s International Business Council, and a director of the International Integrated Reporting Council. Mr. Flynn graduated from the University of St. Thomas, St. Paul, Minnesota and is a member of the school’s board of trustees.





SKILLS AND

QUALIFICATIONS



Mr. Flynn has more than 32 years of experience in risk management, financial services, financial reporting, and accounting. Mr. Flynn also brings extensive experience with issues facing complex, global companies, and expertise in accounting , auditing, risk management , and regulatory affairs for such companies. In addition, Mr. Flynn brings his experiences in executive leadership positions at KPMG and his service on the boards of directors of other large public companies.

Sarah J. Friar Independent Director Joined the Board: 2018

Age: 45 Board Committees

• Audit

• SPFC Other Current Public

Company Directorships

New Relic, Inc.





Since July 2012, Ms. Friar has served as the CFO of Square, Inc., a provider of commerce solutions, including managed payments and point-of-sale systems for businesses and mobile financial offerings for consumers. Prior to that she served as the Senior Vice President of Finance & Strategy at Salesforce.com, Inc. from April 2011 to July 2012, and in various positions from 2002 to 2012 at The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. including as a Managing Director in the Equity Research Division and other various positions where she focused on corporate finance, mergers and acquisitions, and equity research. She joined The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. from McKinsey & Company. Ms. Friar has served on the boards of directors of New Relic, Inc.,

a software analytics company, since December 2013, and Slack Technologies, Inc., a business communications platform, since March 2017. She also has served as the vice-chair of the board of Spark Program Inc., a nonprofit focused on changing the lives of at-risk middle schoolers through mentorship. She previously served on the board of directors of Model N, Inc. from September 2012 until May 2015. Ms. Friar is a Fellow of the inaugural class of the Finance Leaders Fellowship Program and a member of the Aspen Global Leadership Network. Ms. Friar graduated from the University of Oxford with a Master of Engineering in Metallurgy, Economics, and Management and also from Stanford Graduate School of Business with an M.B.A.





SKILLS AND

QUALIFICATIONS Ms. Friar brings financial, accounting , and risk management expertise as the CFO of a multinational publicly-traded company and from her prior experience with a multinational investment banking firm. The Board benefits from her leadership experience as CFO of a publicly-traded company and other various leadership positions at Salesforce.com and Goldman Sachs. Ms. Friar brings a global perspective gained from her service as CFO with a multinational company that supports customers across a variety of businesses and industries. The Board benefits from Ms. Friar’s perspective regarding eCommerce and information technology in light of her leadership position with a publicly-traded company that provides managed payments and point-of-sale systems for businesses and mobile financial offerings for consumers.

14 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Proposal No. 1: Election of Directors

Carla A. Harris

Independent Director Joined the Board: 2017

Age: 55 Board Committees

• CMDC

• SPFC Other Current Public

Company Directorships

None





Ms. Harris has served as the Vice Chair, Wealth Management and Head of Multicultural Client Strategy for Morgan Stanley since August 2013, and as Managing Director and Senior Client Advisor since June 2012. In these roles, she is responsible for increasing client connectivity and penetration to enhance revenue generation across the firm. Ms. Harris joined the mergers and acquisitions team at Morgan Stanley in 1987 and since then has held a number of positions during her tenure. Her experiences at Morgan Stanley range from investment banking, equity capital markets, equity

private placements, and initial public offerings in a number of industries such as technology, media, retail, telecommunications, transportation, healthcare, and biotechnology. In August 2013, President Obama appointed Ms. Harris to serve as Chair of the National Women’s Business Council. She currently serves on the boards of several non-profit organizations including St. Vincent’s HealthCare and the Morgan Stanley Foundation.





SKILLS AND

QUALIFICATIONS Ms. Harris brings broad-based and valuable insights in finance and strategy gained from more than 30 years of experience at a prominent global investment banking firm. The Board benefits from Ms. Harris’ senior leadership experience at Morgan Stanley. The Board values Ms. Harris’ extensive work experience in a regulated industry and advising clients across a broad range of other regulated industries.

Thomas W. Horton

Independent Director* Joined the Board: 2014

Age: 56 Board Committees

• Audit

• NGC

• SPFC (Chair) Other Current Public

Company Directorships

QUALCOMM Incorporated





Mr. Horton has served as a Senior Advisor at Warburg Pincus LLC, a private equity firm focused on growth investing, since October 2015. Mr. Horton was the Chairman of American Airlines Group Inc. (“American”) from December 2013 to June 2014. He also served in other executive leadership positions at American, including as President from 2010 until his appointment as Chairman and CEO in 2011, during which time he led the company through a successful restructuring and turnaround that culminated in the 2013 merger with US Airways, creating the world’s largest airline. From 2006 to 2010, Mr. Horton served as Executive Vice President of Finance and Planning at American. Mr. Horton joined American from AT&T

Corporation, where he served in various roles between 2002 and 2005, including as Vice Chairman and as Chief Financial Officer. While at AT&T, Mr. Horton led the evaluation of strategic alternatives that ultimately led to the combination of AT&T and SBC Communications, Inc. Mr. Horton joined AT&T from American, where he had served in various roles from 1985 until 2002, including as Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer. He has served on the board of directors of QUALCOMM Incorporated since 2008. He has been the Presiding Director of QUALCOMM since 2015. Mr. Horton also serves on the executive board of the Cox School of Business at Southern Methodist University.





SKILLS AND

QUALIFICATIONS Mr. Horton brings valuable perspective developed from more than 30 years of experience in finance, accounting , auditing, and risk management . Our Board benefits from Mr. Horton’s leadership experience in several complex, international industries. In addition, Mr. Horton brings unique insights gained from his executive leadership roles at large, global , publicly-traded companies.

* The independent directors of the Board have appointed Mr. Horton to serve as our Lead Independent Director effective upon his re-election as a Director at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting. In this role, Mr. Horton will succeed Dr. James I. Cash, Jr. who is retiring from the Board and is not standing for re-election at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting.

Proposal No. 1: Election of Directors • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 15

Marissa A. Mayer

Independent Director Joined the Board: 2012

Age: 42 Board Committees

• CMDC

• TeCC Other Current Public

Company Directorships

None





In March 2018, Ms. Mayer co-founded Lumi Labs Inc., a technology incubator focused on consumer internet technologies. From July 2012 through June 2017, Ms. Mayer served as the President and Chief Executive Officer and a member of the board of directors of Yahoo! Inc. (“Yahoo”) (now Altaba Inc.). At Yahoo, she led the internet giant’s push to reinvent itself for the mobile era. With a renewed focus on user experience, Ms. Mayer grew Yahoo to serve over 1 billion people worldwide - with over 600 million mobile users - and transformed its advertising approach. Prior to her role at Yahoo, Ms. Mayer spent 13 years at Google Inc. (“Google”) where

she led various initiatives including Google Search for more than a decade, and other products such as Google Maps, Gmail, and Google News. Ms. Mayer holds a bachelor’s degree in symbolic systems and a master’s degree in computer science from Stanford University. From March 2013 until October 2016, Ms. Mayer served on the board of directors for AliphCom, which operates as Jawbone. She also serves on the boards of the Stanford Children’s Hospital, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, the San Francisco Ballet, and the foundation board for the Forum of Young Global Leaders at the World Economic Forum.





SKILLS AND

QUALIFICATIONS Ms. Mayer brings extensive expertise and insight into the technology and consumer internet industries, and her senior leadership experience is demonstrated by her executive role at a prominent consumer internet company and her positions on the boards of several non-profit organizations. Ms. Mayer brings distinguished experience in internet product development, engineering, and brand management. The Board values Ms. Mayer’s insights into global business and strategy gained from her experience as the CEO of a global company.

C. Douglas McMillon

President and Chief Executive Officer Joined the Board: 2013

Age: 51 Board Committees

• Executive Committee (Chair)

• GCC (Chair) Other Current Public

Company Directorships

None





Mr. McMillon is the President and CEO of Walmart and has served in that position since February 1, 2014. Prior to this appointment, he held numerous other positions with Walmart, including Executive Vice President, President and CEO, Walmart International, from February 1, 2009 through January 31, 2014, and Executive Vice President, President and CEO, Sam’s Club, from August 2005 through January 2009. Mr. McMillon has held a variety of other leadership

positions since joining our company more than 25 years ago. Mr. McMillon also serves as a member of the executive committee of the Business Roundtable, and serves as a member of the boards of directors of a number of organizations, including The Consumer Goods Forum, The US-China Business Council, and Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art.





SKILLS AND

QUALIFICATIONS Mr. McMillon brings years of executive leadership experience at our company and extensive expertise in corporate strategy, development, and execution. In addition, Mr. McMillon brings extensive knowledge and unique experience leading Walmart’s International segment. The Board benefits from Mr. McMillon’s more than 25 years of retail experience and his leadership role developing and executing our strategy to deliver seamless shopping at scale.

16 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Proposal No. 1: Election of Directors

Gregory B. Penner*

Chairman Joined the Board: 2008

Age: 48 Board Committees

• Executive Committee

• GCC Other Current Public

Company Directorships

None





Mr. Penner was appointed as Chairman of the Board in June 2015, after serving as Vice Chairman of the Board from June 2014 to June 2015. He has been a General Partner of Madrone Capital Partners, LLC, an investment management firm, since 2005. From 2002 to 2005, he served as Walmart’s Senior Vice President and CFO – Japan, and before serving in that role, Mr. Penner was the Senior Vice President of Finance and Strategy for Walmart.com

from 2001 to 2002. Prior to working for Walmart, Mr. Penner was a General Partner at Peninsula Capital, an early stage venture capital fund, and a financial analyst for Goldman, Sachs & Co. Mr. Penner served as a member of the board of directors of Baidu, Inc. from May 2004 until February 2017, and he previously served on the boards of Hyatt Hotels Corporation; eHarmony, Inc.; Castleton Commodities International, LLC; 99Bill Corporation; and Cuil, Inc.





SKILLS AND

QUALIFICATIONS Mr. Penner brings expertise in strategic planning, finance , and investment matters, including prior experience as a CFO in our company’s operations in Japan, and his service on the boards of directors of public and private companies in a variety of industries. The Board benefits from Mr. Penner’s retail experiences with our company’s operations in Japan and at Walmart.com, as well as his leadership service as our non-executive Chairman. In addition, Mr. Penner has broad knowledge of international business , particularly in Japan and China. Mr. Penner brings unique expertise gained through both his service with the company and as a director of various technology companies.

* Greg Penner is the son-in-law of Rob Walton.

Steven S Reinemund

Independent Director Joined the Board: 2010

Age: 70 Board Committees

• CMDC (Chair)

• NGC

• TeCC Other Current Public

Company Directorships

Exxon Mobil Corporation

Marriott International, Inc.





Mr. Reinemund is the retired Dean of Business and Professor of Leadership and Strategy at Wake Forest University, a position he held from July 2008 to June 2014, and where he continues to serve in an advisory role as an Executive-in-Residence. Prior to joining the faculty of Wake Forest University, Mr. Reinemund had a distinguished 23-year career with PepsiCo, Inc. (“PepsiCo”), where he served as Chairman of the Board from October 2006 to May 2007, and as Chairman and CEO from May 2001 to October 2006. Prior to becoming Chairman and CEO, Mr. Reinemund was

PepsiCo’s President and Chief Operating Officer from 1999 to 2001 and Chairman and CEO of Frito-Lay’s worldwide operations from 1996 to 1999. Mr. Reinemund has served as a director of Exxon Mobil Corporation and Marriott International, Inc. since 2007 and Chick-fil-A, Inc. since June 2015. He previously served as a director of American Express Company from 2007 to 2015 and Johnson & Johnson from 2003 to 2008. Mr. Reinemund is a member of the boards of trustees of The Cooper Institute and the U.S. Naval Academy Foundation.





SKILLS AND

QUALIFICATIONS Mr. Reinemund has considerable international business leadership experience gained through his service as Chairman and CEO of a global public company, through his service as dean of a prominent business school, and his service on the boards of several large companies in a variety of industries. Mr. Reinemund also brings valuable experience with large, international businesses. In addition, Mr. Reinemund’s experience in executive leadership positions at PepsiCo and Frito-Lay provides valuable insights to our Board regarding brand management, marketing , finance, and strategic planning.

Proposal No. 1: Election of Directors • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 17

S. Robson Walton*

Director Joined the Board: 1978

Age: 73 Board Committees

• SPFC

• Executive Committee

• GCC Other Current Public

Company Directorships

None





Mr. Walton was the Chairman of Walmart from 1992 to June 2015 and has been a member of the Board since 1978. Prior to becoming Chairman, he had been an officer at our company since 1969 and held a variety of positions during his service, including Senior Vice President, Corporate Secretary, General Counsel, and Vice Chairman. Before joining Walmart, Mr. Walton was in private law practice as a

partner with the law firm of Conner & Winters in Tulsa, Oklahoma. In addition to his duties at Walmart, Mr. Walton is involved with a number of non-profit and educational organizations, including Conservation International, where he serves as Chairman of that organization’s executive committee, and the College of Wooster, where he is an Emeritus Life Trustee for the college.





SKILLS AND

QUALIFICATIONS Mr. Walton brings decades of leadership experience with Walmart and his expertise in strategic planning gained through his service on the boards and other governing bodies of non-profit organizations. Mr. Walton has extensive legal , risk management , and corporate governance expertise gained as Walmart’s Chairman, Corporate Secretary and General Counsel and as an attorney in private practice. The Board benefits from Mr. Walton’s in-depth knowledge of our company, its history and the global retail industry , all gained through more than 35 years of service on the Board and more than 20 years of service as our company’s Chairman.

* Greg Penner is the son-in-law of Rob Walton, and Steuart Walton is the nephew of Rob Walton.

Steuart L. Walton*

Director Joined the Board: 2016

Age: 36 Board Committee

• SPFC Other Current Public

Company Directorships

None





Mr. Walton is the founder and Chairman of RZC Investments, LLC, an investment business which he founded in May 2016. He is also the founder of Game Composites, Ltd., a company that manufactures carbon fiber aircraft and aircraft parts. He served as the CEO of Game Composites from its founding in February 2013 until November 2017. Before founding Game Composites, from June 2011 to January 2013, Mr. Walton worked in our company’s International division as a Senior Director, International Mergers and Acquisitions. Prior to his service

at our company, he was an associate at Allen & Overy, LLP in London from 2007 to 2010, where he advised companies on securities offerings. Mr. Walton is also a member of the boards of directors of Rapha Racing Limited, Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art, Leadership for Educational Equity, and the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum. He is a graduate of Georgetown University Law Center, and he holds a bachelor’s degree in business administration from the University of Colorado, Boulder.





SKILLS AND

QUALIFICATIONS Mr. Walton brings broad-based and valuable international legal and regulatory experience gained from his work on complex, international financial transactions. Mr. Walton has a strong history and familiarity with our company and its retail operations and global businesses. He also brings valuable leadership and financial insights gained from his entrepreneurial experiences and investments.

* Steuart Walton is the nephew of Rob Walton.

18 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Proposal No. 1: Election of Directors

Are there any directors not standing for re-election?

Yes. Dr. James I. Cash, Jr. and Kevin Y. Systrom will retire from the Board at the conclusion of their current term and will not stand for re-election at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting. In accordance with the term limits set forth in our Corporate Governance Guidelines, Dr. Cash is retiring from our Board after 12 years of service. Following discussions, the Board and Mr. Systrom have mutually agreed that he will not stand for re-election at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting as he prioritizes work, board responsibilities, and other outside commitments.

James I. Cash, Jr.

Lead Independent Director Joined the Board: 2006

Age: 70 Board Committees

• Audit

• Executive

• NGC (Chair)

• TeCC Other Current Public

Company Directorships

Chubb Limited





Dr. Cash is the James E. Robison Professor of Business Administration Emeritus at Harvard Business School, where he served from July 1976 to October 2003. Dr. Cash served as the Senior Associate Dean and Chairman of HBS Publishing and Chairman of the MBA Program while on the faculty of the Harvard Business School. Dr. Cash holds an advanced degree in accounting and computer science and has been published extensively in accounting and information technology journals. He currently provides executive development and consulting services through The Cash Catalyst, LLC, which he formed in 2009. He has served

as a director of Chubb Limited since its acquisition in January 2016 and had previously served on the board of its predecessor, The Chubb Corporation, since 1996. Dr. Cash has served as a director of a number of other public companies, including General Electric Company from April 1997 to April 2016, Phase Forward Incorporated from October 2003 to May 2009, and Microsoft Corporation from May 2001 to November 2009, and has served on the audit committees of several public companies. He also serves as a director of several private companies.





Kevin Y. Systrom

Independent Director Joined the Board: 2014

Age: 34 Board Committees

• CMDC

• TeCC (Chair) Other Current Public

Company Directorships

None





Mr. Systrom is the CEO and co-founder of Instagram, where he managed the company from its founding in 2010 through a period of extremely rapid growth and through the purchase of Instagram by Facebook, Inc. in April 2012. Under his leadership as CEO, Instagram has continued its entrepreneurial development of a video sharing and direct messaging product, Instagram Direct, and has grown it to hundreds of millions of active users worldwide, making it one of the fastest growing social networks of all time. From 2006

until 2009, he was at Google Inc. and worked on large consumer products such as Gmail and Google Calendar. Before joining Google, Mr. Systrom worked with Odeo, a startup company that eventually became Twitter. He graduated from Stanford University with a bachelor of science in management science and engineering with a concentration in finance and decision analysis. While attending Stanford University, he participated in the Mayfield Fellows Program, a high-tech entrepreneurship program.





Proposal No. 1: Election of Directors • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 19

Corporate Governance

Effective corporate governance is essential for maximizing long-term value creation for our shareholders. Our values of honesty, accountability, and integrity guide our business and ensure that we maintain the trust of our shareholders, customers, and communities.

Our governance structure is based on our Corporate Governance Guidelines and other key governance documents. These guidelines are reviewed at least annually and updated as needed in response to evolving best practices, regulatory requirements, feedback from our annual Board and committee evaluations, and recommendations made by our shareholders, all with the goal of supporting and effectively overseeing our ongoing strategic transformation.

Our Corporate Governance Guidelines address, among other topics:

○ Board size, structure, and composition; ○ Board refreshment and tenure of independent directors; ○ Board leadership structure, including the separation of the Chairman and CEO roles and the selection, role, and responsibilities of the Lead Independent Director; ○ Board committees; ○ stock ownership guidelines; ○ the Board’s commitment to diversified membership;

○ management development and succession planning, diversity initiatives, and long-term strategic planning; ○ the directors’ full and free access to officers, other associates of the company, and the company’s outside advisors; ○ director compensation; ○ director orientation and continuing education; ○ the annual review of the CEO’s performance by the CMDC and the Board; and ○ annual Board and Board committee evaluations.





Governance Materials Available on our Website Our Board and Board committee governance documents, including the Board committee charters, the Corporate Governance Guidelines, and other key corporate governance documents are available to our shareholders on our corporate website at http://stock.walmart.com/investors/corporate-governance/governance-documents. You may also access and review the following additional corporate governance documents on our corporate website: ¢ Amended and Restated Bylaws; ¢ Fair Disclosure Procedures; ¢ Code of Ethics for the CEO and Senior Financial Officers; ¢ Global Anti-Corruption Policy; ¢ Global Statement of Ethics (available at www.walmartethics.com); ¢ Government Relations Policy; and ¢ Procedures for Accounting and Audit-Related Complaints; ¢ Privacy Policy. ¢ Investment Community Communications Policy; These materials are also available in print at no charge to any shareholder who requests a copy by writing to: Walmart Inc., Global Investor Relations Department, 702 Southwest 8th Street, Bentonville, Arkansas 72716-0100. A description of any substantive amendment or waiver of Walmart’s Code of Ethics for the CEO and Senior Financial Officers or Walmart’s Global Statement of Ethics granted to Executive Officers or directors will be disclosed on our corporate website within four business days following the date of the amendment or waiver (http://stock.walmart.com/investors/corporate-governance/governance-documents) for a period of 12 months after the date of the amendment or waiver. There were no substantive amendments to or waivers of Walmart’s Code of Ethics for the CEO and Senior Financial Officers or Walmart’s Global Statement of Ethics granted to Executive Officers or directors during fiscal 2018.

20 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Corporate Governance

Board Leadership Structure

The leadership structure of our Board is designed to ensure robust oversight, independent viewpoints, and the promotion of the overall effectiveness of the Board. The Board annually reviews its leadership structure as part of the process described on page 26. As discussed on page 80, approximately 51% of our company’s Shares are held by members of the family of Sam Walton, our company’s founder. Three generations of Walton family members have served on our Board, which demonstrates the Walton family’s interests in and commitment to the long-term success of our company. Despite their substantial ownership in the company, the members of the Walton family traditionally have held only three seats on our Board. While the NYSE Listed Company Rules provide exemptions from independence requirements for controlled companies, Walmart has not and has no plans to rely on any of those governance exemptions because we believe it is important to have a majority independent board.

Our current Board leadership structure consists of:

Non-Executive Chairman Greg Penner Primary Responsibilities • Presides over meetings of the Board and shareholders • Focuses on Board oversight and governance matters • Provides advice and counsel to the CEO • Agenda review process Lead Independent Director Jim Cash* Primary Responsibilities • Liaison between Independent Directors and Chairman • Agenda review process • Board and committee development and evaluation • Shareholder engagement President and CEO Doug McMillon Primary Responsibilities • Leadership of Walmart’s complex global business • Implements strategic initiatives • Development of robust management team

We have separated the Chairman and CEO roles since 1988. By separating these roles, our CEO is able to focus on managing Walmart’s complex daily operations and our Chairman, who is an Outside Director, can devote his time and attention to matters of Board oversight and governance.

We have had a Lead Independent Director since 2004. The role of the Lead Independent Director is designed to enhance the candor and communication between the independent members of the Board, the Chairman, and the CEO. Our Lead Independent Director is appointed annually by the independent members of the Board and has a robust set of responsibilities, including:

• presiding over executive private sessions of the Outside Directors and the Independent Directors; • authority to call meetings of the directors, including separate meetings of the Outside Directors and the Independent Directors; and • is available, when appropriate, for consultation with major shareholders.

In addition to his role as Lead Independent Director, Dr. Cash also serves as the Chair of the NGC, which means he also oversees the annual Board and Board committee evaluation process and actively participates in the work related to overall Board effectiveness, including Board development, succession planning, and refreshment. Due to the 12 year term limit for independent directors under our Corporate Governance Guidelines, Dr. Cash, who has served on our Board since 2006 and as our Lead Independent Director since 2013, is not standing for re-election at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting. In April 2018, the Independent Directors appointed Mr. Horton to succeed Dr. Cash as our next Lead Independent Director effective upon Mr. Horton’s re-election as a Director at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting.

Independent Board Committee Chairs: Each of the Board’s key committees currently is led by an independent chair. These committees play a critical role in our governance and strategy, and each committee has access to management and the authority to retain independent advisors as it deems appropriate.

Governance Committees Strategy Committees Audit Compensation

and Management

Development Nominating and

Governance Strategic Planning

and Finance Technology and

eCommerce Tim Flynn

Independent Chair Steve Reinemund

Independent Chair Jim Cash*

Independent Chair Tom Horton*

Independent Chair Kevin Systrom*

Independent Chair

* Dr. Cash and Mr. Systrom are not standing for re-election at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ meeting. Our Independent Directors have appointed Mr. Horton to succeed Dr. Cash as Lead Independent Director effective upon Mr. Horton’s re-election as a Director at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting. The Board will review the Board committee assignments recommended by the NGC at its meeting to be held in connection with the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting.

Corporate Governance • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 21

Board Committees

To enhance the effectiveness of the Board’s risk oversight function, the Board regularly reviews its committee structure and committee responsibilities to ensure that the Board has an appropriate committee structure focused on matters of strategic and governance importance to Walmart. Currently, the Board has seven standing committees, which are described below. In addition to the duties described below, our Board committees perform the risk oversight functions described on page 28.

STRATEGIC PLANNING AND FINANCE COMMITTEE

meetings

during fiscal 2018

TECHNOLOGY AND eCOMMERCE COMMITTEE

meetings

during fiscal 2018

(1) Not standing for re-election at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ meeting.

22 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Corporate Governance

AUDIT COMMITTEE

meetings

during fiscal 2018

* Independence and financial literacy: The Board has determined that each member of the Audit Committee is independent as defined by the Exchange Act, the SEC’s rules, and the NYSE Listed Company Rules. Each Audit Committee member is financially literate as required by NYSE Listed Company Rules, and is an “audit committee financial expert” as defined in the SEC’s rules. ** For more information about the Audit Committee’s role with respect to the FCPA investigation, see “Director Compensation” on page 35. (1) Not standing for re-election at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting.

COMPENSATION AND MANAGEMENT DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

meetings

during fiscal 2018

* Independence: The Board has determined that each member of the CMDC is independent as defined by the Exchange Act, the SEC’s rules, and the NYSE Listed Company Rules, is an outside director as defined in Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code, and is a “non-employee director” as defined in the SEC’s rules. (1) Not standing for re-election at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting.

Corporate Governance • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 23

NOMINATING AND GOVERNANCE COMMITTEE

meetings

during fiscal 2018

* Independence: The Board has determined that each member of the NGC is independent as defined by the NYSE Listed Company Rules. (1) Not standing for re-election at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting.

The remaining two standing committees of the Board are responsible for various administrative matters.

GLOBAL COMPENSATION COMMITTEE meetings

during fiscal 2018 Primary Responsibilities • Administers Walmart’s equity and cash incentive compensation plans for associates who are not Directors or Executive Officers Total Members: 3 Doug McMillon, Chair Greg Penner

Rob Walton

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE No meetings*

during fiscal 2018 Primary Responsibilities • Implements policy decisions of the Board • Acts on the Board’s behalf between Board meetings Total Members: 4 Doug McMillon, Chair

Jim Cash1

Greg Penner

Rob Walton * The Executive Committee acted by unanimous written consent 13 times during fiscal 2018. The Board reviewed and ratified all unanimous written consents of the Executive Committee during fiscal 2018. (1) Not standing for re-election at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting.





24 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Corporate Governance

Governing Documents

In addition to our Corporate Governance Guidelines, each standing committee of the Board has a written charter, which defines the roles and responsibilities of the Board committee. The committee charters and the Corporate Governance Guidelines provide the overall framework for our corporate governance practices. The NGC and the Board review the Corporate Governance Guidelines, and the NGC, the Board, and each Board committee review the Board committee charters at least annually to determine whether any updates or revisions to these documents may be necessary or appropriate.

Board Meetings and Director Attendance

The Board held a total of five meetings during fiscal 2018.The Outside Directors and Independent Directors met regularly in separate executive sessions, with the Lead Independent Director presiding over those sessions. As a whole, during fiscal 2018, our directors attended approximately 97% of the aggregate number of Board meetings and meetings of Board committees on which they served.

Under our Board policy, all directors are expected to attend the company’s annual shareholders’ meetings. While the Board understands that there may be situations that prevent a Director from attending an annual shareholders’ meeting, the Board encourages all Directors to make attendance at all annual shareholders’ meetings a priority.

Eleven Board members attended the 2017 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting, including 8 of the 9 director nominees named in this proxy statement who were members of the Board or Board nominees at the time of the 2017 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting.

Communicating with the Board

The Board welcomes feedback from shareholders and other interested parties. There are a number of ways that you can contact the Board or individual members of the Board.

Via mail: Via email: Name of Director(s) or Board of Directors

c/o Gordon Y. Allison, Vice President and General Counsel, Corporate Division Walmart Inc.

702 Southwest 8th Street

Bentonville, Arkansas 72716-0215 ○ the entire Board at directors@wal-mart.com; ○ the Independent Directors at Independent.Directors@wal-mart.com; ○ the Outside Directors at nonmanagementdirectors@wal-mart.com; or ○ any individual director, at the full name of the director as listed under “Proposal No.1 – Election of Directors” followed by “@wal-mart.com.” For example, our Chairman, Gregory B. Penner, may be reached at gregorybpenner@wal-mart.com.

We receive a large volume of correspondence regarding a wide range of subjects each day, including correspondence relating to ordinary store operations and merchandise in our stores. As a result, our individual directors are often not able to respond to all communications directly. Therefore, the Board has established a process for managing communications to the Board and individual directors.

Communications directed to the Board or individual directors are reviewed to determine whether, based on the facts and circumstances of the communication, a response on behalf of the Board or an individual director is appropriate. If a response on behalf of the Board or an individual director is appropriate, Walmart management may assist the Board or individual director in gathering all relevant information and preparing a response. Communications related to day-to-day store operations, merchandise, and similar matters are typically directed to an appropriate member of management for a response. Walmart maintains records of communications directed to the Board and individual directors, and these records are available to our directors at any time upon request.

Shareholders wishing to recommend director candidates for consideration should do so in writing to the address above. The recommendation should include the candidate’s name and address, a resume or curriculum vitae that demonstrates the candidate’s experience, skills, and qualifications, and other relevant information for the Board’s consideration. All director candidates recommended by shareholders will be evaluated by the NGC on the same basis as any other director candidates.

Corporate Governance • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 25

Board Evaluations and Board Effectiveness

The Board is committed to robust Board and Board committee evaluations as an important tool for promoting effectiveness and continuous improvement. The Board has implemented a two-year evaluation cycle, with the evaluation process led by the Lead Independent Director and by a third-party consulting firm in alternating years. The evaluation process was led by our Lead Independent Director in fiscal 2018 and will be led by a third-party consulting firm in fiscal 2019 to bring an outside perspective to the evaluation process.

Our Board Evaluation Process Questionnaires Each director completes a detailed questionnaire. Topics covered include, among others: • The effectiveness of the Board’s leadership structure and the Board committee structure; • Board and committee skills, composition, diversity, and succession planning; • Board culture and dynamics, including the effectiveness of discussion and debate at Board and committee meetings; • The quality of Board and committee agendas and the appropriateness of Board and committee priorities; and • Board/management dynamics, including the quality of management presentations and information provided to the Board and committees. Interviews Individual director interviews – each director participates in a confidential, open-ended, one-on-one interview to solicit input and perspective on Board and committee effectiveness. Senior management interviews – Members of Walmart’s senior executive team also participate in confidential, one-on-one interviews designed to solicit management’s perspective on the Board’s effectiveness, engagement, and the dynamic between the Board and management. Action Items These evaluations have consistently found that the Board and Board committees are operating effectively. Over the past few years, this evaluation process has contributed to various refinements in the way the Board and Board committees operate, including: • reducing the size of the Board to promote engagement and input into our strategic decision-making; • changing the Board committee structure to create a separate Compensation and Management Development Committee and a Nominating and Governance Committee; • changing committee assignments so that Independent Directors sit on one “strategy” committee and one “governance” committee; • ensuring that Board and committee agendas are appropriately focused on strategic priorities and provide adequate time for director input; • additional responsibilities for our Lead Independent Director, including active participation in the agenda-setting process for the Board and Board committees; and • increased focus on continuous Board succession planning and refreshment, including engaging a third-party consulting firm to help further develop our robust long-term director candidate pipeline.

Board Refreshment and Succession Planning

The NGC is responsible for identifying and evaluating potential director candidates, for reviewing the composition of the Board and Board committees, and for making recommendations to the full Board on these matters. Throughout the year, the NGC actively engages in Board succession planning, taking into account the following considerations:

○ Input from Board discussions and from the Board and Board committee evaluation process regarding the specific backgrounds, skills, and experiences that would contribute to overall Board and committee effectiveness; and ○ The future needs of the Board and Board committees in light of the Board’s tenure policies, Walmart’s long-term strategy, and the skills and qualifications of directors who are expected to retire in the future.





26 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Corporate Governance

The Board believes that a mix of longer-tenured directors and newer directors with fresh perspectives contributes to an effective Board. In order to promote thoughtful Board refreshment, the Board has adopted the following retirement policies for Independent Directors, as set forth in Walmart’s Corporate Governance Guidelines: Term Limit: Independent Directors are expected to commit to at least six years of service, and may not serve for more than 12 years. Retirement Age: Unless they have not yet completed their initial six-year commitment, Independent Directors may not stand for re-election after age 75.

The Board may make exceptions to these retirement policies if circumstances warrant. For example, the Board could extend the term limit or retirement age for an individual director with particular skills or qualifications that are valuable to the Board’s effectiveness until a suitable replacement is found. Similarly, an Independent Director may retire before serving 12 years in order to “stagger” turnover on the Board or a Board committee. The Board believes these policies provide discipline to the Board refreshment process, and have resulted in a diverse Board with an effective mix of skills, experiences, and tenures, as shown on page 7. During fiscal 2018, the NGC engaged a third-party consulting firm to help further refine its refreshment and succession planning process and to cultivate a pipeline of potential director candidates as a resource for both planned retirements as a result of our term limits or in the event of a director’s unanticipated early departure from the Board. As a part of the process of identifying potential director candidates, the NGC may also consult with other directors and senior officers. If the NGC decides to proceed with further consideration of a potential candidate, the Chair of the NGC and other members of the NGC, as well as other members of the Board, may interview the candidate. The NGC then may recommend that the full Board appoint or nominate the candidate for election to the Board. Ms. Friar was appointed to the Board in February 2018 and is standing for election for the first time at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting. Ms. Friar and Mr. Easterbrook were initially identified as a potential director candidates by the NGC’s consulting firm, and their nominations were the result of the process outlined above.





Director Onboarding and Engagement

All directors are expected to invest the time and energy required to quickly gain an in-depth understanding of our business and operations in order to enhance their strategic value to our Board. We develop tailored onboarding plans for each new director, taking into account his or her background and experience. Shortly after joining our Board, each new director is partnered in a mutual mentoring relationship with a member of senior management, and each new director has “learn the business” meetings with the leaders of key operational and corporate support functions. Typically, at least one Board meeting each year is held at a location away from our home office, usually in a market in which we operate. In connection with these Board meetings, our directors learn more about the local business market through meetings with our business leaders in these markets, visits to our stores and other facilities in the local market, and visits to the stores of our competitors. We also typically hold one Board meeting per year at one of our eCommerce offices, where our Board members participate in intensive sessions focused on our eCommerce strategies and operations.

Our Board members are also expected to participate in other company activities and engage directly with our associates at a variety of events throughout the year. Examples of activities and events that members of our Board have participated in include: ○ attending Walmart leadership meetings and traveling with senior business leaders on trips to domestic and international markets; ○ attending a summit of our CFOs from our worldwide markets; ○ attending a summit of our controllers from our worldwide markets; ○ touring facilities with our compliance associates; ○ speaking at various culture, diversity and inclusion events held at our home office in Bentonville, Arkansas and other locations; and ○ attending and speaking at meetings of Walmart business segments, divisions, and corporate support departments.





Corporate Governance • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 27

Management Development and Succession Planning

Our Board places a high priority on senior management development and succession planning. The CMDC has primary responsibility for overseeing the succession planning and retention practices for our Executive Officers and other senior leaders. Executive Officer succession planning and senior management development is a regular topic on the agendas for the meetings of the CMDC.

At these meetings, the members of our CMDC, in consultation with our CEO, our Executive Vice President – Global People, and others as the CMDC may deem appropriate, engage in comprehensive deliberations regarding the development and evaluation of current and potential senior leaders, as well as the development of executive succession plans, including succession plans for our CEO position. This process has contributed to two successful CEO transitions since 2009. The Board has also adopted a CEO succession planning process to address unanticipated events and emergency situations.

The Board’s Role in Risk Oversight

Taking reasonable and responsible risks is an inherent part of Walmart’s business and is critical to our continued innovation, growth, and achievement of our strategic objectives. The Board and the Board committees actively oversee and monitor the management of the most significant risks that could impact our company’s operations. The Board does not view risk in isolation, but instead considers risk in conjunction with its oversight of Walmart’s strategy and operations.

Walmart identifies, assesses, and assigns responsibility for managing risks through its annual enterprise risk assessment process, other internal processes, and internal control environment. The Board, Board committees, and management coordinate the risk oversight role in a manner that serves the long-term interests of our company and our shareholders through established periodic reporting and open lines of communication.

Additional information regarding the roles and responsibilities of our Board committees can be found under “Board Committees” beginning on page 22.

28 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Corporate Governance

Board Oversight of Legislative Affairs, Public Policy Engagement, Charitable Giving, and Sustainability

The NGC reviews and advises management regarding the company’s legislative affairs and public policy engagement strategy, as well as the company’s charitable giving strategy and other social, community, and sustainability initiatives. Walmart engages in the political process when we believe that doing so will serve the best interests of the company and our shareholders. Walmart is committed to engaging in the political process as a good corporate citizen and in a manner that complies with all applicable laws. Over the years, Walmart has provided greater transparency regarding the company’s political engagement. Since 2015, we have compiled lobbying disclosure information from our U.S. state-level public filings and presented them on our corporate website, and since 2016 we have also disclosed on our corporate website the lobbying expense from our public filings at the U.S. federal level.

Global Responsibility Report Since 2007, our company has prepared and produced a report describing our company’s progress and initiatives regarding sustainability and other environmental, social, and governance (“ESG”) matters. For the most recent information regarding Walmart’s engagement in the political process, as well as other ESG matters, please see our most recent Global Responsibility Report, available at http://corporate.walmart.com/global-responsibility. Walmart’s Government Relations Policy is also available at http://corporate.walmart.com/policies.

Shareholder Outreach and Engagement

We recognize the value of listening and taking into account the views of our shareholders, and the relationship with our shareholders is an integral part of our corporate governance practices. We conduct shareholder outreach throughout the year to ensure that management and the Board understand and consider the issues of importance to our shareholders and are able to address them appropriately.

Senior leaders and subject matter experts from the company meet regularly with representatives at many of our top institutional shareholders and periodically with leading proxy advisory firms to discuss Walmart’s strategy, governance practices, executive compensation, compliance programs, and other ESG related matters. Members of our Board participate from time to time in these meetings. Management reports regularly to the CMDC and NGC about these meetings, including feedback on these diverse topics and concerns raised by our shareholders.

We are continuing this program of shareholder engagement during fiscal 2019, in addition to our customary participation at industry and investment community conferences, investor road shows, and analyst meetings. We also have incorporated into this proxy statement some of the feedback we received during these meetings. We also respond to individual shareholders who provide feedback about our business. We have had success engaging with parties to understand shareholder concerns and reach resolutions on issues that are in the best interests of our shareholders, and we remain committed to these ongoing initiatives.

Active Ongoing Shareholder Engagement ○ Board members, senior leaders and/or subject matter experts actively solicit feedback from our large shareholders on strategy, governance, compensation, and other topics. During fiscal 2018, we engaged with more than half of our 60 largest institutional shareholders, representing approximately 450 million Shares. ○ The CMDC and NGC receive regular reports on this engagement. ○ We welcome feedback from all shareholders, who can contact our Global Investor Relations team by: • calling 1-479-273-6463 • emailing IRinqu@wal-mart.com • using Walmart’s Global Investor Relations app, available for free in iTunes and Google Play • visiting http://stock.walmart.com

Corporate Governance • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 29

How We Determine Director Independence

Our Board is committed to ensuring its membership consists of the right mix of skill sets in light of Walmart’s strategy, the Board’s tenure policies, and the Board’s desire to maintain at all times a majority of directors who are independent in accordance with the NYSE Listed Company Rules. Historically, three members of the Walton family have been members of our Board, and the NGC and the Board believe this is appropriate in light of the Walton family’s significant and long-term Share ownership. Our CEO also serves on the Board, and our former CEOs have historically served on the Board for a period of time after they retire. Our incoming CEOs have supported this practice and we believe this practice has contributed to successful CEO transitions during our company’s history. Consistent with our Board’s commitment to independent Board oversight, the Board generally seeks to fill the remaining Board seats with directors who are independent as defined in the NYSE Listed Company Rules.

In making independence determinations, the Board complies with all NYSE criteria, and with respect to Board committee membership, certain SEC criteria, and considers all relevant facts and circumstances. Under the NYSE Listed Company Rules, to be considered independent:

○ the director must not have a disqualifying relationship, as described in the NYSE Listed Company Rules; and ○ the Board must affirmatively determine that the director otherwise has no direct or indirect material relationship with our company.

To aid in the director independence assessment process, the Board has adopted materiality guidelines that it considers in its independence assessment process. While not determinative of independence, these guidelines identify the following categories of relationships that the Board has determined will generally not affect a director’s independence.

Materiality Guideline Description Ordinary Retail Transactions The director, an entity with which a director is affiliated, or one or more members of the director’s immediate family, purchased property or services from Walmart in retail transactions on terms generally available to Walmart associates during Walmart’s last fiscal year. Immaterial Ownership The director or one or more members of the director’s immediate family owns or has owned during the entity’s last fiscal year, directly or indirectly, 5% or less of an entity that has a business relationship with Walmart. Immaterial Transactions The director or one or more members of the director’s immediate family owns or has owned during the entity’s last fiscal year, directly or indirectly, more than 5% of an entity that has a business relationship with Walmart so long as the amount paid to or received from Walmart during the entity’s last fiscal year accounts for less than $1,000,000 or, if greater, 2% of the entity’s consolidated gross revenues for that entity’s last fiscal year. The director or a member of the director’s immediate family is or has been during the entity’s last fiscal year an executive officer or employee of an entity that made payments to, or received payments from, Walmart during the entity’s last fiscal year that account for less than $1,000,000 or, if greater, 2% of the entity’s consolidated gross revenues for that entity’s last fiscal year. Immaterial Positions The director or one or more members of the director’s immediate family is a director or trustee or was a director or trustee (but not an executive officer or employee) of an entity during the entity’s last fiscal year that has a business or charitable relationship with Walmart and that made payments to, or received payments from, Walmart during the entity’s last fiscal year in an amount representing less than $5,000,000 or, if greater, 5% of the entity’s consolidated gross revenues for that entity’s last fiscal year. Walmart paid to, employed, or retained one or more members of the director’s immediate family for compensation not exceeding $120,000 during Walmart’s last fiscal year. Immaterial Benefits The director or one or more members of the director’s immediate family received from Walmart, during Walmart’s last fiscal year, personal benefits having an aggregate value of less than $5,000.

In April 2018, the Board and the NGC conducted their annual review of the directors’ and the director nominee’s responses to a questionnaire soliciting information regarding their direct and indirect relationships with the company (and the directors’ and the director nominee’s immediate family members’ direct and indirect relationships with the company) and other relationships that may be relevant to independence. They also reviewed due diligence performed by management regarding any transactions, relationships, or arrangements between the company and the directors and director nominee or parties related to the directors and director nominee.

As a result of this review, the Board has determined that the following directors and the director nominee either are or will be Independent Directors under the independence standards in the NYSE Listed Company Rules: Stephen J. Easterbrook; Timothy P. Flynn; Sarah J. Friar; Carla A. Harris;Thomas W. Horton; Marissa A. Mayer; and Steven S Reinemund. The Board has also determined that James I. Cash, Jr. and Kevin Y. Systrom, who are not standing for re-election at the 2018 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting, are Independent Directors. In addition, the Board determined that the currently serving members of the Audit Committee and the CMDC meet the heightened independence

30 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Corporate Governance

standards for membership on those Board committees under the NYSE Listed Company Rules and the SEC’s rules. The Board also determined that Linda S. Wolf, who did not stand for re-election at the 2017 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting and, therefore, ceased to be a director of Walmart on June 2, 2017, was independent and met the heightened independence standards under the NYSE Listed Company Rules and the SEC’s rules for compensation committee membership during the portion of fiscal 2018 during which she served on the Board.

In making its determination as to the independence of our Independent Directors and our director nominee, the Board considered whether any relationship between a director or director nominee and Walmart is a material relationship based on the materiality guidelines discussed above, the facts and circumstances of the relationship, the amounts involved in the relationship, the director’s or director nominee’s interest in such relationship, if any, and such other factors as the Board, in its judgment, deemed appropriate. In each case, the Board found the relationship with our Independent Directors and director nominee to be immaterial to the director’s or director nominee’s independence. The types of relationships considered by the Board are noted below:

Relationship Type Director or Nominee The director or director nominee was an officer and less than 5% equity owner of a Walmart vendor or service provider Mr. Easterbrook Ms. Friar Ms. Harris Ms. Mayer Mr. Systrom Immediate family members of the director or director nominee were employees or officers and less than 5% equity owners of Walmart vendors or service providers Dr. Cash Mr. Easterbrook Mr. Flynn Ms. Friar Mr. Reinemund Mr. Systrom Ms. Wolf The director or director nominee was a director or trustee and less than 5% equity owner of a Walmart vendor or service provider Dr. Cash Mr. Easterbrook Mr. Flynn Ms. Friar Mr. Horton* Ms. Mayer Mr. Reinemund Walmart employed one or more members of the director’s immediate family for compensation not exceeding $120,000 during Walmart’s last fiscal year Ms. Harris The director’s immediate family member directly or indirectly owned 5% or less of, but was not a director, officer, or employee of, a Walmart service provider or vendor Ms. Mayer

*Mr. Horton has been nominated to serve as a director of a Walmart vendor.

The aggregate amounts involved in each of the relationships and transactions described in the preceding table were less than $1 million or, if greater, 2% of the consolidated gross revenues for the entity’s last fiscal year, with the exception of certain relationships involving Mr. Reinemund.

Immediate family members of Mr. Reinemund are or were employed by and had a less than 5% ownership interest in (but are not executive officers of) a Walmart supplier or vendor that received payments from Walmart during the entity’s last fiscal year that account for more than 2% of the entity’s consolidated gross revenues for that entity’s last fiscal year. The Board determined these relationships were immaterial to Mr. Reinemund’s independence because in each case neither Mr. Reinemund nor his immediate family member: (i) is or was an executive officer of the entity; (ii) is or was involved in the marketing or sale of goods or services to Walmart, the negotiation of transactions, or the management of the business relationship between Walmart and the entity; (iii) does or did receive compensation from the entity based on the marketing or sale of the entity’s goods or services to Walmart; or (iv) had an advancement within or continued employment with such entity based on the marketing or sale of the entity’s goods or services to Walmart. Further, the payments made by Walmart to the entities, or by the entities to Walmart, were for various products and services in the ordinary course of business, and Walmart has had a relationship with these entities prior to Mr. Reinemund’s immediate family members’ employment with these entities.

The Board does not believe S. Robson Walton, Gregory B. Penner, or Steuart L. Walton have any relationships with Walmart that would disqualify them from being considered independent under the NYSE Listed Company Rules. However, the Board has deferred its determination as to their independence. If the Board had made such an independence determination, then

Corporate Governance • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 31

10 of 11 of Walmart’s nominees, or 91%, would have been independent.

In addition, although the Walton family holds approximately 51% of our company’s Shares, we have not and do not plan to rely on any of the exemptions from certain board independence requirements available to controlled companies under the NYSE Listed Company Rules. Our Board is committed to maintaining a majority independent Board and believes that this independence ensures robust oversight, independent viewpoints, and promotes the Board’s overall effectiveness.

The Board and the NGC concluded that each of the Independent Directors does not currently have, and has not had during any pertinent period, any relationship that: (i) constitutes a disqualifying relationship under the NYSE Listed Company Rules; (ii) otherwise compromises the independence of such directors or the director nominee; or (iii) otherwise constitutes a material relationship between Walmart and the director or director nominee.

Related Person Transaction Review Policy

The Board has adopted a written policy applicable to all Walmart officers who serve as executive vice presidents or above; all directors and director nominees; all shareholders beneficially owning more than five percent of Walmart’s outstanding Shares; and the immediate family members of each of the preceding persons (collectively, the “Covered Persons”). Any entity in which a Covered Person has a direct or indirect material financial interest or of which a Covered Person is an officer or holds a significant management position (each a “Covered Entity”) is also covered by the policy. The Transaction Review Policy applies to any transaction or series of similar or related transactions in which a Covered Person or Covered Entity has a direct or indirect material financial interest and in which Walmart is a participant (each, a “Covered Transaction”).

Under this Transaction Review Policy, each Covered Person is responsible for reporting to Walmart’s chief audit executive any Covered Transactions of which he or she has knowledge. Walmart’s chief audit executive, with the assistance of other appropriate Walmart personnel, reviews each Covered Transaction and submits the results of this review to the Audit Committee. The Audit Committee reviews each Covered Transaction and either approves or disapproves the transaction. To approve a Covered Transaction, the Audit Committee must find that:

○ the substantive terms and negotiation of the Covered Transaction are fair to Walmart and its shareholders and the substantive terms are no less favorable to Walmart and its shareholders than those in similar transactions negotiated at an arm’s-length basis; and ○ if the Covered Person is a director or officer of Walmart, he or she has otherwise complied with the terms of Walmart’s Global Statement of Ethics as it applies to the Covered Transaction.

32 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Corporate Governance

Related Person Transaction Process

The following chart shows our process for identification and disclosure of related person transactions.

Fiscal 2018 Review of Related Person Transactions

Our company’s Legal Department reviews each Covered Person transaction that exceeds $120,000. The purpose of this review is to determine whether the related person has a direct or indirect material interest in the transaction.

Our Legal Department has developed and implemented processes and controls for obtaining information about proposed or existing related person transactions from our directors, director nominees, Executive Officers, and principal shareholders. The Legal Department analyzes each related person transaction and, based upon the facts and circumstances, determines whether the related person has or will have a material interest in the transaction. If so, under the company’s Transaction Review Policy, then the related person transaction is presented to the Audit Committee for its review and approval or ratification. As described in our “Transaction Review Policy,” the Audit Committee also considers the following factors when reviewing a related person transaction:

○ the nature of the related person’s interest in the transaction; ○ the substantive terms of the transaction, including the type of transaction and the amount involved; ○ opinions from the company’s internal audit function and global ethics office regarding the fairness of the transaction to our company; and ○ any other factors the Audit Committee deems appropriate.

We disclose in this proxy statement all transactions in which a related person has been determined to have a material interest and the amount involved exceeds $120,000, as required under SEC rules. Walmart believes that the terms of the transactions described below are comparable to terms that would have been reached by unrelated third parties in arm’s-length transactions. The Audit Committee has approved each of the transactions disclosed below.

○ On September 19, 2016, Walmart acquired Jet.com in a merger transaction, with Jet.com becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of Walmart. The aggregate transaction consideration paid by the Company consisted of a combination of cash of approximately $3.0 billion and restricted stock units representing the right to receive shares of Walmart common stock determined using the closing date trading

Corporate Governance • Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement 33

price equal to approximately $300 million. Marc Lore, the founder and largest stockholder of Jet.com (approximately 15.9% of the outstanding Jet.com shares on a fully-diluted basis) received the right to approximately $477 million in cash consideration payable by the Company for his Jet.com shares as part of the merger transaction. Of this amount, approximately $80 million was paid in fiscal 2017 following the closing of the transaction and Mr. Lore received cash consideration payments of approximately $44 million related to the transaction in fiscal 2018. The remaining approximately $353 million of cash consideration from the transaction will be paid to Mr. Lore over the next four (4) years, subject to Mr. Lore remaining a Walmart associate during such period. However, if Walmart terminates Mr. Lore’s employment without cause, or Mr. Lore resigns for good reason, Mr. Lore will continue to receive these payments over the remaining portion of the five (5) year period following the closing date of the transaction. Mr. Lore’s portion of the transaction equity consideration consisted of restricted stock units for 3,554,093 shares of Walmart stock vesting over the five (5) year period following the closing date of the transaction, subject to Mr. Lore remaining a Walmart associate during such period as further discussed and described in the footnotes to the Summary Compensation table on page 66. During fiscal 2018,Walmart issued 533,113 Shares to Mr. Lore pursuant to such vestings. Mr. Lore is the Executive Vice President – President and Chief Executive Officer, U.S. eCommerce, of Walmart. His employment with Walmart in this role began immediately following the closing of the transaction. ○ During fiscal 2018, Walmart paid Some Spider Inc. (“Some Spider”), an internet marketing company, approximately $350,000 for internet marketing services. Marc E. Lore, an Executive Officer of Walmart, owns approximately 16% of the outstanding capital stock of Some Spider. We cannot estimate the dollar value of Mr. Lore’s interest in such transaction as that amount will depend in large measure on the dividends paid on the stock of Some Spider held by Mr. Lore and the appreciation, if any, in the fair value of that stock that would be attributable to the proposed transaction described above. Walmart may engage Some Spider in fiscal 2019 to purchase similar services. ○ Lori Haynie, the sister of C. Douglas McMillon, a director of Walmart and an Executive Officer, is an executive officer of Mahco, Incorporated (“Mahco”). During fiscal 2018, Walmart paid Mahco and its subsidiaries approximately $21.5 million in connection with Walmart’s purchases of sporting goods and related products. Walmart expects to purchase similar types of products from Mahco during fiscal 2019. ○ Greg T. Bray, a management associate in Walmart’s Finance department, is the brother-in-law of C. Douglas McMillon, a director of Walmart and an Executive Officer. For fiscal 2018, Walmart paid Mr. Bray a salary of approximately $230,000, a payment pursuant to the cash incentive plan of approximately $87,000, and other benefits totaling approximately $26,000 (including Walmart’s matching contributions to Mr. Bray’s 401(k) Plan account and health insurance premiums). In fiscal 2018, Mr. Bray also received a grant of 821 restricted stock units with a calculated value of approximately $60,000 at the date of grant. Mr. Bray continues to be an associate, and, in fiscal 2019, he may receive compensation and other benefits in amounts similar to or greater than those he received during fiscal 2018. ○ Nichole R. Bray, a management associate in the company’s Information Systems Division, is the sister-in-law of C. Douglas McMillon, a director of Walmart and an Executive Officer. For fiscal 2018,Walmart paid Ms. Bray a salary of approximately $144,000, a payment pursuant to the cash incentive plan of approximately $47,000, and other benefits totaling approximately $22,300 (including Walmart’s matching contributions to Ms. Bray’s 401(k) Plan account and health insurance premiums). In fiscal 2018, Ms. Bray also received a grant of 890 restricted stock units having a calculated value of approximately $65,000 at the date of grant. Ms. Bray continues to be an associate, and, in fiscal 2019, she may receive compensation and other benefits in amounts similar to or greater than those she received during fiscal 2018. ○ Jason Turner, a store manager for a Walmart Neighborhood Market, is the brother-in-law of John R. Furner, an Executive Officer. For fiscal 2018, Walmart paid Mr. Turner a salary of approximately $86,400, a payment pursuant to the cash incentive plan of approximately $52,000, and other benefits totaling approximately $12,300 (including Walmart’s matching contributions to Mr. Turner’s 401(k) Plan account and health insurance premiums). Mr. Turner continues to be an associate, and, in fiscal 2019, he may receive compensation and other benefits in amounts similar to or greater than those he received during fiscal 2018. ○ Stephen Furner, a store manager for a Walmart Neighborhood Market, is the father of John R. Furner, an Executive Officer. For fiscal 2018, Walmart paid Mr. Stephen Furner a salary of approximately $86,400, a payment pursuant to the cash incentive plan of approximately $55,000, and other benefits totaling approximately $100. Mr. Stephen Furner continues to be an associate, and, in fiscal 2019, he may receive compensation and other benefits in amounts similar to or greater than those he received during fiscal 2018.

34 Walmart | 2018 Proxy Statement • Corporate Governance

Other Transactions

During fiscal 2018, certain banking subsidiaries of a bank holding company that is collectively owned by Mr. Jim C. Walton, Mr. S. Robson Walton, and certain members of the Walton family and related trusts, made payments to Walmart in the aggregate amount of approximately $336,000 for supercenter, discount store, and Neighborhood Market banking facility rent pursuant to negotiated arrangements. The banking subsidiaries made other payments to Walmart pursuant to similar arrangements that were awarded by Walmart on a competitive-bid basis. The leases of banking facility space in various stores remains in effect, and we anticipate that in fiscal 2019 such banking subsidiaries will pay Walmart approximately $330,000 pursuant to those leases not awarded on a competitive-bid basis. Mr. Jim C. Walton is the father of Mr. Steuart L. Walton, a director of Walmart. We do not believe that either Walmart or the members of the Walton family have a direct or indirect material interest in any of the transactions between Walmart and the banking subsidiaries.

Director Compensation

Walmart’s compensation program for Outside Directors is intended to:

○ provide fair compensation commensurate with the work required to serve on the Board of a company with Walmart’s size, scope, and complexity; ○ align directors’ interests with the interests of Walmart shareholders; and ○ be easy to understand and communicate, both to our directors and to our shareholders.

Each year, the C