EX-1.01
EXHIBIT 1.01

CONFLICT MINERALS REPORT

Introduction

This Report has been prepared pursuant to Rule 13p-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, for the reporting period from January 1 to December 31, 2014.

This Report relates to the process undertaken for Apple products that were manufactured, or contracted to be manufactured, during calendar year 2014 and that contain gold, columbite-tantalite (coltan), cassiterite, wolframite, tantalum, tin, and tungsten (collectively, the “Subject Minerals”).

These products are Apple’s iPhone®, iPad®, Mac®, iPod®, Apple TV®, displays, and Apple accessories.* Third-party products that Apple retails but that it does not manufacture or contract to manufacture are outside of the scope of this Report.

When this Report uses the term “conflict-free,” it means the minerals, smelters or refiners have been verified as complying with the Conflict-Free Sourcing Initiative’s Conflict-Free Smelter Program (the “CFSP”) or an equivalent third-party audit program.

Apple’s Conflict Minerals Program

Apple is dedicated to ensuring ethical sourcing, and has made significant progress toward using only conflict-free minerals in its products. Rather than funnel its demand through a limited number of smelters and refiners, or avoid entirely those sourcing in Central Africa, Apple is expanding the base of smelters and refiners that have been verified as conflict-free.

Apple’s strategy of continuous engagement and accountability has driven real change. The number of conflict-free smelters and refiners in Apple’s supply chain has more than doubled in the past year, so that a majority of the identified and reported smelters and refiners as of December 31, 2014 have been verified as conflict-free. More than 88% of the identified smelters and refiners have either successfully completed conflict-free audits or have begun the audit process, and Apple is working with its suppliers to verify the rest or remove them from its supply chain.

Apple began investigating the uses of tantalum, tin, tungsten, and gold in its products in 2009. In 2010, Apple became one of the first companies to begin mapping its supply chain to the smelter or refiner level, in order to identify the smelters and refiners its suppliers use and to understand potential entry points into its supply chain for tantalum, tin, tungsten, and gold.