COLUMBIA ACORN TRUST
Notes to Portfolio of Investments

(a) Non-income producing security. (b) All or a portion of this security was on loan at March 31, 2017. The total market value of securities on loan at March 31, 2017 was $18,773,888. (c) The rate shown is the seven-day current annualized yield at March 31, 2017. (d) Investment made with cash collateral received from securities lending activity.

Abbreviation Legend

ADR American Depositary Receipt

Investments are valued using policies described in the Notes to Financial Statements in the most recent shareholder report.

At March 31, 2017, the approximate cost of securities for federal income tax purposes and the approximate aggregate gross unrealized appreciation and depreciation based on that cost was:

Federal

tax cost ($) Gross unrealized

appreciation ($) Gross unrealized

(depreciation) ($) Net unrealized

appreciation ($) 492,182,000 185,273,000 (8,606,000) 176,667,000

Fair value measurements

Various inputs are used in determining the value of the Fund’s investments, following the input prioritization hierarchy established by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). These inputs are summarized in the three broad levels listed below:

• Level 1 – quoted prices in active markets for identical securities

• Level 2 – prices determined using other significant observable inputs (including quoted prices for similar securities, interest rates, prepayment speeds, credit risk and others)

• Level 3 – prices determined using significant unobservable inputs where quoted prices or observable inputs are unavailable or less reliable (including management’s own assumptions about the factors market participants would use in pricing an investment)

The inputs or methodology used for valuing securities are not necessarily an indication of the risk associated with investing in those securities.

Examples of the types of securities in which the Fund would typically invest and how they are classified within this hierarchy are as follows. Typical Level 1 securities include exchange traded domestic equities, mutual funds whose net asset values are published each day and exchange traded foreign equities that are not statistically fair valued. Typical Level 2 securities include exchange traded foreign equities that are statistically fair valued, forward foreign currency exchange contracts and short-term investments valued at amortized cost. Additionally, securities fair valued by Columbia Wanger Asset Management’s Valuation Committee (the Committee) that rely on significant observable inputs are also included in Level 2. Typical Level 3 securities include any security fair valued by the Committee that relies on significant unobservable inputs.

The Committee is responsible for applying the Columbia Acorn Trust Portfolio Pricing Policy and the Columbia Wanger Asset Management pricing procedures (the Policies), which are approved by and subject to the oversight of the Board of Trustees.

The Committee meets as necessary, and no less frequently than quarterly, to determine fair values for securities for which market quotations are not readily available or for which Columbia Wanger Asset Management believes that available market quotations are unreliable. The Committee also reviews the continuing appropriateness of the Policies. In circumstances where a security has been fair valued, the Committee will also review the continuing appropriateness of the current value of the security. The Policies address, among other things: circumstances under which market quotations will be deemed readily available; selection of third party pricing vendors; appropriate pricing methodologies; events that require fair valuation and fair value techniques; circumstances under which securities will be deemed to pose a potential for stale pricing, including when securities are illiquid, restricted, or in default; and certain delegations of authority to determine fair values to the Fund’s investment manager. The Committee may also meet to discuss additional valuation matters, which may include review of back-testing results, review of time-sensitive information or approval of other valuation related actions, and to review the appropriateness of the Policies.

For investments categorized as Level 3, the significant unobservable inputs used in the fair value measurement of the Fund’s securities may include: (i) data specific to the issuer or comparable issuers, (ii) general market or specific sector news and (iii) quoted prices and specific or similar security transactions. The Committee considers this data and any changes from prior periods in order to assess the reasonableness of observable and unobservable inputs, any assumptions or internal models used to value those securities and changes in fair value. Significant changes in any of these factors could result in lower or higher fair value measurements. Various factors impact the frequency of monitoring (which may occur as often as daily), however the Committee may determine that changes to inputs, assumptions and models are not required with the same frequency.

The following table is a summary of the inputs used to value the Fund’s investments at March 31, 2017: