A decade of homelessness: Thousands in S.F. remain in crisis
Daytime disincentives

Just because the plan moved 3,000 people inside at night doesn’t mean they’re off the streets during the day.

The quality and amount of social services vary greatly between supportive housing complexes, and residents aren’t required to take advantage of them. Many residents either languish in their tiny rooms all day or panhandle.

Some argue that the behavior on the streets is out of control and needs to be dealt with.

Bill McConnell worked in quality management for the behavioral health division of the city’s Department of Public Health from 1975 to 2007. Essentially, he evaluated what worked and what didn’t when it came to how the city handled mental health.

He said the Ten Year Plan focused intensely on positive incentives to get homeless people off the streets, such as outreach, supportive housing and Project Homeless Connect to provide a one-stop shop for homeless people to access services. But a better approach, he believes, would be to add disincentives into the mix.

Despite several laws on the books that Newsom promoted (and that have been blasted by homeless advocates as being mean-spirited), there’s not much police enforcement of them. Newsom’s voter-approved 2010 ban on sitting or lying on sidewalks isn’t enforced much outside the Haight, for example.

More significantly, open-air drug dealing and drug use persist, public urination and defecation are widespread, and downright creepy behavior such as screaming at and threatening passersby is tolerated. The Ten Year Plan avoided much discussion of law enforcement.

“If you’re very tolerant of inappropriate behavior, you’re pretty likely to keep getting more of it,” McConnell said. “When I thought of myself as a professional observer, it never seemed to change. And it seems to be getting worse.”

Despite all these complaints, many of which Newsom agrees with, the former mayor remains glad he pushed for the plan because it united many disparate groups behind the idea that permanent housing is the right way.

“The plan was just setting expectations, setting standards and guiding principles,” he said. “If you fail to plan, you’re planning on failing.”

S.F.’s new ideas for ending chronic homelessness

San Francisco officials believe their decadelong attempt to place homeless people in permanent housing with services attached remains the smartest way to get them off the street, but they’re trying, or at least considering, several additional approaches to finally curb one of the city’s most stubborn problems. Here are some of the fresh ideas in the works:

Climbing up ‘housing ladder’

Mayor Ed Lee says the city’s next big push on homelessness should be creating a “housing ladder” so that people don’t get stuck at whatever rung they’re currently on, as so many do now.

Homeless people need to move into supportive housing, many of those residents need to move on to public housing, and many of those residents need to move on to affordable and market-rate housing.

“Self-sufficiency is one of our biggest challenges,” Lee said. “When I lived in public housing growing up in Seattle, our attitude was, ‘Get the heck out of here as fast as we can.’ Everybody in the family had to contribute. We’re not sure that’s the way things are in public housing, and we want to inspire that kind of effort.”

He said City Hall needs to foster a “spirit of advancement” through job training, employment assistance and education.

City officials and some homeless service providers are also beginning to talk about attaching some requirements to obtaining a supportive housing unit. Trent Rhorer, director of the city’s Human Services Agency, mentioned in a recent hearing on homelessness that perhaps residents should be required to spend 10 hours a week engaging in services or community activities.

Jeff Bialik, director of Catholic Charities, said, “We get someone into housing and the question is, ‘Is that it?’ I think sometimes for many people that sort of becomes it.

“Are we saying permanent, supportive housing is where they’re going to live for the rest of their lives, or are we saying it’s a place folks are going to move into and then move on? We haven’t really come to grips with that.”

Developing an integrated system to track use of homeless services

This was an idea pushed in the Ten Year Plan to Abolish Chronic Homelessness, but remarkably it still hasn’t happened.

Coordinated assessment refers to one common procedure for homeless people applying for emergency shelter, transitional short-term housing, permanent housing and access to other services. It would allow city officials to keep track of everyone who wants particular units and easily determine who should get them when one is available.

The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development is now requiring that cities that receive federal funds for homelessness adopt the system, and San Francisco is piloting a program next month. Bevan Dufty, Lee’s point man on homelessness, said this should help create movement within the system akin to Lee’s “housing ladder” idea.

Dufty wants to give priority to those who’ve been homeless the longest. Among those are “long-term shelter stayers” who practically live at shelters. They make up 19 percent of those in a shelter on any given night.

He also wants to prioritize finding housing for the very chronically homeless, those who’ve lived on the streets for 15 years or more. Dufty said he doesn’t know how many people fit into that category, but believes it’s a surprisingly large group.

Laura’s Law may force treatment

Supervisor Mark Farrell last month introduced Laura’s Law, which allows compelled treatment of mentally ill people in limited circumstances. He intended to take it to voters on the November ballot, but it appears he has the backing of enough supervisors to pass it through the standard legislative process this summer.

Allowing alcohol use at ‘wet house’

Dufty has been calling for the creation of a controversial “wet house” since 2010. He envisioned a facility based on one in Seattle where 75 chronic inebriates are assisted by staff who go on booze runs and disburse beer, wine and hard liquor like medicine. Dufty eventually got buy-in from Lee and other city officials, but is still trying to find a space.

In the meantime, the Department of Public Health is piloting a program in which it administers Vivitrol, an injectable drug that helps people not want to drink as much, to homeless alcoholics who agree to participate. So far, nine have signed on.

In addition, Swords to Plowshares has received a three-year grant worth $1.2 million a year to open a temporary-housing complex for drug-addicted and alcoholic homeless veterans. It will be in a converted Tenderloin SRO (single-room occupancy) hotel and should be ready next month, said Leon Winston, chief operating officer of the nonprofit, which helps homeless veterans. Fifteen veterans can live there at a given time.

Unlike at a wet house, the veterans won’t be allowed to drink at the facility, but there won’t be any drug testing, so they are allowed to keep drinking and using drugs off-site. It will be heavily staffed with social workers, drug and alcohol counselors, and other staff members to ideally help them curb their addictions and find permanent housing within six months.

Ongoing care at medical shelter