Trump complains about California taxes, but in SF, he’s got a sweet deal
“I have great property in California,” President Trump said during his visit to the state last week. But he added, “The taxes are way, way out of whack.”

Or maybe not.

One of Trump’s properties is the famous Bank of America building in San Francisco. The Trump Organization owns a 30 percent stake of 555 California St. The other 70 percent is held by Vornado Realty Trust, a real estate investment trust that bought out Trump’s former Hong Kong business partners in 2007.

The four parcels that make up the Bank of America building site have an assessed value of more than $1.2 billion. The annual property taxes come to $14.4 million.

That’s hardly chump change, but it’s still less than the Trump Organization would be paying in other states, according to the personal finance website WalletHub. It ranks California’s property tax rate — which is the same for both commercial and residential properties — as 34th highest in the nation.

That shouldn’t be a big surprise — after all, California gave the nation Proposition 13, the 1978 measure that sharply cut property taxes and limited annual increases.

And while tax experts tell us that no one has undertaken a state-by-state comparison of exclusively commercial property taxes, WalletHub’s figures for residential properties are at least instructive.

A homeowner in California, for instance, pays $3,237 a year in property taxes on a home assessed at the state’s median value of $409,300.

Property owners in New Jersey pay the most in the country — $7,601 on the median-assessed home — while those in Hawaii pay the least, $1,469, WalletHub said.

Property owners in both New York (home to Trump Tower) and Florida (home to Trump’s Mar-a-Lago resort) also pay higher taxes than those in California, coming in at 11th and 25th highest, respectively.

California’s property tax system “as a whole is in the middle of the pack,” said Jared Walczak, a senior policy analyst at the nonpartisan Tax Foundation research group in Washington, D.C.

He added, however, that Prop. 13’s ban on reassessing property until it’s sold has led to “an inequitable tax code” that favors longtime owners over new ones.

“That can mean the burden is extremely high for some homeowners and businesses and extremely attractive for others,” Walczak said.

The San Francisco tax assessor’s office tells us that 555 California was last reassessed in 2007, when Vornado Realty came aboard.

It’s worth noting that if the building were located in Miami, the annual property tax would total $25.4 million, according to an online estimator at the Dade County property appraiser’s office — nearly twice as much as the Trump Organization and its partners are paying in California.

“Trump has been a huge beneficiary of Prop. 13,” said Democratic Assemblyman Phil Ting, who used to be San Francisco’s tax assessor. “So I don’t know what he’s complaining about.”

Lethal lesson: While students across the Bay Area walked out of classes Wednesday in a call for stricter gun control laws, some 50 Oakland teachers and after-school workers were gathered in the auditorium of Cole Elementary School for a class on what to do in the event of a school shooting.

“Hide, run, fight? Run, hide, fight? Fight, hide, run? What are you going to do?” Chief Jeff Godown of the Oakland School Police Department asked as he went through his PowerPoint presentation.

Godown did not mince words, telling the school staff that shooters know that after the first shot, “they have only five to 10 minutes before the cavalry is going to show up, and they are out to inflict as much damage as humanly possible” in that time.

“I’m going to come and try and save you, but in that time, you are going to be the ones making decisions about what is best for you and your students,” Godown said.

His first piece of advice to teachers and their classes: “Get the hell out of Dodge as fast as possible.”

“That’s easier said than done, chief,” one teacher said. “If I’m in a classroom and I hear gunshots, I don’t know if it’s the left side or the right side of the building.”

The voluntary class was the first in a series that will run through April. The school district is considering making them mandatory for teachers and staff.

“There are no easy answers” for what to do when faced with a shooter, Godown said. “All we can do is get people thinking.”

But he’s sure of one thing: Arming teachers, as suggested by President Trump, is not the solution.

“That is just a knee-jerk reaction to a subject matter he knows nothing about,” Godown said.

David McKay, who teaches elementary school, agreed: “I think that is the worst idea in the world.”

Last word: From San Francisco mayoral candidate Supervisor London Breed, who lost her job as acting mayor, reacting to news that 60 of her campaign ads had been ordered removed from bus shelters for violating a ban on political advertising on Muni:

“I guess I just can’t get comfortable anywhere without someone trying to throw me out.”