Kamala Harris takes measured approach to probing SF cop shootings
In TV ads for her U.S. Senate campaign, California Attorney General Kamala Harris describes herself as fearlessly taking on “powerful” interests on behalf of “voiceless and vulnerable” Californians.

But some civil rights advocates, legal scholars and community leaders say California’s top law enforcement official hasn’t done enough when it comes to investigating officer-involved shootings in San Francisco, where she was elected twice as district attorney.

The calls for her to get involved grew louder after the fatal shooting last month of an unarmed African American woman by a San Francisco police sergeant. Hours after the 21st officer-involved fatal shooting of his five-year tenure, San Francisco Police Chief Greg Suhr resigned.

For months, ever since the Dec. 2 fatal police shooting of Mario Woods in the Bayview — a shooting that drew national attention after a video of it went viral — community members and victims’ advocates have been urging Harris to take a more direct role in investigating the San Francisco Police Department.

Wait-and-see stance

But Harris — the front-runner in the race to replace retiring Democratic Sen. Barbara Boxer — has declined, waiting to see the results of a federal examination of the department first.

“I think the California attorney general should be playing a much more aggressive role in investigating civil rights violations by police, including this one in San Francisco,” said Erwin Chemerinsky, dean of the UC Irvine School of Law whom National Jurist magazine named one of the most influential people in legal education in 2014.

“But what I can’t answer is why this is not occurring,” he said. “I do not know.”

Neither does San Francisco Public Defender Jeff Adachi, who said, “It’s mind-boggling to me why the attorney general has refused to step in. Particularly when San Francisco is suffering.

“Could this last shooting have been prevented had the AG not refused to step in?” Adachi asked. “Her office’s involvement would have signaled to police that there will be increased oversight.”

Harris said she has assigned the head of the state’s civil rights division to monitor the progress of the collaborative review of the SFPD by the community policing division of the U.S. Department of Justice.

“I’m waiting to see the outcome of their process and recommendations,” Harris said during a recent interview in San Francisco. “I’ve been very clear that if there is any refusal or failure to cooperate and comply, I’m ready to open a practice-and-pattern investigation” into the department.

She bristled at criticism that it was a by-the-book response to the community’s concerns and that the situation called for something more dramatic.

“It’s not by the book. It’s not by the book,” Harris said. “I’m saying that I’ve assigned the head of the civil rights division of the California Department of Justice to monitor what’s going on at a local level between the United States Department of Justice and a police department. That’s about actually being engaged — actively.”

Phelicia Jones, an organizer with the Justice for Mario Woods Coalition, said Harris “is not actively engaged. And if she is, whom is she engaged with?

“How many more people need to die before she steps in?” said Jones, who voted twice for Harris for attorney general and helped organize events for her first campaign for San Francisco district attorney. “We don’t even know that you (Harris) care. You have turned your back on the people who got you to where you are.”

Adachi said that the federal review of the SFPD that Harris refers to “is voluntary and lacks teeth.” While he called the review by the Justice Department’s Office of Community Oriented Policing Services — known as COPS — “a step in the right direction,” it would not have the power to enforce changes.

Brown’s example

Adachi would like to see Harris investigate the department in the same way that then-California Attorney General Jerry Brown looked into the use of force by the Maywood (Los Angeles County) Police Department in 2007. After a 16-month investigation found eight alleged incidents of excessive force and other wrongdoing, Brown secured a court order to institute new training and other reforms for the department.

“I’m dead serious about this,” Brown said in announcing the results of the investigation in 2009. “When you have rogue cops, it’s just intolerable in a free society.” In 2010, the tiny city folded its 60-member Police Department because it was unable to buy insurance.

But that investigation was somewhat unusual for California’s top law enforcement agency to undertake, said Peter Bibring, the police practices director for the American Civil Liberties Union of California.

“The California Department of Justice has never been particularly active in investigating police misconduct in California,” Bibring said. “And that hasn’t changed under Kamala Harris.”

Bibring said that because so many people have lost faith in the ability of local police departments to investigate themselves, there is a need for some sort of independent legal body to perform those examinations.

“In that context, there is certainly space for the attorney general’s office to do more,” Bibring said. “The attorney general is free from the day-to-day interaction with local officers — they’re not interacting with police like (local) prosecutors are. And they’re in California and closer to the ground than the U.S. Department of Justice, that’s based in D.C.”

When Adachi wrote to Harris in April to request a civil rights investigation, he was disappointed that her office didn’t reply in writing. “Instead, they replied on social media,” Adachi said. “That signals to us that her office will do nothing.”

Longtime Oakland civil rights attorney John Burris is among those who say Harris hasn’t done enough when it comes to taking on what he calls “evidence of deep-rooted practice of racial bias” in the San Francisco Police Department, including the police shooting death of Woods, whose family he represents.

Burris said he wrote to her last month to “implore her to take immediate action before another person is killed or targeted.”

“I know she cares about these issues — I’ve known her for a long time,” Burris said. “But what the community is raising is that they want her to be more actively involved. Our issue of being involved means conducting the investigation herself, with her office.”

Like Chemerinsky, neither Burris, Adachi nor Bibring would speculate about whether Harris’ reticence is rooted in her Senate campaign. Democrat Harris faces Rep. Loretta Sanchez, D-Anaheim, former state Republican Party Chairmen Tom Del Beccaro and Duf Sundheim and Silicon Valley businessman Ron Unz, also a Republican, in a field of 34 candidates in Tuesday’s primary. The top two finishers in the primary, regardless of their party affiliation, will advance to the general election in November.

This is not the first time Harris has stuck to her position even as there were loud calls for her to change it.

Just a few months after she upset incumbent Terence Hallinan to become San Francisco’s district attorney, San Francisco police Officer Isaac Espinoza was shot to death while on patrol in the Bayview. Three days after the shooting in 2004, Harris said she wouldn’t seek the death penalty against the man arrested in the case, David Hill.

Police groups were outraged, not just at her decision but also at the speed with which she reached it. Typically, prosecutors wait months and study many factors before deciding whether to seek the death penalty. But Harris ran for office on her opposition to the death penalty, which was in tune with what polls said San Francisco voters wanted.

There was political blowback, too. At Espinoza’s funeral, fellow Democrat Sen. Dianne Feinstein — a former San Francisco mayor — rose before the congregation at St. Mary’s Cathedral and said: “This is not only the definition of tragedy, it’s the special circumstance called for by the death penalty law.”

Grieving family members and blue-uniformed police who packed the church stood and cheered.

Those repercussions continued during Harris’ first run for statewide office in 2010, when many law enforcement organizations supported former Los Angeles County District Attorney Steve Cooley. But Harris won and sought to repair those relationships. Four years later — helped by the power of incumbency — many of those same organizations supported her re-election.

Such consensus-building is what Harris said she would use to take on issues she might face in the Senate, like immigration reform, where partisans seem miles apart on overhauling what nearly everyone agrees is a broken system.

“One of the ways that I have found to have people really open up their hearts and mind is to understand the number of undocumented immigrants who are victims of crime,” Harris said. “If there is a victim of a rape, I want her to be able to run in the middle of the street and wave down the passing patrol car, the local cop, and not be afraid to do so thinking that’s a (federal immigration) agent.”

Yet in recent Senate candidate debates, Harris’ Republican opponents have criticized her approach in general as too cautious, not bold enough. To them, she said that she is “fearless, yes; reckless, no.”

Joe Garofoli is The San Francisco Chronicle’s senior political writer. Email: jgarofoli@sfchronicle.com Twitter: joegarofoli