SF DA’s office to take lead in investigating police shootings

Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close SF DA’s office to take lead in investigating police shootings 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

The San Francisco district attorney’s office is a step closer to becoming the lead investigator in all shootings involving city police officers, a move designed to ease concerns about cops policing themselves.

Mayor Ed Lee has approved a final round of funding for a new unit in the district attorney’s office that will take the lead in the shootings, officials said Wednesday. The idea is not only to promote independent probes, officials said, but to help the district attorney’s office clear a backlog of 10 fatal shooting cases dating as far back as 2014 that remain open.

But some law enforcement experts worry that giving prosecutors rather than homicide detectives the lead role could degrade the quality of investigations. The shift could also test an uneasy relationship between police and George Gascón, the district attorney and former police chief .

The funding of the new unit, which still must be staffed up, comes amid a growing call for expanded police accountability from civil rights activists and others in the Bay Area and across the nation. In modern history, only one police officer in the region — former BART O fficer Johannes Mehserle — has been charged for an on-duty killing.

The fight over handling these cases has been intense in San Francisco, where officer-involved shootings in the past two years — in particular, the video-recorded killing of Mario Woods in the Bayview neighborhood — prompted a pending U.S. Department of Justice review of the police force.

Currently, the district attorney’s office conducts an independent investigation into police shootings in the city before deciding whether to file charges against officers. But the Police Department plays the lead role in critical components of the investigation, including interviewing witnesses and handling physical evidence.

“When a San Francisco police officer is involved in a shooting, SFPD is currently the lead agency investigating the case,” said district attorney’s office spokesman Max Szabo. “Even if it’s a justifiable shooting, the community is going to have a difficult time believing the outcome of the investigatio n.”

After the mayor’s approval this week of a final round of funding, the city has allocated $1.8 million for 14 positions in the newly created Independent Investigations Bureau. Six of the new positions will be for investigators, bumping the total number from 33 to 39. No hires have been made, and there’s no firm timeline on when the bureau will be operating, Szabo said.

The money comes from a $20 million police-reform budget, which aims to improve public safety and community-police relations, officials said. Funding for six of the positions was approved this summer, and the remaining eight were authorized Tuesday.

The new unit will be in charge of conducting investigations of officer-involved shootings as well as other potential instances of law-enforcement abuse. It will work independently from the rest of the district attorney’s office to address concerns that the close working relationship between police and prosecutors presents an inherent conflict. Gascón retains authority over the unit.

The details of the new arrangement still need to be fleshed out. Officials said a “memorandum of understanding” is in the works that should spell out what, exactly, it will look like to have the district attorney’s office running the show during police shooting investigations — and what role San Francisco police will play moving forward.

“To restore faith in law enforcement and ensure there is accountability for misconduct, these investigations must be objective and independent,” Gascón said. “That’s why this is so important. It’s an essential step toward restoring trust.”

The planned shift follows a rash of controversial police shootings in San Francisco, which prompted widespread protests, the Department of Justice review of police practices and the resignation in May of Chief Greg Suhr.

Some have questioned whether the district attorney’s office is the best agency to head the investigations. While San Francisco police officials did not return requests for comment Wednesday, Sgt. John Crudo of the internal affairs division told The Chronicle in May that the Police Department is the only agency in the city with the expertise to investigate complicated police shootings.

“If somebody else did it in this county,” he said, “you’re losing a lot of expertise and you’re losing a lot of resources.”

The San Francisco Police Officers Association supports the “general idea” of separate and independent investigations, but doesn’t believe local prosecutors should lead the charge. Instead, police union adviser Nathan Ballard suggested neighboring agencies, or a multiagency task force, should head the effort — as recommended by President Obama’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing.

“A city or county prosecutor’s office is inherently compromised to judge a shooting,” Ballard said. “There’s an inherent conflict if you’re leading an investigation and also charged with prosecuting the defendant.”

The district attorney’s office has struggled to promptly complete its investigations into police shootings, taking an average of 15 months to decide whether or not to file charges.

Jason Elliott, Lee’s deputy chief of staff, said the mayor’s efforts to improve policing in the face of criticism cannot succeed without gaining community trust.

“A key to rebuilding trust is closure for families and officers, and that only happens when investigations are resolved,” Elliot said. “Two years is too long for some families and officers to wait, and that is why we are funding these positions.”

The district attorney’s office attributes the lag to staffing shortages. Currently, the agency has to pull investigators from other assignments to examine police shootings.

Some observers, including Ballard, have suggested the state attorney general would be a better choice to lead investigations of San Francisco police shootings. The proposal has sparked discussion at City Hall and could still be adopted in the future, forcing the district attorney’s office to step aside.

“More independence is always better,” said John Crew, a former police practices expert with the American Civil Liberties Union. “But you also need to deal with the practical problems, like whether or not the attorney general would be staffed in a way where it can roll out to a shooting quickly.”

Kristin Ford, a spokeswoman for Attorney General Kamala Harris, said Wednesday that Harris “has advocated to the governor, the speaker of the Assembly, and the Senate president pro tem for the necessary resources to create new teams within the attorney general’s office to conduct criminal investigations of officer-involved shootings, including working with San Francisco.”

Joaquin Palomino is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: jpalomino@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @JoaquinPalomino

Police shootings backlogged

San Francisco prosecutors have yet to decide whether officers who fatally shot the following 10 people should face charges or be cleared:

Giovany Contreras-Sandoval: Shot Sept. 25, 2014

O’Shane Evans: Oct. 7, 2014

Mathew Hoffman: Jan. 4, 2015

Amilcar Perez-Lopez: Feb. 26, 2015

Alice Brown: March 17, 2015

Herbert Benitez: Oct. 15, 2015

Javier Ivan Lopez Garcia: Nov. 11, 2015

Mario Woods: Dec. 2, 2015

Luis Gongora: April 7, 2016

Jessica Williams: May 19, 2016