Kamala Harris sees safeguards in D.A.s prosecuting police killings

California Attorney General Kamala Harris. California Attorney General Kamala Harris. Photo: Pete Kiehart, The Chronicle Buy photo Photo: Pete Kiehart, The Chronicle Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Kamala Harris sees safeguards in D.A.s prosecuting police killings 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

The furor over the non-indictments of white police officers for killing unarmed black men in Missouri and New York has led to widespread calls for states to take such cases away from local district attorneys, who work with police every day and often depend on their support for re-election.

“You absolutely need independent prosecutors,” said Barbara Arnwine, president of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights.

Many advocacy groups and legal commentators have called for a new system of reviewing potential criminal cases against police officers. They argue that a special prosecutor, perhaps affiliated with the state attorney general’s office, would be insulated enough from police and politics to weigh the issues objectively and make decisions the public would trust.

California Attorney General Kamala Harris sees it differently.

“I don’t think it would be good public policy to take the discretion from elected district attorneys,” Harris, formerly San Francisco’s district attorney, said in an interview. “I don’t think there’s an inherent conflict. ... Where there are abuses, we have designed the system to address them.”

Harris said the system has built-in safeguards: Locally elected prosecutors are accountable to their communities, and when a district attorney is not following the law or has a conflict of interest, the attorney general has the power to come in and take over the case.

Missouri, N.Y. cases

The debate arises from decisions by local prosecutors in both states to refer the homicides — the fatal shooting of 18-year-old Michael Brown after a confrontation with an officer in Ferguson, Mo., and the choke-hold death of 43-year-old Eric Garner in Staten Island, N.Y., after police tried to arrest him for selling untaxed cigarettes — to grand juries rather than filing charges themselves. Contrary to standard practice, neither prosecutor asked the grand jury for an indictment, and none was issued.

The U.S. Justice Department is investigating both incidents and could seek federal indictments on civil rights charges. The department is also looking into overall police practices in Ferguson and could demand court-supervised reforms, as it has done in other cities.

But critics of the current procedures say they fail to hold individual officers accountable.

“The system we have in place now is not serving the public and is not serving justice because of a conflict of interest,” said LaDoris Cordell, a former Santa Clara County judge who is now San Jose’s independent police auditor. “The decision about whether to prosecute police officers should be taken away from prosecutors who work hand in hand, on a daily basis, with police officers.”

An outside prosecutor, either part of the attorney general’s office or chosen by that office, would “eliminate the conflict and even the appearance of conflict,” Cordell said.

Natasha Minsker, legislative director for the American Civil Liberties Union in California, recalled the outcry after the fatal shooting of unarmed passenger Oscar Grant by BART police Officer Johannes Mehserle on an Oakland transit platform in 2009.

Attorney general’s role

Mehserle, who said he had mistaken his gun for a Taser, was convicted of involuntary manslaughter by a jury in Los Angeles and served 11 months in prison. Although Alameda County District Attorney Tom Orloff had filed murder charges against Mehserle, Minsker said many people dissatisfied with the verdict wondered whether Orloff’s office had tried hard enough — suspicions that wouldn’t have arisen, she said, with an independent prosecutor.

Minsker said any elected official, including the attorney general, faces a potential conflict of interest in such cases. But Stanford law Professor David Sklansky, a former federal prosecutor, said police prosecutions should be handled by the attorney general’s office, noting that the California Constitution authorizes the attorney general to intervene whenever she concludes a district attorney is failing to enforce state law.

In federal cases, he said, a Watergate-era law, now expired, allowed the government to appoint an independent counsel to investigate high-ranking officials. Experience with that law was “not encouraging,” Sklansky said, and the Justice Department now appoints its own special prosecutors for cases beyond the scope of a U.S. attorney’s office.

Harris said no such mechanisms are needed in California.

Under the current system, she said, “if I decided that there was a case where there was a local prosecutor who was breaking the law, who was committing prosecutorial misconduct, we would come in and take the case,” she said.

That hasn’t happened since she took office in 2011. But she cited past cases in which the attorney general, first Bill Lockyer in 2000 and then Jerry Brown in 2009, obtained court orders intended to curb abusive police practices in Riverside and the Los Angeles County community of Maywood.

Neither of those cases involved criminal prosecutions, which would have required the attorney general to second-guess a local district attorney’s decision not to file charges. Harris has no record of prosecuting police, but as district attorney she took heat from police and political opponents for refusing to seek the death penalty against the killer of a San Francisco police officer in 2004, a decision consistent with her policy of not filing capital charges.

“I always, as DA, did whatever I believed and my team believed was the right thing to do, and I wasn’t concerned with popularity,” she said in last week’s interview.

Restoring confidence

Rather than establishing a special prosecutor’s office, Harris said, California and its local governments can restore public confidence by bringing police closer to the public: recruiting more diverse officers who “speak the language, the cultural language of the community,” improving their training and outfitting them with body cameras, while continuing efforts to reduce inequities in sentencing.

Arnwine, of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights, was unconvinced.

“You can have all the body cameras you want, but if you don’t have good standards for misconduct and excessive force, body cameras are meaningless,” she said. “And you need independent review.”

Bob Egelko is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer.

E-mail: begelko@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @egelko