Truancy costs us all OPEN FORUM Depriving a Child of an Education Is a Crime

When Michael was in kindergarten, he missed more than 80 days of school. He was not ill and no one from Michael's family ever called to say why he was not attending school.

When I was elected district attorney, I learned that 5,500 students in San Francisco were habitually truant and - shockingly - 44 percent of the truant students were in elementary school. That is when I partnered with the San Francisco Unified School District to combat school truancy. At the time, many asked why the city's chief prosecutor was concerned with the problem of school attendance. The answer was simple, and as our partnership now enters its fourth year, the reason remains the same: a child going without an education is tantamount to a crime.

Despite his young age, Michael's truancy makes him far more likely to be arrested or fall victim to a crime later in life. In San Francisco, over 94 percent of all homicide victims under the age of 25 are high school dropouts. Statewide, two-thirds of prison inmates are high school dropouts.

Combatting truancy is a smart approach to crime prevention. Every fall I send out letters to parents of all SFUSD students informing them that truancy is against the law. During the school year, prosecutors from my office hold mediations with parents and truant students to reinforce this message and urge them to get help to improve their children's attendance. In most cases, attendance improves.

When it does not, my office prosecutes parents in a specialized truancy court we created that combines close court monitoring with tailored family services. To date, I have prosecuted 20 parents of young children for truancy. The penalty for truancy charged as a misdemeanor is a fine of up to $2,500 or up to a year of jail. Our groundbreaking strategy has worked. After Michael's parents did not respond to repeated pleas from the school district to get him in class, my investigators served his parents with criminal complaints. His parents appeared in court and agreed to work to get needed services and get Michael back in school. Michael missed only three days the following school year. He got extra attention from teachers to get on track and one parent has even become a school volunteer.

The majority of parents who have been brought to truancy court have dramatically improved their children's attendance. In the last year alone, truancy among elementary school students declined on average by 20 percent. In this new school year, my office will work closely with school district staff to expand our strategy to include older truant students.

Preventing truancy protects precious public resources in the midst of California's worst economic crisis. The crimes dropouts commit cost the state $1.1 billion per year, according to the UC Santa Barbara California Dropout Research Project. Adding in the social and medical costs, and wage taxes and associated economic losses, the report estimates that dropouts cost the state more than $24 billion a year. As the elected district attorney for the City and County of San Francisco, I see what happens on the back end of school failures: young lives are being lost to street violence or prison time at an appalling rate. While we must invest in effective law enforcement, we must also take seriously the task of keeping our kids in school. Children like Michael will either get their education in the streets or in the school. The fabric of our community, and the future of our economy, depend on our ability to ensure that learning happens in the classroom.

This article has been corrected since it appeared in print editions.