Ricardo Lara glad that Steve Poizner “repents” for past immigration positions

State Sen. Ricardo Lara, D-Bell Gardens (Los Angeles County), a candidate for state insurance commissioner, sounded strangely coy about whether he plans to attack one of his rivals, Steve Poizner, for the hardline positions Poizner took on immigration during the bare-knuckle 2010 GOP gubernatorial primary that the then-Republican lost to Meg Whitman.

At the time, Poizner supported cutting “taxpayer-funded benefits” for “illegal aliens,” including in-state tuition at public colleges. He wanted the California National Guard to assist federal authorities in patrolling the U.S.-Mexican border. He supported Arizona’s controversial AB1070, which made failing to carry immigration documentation a crime and gave law enforcement officers broad powers to detain anyone they believed to be in the country illegally. He opposed sanctuary cities.

Poizner, a wealthy technology entrepreneur who is running for his old job as insurance commissioner as a nonpartisan candidate, told The Chronicle that he’s changed on many of those positions. He no longer wants to cut tuition benefits to undocumented immigrants and said his support of AB1070 was a mistake. He said time he spent with Ohio Gov. John Kasich, whom he supported in the 2016 GOP presidential primaries, softened his views on immigration.

It’s likely that Lara will attack Poizner on these issues, given that he has made immigration issues and resistance to President Trump part of his campaign. But he demurred to say whether he would during an interview with The Chronicle editorial board this week.

“Some of us have the luxury to say ‘I’m sorry’ and get a pass,” Lara told The Chronicle during an interview with its editorial board. “I’m glad he repents what he said. It’s an important part of his coming to terms with the new California reality.”

Lara was asked to clarify if he was inferring that Poizner could “get a pass” because he’s a rich white guy.

“You said that, I didn’t,” Lara said. “I just think people are treated differently. If some of us made a mistake like that we wouldn’t be able to recover. That’s what I’m saying.”

Lara’s challenge is that unless he gets help from an independent expenditure group, his campaign might not have the cash on hand to let voters decide.

Lara has only $178, 144 cash on hand, according to campaign finance disclosures filed through April 21. One of his Democratic rivals, Los Angeles physician Asif Mahmood, reported $905,842 cash on hand — much of it transferred from his ill-fated campaign for lieutenant governor that he quit earlier this year to run for insurance commissioner. And while Poizner only has $399, 018 cash on hand, he’s a multimillionaire thanks to his technology career and has said he won’t be shy about funding his campaign, if necessary.

Said Lara: “It’s very difficult to raise money for a very niche position like this. One of my constituents told me, ‘I heard you’re going to leave the Senate to sell insurance.’ I don’t know,” Lara said and laughed, “maybe I can make more money that way.”

Joe Garofoli is the San Francisco Chronicle’s senior political writer. Email: jgarofoli@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @joegarofoli