John Cox says he opposes family separations at border, echoes Trump's call for congressional action

FILE - In this May 23, 2018, file photo, Republican gubernatorial candidate John Cox address supporters at the Sacramento County Republican Party headquarters in Sacramento, Calif. FILE - In this May 23, 2018, file photo, Republican gubernatorial candidate John Cox address supporters at the Sacramento County Republican Party headquarters in Sacramento, Calif. Photo: Rich Pedroncelli / Associated Press Photo: Rich Pedroncelli / Associated Press Image 1 of / 27 Caption Close John Cox says he opposes family separations at border, echoes Trump's call for congressional action 1 / 27 Back to Gallery

California Republican gubernatorial candidate John Cox stated that he is opposed to separating children from their families at the Southern border and echoed President Trump's call for congressional action on the issue.

"I'm against separating parents and children, I'm a father. I have four daughters. That's a congressional problem," Cox said during a Monday rally in Sacramento. "I hope we get a congressional solution very soon."

Speaking at a rally in support of gas tax repeal efforts, CA GOP gubernatorial candidate @TheRealJohnHCox says he's against "separating parents and children. I'm a father. I have four daughters. That's a congressional problem." Full Q/A below: pic.twitter.com/Le65Guf1TG — Kody Leibowitz (@kodyleibowitz) June 18, 2018

This is a sentiment expressed by President Trump himself, who blamed congressional Democrats for the recent family separations at the border.

"Democrats can fix their forced family breakup at the Border by working with Republicans on new legislation, for a change!" Trump tweeted on Saturday.

Trump administration officials have repeatedly stated that they are merely enforcing pre-existing laws that mandate separating children from their parents at the border, however the Washington Post's fact checkers gave this claim a "Four Pinocchios" rating.

The fact check article explains that the separations are a direct result of the Trump administration's new "zero-tolerance policy" that calls for the criminal prosecution of anyone who attempts to cross the border. When families are arrested at the border, children are transferred to the custody of the Office of Refugee Resettlement while their parents await prosecution and potential deportation.

"The Trump administration owns this family-separation policy and its spin deserves Four Pinocchios," the article concludes.

MORE: Trump hugs flag after defending immigration policy.

"I hate the children being taken away," Trump told reporters on Friday. "The Democrats have to change their law. That's their law."

Now Playing:

"The president of the United States has tried to solve this problem," Cox said. "Get the politicians together and solve this problem, get a plan that works so we can have an immigration system where we get people in this country and we don't separate women and children."