Pelosi brother-in-law not tied to solar project POLITICS































Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle Image 1 of / 9 Caption Close Image 1 of 9 Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi greets a few of the brewers before holding a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday September 29, 2011. The brewery owner Keith Greggor is to her right. The meeting was called to discuss House Democrats' "Make It In America" initiative, President Obama's American Jobs Act, and how Congress can best help small businesses grow and hire. less Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi greets a few of the brewers before holding a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday September 29, 2011. The ... more Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle Image 2 of 9 Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi speaks to the media following her roundtable discussions. Pelosi, held a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewery, in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday September 29, 2011, to discuss the House Democrats' "Make It In America" initiative, President Obama's American Jobs Act, and how Congress can best help small businesses grow and hire. less Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi speaks to the media following her roundtable discussions. Pelosi, held a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewery, in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday ... more Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle Image 3 of 9 Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi,(top left center) held a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday September 29, 2011, to discuss the House Democrats' "Make It In America" initiative, President Obama's American Jobs Act, and how Congress can best help small businesses grow and hire. less Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi,(top left center) held a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday September 29, 2011, to discuss the House ... more Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle Image 4 of 9 Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi held a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday September 29, 2011, to discuss the House Democrats' "Make It In America" initiative, President Obama's American Jobs Act, and how Congress can best help small businesses grow and hire. less Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi held a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday September 29, 2011, to discuss the House Democrats' "Make It In ... more Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle Image 5 of 9 Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi speaks with small business owner Mark Dwight of Rickshaw Bags, before sitting down for a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday September 29, 2011, to discuss the House Democrats' "Make It In America" initiative, President Obama's American Jobs Act, and how Congress can best help small businesses grow and hire. less Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi speaks with small business owner Mark Dwight of Rickshaw Bags, before sitting down for a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, ... more Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle Image 6 of 9 Joined at thre front of the table by Kate Sofis, executive director of SFMADE and Keith Greggor, owner of Anchor Steam beer, , Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi held a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday September 29, 2011. Discussing the House Democrats' "Make It In America" initiative, President Obama's American Jobs Act, and how Congress can best help small businesses grow and hire. less Joined at thre front of the table by Kate Sofis, executive director of SFMADE and Keith Greggor, owner of Anchor Steam beer, , Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi held a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the ... more Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle Image 7 of 9 Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi speaks with small business owner David Wolfgren, before sitting down for a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday September 29, 2011, to discuss the House Democrats' "Make It In America" initiative, President Obama's American Jobs Act, and how Congress can best help small businesses grow and hire. less Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi speaks with small business owner David Wolfgren, before sitting down for a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday ... more Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle Image 8 of 9 Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi holds a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday September 29, 2011, to discuss the House Democrats' "Make It In America" initiative, President Obama's American Jobs Act, and how Congress can best help small businesses grow and hire. less Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi holds a roundtable with local manufacturers, at the Anchor Steam Brewing Co., in San Francisco, Ca., on Thursday September 29, 2011, to discuss the House Democrats' "Make It In ... more Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle Image 9 of 9 Pelosi brother-in-law not tied to solar project 1 / 9 Back to Gallery

SANTA MONICA -- Department of Energy officials and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi have slammed as absurd reports from conservative blogs that inflated the connection between Pelosi's brother-in-law and a Nevada solar power project that received a $737 million federal government loan guarantee this week.

SolarReserve, based in Santa Monica, received the loan guarantee to build a 110-megawatt solar-thermal plant in Tonopah, Nev., that will use the sun's heat to create steam to drive a turbine.

Among SolarReserve's investors is Pacific Corporate Group, a private-equity firm headquartered in La Jolla (San Diego County). Ronald Pelosi, the brother-in-law of the House Democratic leader and a former president of San Francisco's Board of Supervisors, is an executive with the firm.

That connection was enough for a blog at the conservative Weekly Standard to erroneously trumpet the headline, "Crony Capitalism: $737 million loan given to Pelosi's brother-in-law."

Drudge Report, the widely read conservative online aggregator, picked up the story and soon conservative media circles were ablaze with what they thought was the next Solyndra - the failed Fremont solar firm that received a $528 million federal loan.

The story disappeared from the Drudge site by Thursday afternoon.

Ronald Pelosi joined Pacific Corporate Group in April, roughly three years after it had invested in SolarReserve, a company official confirmed Thursday. The official said Ronald Pelosi doesn't stand to profit or lose from the firm's stake in SolarReserve because he doesn't have an interest in the fund that made that investment.

The Pacific Corporate Group official said Thursday that no one from the firm had contacted the White House in connection with the application.

"This is an absurd suggestion," Department of Energy press secretary Damien LaVera said of any connection between Ronald Pelosi and the loan guarantee announcement. "Many months of rigorous technical, financial and legal due diligence was done by nonpolitical career employees to scrutinize every aspect of this transaction - over a period of years.

"It was approved because it meets all the requirements of the program - helping America win the clean energy race and create entire new industries for American workers."

Nancy Pelosi, at an event Thursday in San Francisco to drum up support for President Obama's jobs plan, told The Chronicle that she was not familiar with the solar firm, its federal loan application or any association her brother-in-law had with the firm.

Ronald Pelosi is "a great guy," she said, adding that she was sorry he had been "dragged into this."

The solar project has been endorsed by Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., and Republicans including Rep. Dean Heller, R-Nev., whose district includes the plant site. On Nov. 3, 2009, former Nevada Gov. Jim Gibbons, a Republican, wrote a letter to Energy Secretary Steven Chu asking him to approve the plan, which he estimated would result in "4,000 indirect U.S. jobs."

Gibbons wrote that the project would "deliver on jobs and protect the taxpayer by having an extremely viable project and a solid implementation plan."