FACT CHECK: Did Hillary Clinton Say 'We Must Destroy Syria for Israel' in a Leaked E-Mail?
Following controversial airstrikes on Syria in April 2018, a 2017 article published by repeat offender YourNewsWire.com with the claim that Hillary Clinton voiced support for destroying Syria in a “leaked” e-mail popped up and began to circulate again:

Lest We Forget – Hillary Clinton: We Must Destroy Syria For israel https://t.co/VxkzUu1IkE pic.twitter.com/Zf4iagpqsv — Michael Lee (@MichaelLee2009) April 15, 2018

The piece included a screenshot of what were purportedly Clinton’s views taken from an e-mail, as well as quotes:

Clinton Email: We Must Destroy Syria For Israel […] “The best way to help Israel deal with Iran’s growing nuclear capability is to help the people of Syria overthrow the regime of Bashar Assad,” Clinton forthrightly starts off by saying. Even though all US intelligence reports had long dismissed Iran’s “atom bomb” program as a hoax (a conclusion supported by the International Atomic Energy Agency), Clinton continues to use these lies to “justify” destroying Syria in the name of Israel. She specifically links Iran’s mythical atom bomb program to Syria because, she says, Iran’s “atom bomb” program threatens Israel’s “monopoly” on nuclear weapons in the Middle East.

A nearly identical claim (since deleted) was published by a separate site in March 2016. Both attribute the text of the purported e-mail to Clinton during her tenure as Secretary of State, a position she held for approximately four years between 2009 and 2013.

The text is indeed a part of WikiLeaks’ “Hillary Clinton Email Archive,” and the title search returns three documents in that data set. The same document was also available via FOIA.state.gov [PDF].

Although its content was characterized as an e-mail authored by Hillary Clinton, that is misleading. It appears that she actually received and forwarded an attachment from James P. Rubin. In all three documents (two forwards and an attachment) it is clear that Rubin authored and sent the commentary to Clinton, stating in his preface that the then-Secretary of State “may not agree” with his stance on Syria: