Southern Poverty Law Center
It’s difficult to live in the South without being reminded that its states once comprised a renegade nation known as the Confederate States of America. Schools, parks, streets, dams and other public works are named for its generals. Courthouses, capitols and public squares are adorned with resplendent statues of its heroes and towering memorials to the soldiers who died. U.S. military bases bear the names of its leaders. And, speckling the Southern landscape are thousands of Civil War markers and plaques.

Note: The map below includes symbols and monuments that have been removed. To view only the active symbols, uncheck the "Removed symbols" box.

View the full map.

The South even has its own version of Mount Rushmore — the Confederate Memorial Carving, a three-acre, high-relief sculpture depicting Jefferson Davis, Robert E. Lee and Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson on the face of Stone Mountain near Atlanta.

There is nothing remotely comparable in the North to honor the winning side of the Civil War.

For decades, those opposed to public displays honoring the Confederacy raised their objections, but with little success. A notable exception was a Southern Poverty Law Center suit that, relying on an obscure state law, led to the removal of the Confederate battle flag from the Alabama Capitol in 1993. Another was a 2000 compromise between South Carolina lawmakers and the NAACP that moved the flag from its perch above the Capitol dome to a monument on the State House grounds.

But everything changed on June 17, 2015 — just five days short of the 150th anniversary of the last shot of the Civil War.

That day in June, a white supremacist killed nine African-American parishioners at the “Mother Emanuel” church in Charleston, a place of worship renowned for its place in civil rights history.

As the nation recoiled in horror, photos showing the gunman with the Confederate flag were discovered online. Almost immediately, political leaders across the South were besieged with calls to remove the flag and other Confederate symbols from public spaces.

In the weeks that followed, it became clear that hundreds of public entities ranging from small towns to state governments across the South paid homage to the Confederacy in some way. But there was no comprehensive database of such symbols, leaving the extent of Confederate iconography supported by public institutions largely a mystery.

In an effort to assist the efforts of local communities to re-examine these symbols, the SPLC launched a study to catalog them. For the final tally, the researchers excluded thousands of monuments, markers or other tributes that were on or in battlefields, museums, cemeteries and other places that are largely historical in nature. In this second edition of the report, the SPLC has identified monuments and symbols not included in the first report and removed those reported erroneously.

Here are the most salient findings:

1. There are more than 1,700 symbols of the Confederacy in public spaces.

The study identified 1,747 publicly sponsored symbols honoring Confederate leaders, soldiers or the Confederate States of America in general. These include monuments and statues; flags; holidays and other observances; and the names of schools, highways, parks, bridges, counties, cities, lakes, dams, roads, military bases and other public works. Many of these are prominent displays in major cities and at state capitols; others, like the Stonewall Jackson Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department in Manassas, Virginia, are little known.

Among the approximately 184 individual Confederates* honored with monuments and place names, Robert E. Lee is by far the most prominent, with a total of 230. He’s followed by Jefferson Davis (152), Stonewall Jackson (112), P.G.T. Beauregard (57) and J.E.B. Stuart (49).

Sign our petition to tell lawmakers to remove symbols honoring Jefferson Davis from public spaces.

2. There are 103 public K-12 schools and three colleges named after prominent Confederates.

Of the 103 public schools and three colleges named for Confederates leaders, those honoring Robert E. Lee are the most numerous (42), followed by Stonewall Jackson (15), Jefferson Davis (11), Nathan Bedford Forrest (8) P.G.T. Beauregard (7) and John Reagan (6).

At least 34 of these schools/colleges were built or dedicated from 1950 to 1970, broadly encompassing the era of the modern civil rights movement.

The vast majority are in the states of the former Confederacy, though Robert E. Lee Elementary in East Wenatchee, Washington, is an interesting outlier. And, until their names were changed in 2016, two elementary schools in California (Long Beach and San Diego) were named for Lee. The Long Beach school was renamed in honor of a local labor activist.

3. There are nearly 800 Confederate monuments and statues on public property throughout the country, the vast majority in the South.

The study identified 780 monuments at county courthouses, town squares, state capitols and other public venues. The majority (604) were dedicated before 1950. Twenty eight were dedicated between 1950 and 1970. Thirty-four were dedicated after 2000.

Many of these are memorials to Confederate soldiers, typically inscribed with colorful language extolling their heroism and valor, or, sometimes, the details of particular battles or local units. Some go further, however, to glorify the Confederacy’s cause. For example, in Abbeville, South Carolina, a monument erected in 1906 is inscribed with a poem that reads, in part: “The world shall yet decide, in truth’s clear, far-off light, that the soldiers who wore the gray, and died with Lee, were in the right.”

Three states stand out for having far more monuments than others: Georgia (114), Virginia (110) and North Carolina (97). But the other eight states that seceded from the Union have their fair share: Texas (68), Alabama (60), South Carolina (58), Mississippi (52), Tennessee (43), Arkansas (41), Louisiana (32) and Florida (26).

These monuments are found in a total of 23 states and the District of Columbia. Outside of the seceding states, the states with the most are Kentucky (24), Missouri (13) and West Virginia (9). Monuments are also found in states far from the Confederacy, including California (3) and Arizona (4). There was even a Confederate monument in Massachusetts, a stalwart of the Union during the Civil War, but it was removed from Georges Island in Boston Harbor in 2017.

4. There were two major periods in which the dedication of Confederate monuments and other symbols spiked — the first two decades of the 20th century and during the civil rights movement.

Southerners began honoring the Confederacy with statues and other symbols almost immediately after the Civil War. The first Confederate Memorial Day, for example, was dreamed up by the wife of a Confederate soldier in 1866. That same year, Jefferson Davis laid the cornerstone of the Confederate Memorial Monument in a prominent spot on the state Capitol grounds in Montgomery, Alabama.

But two distinct periods saw a significant rise in the dedication of monuments and other symbols.

The first began around 1900, amid the period in which states were enacting Jim Crow laws to disenfranchise the newly freed African Americans and re-segregate society. This spike lasted well into the 1920s, a period that saw a dramatic resurgence of the Ku Klux Klan, which had been born in the immediate aftermath of the Civil War.

The second spike began in the early 1950s and lasted through the 1960s, as the civil rights movement led to a backlash against deseregationists.

5. The Confederate flag maintains a publicly supported presence in at least five Southern states.

In 2015, Confederate flags were removed from the capitol grounds of South Carolina and Alabama following the Charleston church massacre. However, the survey identified seven public places in five former Confederate states where the flag still flies or is represented.

An honor guard from the South Carolina Highway Patrol lowers the Confederate battle flag as it is removed from the Capitol grounds to the cheers of thousands, ending its 54-year presence there and marking a stunning political reversal in a state where many thought the rebel banner would fly indefinitely. AP Images/John Bazemore

The most prominent is the Mississippi state flag, adopted amid the onset of Jim Crow in 1894. It conspicuously incorporates the Confederate battle flag into its design. In addition, emblems that adorn the uniforms of Alabama state troopers contain a likeness of the flag.

Also, there are four county courthouses where the flag still flies: Grady and Rabun counties in Georgia, Carroll County in Mississippi, and Walton County in Florida.

6. Ten major U.S. military bases are named in honor of Confederate military leaders.

All of the 10 military bases named for Confederate leaders are located in the former states of the Confederacy. They are Fort Rucker (Gen. Edmund Rucker) in Alabama; Fort Benning (Brig. Gen. Henry L. Benning) and Fort Gordon (Maj. Gen. John Brown Gordon) in Georgia; Camp Beauregard (Gen. P.G.T. Beauregard) and Fort Polk (Gen. Leonidas Polk) in Louisiana; Fort Bragg (Gen. Braxton Bragg) in North Carolina; Fort Hood (Gen. John Bell Hood) in Texas; and Fort A.P. Hill (Gen. A.P. Hill), Fort Lee (Gen. Charles Lee) and Fort Pickett (Gen. George Pickett) in Virginia.

7. Eleven states have 23 Confederate holidays or observances in their state codes; nine of those were paid holidays in 2018.

In 11 states, 23 Confederate holidays or observances are written into the state code, but only nine of those holidays, in five states, are paid holidays for state employees.

Alabama and Mississippi each have three Confederate holidays in which state employees are given a day off, though in some cases they are combined with other holidays (Lee’s birthday, for example, is celebrated on the same day as Martin Luther King Day).

The nine holidays officially observed in 2018 are: Alabama (Robert E. Lee Day, Confederate Memorial Day and Jefferson Davis’ Birthday); Mississippi (Robert E. Lee Day, Confederate Memorial Day and Jefferson Davis’ Birthday); South Carolina (Confederate Memorial Day); Texas (Confederate Heroes’ Day); Virginia (Lee-Jackson Day).

The other states that have Confederate holidays in their state codes are Arkansas, Florida, Kentucky, Louisiana, North Carolina and Tennessee.

Georgia struck Lee’s birthday and Confederate Memorial Day from its official state calendar in August 2015 and replaced the names with the term “state holiday.” Arkansas in 2017 decoupled Robert E. Lee Day from Martin Luther King Day and made it a standalone, unpaid holiday marked with a gubernatorial proclamation.

Sign our petition to tell lawmakers to eliminate public holidays honoring Jefferson Davis.

8. More than 100 monuments and other Confederate symbols have been removed in 22 states, including the District of Columbia, since June 2015.

The survey identified 114 Confederate symbols removed since the Charleston massacre, including 48 monuments and three flags, and name changes for 35 schools and one college, and 10 roads. Among them was the Confederate battle flag that had flown at the South Carolina State House grounds in Columbia for 54 years.

Texas led the way (33), followed by Virginia (15), Florida (10), Tennessee (8), Georgia (6), Maryland (6), and North Carolina (4). Eighty-five removals were in former Confederate states.

Some removals were highly contentious, like in New Orleans, where the city in 2017 removed three prominent statues honoring Robert E. Lee, Jefferson Davis and P.G.T. Beauregard.

Sign our petition to tell lawmakers to remove symbols honoring Jefferson Davis from public spaces.

Return to Table of Contents