Social Security History
"Mr. Social Security" Even though he prided himself and his organization on administration, Altmeyer was also the premier policy maker of his era. From the earliest days of the program, he was a spokesman for social insurance in America and was the primary "evangelist" (a description he would have hated) for convincing the nation of the value of this new experiment in social welfare policy. He often articulated Social Security policy in larger contexts, as part of a social welfare tradition with old roots and based on eternal truths about human nature. He was very much a "big picture" thinker. He also was, despite his stated alliance to administration, a master legislative craftsman. The improvements to the Social Security program embodied in the 1939 Amendments, and especially in the 1950 Amendments, were to a considerable degree the realization of Altmeyer's legislative agenda. Indeed, if you read the speeches and articles reproduced here that Altmeyer authored throughout the late 1930s and the 1940s, he lays out in great detail the policies and proposals that are destined to become law during the next couple of decades. Altmeyer on Social Insurance "Social security as a specific program is in essence simply a social budgeting of costs already being borne by the individual citizens of a nation. Whether they have a social security system or not, the citizens of every nation are confronted with the economic burdens of old age, premature death, physical and mental disability, sickness, and unemployment. These risks affect individual citizens unevenly and unpredictably. Apart from its preventive functions, a social security system spreads these costs more evenly among groups of people and over periods of time, thereby making bearable costs and losses which otherwise are unbearable and lead to destitution and want." -- 1943 "Social insurance is still so new in this country that many people are yet not sure exactly how it works. Actually it works on the same principle as private insurance. That is the principle of spreading the risk. As Winston Churchill has said, it brings the magic of averages to the rescue of the millions. Disaster, to which millions are subject, actually strikes only a few of us at any given time. If we collect a small premium from the many who are exposed to the risk, we can build a fund out of which we can pay benefits to those who at any given time are suffering from the impact of the risk." -- 1944 "Social Security in the sense we use it should not mean that everyone shall be guaranteed all the good things of life without any effort on his part. It should not mean a redistribution of wealth, but a redistribution of welfare. What it should mean is genuinely equal opportunity in a free society. Therefore, liberty and security are synonymous, and we can not have one without the other. Perhaps what people are concerned about when they deplore the 'welfare state,' is a paternalistic welfare state rather than a cooperative state of welfare. In a free society our quest for social security must always be for a method whereby people can work together effectively through their government to achieve security in such a way as to promote, at one and the same time, individual incentive and mutual responsibility." -- 1958 "It seems to me that the people who are fearful that social insurance will affect the initiative and the freedom of human beings don't really comprehend the meaning of those terms, and the motivations that are involved. It seems to me that it isn't fear that presses people on to high endeavor, to do better and better, but hope; and I think social insurance replaces fear with hope." --1963 Altmeyer and the Development of Social Security Altmeyer argued tirelessly for many core ideas that would not be realized until long after he left office--and some that to this day remain unfulfilled dreams. He argued for coverage of permanent disabilities and health care needs, and his vision would be realized in the 1956 Amendments and in the creation of Medicare in 1965. He argued for universal coverage of all workers, and this goal is still not quite yet in hand. He argued also, for a philosophy of social welfare that viewed all forms of social insurance in equal terms. He viewed all forms of public provision as part of a hoped-for comprehensive system, with appropriate forms of provision--by social insurances or by public assistance as need be. He asserted that unemployment insurance could be better run as a federal program. And he pleaded for more generous benefits for virtually all social welfare programs. Most of this agenda remains unrealized.

The "Missing Pieces" of Social Insurance The advocates of social insurance wanted the original Social Security Act to include comprehensive programs for the major threats to economic security, including death, disability, illness, unemployment and retirement. The 1935 Act did not include sickness or disability benefits or survivors benefits and was thus seen by these theorists has having "missing pieces." This was certainly Altmeyer's view. Therefore, almost before the ink was dry on the 1935 Act, Altmeyer began to campaign for the extension of Social Security to include these other forms of coverage. In a January 1943 radio address Altmeyer offered what we can take as a definitive statement of his vision of Social Security: " I believe that we should be thinking in terms of developing for this country a unified comprehensive system of contributory social insurance which would cover all of the major economic hazards to which the workers of this country are subjected, namely, old age, disability, death, and unemployment. We already have a Federal system providing protection against old-age and premature death and a Federal-State system providing some protection against unemployment, but we have no nationwide system providing protection against the hazards of ill health and disability. Under a unified comprehensive system of social insurance there would be no gaps, no overlaps, and no discrepancies in the protection afforded. Such a system could operate with a maximum degree of simplicity and efficiency. . . The present Federal old-age and survivors insurance central record system, which already contains 68 million individual accounts, could be used for all insurance purposes. . . The nationwide network of offices of the Federal old-age and survivors insurance system and the offices of the United States Employment Service could be merged and used as the offices of the new system. The contributory social insurance system should of course be extended to all employees and (except in the case of unemployment and temporary disability) should be extended to all self-employed persons as well. If this were done, we would be providing a minimum basic security for the people of this country upon which they would have a greater opportunity to build a higher degree of security through individual savings and private insurance. In other words, this minimum basic security would constitute a safety net protecting the workers of this country against these major economic hazards, not a feather bed releasing them from the necessity of helping themselves. While I believe responsibility for the establishment and maintenance of a unified comprehensive system of social insurance should be centralized in the Federal Government, I believe that the actual administration of the system should be highly decentralized with representative advisory committees and appeals councils in the several States. The cost of providing this basic security would not be excessive. If the cost were shared equally by employers and employees, contributions at the rate of 5 or 6 percent each would be sufficient for a long time to come. In my opinion such a plan would provide a maximum degree of protection to the people of this country at a minimum cost which could easily be borne because it would be spread evenly." At first he was cautious in pursuit of this vision. In his first public pronouncement after becoming Board Chairman, he would only say that the Board was "studying" the question of expansion of the program. "No one realizes more clearly than the Social Security Board that possible amendments now under consideration represent only the first beginnings in a long slow process of growth and development. . . There is no responsibility which it takes more seriously than the duty, placed upon it by the act itself, of studying and making recommendations to Congress, not only within the scope of the present act, but also in the whole field of social security legislation. Because it . . . believes profoundly that no program of social legislation is ever complete or final--that, indeed, in social legislation to "finish" would be to fail --the Board has no sense of apology either for the Social Security Act in its present form or for the admission that it is open to amendment." It was not until the summer of 1938 that he ventured for the first time to actually identify the specific shortcomings of the Act and the kinds of Amendments he had in mind, suggesting: survivors benefits, universal coverage, accelerated monthly benefits, and some acknowledgement of the need for disability and health coverage. This was, by no coincidence, the agenda he was pushing with the 1937-1938 Advisory Council. The Advisory Council was Altmeyer's first real opportunity to focus the nation's agenda on the "missing pieces." This Council, which Altmeyer initially opposed, would in fact become the vehicle through which Altmeyer would realize a major part of his vision. Altmeyer crafted a completed legislative agenda for the Council, persuaded President Roosevelt to support it, and skillfully "sold" it to the Council. The Council's report, which tracked Altmeyer's agenda almost perfectly, would become the very important 1939 Amendments, which fundamentally altered the nature of the program by adding survivors and dependents benefits to what had been a retirement program for workers. This changed Social Security from a program focused on the economic security of the individual worker and made it a program focused on the economic security of the family unit. This was very much in keeping with Altmeyer's vision of social insurance, and he played a major role in the development of the 1939 Amendments. After the passage of the 1939 Amendments Altmeyer's efforts shifted to disability and health insurance, as well as the overall adequacy of old-age insurance. The next big milestone was the 1950 Amendments. It was these amendments which increased the value and importance of old-age insurance and made it into the modern Social Security program we know today. If the theme of the 1939 Amendments was new benefits, the theme of the 1950 Amendments was benefit adequacy. Prior to the 1950 Amendments there were more recipients of old-age assistance than of Social Security retirement and the dollar amount of this public assistance was actually higher on average than the Social Security benefits. If this trend had not been reversed, there is good possibility that Social Security may well have been replaced by a welfare program. Indeed, years later, another Commissioner of Social Security, Bob Ball, would observe: "It is probably no exaggeration to say that the 1950 Amendments really saved the concept of contributory social insurance in this country." Again, Altmeyer was in a position to influence the legislation. By now, the big issues were coverage and adequacy, as well as disability insurance. The Administration recommended both significant increases in coverage and dramatic increases in benefits (both of which were enacted) and disability benefits (which were not). Altmeyer withheld any proposals regarding health insurance or unemployment insurance as battles to be fought another day. He was gratified that coverage and adequacy were addressed, and disappointed that disability was not. When Altmeyer left office in April 1953, two big pieces of his vision were still missing--disability benefits and health insurance. Recall that he had begun advocating both of these programs as early as 1938, and he took every opportunity to make the case that they were sorely needed. In the lead article of the March 1941 Social Security Bulletin, Altmeyer offered a detailed proposal for how a disability program might work--including thing from making disability determinations to computing benefit amounts. It was, in effect, the blueprint for a future disability program and most of this blueprint would be realized in 1956 when President Eisenhower signed the disability program into law. On health insurance neither Altmeyer nor anyone else conceived in advance the unexpected way that health care would finally become part of the Social Security Act--as a program, initially, only for retirees. Altmeyer always conceived of health care coverage as a universal need and it would never have occurred to him to limit it to only one segment of the population. Of course, the idea of limiting Medicare to the elderly was more a political decision than the expression of a public policy principle. So it should not come as a surprise that Altmeyer did not foresee it. In any case, he did identify health care as a need early on, he articulated its logic, and he advocated for it whenever he had a chance. He even participated in the drafting of the famous 1945 proposal by President Truman calling for national health insurance. But the realization of this part of the dream was many years in the making.

Universal Coverage Altmeyer and Frances Perkins, along with most all of the social insurance theorists on the CES, believed that the Social Security program should be nearly universal--so that all might share in its support and all might enjoy its benefits. After some modest internal debate, the CES did in fact settle on more or less universal coverage (the self-employed and highly paid professional were to be the only excluded groups). Their initial report, implicitly agreed to by President Roosevelt, was forwarded to the Congress with this recommendation and Altmeyer was deeply disappointed when the bill that emerged covered less than half the nation's workers under the new contributory social insurance scheme. Arguing for expansions of coverage thus became one of Altmeyer's earliest and most persistent "crusades." In only the second article he wrote for the Social Security Bulletin, in August 1938, Altmeyer could confidently observe: "In principle, there is no reason why old-age insurance should not apply to every wage earner and even to those who are not technically wage earners but who are the operators of small enterprises, that is, the 'self-employed.' Because of the practical administrative difficulties involved, this is an ideal which probably cannot be attained immediately. There is every reason to believe, however, that it will not be long before a number of wage earning groups, now excluded, will be brought into the system." Altmeyer was somewhat over-confident in this early assessment. It would be 1950 before any significant inroads were made on his goal of universal coverage. The reference to administrative difficulties was due to the fact that this was the argument advanced by the Treasury in 1935 for excluding certain groups from the program--Treasury was afraid it would be too difficult to collect the taxes. But this would prove to be one of Altmeyer's more successful "crusades" in that the nation has in fact progressed steadily toward his ideal of universal coverage--no doubt more slowly than he would have liked.

Universal Coverage--High Stakes Poker Henry Morgenthau, Jr. was FDR's second choice for Secretary of the Treasury. His first choice, William Woodin, died less than a year after taking office. Despite being FDR's second choice, Morgenthau had ready access to the President and often was able to influence him to support the policies Morgenthau preferred. The affinity between Morgenthau and FDR was based on a long-standing personal friendship--he was a Hudson Valley neighbor to FDR's magnificent Hyde Park estate, and they were "poker buddies" in the frequent games Roosevelt held with his closest circle of friends. Within the CES, the question of the scope of the program was settled in favor of universal coverage, which meant that essentially all employees in the country would be subject to the new payroll taxes and would eventually be eligible for the new benefits. Morgenthau signed the unanimous report to this effect. But when the legislative dust settled, the new Social Security Act would exclude from the program the self-employed, government workers, agricultural and domestic workers, members of non-profit, religious and charitable organizations, and all workers age 65 and older--hardly the universal coverage the CES proposed. The CES' legislative proposal had to be revised at the last minute to make the old-age insurance program fully self-supporting and this required actuarial recalculations of the tax and benefit rate tables included in the original proposal. These revised calculations were not available when the bill was first filed and had to be added by a later amendment. Once the revised rate tables were ready, a special hearing was held before Ways and Means to present them, and Secretary Morgenthau was the designated Administration spokesman. And in a time-honored tradition of Washington hard-ball politics, Morgenthau used the opportunity of his testimony to announce that the Treasury Department did not support universal coverage, citing administrative difficulties in collecting payroll taxes from certain types of workers. Secretary Perkins was angered by Morgenthau's move and spoke at the hearing in favor of universal coverage, but the Committee was only too happy to go along with the Morgenthau recommendations since this was the path of least political resistance. And because of this moment of high-stakes political poker, the new Social Security program would only cover about half of the nation's workers when it began in 1937. The biggest expansion in coverage was enacted in the 1950 Amendments, but even today the Social Security program has not quite achieved the universal coverage that the CES envisioned. Public Assistance vs. Social Insurance One of Altmeyer's losing battles was his campaign to convince America that public assistance should be greatly expanded. Public assistance was woefully inadequate, he repeatedly said, and needed to be substantially raised. It made moral sense, he argued, it made economic sense, and it made public policy sense. In virtually every speech he gave or article he penned, Altmeyer returned again and again to this theme. He wanted America to adopt a comprehensive view of social provision whereby government protected its citizens against economic hazards by a combination of contributory programs where possible and "welfare" programs where necessary. But he did not view recourse to a welfare program as a failure in any sense. It was just that non-contributory forms of social insurance made more sense for certain groups of people, such as dependent children and chronic "unemployables." The stigmatizing of welfare as a moral failure of the recipient was alien to Altmeyer's philosophy, although he always viewed income from work as the basis for economic security. Thus, welfare was to be paid to people who suffered a disruption in their income "for reasons beyond their control," and who could not otherwise be provided for under social insurance programs. Although Altmeyer's views were fairly standard among the social welfare types of his era, they were considerably more liberal than the general attitude of the country at the time. They were conservative, however, in the sense that he always conditioned his advocacy of public assistance on the idea that people suffered from disruptions to their income for reasons other than choice--age, youth, illness and unemployment being the principal ones. He probably would have shared the common attitude that the able-bodied ought to work, and he viewed the creation of a "full employment" economy as one of the obligations of government--so that the able-bodied would have work to do. In one sense, Altmeyer's views were again ahead of his time in that during the "war on poverty" of the 1960s his more liberal view of welfare gained favor with the policymakers of that era. But this view, and the whole war on poverty, came to grief over an older, deeper, tradition in America--the idea that welfare was shameful and that the poor ought to be responsible for lifting themselves out of poverty, that their predicament was almost certainly their own fault. This quintessentially American attitude toward welfare was something Altmeyer could never overcome. And yet he tried, with practical argument and deeply held moral conviction. In 1952 he would optimistically observe: "A new concept of social welfare has been developing under which welfare programs consist not only of counseling and assisting the individual and family in making the necessary adjustments to the environment but, more importantly, of marshaling community resources to promote the well-being of individuals and of families generally. In other words, we no longer think in terms of a few underprivileged and disadvantaged persons but in terms of all individuals and families. In this country, under this newer concept, social work would include both constructive welfare services and measures designed to promote economic security--that is, both public assistance and the social insurances. . . In other words, social security would be part of social welfare in its present-day meaning."

Federalizing Unemployment Insurance One of Altmeyer's biggest failures was his attempt to persuade the Congress and the States that the nation would be better off with a federal take-over of the unemployment insurance program. When the CES was considering its unemployment program recommendations there was an internal split--many members favored a purely federal system while others favored some form of federal/state partnership. President Roosevelt had broadly hinted his preference for a federal/state type system and this was in fact the recommendation the Committee ultimately put forward. Altmeyer supported this recommendation. Altmeyer never really clarified why he supported the mixed system, but he suggested that his main motive was that he was taking his cue from the the President. In any case, somewhere along the way he changed allegiances to become the principal advocate for federalization. He began this crusade in 1941 by criticizing the level of support provided by the States and pointing to the lack of uniformity in payment levels from State to State. He argued, in effect, that the present system was broken. It was nearly two years later, in March 1943, before he would openly argue that the broken system should be replaced by federal administration: " There is no question in my mind that combining the present State-by-State unemployment insurance system into a unified comprehensive contributory social insurance system would result in far simpler, more effective, and more economical administration. . . But of still greater importance than these administrative advantages is the fact that a truly national system of unemployment insurance would be much safer and sounder because of the wider spreading of the unemployment risk and the more effective utilization of reserves. . . A Federal unemployment compensation system could also provide much more adequate benefits for workers generally because of the wider spreading of the risks and the more effective utilization of reserves. It is most important that unemployment compensation benefits be made more adequate than they are at the present time. The weekly benefit rates in many States are insufficient to cover a reasonable proportion of the weekly wage loss that an unemployed worker suffers. Most serious of all is the fact that in most States the duration for which benefits are payable is so limited that a very high proportion of workers in receipt of unemployment compensation benefits exhaust their benefit rights before finding another job. For the country as a whole, even in a period of good employment, such as 1940 and 1941, 50 percent of the workers exhausted their benefit rights before they found another job. In some States the proportion ran as high as 65 and 75 percent. In a period of considerable unemployment these percentages would of course be still higher." His arguments had a certain logic, and viewed abstractly they probably had considerable merit. But logic can take you only so far, and powerful vested political interests were involved in the status quo and these interests were unlikely to yield to the gentle pleadings of the reasonable bureaucrat. Once the die had been cast in the report of the CES, and codified in the 1935 Act, there was no going back. The War Years as a Time of Opportunity for Social Insurance Although World War II was a vast tragedy for the nation and the world, Altmeyer saw it as presenting unique opportunities for the cause of social insurance. Several related economic shifts happened due to the War: many previously covered workers went into military service where they had no Social Security coverage;

many workers previously in non-covered employment shifted into covered employment in war-industries;

unemployment went down, reducing demands on unemployment compensation;

because more people were working, wages were higher, and many retirements were being deferred for the duration, there was a sudden "windfall" of income to the Social Security Trust Funds. This unique set of circumstances led Altmeyer to argue that the War was in fact an opportunity for the nation . First, it raised the problem of coverage, since millions of people who had been covered were losing their coverage during their war service. Altmeyer seized on this anomaly and started arguing as early as October 1943, that coverage should be extended to service personnel in the form of "credits" toward Social Security coverage--an idea that would be adopted in 1956 as "gratuitous wage credits" for military service. He also made a very novel and somewhat creative argument for expanding coverage to non-covered groups based on an appeal for more effective financing of the war effort. His argument, articulated first in a November 1942 article, was that bringing new workers under the program now would result in an inflow of cash into the Treasury, which could be used to finance the war effort--without recourse to additional borrowing. And since there would be greater need for restored income security in the aftermath of the War, this form of financing would also help with post-War adjustments. President Roosevelt echoed Altmeyer's thesis by observing: "This is one case in which social and fiscal objectives, war and post-war aims are in full accord. Expanded social security, together with other fiscal measures, would set up a bulwark of economic security for the people now and after the war and at the same time would provide anti-inflationary sources for financing the war." In the unemployment insurance program his argument was that by federalizing the program now the adverse impacts of expected post-war surges in unemployment could be lessened --and that there was no time like the present, when revenues were high and claims were low. So the War, in Altmeyer's eyes, even facilitated his cherished goal of a federalized unemployment compensation system. (See April 1943 speech.) He also argued very forcefully (see March 1943 speech) that the provision of income security would be especially pressing for children since many working fathers will be killed or disabled by the War and their best hope of security comes from participation in the programs of the Social Security Act. This argues, according to Altmeyer, for an immediate expansion of coverage to include all workers and to provide disability insurance so that the nation's children can have the maximum of protection in the post-war world.

Long-Range Financing And Delays In Contribution Rate Increases The 1935 Act contained a rationalized schedule of tax rate increases designed by the actuaries to make the system self-supporting--in fact it was due to yield a $47 billion surplus by 1980. The fact that the system was designed to be in surplus was a source of political controversy. In the early years, one major conservative criticism of the program was over the issue of the surplus--conservatives being opposed on general political grounds to the accumulation of a tax-financed government surplus. The surplus was also a constant temptation to reduce the tax rates on the argument that the system did not really need the money. The issue about the surplus expressed itself in a conflict between advocates of "reserve financing" (the basis of the 1935 Act with its $47 billion surplus) and advocates of a "pay-as-you-go" approach, which would mean lower taxes in the early years and higher taxes in the distant future. The great temptation, of course, from a politician's point-of-view would be to opt for lower taxes and happier constituents now, with only the promise of higher taxes by and by. Altmeyer clearly saw this as one of the motives for supporting "pay-as-you-go" and he thought it was not responsible financing. Altmeyer offered his views in May 1937, only two months after assuming Chairmanship of the Board. Although he did not come right out and advocate reserve financing, he made it clear that the alternative "pay-as-you-go" approach had serious problems. "As a matter of fact, there is very little difference between the pay-as-you-go and the reserve systems in so far as the next few years are concerned. Violent disagreement arises, however, when the respective advocates undertake to project their imagination to the distant future, two generations hence. . . A second important reason for this violent disagreement is that the respective advocates fail to come to grips as to whether or not they would apply the pay-as-you-go system before or after there is practically universal coverage. . . The significance of the extent of coverage lies in the fact that unless the system operates on the reserve principle, either the future payroll taxes must ultimately increase to a figure double that now contemplated or there must be a substantial government subsidy, which means in effect that the uncovered portion of the population pays for a part of the cost of insuring the covered population. . . Moreover, if we start monthly benefit payments sooner, pay such benefits in more liberal amounts during the early years, add survivors' benefits and benefits for permanent total disability, we would be hard put to it to finance these benefits under even the existing tax rates. However, there is this real difference between pay-as-you-to advocates and the reserve advocates. The pay-as-you-go advocates would collect less money in payroll taxes in the early years of the system than the reserve advocates." Altmeyer then put his keen mind on the central political point regarding program financing. It is hard to imagine an observation with more currency than this one by Altmeyer in 1937: "It is absolutely vital to recognize clearly that if we adopt a pay-as-you-go system either before or after we have been able to achieve universal coverage, we must bear in mind the effect on our entire tax structure and government budget. To be concrete, if we adopt the pay-as-you-go system, we must make absolutely certain that at the same time we not only balance the budget but proceed to retire the government debt within the next generation through the imposition, let us hope, of progressive taxes, in order that we do not reach a period in the future when the burden of the interest charges on a large public debt and the burden of a large government subsidy to the Federal Old-Age Insurance plan cannot be sustained through current taxation." The production of a future surplus depended, of course, on the tax rates built into the system. Under the 1935 law, the rates were to start at 1% (on the employer and the employee), rising to 1.5% in 1940, 2% in 1943, 2.5% in 1946 and 3% in 1949. The 1939 Amendments eliminated the 1.5% rate and accelerated the payment of monthly benefits from 1942 to 1940, while adding major new benefits for survivors and dependents. In Altmeyer's view, these changes placed increased strain on the remaining rate schedule, making adherence to it more imperative. And yet in 1943 the Congress was considering delaying again one of the scheduled rate increases. In fact, this would become a pattern in Social Security financing. Scheduled increases were delayed or eliminated throughout the 1940s and 1950s. The 1% rate did not rise to 1.5% until 1950 and the 3% rate originally contemplated for 1949 did not actually start until 1960. Altmeyer sternly warned the Congress against this trend in testimony he gave in October 1943: "In the history of social insurance throughout the world the major difficulty of social insurance systems has been the lack of adequate financing of old-age retirement benefits. It is always easiest to delay levying the necessary insurance contributions, thus perpetuating and strengthening the belief that the insurance benefits are meager and the costs of the insurance system are low. Inevitably when the time comes to increase the taxes many reasons can always be advanced as to why the imposition of the additional taxes is unwise or impossible. In this country we are still in a position to avoid these mistakes by getting clearly established now that if our people want social insurance they must be willing to pay for it. The time to obtain the necessary contributions is when people are able to pay for the insurance and are willing to pay for it because they can be shown that they are getting their money's worth. If we should let a situation develop whereby it eventually becomes necessary to charge future beneficiaries rates in excess of the actuarial cost of the protection afforded them, we would be guilty of gross inequity and gross financial mismanagement, bound to imperil our social insurance system." Three of the most important figures in the history of Social Security are here assembled on the porch of the White House, May 5, 1965, at a ceremony where President Johnson honored the 20,000,000th Social Security beneficiary. Left to right Arthur Altmeyer; Bob Ball (taller man in back) and Wilbur Cohen (shorter man in front). SSA History Archives.