Cost-of-Living Adjustment (COLA) Information for 2019 Social Security and Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits for more than 67 million Americans will increase 2.8 percent in 2019. The 2.8 percent cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) will begin with benefits payable to more than 62 million Social Security beneficiaries in January 2019. Increased payments to more than 8 million SSI beneficiaries will begin on December 31, 2018. (Note: some people receive both Social Security and SSI benefits.) Read more about the Social Security Cost-of-Living adjustment for 2019. The maximum amount of earnings subject to the Social Security tax (taxable maximum) will increase to $132,900. The earnings limit for workers who are younger than "full" retirement age (age 66 for people born in 1943 through 1954) will increase to $17,640. (We deduct $1 from benefits for each $2 earned over $17,640.) The earnings limit for people turning 66 in 2019 will increase to $46,920. (We deduct $1 from benefits for each $3 earned over $46,920 until the month the worker turns age 66.) There is no limit on earnings for workers who are "full" retirement age or older for the entire year. Read more about the COLA, tax, benefit and earning amounts for 2019.

Medicare Information Information about Medicare changes for 2019, when announced, will be available at www.medicare.gov. For Social Security beneficiaries receiving Medicare, Social Security will not be able to compute their new benefit amount until after the Medicare premium amounts for 2019 are announced. Final 2019 benefit amounts will be communicated to beneficiaries in December through the mailed COLA notice and my Social Security’s Message Center.

Your COLA Notice In December 2018, Social Security COLA notices will be available online to most beneficiaries in the Message Center of their my Social Security. This is a secure, convenient way to receive COLA notices online and save the message for later. You will still receive your COLA notice by mail this year, but in the future you will be able to choose whether you receive your notice online instead of on paper. Be sure to choose your preferred way to receive courtesy notifications so you won’t miss your secure, convenient electronic COLA notice. Online notices will not be available to representative payees, individuals with foreign mailing addresses, or those who pay higher Medicare premiums due to their income. We plan to expand the availability of COLA notices to additional online customers in the future. Remember, our services are always free of charge. No government agency or reputable company will solicit your personal information by email or request advanced fees for services in the form of wire transfers or gift cards. Avoid falling victim to fraudulent internet “phishing” schemes by not revealing personal information, selecting malicious links, or opening malicious attachments. You can learn more about the ways we protect your investment, personal information, and my Social Security account here.