The Fact Hub
Sen. Obama Launches Inaccurate Attack On Hillary's Plan To Curb Housing Crisis

Hillary has a plan to curb the foreclosure crisis by freezing rates on adjustable rate subprime loans. It was a policy also favored by Sen. Edwards. Barack Obama has no plan so he's chosen to go on the attack. From his event in Texas today:

She's proposed that we freeze the monthly rate on existing adjustable rate mortgages for at least five years. I disagree with that approach, although I'm sure it's well-intentioned, and here's why: it will reward people who made this problem worse. It will also reward people who are wealthy and don't need it. It won't just target the struggling home owners who need help the most. And on top of that, a blanket freeze as she's proposed will drive rates through the roof on people who are trying to get new mortgages to buy or refinance a home. Experts say the value of homes will fall even more, and even more families could face foreclosure. That's why one economic analyst called her plan "disastrous".

His argument is false, and based on a flawed report in the New Republic that assumes Hillary's plan applies to all adjustable rate mortgages and not just subprime adjustable rate mortgages. Subprime mortgages are overwhelmingly held by low-income individuals. Laura Tyson, professor of economics at the Hass School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley explained:

The rate freeze would give the housing market time to stabilize and would give mortgage servicers an opportunity to restructure unworkable mortgages and avoid unnecessary and costly foreclosures that harm both homeowners and investors. The rate freeze is critical because the 30 to 40 percent escalation in monthly payments is a major driver of defaults and ultimately foreclosures in the subprime mortgage market. Senator Clinton limits the proposed moratorium and rate freeze to subprime mortgages because the foreclosure crisis is disproportionately a subprime crisis. Subprime loans comprise less than 15 percent of all mortgages but more than 50 percent of foreclosures.



Thaler and Woodward are simply wrong when they describe the Senator's proposed rate freeze as applying to all adjustable rate mortgages and not just subprime ones.

When corporations run into trouble meeting their obligations, creditors often arrange a “workout” that restructures the financial obligation by setting new payment terms, etc. Creditors don’t do this under force of law. They do it voluntarily because it keeps their clients in business and it limits their own losses. Senator Clinton is proposing that banks do for families what they already do for big business.

Jon Corzine, who in addition to being a governor is the former head of Goldman Sachs, has said the following about Senator Clinton’s plan: “I believe that her call for a 90-day moratorium on subprime foreclosures, a 5-year freeze in rates on subprime loans, and a $30 billion fund to help states fight foreclosures, is the right approach for tackling the mortgage crisis."

Sen. Obama is positioning himself to the right of President Bush. The Bush administration recently reached an agreement with the mortgage industry to implement a limited foreclosure moratorium and a loan modification program that could result in rate freezes for at-risk borrowers. In December, the administration announced another plan that also called for a rate freeze for qualified at-risk homeowners. While this plan is not sufficient, it goes farther than Sen. Obama.

More on Hillary's plan to curb the housing crisis HERE.