France yellow vest protests: Donald Trump blames violence on Paris climate change agreement and boasts protesters are chanting 'We want Trump'
ES News Email Enter your email address Please enter an email address Email address is invalid Fill out this field Email address is invalid You already have an account. Please log in or register with your social account

Donald Trump has blamed the French “yellow vest” protests on the Paris Agreement for tackling climate change while also claiming demonstrators chanted: “We want Trump!”

As France, and in particular Paris, was hit by another series of violent demos on Saturday, the US president waded in to have his say.

He tweeted: “The Paris Agreement isn’t working out so well for Paris. Protests and riots all over France.

“People do not want to pay large sums of money, much to third world countries (that are questionably run), in order to maybe protect the environment.

“Chanting “We Want Trump!” Love France.”

The yellow vest protests – named after the high-visibility jackets French motorists have to keep in their vehicles – were originally called over a fuel tax hike, and not specifically the Paris Agreement on climate change which Mr Trump has pledged to remove the US from.

Emmanuel Macron’s government made a climbdown on the tax, though campaigners are now demanding more concessions such as lower taxes.

Moreover, officials claim the protests have been hijacked by far-right and anarchist elements.

Meanwhile, there have been no confirmed reports of protesters chanting: “We want Trump.”

One Paris native, “Thomas V”, sought to set the record straight, replying to the tweet: “Huh...No. I live in Paris. Protests are definetly [sic] not about the Paris agreement but about the cost of living. Also, no one is chanting that. Sorry.”

Eric Boucq spluttered: “French people aren't protesting against the Paris agreement AT ALL!”

Meanwhile, on the president's “we want Trump” boast, Matthew Gertz, senior fellow of Media Matters for America, said: “French protestors have not been chanting "We Want Trump." The false claim moved through Trump social media based on a QAnon supporter's video that actually shows such chants from a June rally in the UK held in support of far-right extremist Tommy Robinson.”

William LeGate added: “No one in Paris is chanting "We Want Trump".”

On Saturday, Paris police were firing water cannons on the yellow-vested protesters throwing flares and setting fires in one of the capital’s main shopping districts.

Scattered clashes were continuing around the city as the protesters sought to reach the presidential palace and demand President Emmanuel Macron's resignation.

However, the huge police presence – 8,000 in the capital alone – appeared to have the clashes under control on Saturday afternoon.

There have been more than 500 arrests in Paris, though no injuries have been reported.