2015 International Narcotics Control Strategy Report (INCSR)
Vietnam is an illicit drug transshipment point for local and international criminal organizations. In 2014, Vietnamese law enforcement officials detected and arrested Vietnamese and foreign nationals smuggling illicit narcotics from Burma, Cambodia, China, and Laos to Vietnam and onwards to Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Singapore, and Thailand. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) reports that West African drug trafficking organizations are active in Ho Chi Minh City and southern Vietnam. Government of Vietnam statistics show that heroin is the main drug used and trafficked in Vietnam, though use of amphetamine-type stimulants (ATS) is on the rise. Since 2010, ATS has been the second most widely used drug in Vietnam, predominantly in the form of methamphetamine pills, but increased presence of crystalline methamphetamine has been reported. Cultivation and production of illicit narcotics in Vietnam remains limited.

The Government of Vietnam continues to implement its 2011 comprehensive anti-drug strategy. In 2012, the Prime Minister allocated $121 million to support drug control and drug prevention, and Vietnam ratified the UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. In December 2013, the GVN approved the Decision on Drug Rehabilitation Renovation Plan for the period 2013-2020 which aims to diversify drug dependence treatment models, scale up community-based and voluntary treatment centers, and reduce the number of people in compulsory rehabilitation centers.

According to Vietnam’s National Committee on AIDS, Drugs and Prostitution Control and Prevention, in the first six months of 2014, Vietnam’s law enforcement investigated 10,256 drug-related cases and arrested 15,298 people involved in drug-related crime, both slight increases from the same period in 2013. The Committee also reported that over the first six months of 2014, law enforcement agencies seized 478.7 kg of heroin, 14.1 kg of opium, 909.1 kg of cannabis, and 127.5 kg and 197,097 tablets of synthetic drugs. These figures reflect a slight increase in seizures of heroin, synthetic drugs and cannabis, but a decrease in opium compared to the same period of 2013 (466 kg of heroin, 83 kg of cannabis, 46 kg and 140,000 tablets of synthetic drugs, and 83 kg of opium).

Vietnam works closely with neighboring countries to carry out interdiction operations, including through border liaison offices on both sides of the Sino-Vietnamese border. The United States promotes counternarcotics information sharing, coordination of operations, and capacity building with Vietnam’s Ministry of Public Security, including through ongoing cooperation with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration. Through the U.S. President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), the United States budgeted approximately $10 million in 2014 to support medication-assisted therapy for 20,000 patients to prevent HIV transmission and improve treatment outcomes among people who inject drugs.

Vietnam does not have a mutual legal assistance treaty or extradition agreement with the United States, although Vietnam has acceded to relevant multilateral conventions that enable such cooperation.