Jamaica
More information about Jamaica is available on the Jamaica Page and from other Department of State publications and other sources listed at the end of this fact sheet.

U.S.-JAMAICA RELATIONS

The United States established diplomatic relations with Jamaica in 1962 following its independence from the United Kingdom. The United States and Jamaica maintain strong and productive relations, based on trust and mutual interest. This close friendship is built on a foundation of people-to-people ties and a vibrant Jamaican-American community. The United States and Jamaica foster prosperity and stability for both countries within the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative (CBSI).

Bilateral Economic Relations

The United States is Jamaica's most important trading partner. An important destination for U.S. investment, Jamaica has generally been a supportive partner in efforts – bilaterally, regionally, and globally – to liberalize trade. Under the Caribbean Basin Trade Partner Act and other trade measures, over 80% of Jamaican exports enter the U.S. market duty free. The United States provides over $100 million in support through the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) for expanding and diversifying energy sources available on the island. The two countries have an investment treaty and a double taxation agreement. More than 80 U.S. firms have offices in the country and hundreds of other U.S. firms sell their products through local distributors. Over a million American tourists visit Jamaica each year, and hundreds of thousands of Jamaicans visit the United States. The large Jamaican-American community sends billions of dollars in remittances to Jamaica annually.

U.S. Assistance to Jamaica

The United States provides key assistance to Jamaica to help counter violent crime and transnational criminal activity. The partnership focuses on reducing corruption; increasing transparency and good governance; fostering Jamaican participation in regional security efforts; strengthening basic education; and increasing adaptation to climate change. Regional HIV/AIDS and security programs complement U.S. assistance.

Jamaica's Membership in International Organizations

Jamaica and the United States belong to a number of the same international organizations, including the United Nations (UN), Organization of American States (OAS), Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM), International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank (WB), and World Trade Organization (WTO).

Bilateral Representation

Principal U.S. embassy officials are listed in the Department's Key Officers List.

Jamaica maintains an embassy in the United States at 1520 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036 (tel. 202-452-0660).

More information about Jamaica is available from the Department of State and other sources, some of which are listed here:

Department of State Jamaica Page

Department of State Key Officers List

CIA World Factbook Jamaica Page

U.S. Embassy

USAID Jamaica Page

History of U.S. Relations With Jamaica

Human Rights Reports

International Religious Freedom Reports

Trafficking in Persons Reports

Narcotics Control Reports

Investment Climate Statements

U.S. Census Bureau Foreign Trade Statistics

Export.gov International Offices Page

Travel Information