Divided House backs 'born-alive' abortion bill
A divided Texas House gave initial approval Tuesday to a bill requiring doctors who perform abortions to provide medical care to a child born alive during the procedure, with most Democrats declining to vote on legislation that one described as a harmful charade.

The bill's author, state Rep. Jeff Leach, R-Plano, urged members of both parties to support the measure, arguing that there should be no disagreement over providing treatment to a child in need.

"Today we're drawing a line in the sand, proclaiming clearly and loudly together on behalf of the Texans we represent, that a baby who survives an abortion deserves the full protection of the law and the highest standards of medical care," Leach said, surrounded by fellow Republicans on the House floor.

Rep. Donna Howard, D-Austin, was the only other House member to speak Tuesday evening on House Bill 16, calling it "blatantly false, inflammatory and dangerous."

"The aim of HB 16 is clear: further stigmatize abortion, misinform the public, intimidate physicians and interfere with a woman's ability to seek medical care," she said.

Saying there have been no reported instances of a child born alive during an abortion in Texas, Howard said no other Democrats would participate in debating the bill. Nor would they try to amend it or even vote on it, she said.

"We refuse to waste the limited time that we have here to take care of the peoples' business by entertaining malicious and purely political attacks on women and their doctors," Howard said.

Leach took exception to what he called Howard's "ridiculous allegations," saying his bill — named the Texas Born-Alive Infant Protection Act — was not based on misinformation or intimidation.

"This legislation is about protecting innocent life, a baby who was born alive," Leach said. "I don't think that's a charade. I think that's why we're here."

HB 16 passed 93-1, with 50 Democrats registered as "present, not voting."

If a child is born alive during an abortion, HB 16 would require the doctor to provide medical care and ensure that the child "be immediately transferred and admitted to a hospital."

Doctors who decline to provide medical treatment could be charged with a third-degree felony and face a sentence of two to 10 years in prison. They also could be sued by the Texas attorney general to collect a civil penalty of “not less than $100,000.”

The doctor also could be sued by the child or the child's parents for economic damages equal to three times the cost of the abortion as well as compensatory and exemplary damages, which can be much higher.

Texas law has required treatment for children born alive during an abortion since 1979, but Leach said his bill was needed to provide teeth to ensure compliance.

A final House vote on HB 16 is scheduled for Wednesday.

The Texas Senate approved a similar bill last week.

At least 30 bills have been introduced this session to limit or outlaw abortions or increase regulations on clinics, doctors or women seeking an abortion. Thus far, however, only one other measure has made significant progress.

Senate Bill 22, which would prohibit cities and counties from doing business with Planned Parenthood and other abortion providers and their affiliates, has passed the Senate and been approved by a House committee. SB 22 has not yet been sent to the Calendars Committee, which schedules floor votes on bills.

Supporters of the ban have been sharply critical of the city of Austin's $1 a year lease allowing Planned Parenthood to operate a health center in a city-owned building in East Austin. Planned Parenthood advocates say the clinic, which does not provide abortions, last year provided about $560,000 in health care for low-income residents.

In other action, the House State Affairs Committee will hold a public hearing Wednesday on HB 2434, which would ban abortions based on the race, sex or disability of a fetus.

The bill also would eliminate an exemption allowing abortions after the 20th week of pregnancy for fetuses with a severe physical abnormality. In the Senate, a committee has held a hearing but not yet voted on a similar bill.