Senate backs 'born alive' abortion bill
The Texas Senate gave initial approval Monday to a bill requiring doctors who perform abortions to treat a baby born alive during the procedure — an extremely rare event, the measure's Republican author said, but one consistent with promoting a "culture of life" in Texas.

"If it's one life, one life out of a million, it's worth saving," said Sen. Lois Kolkhorst, R-Brenham.

Senate Bill 23 requires doctors who perform abortions to "render aid, to do all they can to save that child," she said.

Doctors who decline to provide medical treatment could be charged with a third-degree felony and face a sentence of two to 10 years in prison. They also could be sued by the Texas attorney general to collect a civil penalty of “not less than $100,000.”

Several Democrats said the bill was unnecessary, including Sen. Nathan Johnson, D-Dallas, who said Texas law allows abortions only until 20 weeks of gestation, a time when a fetus is not viable outside the womb.

"Is this about protecting life, or is this about persecuting the physician, or harassing the physician, or intimidating the physician?" Johnson said.

"I don't see this bill as truly being aimed at a real problem, at a real threat," he said. "What I see it aimed at is physicians who want to practice their own profession consistent with their own beliefs and the constitutional rights of their patients."

Kolkhorst said SB 23 was intended to put teeth into a 1979 state law that requires medical treatment for children born alive during an abortion but does not include adequate penalties.

"This is an attempt to make sure that Texas is not ambiguous," Kolkhorst said.

"I am pro-life and really would want to guide any woman from ever having an abortion," she said. "This is about protecting life. ... If a child were to be born alive, then that child would be protected, and that is what this bill intends to do."

Monday's 20-10 vote on SB 23 was largely along party lines, with only Sen. Eddie Lucio Jr., D-Brownsville, crossing the aisle to vote in favor. A final vote is expected Tuesday to send the bill to the House.

To date, the Senate has approved one other abortion-related bill — SB 22, which prohibits cities and other local governments from contracting with Planned Parenthood and other abortion providers and their affiliates.

That bill, and a similar House bill, are awaiting action by the House State Affairs Committee.

Also Monday, a House committee hearing on a bill to outlaw abortion drew intense interest, with more than 200 people signing up to speak, most of them in favor and all of them willing to wait almost 11 hours for their time at the microphone.

Facing hours of testimony, Rep. Jeff Leach, R-Plano, chairman of the Judiciary and Civil Jurisprudence Committee, limited speakers to one minute each, down from two minutes as posted in the agenda.

The result was an assembly line of witnesses who decried abortion and urged passage of House Bill 896 by Rep. Tony Tinderholt, R-Arlington, which would ban abortion without exceptions and declares that life begins at the moment of fertilization.

"It is our duty, I believe, as Texans to stand up and stop the killing of unborn children," Tinderholt told the committee Monday evening.

Opponents criticized the bill as unconstitutional and a waste of time because U.S. Supreme Court precedent has established a right to abortion before fetal viability. Some supporters, however, saw an opportunity to promote a legal challenge that could return to the Supreme Court, where a new conservative majority could overturn legal abortion in the country.