Texas Senate backs ban on city, county contracts with abortion providers
Divided largely along party lines, the Texas Senate gave initial approval Monday to a bill that would prohibit cities and counties from doing business with Planned Parenthood and other abortion providers and their affiliates.

A final vote is expected Tuesday to send Senate Bill 22 to the House, where a committee began working on a similar measure Monday.

The author of SB 22, Sen. Donna Campbell, R-New Braunfels, said that while the Legislature prohibited the use of almost all state money for Planned Parenthood in 2011, "cities, counties and other government entities can still use taxpayer dollars to fund abortion providers and prop up the industry."

"Texans who oppose abortion should not be forced to subsidize the industry with their tax dollars," Campbell said.

Abortion-rights advocates have denounced the bill as dangerous to tens of thousands of low-income women who rely on Planned Parenthood for contraception, cancer screenings, HIV tests and other health care.

"Planned Parenthood is an important part of providing care for many Texas women, and their facilities offer services that are essential to maintaining their health," said Sen. Jose Menendez, D-San Antonio, adding that 95 percent of Planned Parenthood South Texas patients seek health care, as opposed to 5 percent seeking an abortion.

Democrats offered two amendments that sought to limit the reach of SB 22 — one that would have exempted spending local tax money on health care such as HIV testing, and another that would have exempted contracts related to public health crises such as a Zika outbreak.

Both amendments were rejected on 20-11 votes, with all 19 Republicans joined by one Democrat, Sen. Eddie Lucio Jr. from Brownsville, who also voted in favor of SB 22.

If passed into law, SB 22 would outlaw contracts such as Austin's agreement to rent a city-owned building at East Seventh and Chicon streets for a Planned Parenthood health center for $1 a year.

The clinic, which does not provide abortions, last year served 5,153 patients with subsidized health care that Planned Parenthood estimates was worth about $560,000.

Several other abortion-related bills are awaiting a Senate vote, including SB 23 by Sen. Lois Kolkhorst, R-Brenham, that would require medical treatment in the rare occasions when a child survives an abortion, and SB 24 by Lucio, which would require abortion doctors to hand state-printed pamphlets on adoption, fetal development and other information directly to patients.