Report: Texas leads nation in Confederate symbols removed since 2015
Thirty-one Confederate symbols have been removed in Texas since 2015, more than twice as many as in any other state, according to a Southern Poverty Law Center report.

The state accounted for nearly a third of the 110 Confederate symbols removed across the country since a white gunman killed nine black churchgoers in Charleston, S.C., in 2015. That shooting prompted a national movement to remove public Confederate symbols and rename schools, parks and roads that honored the Confederacy.

All but three of the symbols removed in Texas were in the state’s largest cities: 10 in Austin, eight in Houston, seven in Dallas, two in San Antonio and one in Fort Worth.

"As a consequence of the national reflection that began in Charleston, the myths and revisionist history surrounding the Confederacy may be losing their grip in the South," the report stated. "Yet, for the most part, the symbols still remain."

RELATED: Why Texas leaders erected Confederate monuments at the Capitol

The report, published Monday by the civil rights advocacy group, identified 1,728 Confederate symbols that remain in public spaces, 209 of which are in Texas — the second-highest number among the states.

Sixty-eight Confederate monuments remain in Texas, along with 58 highways and roads and 36 schools named after Confederates.

Last August, after violent protests by white supremacists in Charlottesville, Va., University of Texas President Gregory L. Fenves ordered the removal of statues of three Confederate figures and of the son of a Confederate officer from the South Mall. Fenves had a statue of Confederate President Jefferson Davis removed from the Main Mall two years earlier.

In February, the Austin school board voted to strip Confederate names from five district schools, though they haven’t been renamed yet. The board had renamed Robert E. Lee Elementary School in 2016.

The Austin City Council in April approved renaming Robert E. Lee Road in South Austin and Jeff Davis Avenue in North Austin.

None of the 20 symbols of the Confederacy at the Capitol and its grounds have been removed, however.

State Rep. Eric Johnson, D-Dallas, and House Speaker Joe Straus, R-San Antonio, have called for the removal of a Capitol plaque that honors the Confederacy while distorting Civil War history. Gov. Greg Abbott met with Johnson to discuss Johnson’s concerns about the plaque in October. An Abbott spokeswoman said after the meeting that Abbott would ask the State Preservation Board, which he heads and which is responsible for maintaining and preserving the Capitol, to "look into the issue."

The board hasn’t taken action on the 1959 plaque, titled "Children of the Confederacy Creed," which states slavery did not cause the Civil War and that the South didn’t rebel against the United States.

The only remaining Confederate symbol in Central Texas outside Austin is in Georgetown, according to the Southern Poverty Law Center report. Residents have previously asked the Williamson County Commissioners Court to move the statue of a Confederate soldier from the county courthouse lawn, but that decision can only be made by the Texas Historical Commission.

In San Marcos, a Jefferson Davis highway marker was removed in 2016.

A UT/Texas Tribune poll from October found that most Texans do not support removing Confederate memorials. Just 8 percent of respondents said they supported removing the memorials; 30 percent would move them to museums and 22 percent would leave them but add historical context.

Don Carleton, executive director of UT’s Dolph Briscoe Center for American History, said the Southern Poverty Law Center findings reflect Texans’ shifting sentiments about the Confederacy.

"We were a Confederate state through and through (in the past)," Carleton said. "I think there’s a sea change going on here."

Carleton said he expects the push to remove Confederate symbols to continue in Texas, but added it will likely be more evident in cities than rural areas.