Divisive issues push Texas Senate into partisan slugfest
A sharply divided Texas Senate gave preliminary approval Tuesday to a bill that would let state-licensed professionals decline to serve people based on religious objections, then followed with a short fight over abortion before a partisan slugfest erupted over a surprise Republican resolution on border security.

The day of conflict was a reminder that, despite a legislative session devoted thus far to bipartisan solutions on big issues like school finance and the budget, you don't have to scratch too deeply to expose the political divide in Texas.

Tuesday's clashes opened with a debate over Senate Bill 17, which would prohibit state licensing agencies from adopting rules or policies that limit a professional’s free exercise of religion — including denying or revoking a license for actions taken according to a “sincerely held religious belief.”

The bill's author, Sen. Charles Perry, R-Lubbock, said religious people should not be punished for declining to do business with others if that's what their beliefs demand, adding that professionals should not lose their licenses and livelihoods for following their faith.

"This defense is not absolute, and this bill does nothing to promote any illegal or discriminatory activity," Perry said.

But most Democrats and the only Republican to vote against SB 17, Sen. Kel Seliger of Amarillo, argued that the bill would sanction discrimination, particularly against gay, lesbian and transgender Texans.

"I am concerned that this bill misuses religion as a license to discriminate," said Sen. Carol Alvarado, D-Houston.

"When do you tell the difference between a sincerely held religious belief and bias?" Seliger asked.

Sen. Royce West, D-Dallas, noted that religion had been used in the past to justify racism and other "hideous practices," and Sen. Juan “Chuy” Hinojosa, D-McAllen, called SB 17 an attempt to use the authority and power of government "to discriminate against other people."

Perry disagreed, saying government shouldn't have the power to discriminate against people who follow their faith on the job.

"You are turning this upside down," Hinojosa replied.

But Perry insisted his goal was to provide people of faith with a defense if a state licensing agency tried to punish them for adhering to their faith.

In addition, he said, SB 17 was in response to increasing attacks on religious practice, which must be protected for the good of the country. "We've seen evidence of what happens when you turn away from moral precepts that happen to be faith-related," Perry said.

Under SB 17, medical professionals would be required to provide treatment to prevent death or serious injury no matter the circumstances. The bill also would not apply to licensed police officers and other emergency personnel.

SB 17 was given initial approval on a 19-12 vote and will need a final vote Wednesday before being sent to the House. In addition to Seliger crossing party lines to oppose the bill, Democratic Sen. Eddie Lucio Jr. of Brownsville voted in favor.

The Senate then shifted to a bill to bar cities and counties from doing business with Planned Parenthood and other abortion providers and their affiliates.

West said he had never before seen legislation that told local governments "how they can spend their local dollars, and who they can and cannot contract with." Sen. Jose Menendez, D-San Antonio, said state health programs are less effective, and harder for low-income women to access, than care at Planned Parenthood.

But the author of SB 22, Sen. Donna Campbell, R-New Braunfels, said abortion opponents should not be forced to subsidize abortion providers through their taxes, and the bill — given initial approval Monday — passed 20-11 and was sent to the House.

Lucio joined all Republicans in voting in favor.

But the day's biggest fireworks were set off when Sen. Paul Bettencourt, R-Houston, made a motion to bring Senate Resolution 535 directly to the floor for a vote, bypassing normal consideration in a committee and catching Democrats by surprise.

The resolution, signed by all 19 Republicans, called upon Congress to address the growing humanitarian crisis that has overwhelmed border agents with an unprecedented influx of immigrants, particularly families and unaccompanied minors.

"There is a crisis at the border, and we need to recognize the obvious," Bettencourt said.

Democrats were united in their condemnation of the resolution, which also expressed support for "barriers" along the border and specified that "the Texas Senate supports the president in his efforts to move forward with emergency action."

Democrats also blasted Bettencourt's last-minute unveiling of the resolution, saying he violated the Senate's tradition of transparency and courtesy.

"I felt ambushed. No notice whatsoever," Hinojosa said.

"We didn't need this division today," said Sen. John Whitmire, D-Houston. "The crisis that you described has been with us for months."

But Bettencourt said the worsening border situation demanded rapid Senate action, leaving no choice but to approach only those senators he knew would be receptive to the resolution's message.

After more than three hours of debate, the resolution was approved 19-12 on a party-line vote.