Crisis or contrived? Texas lawmakers face off about border
On Wednesday, Texas Democrats and Republicans, joined by some of their all-star D.C. colleagues on Easter recess, held back-to-back news conferences in the same cramped room off the Texas Senate floor to trade charges of fear-mongering and truth-denying with regard to a resolution that Senate Republicans passed two weeks ago, over Democratic protests, declaring the border in crisis and supporting President Donald Trump's "efforts to move forward with emergency action."

But since the resolution passed April 2, and there is no prospect of any further action, a reporter inquired at the end of the Republican news conference, "What's news today? Is there something happening today that makes this newsworthy?

Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick, who presides over the Senate and is Trump's closest ally in Texas, stepped to the lectern to provide an answer: "More girls are crying. More girls are being assaulted. More people are dying. More people are crossing the border; more drugs are coming across the border; more criminals are crossing the border. We cannot educate, medicate and incarcerate the whole world, costing our state billions of dollars. What's new? More people are dying and suffering, and it's going to continue day after day after day."

Earlier, Patrick, offering the most ferocious rhetoric of the day, asserted: "We have human slavery today with children and women in the state of Texas and all over the country coming through the border, and the Democrats will do nothing to save these women and children. Nothing. They are deniers and deceivers. They either know the truth and deny the truth, or they know the truth and are deceiving the American public. This is not a manufactured crisis. It’s a manufactured cover-up at the highest levels."

Patrick said that "President Trump was in San Antonio last week, and we met with a group of landowners, and they pointed out how many dead bodies they were finding on their land, and I want to know what (House Speaker) Nancy Pelosi and (Senate Democratic Leader) Chuck Schumer, Democrats in Washington, have to say about the dead children and women and elderly who are being left to die in the no-man's land in Texas, where water is scarce."

"Since 2011 we have documentation of 1,671 dead bodies we have recovered in Texas, many of them in Brooks County. Look at the photos. Skeletons. It looks like something we’d see in a Third World country where there has been some civil war," Patrick said. "There are thousands and thousands and thousands more out there. These are just the ones we've seen, on millions of acres."

Democrats characterize the whole episode, from passage of the resolution to Wednesday's Republican statements, as an exercise in contrived paranoia intended to buttress Trump's insistence on building a wall, and perhaps even closing the border, while riding roughshod over niceties like legislative hearings, or even a heads-up.

"We offered multiple amendments, but only one passed, that we keep families together and treat immigrants humanely," said state Sen. Jose Rodriguez, D-El Paso, who chairs the Senate Democratic Caucus.

Rodriguez said U.S. Sens. John Cornyn and Ted Cruz, who participated in the GOP news conference, "have gone all in on the president’s reelection theme, which appears to be `Make America scared again.'”

U.S. Rep. Joaquin Castro, D-San Antonio, who authored the resolution in the U.S. House to block the president's emergency declaration to fund a border wall — which Trump vetoed — said Texas Senate Resolution 535 "plays right into Donald Trump’s hands," encouraging him to close the border, to undertake "what will be the largest federal land-taking in Texas history" to build the wall, and to disrespect asylum-seekers’ rights. He added that issues surrounding asylum-seekers are a worldwide phenomenon not peculiar to the Mexican border.

"All of us agree there is a very deep humanitarian situation on the U.S.-Mexico border," said Castro, who told reporters afterward that he will decide soon on whether to challenge Cornyn's reelection in 2020.

But Cornyn and Cruz wondered why the Democrats couldn't bring themselves to call it a crisis.

"I understand our friends on the other side call it an issue or a situation, but I will quote an authority, Barack Obama, 2014, he called it a humanitarian and security crisis, and that’s exactly what it is," Cornyn said. "And if 76,000 people being detained at the border isn't enough for this to become a crisis, how about 103,000 people being detained at the border in March? When it hits 200,000, will that be enough for them to acknowledge the obvious? How about a quarter million?"

Cruz offered his own take on the Democrats' aversion to calling it a crisis.

"The sky is blue. Water is wet. And we have a crisis on our southern border," Cruz said. "These are statements of obvious fact, which nobody outside the world of partisan politics would even venture to disagree with."