Broward judicial candidate's name misspelled on ballots
One day after voters received inaccurate voter ID cards in Davie, a judicial candidate in Broward found that her name was misspelled on the early voting ballots.

The last name of Broward Circuit Court Group 9 candidate Andrea Ruth Gundersen is misspelled "Gunderson'' on the ballots mailed this week to voters.

"I know I filled my documents out correctly and the state has it correctly," Gundersen said.

Elections supervisor Dr. Brenda Snipes said the Gundersen error has been fixed on ballots for early voting in person and Election Day voting.

"That's a proofing mistake. That's our office,'' she said. "We researched and found out what the mistake was. But it's corrected."

Gundersen is running against Lea P. Krauss and Maxine K. Streeter. She said Snipes called her to apologize.

Elections supervisor Dr. Brenda Snipes faced off with Democratic primary challenger David Brown, a political consultant, at the Sun Sentinel Editorial Board. The two disagreed about just about everything in the hour-plus exchange. The facial expressions give you an idea of how it went. (By Brittany Wallman) (By Brittany Wallman)

Snipes also is dealing with inaccurate voter ID cards her office sent out this week. Her Democratic primary opponent, David Brown, seized on the two snafus to complain about how she runs her office.

"I can't imagine how such carelessness invaded the most important aspect of the supervisor's job ... the ballot itself,'' he wrote in an email to the Sun Sentinel. "And it's not the first time."

Davie has more than 46,000 active voters, and Snipes said about 1,794 got inaccurate ID cards. The affected voters got mail addressed to them, but inside, they found a voter ID card with someone else's name and address on it.

Replacement cards were mailed Thursday, Snipes said.

"We make every possible effort to make everything perfect,'' she said. "When we do realize there's an error we jump on it to fix it. Those people will be getting a new card either today or tomorrow. '

The cards are not required for voting but are sent to advise voters what political districts they are in after redistricting, and to remind them where their polling place is and which political party they are registered under.

Staff writer Rafael Olmeda contributed to this report.

bwallman@sunsentinel.com or 954-356-4541. On Twitter @BrittanyWallman and @BrowardPolitics.