Gov. Ron DeSantis recommits to Canada drug plan, insists imported medicines will be safe
As a new ad campaign blasts the safety of the state’s drug import proposal, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis reconfirmed his commitment to curb prescription drug costs through importation of prescription medicines from Canada.

An ad campaign by the Partnership for Safe Medicines began appearing this week on television during prime-time slots, announcing there is no guarantee the pills and capsules that would flow into Florida would be authentic, or even from Canada.

“Importation undermines our core efforts to keep our medicine supply safe,” the ad states.

On Wednesday, DeSantis said the claims in the ads are unfounded and that the drugs that would be brought in from Canada will have Food and Drug Administration approval.

“It makes sense to give us the option to save money for the state and for the people, and we wouldn’t do it unless the FDA says its safe,” he said

The governor made his comments while visiting Joe DiMaggio Hospital in Hollywood, where he and his wife, Casey, applauded the hospital for providing great medical care for children; they also donated magazines from Marvel Comics.

The governor acknowledged the ad campaign opposing his plan to import prescription drugs from Canada comes as the Senate prepares to discuss the bill on Thursday; it is considered likely to pass.

DeSantis has championed the legislation, which passed in the House last week, as a way to curb prescription drug costs and “save Florida millions of dollars.”

On Wednesday, DeSantis emphasized that President Donald Trump supports his drug importation proposal that would save the government and Floridians money. Spending on prescription drugs in 2017 was $333.4 billion, according to the bill analysis.

If the legislation passes in the Senate and is signed by the governor, it will need to be approved by the federal government.

cgoodman@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4661, Twitter and Instagram @cindykgoodman