Nikolas Cruz not the only murder suspect who registered to vote while jailed
Parkland school shooting suspect Nikolas Cruz was one of at least four accused killers who registered to vote, or voted, while behind bars in Broward County, records show.

Cruz registered as a Republican July 25 while awaiting trial on 17 charges of murder and 17 charges of attempted murder in the Feb. 14 mass shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School.

It won’t be known whether Cruz cast an absentee ballot until the latest voting records are released later this year.

The recent revelation triggered an angry response across social media, including that of Andrew Pollack whose 17-year-old daughter, Meadow, was among those killed.

“Just because something is technically legal doesn't make it just or ethical,” Pollack posted on Facebook, Monday. “Everyone knew this notorious killer had just admitted to 17 murders. Outrageous to go out of the way to register that thing to vote when my daughter can no longer even breathe.”

Broward Sheriff's Office Murder suspects Corey Golden (from left) Jonathan Gordon, and Karari Ritchie all registered to vote while jailed in Broward County. Murder suspects Corey Golden (from left) Jonathan Gordon, and Karari Ritchie all registered to vote while jailed in Broward County. (Broward Sheriff's Office)

But Cruz was not the first inmate to register to vote while at the Broward County Jail.

-- Corey Michael Golden, 24, registered as a Democrat on Sept. 7 but there was no record of him voting. He is scheduled for trial Jan. 21 in the stabbing death of Simon Oloruntola in Davie in 2012.

-- Jonathan Gordon, 35, registered independent in 2016. He voted in the 2016 general election and the 2018 primary with absentee ballots while awaiting trial for the shooting death of Ivan Brandt in Tamarac in 2015.

-- Karari Ritchie, 29, registered as an independent in 2007 while in jail on a misdemeanor trespassing charge. He voted at the polls in 2008, after his release on bond. He voted again in 2016 by absentee ballot while awaiting trial in the fatal stabbing of employee Tikkitress Johnson during an armed robbery of a Taco Bell in Oakland Park in 2009.

Voter registration records did not show how many inmates were registered before they were released from jail on bond.

The Broward Sheriff’s Office said taking away the voting rights of an eligible person awaiting trial is illegal.

“It doesn’t have anything to do with the sheriff,” said spokeswoman Veda Coleman-Wright. “Once they have the voters registered, the Supervisor of Elections Office then mails the ballot directly to inmates.”

The passage of Amendment 4 on Nov. 6 provides for the restoration of voting rights to convicted felons who have served their sentences, with the exception of those convicted of murder or felony sex crimes.

Database editor John Maines contributed to this report.

wkroustan@sunsentinel.com or 954-356-4303 or Twitter @WayneRoustan

Nikolas Cruz registered to vote behind bars; one victim's father tweets outrage

Oakland Park Taco Bell murder case from 2009 nears trial

Two accused in bloody Tamarac murder

Quarrel leads to man's stabbing death in Davie