OLIPHANT SUSPENDED
Gov. Jeb Bush suspended Miriam Oliphant as Broward County's elections supervisor Thursday, accusing her of incompetence and mismanagement and saying he had no faith she could properly run next year's elections.

Bush appointed retired principal and school administrator Brenda Snipes to immediately take over the troubled elections office. His decision came after a state task force informed him that Oliphant had done little to correct serious problems they uncovered last month in almost every aspect of her operations.

Under Bush's order, Oliphant was suspended without pay and now faces a trial in the state Senate over whether to permanently remove her. Bush said in a letter to the Senate that although he is reluctant to suspend elected officials, he had to act in order to preserve people's right to vote in Broward.

"Ten months of continued neglect and denial make it clear that she has no intention of honoring her promises to the voters of Broward," Bush said in the letter. "To leave Ms. Oliphant in office would put the voting rights of every citizen of Broward County in chronic jeopardy."

Oliphant was hosting an employee appreciation party at the Governmental Center as Bush announced his decision. Acting on the governor's instructions, sheriff's deputies informed her of the decision when she returned to her office around 10 a.m. Oliphant met with her staff and collected her personal belongings before the officers escorted her from the building. She was joined by one supporter, the Rev. Dozell Varner, of Mount Bethel Baptist Church.

Oliphant declined to comment, but her lawyer, David Bogenschutz, described her as disappointed. He said he is assembling a defense team to handle the trial and that Oliphant plans to vigorously fight to regain her job. "At least we no longer have a moving target," Bogenschutz said. "We now have somewhat definitive allegations we can respond to."

Oliphant, who was overwhelmingly elected elections supervisor in 2000 after serving nine years on the School Board, became the first Broward official to face a trial in the Senate in almost 30 years.

In laying out the case that Oliphant is guilty of "neglect of duty," "incompetence" and "misfeasance," Bush's seven-page order recited at length the tumultuous events of the past year at the elections office. He noted the disastrous September 2002 primary when polls opened late and closed early, the 268 uncounted votes later found in a file cabinet, Oliphant's dismissal of key office managers, the unprecedented level of help the county gave to ensure success with the November 2002 election and her repeated failure to listen to advice.

But what pushed Bush to take action now was the task force report. The group of elections officials appointed by Secretary of State Glenda Hood warned Oliphant about the disarray in her office after an inspection in mid-October, only to find most of their concerns unanswered when they returned last week.

Oliphant had assured them she was filling key vacancies, but they deemed that to be a gross exaggeration.

They said no action had been taken to find a new deputy supervisor or advertise other jobs and that Oliphant filled key positions with employees who had little management or election experience. Workers from temp agencies were filling other full-time positions.

Oliphant also had assured the state she was preparing for next year's elections. But the task force found that the poll worker manual is not complete, only 400 of 6,000 poll workers have been recruited, and the poll worker manager did not understand what needed to be done.

Hood's task force also charged that the voter registration rolls have not been updated since 1999 even though state law requires the work to be done every other year.

Hood urged Bush to act, saying removal was warranted when "a public official exhibits a pattern of neglect of duty and incompetence that threatens or endangers the public welfare." She said it would be unconscionable to continue to require the state and county to bail out the elections operations because of Oliphant's ineptitude.

"Supervisor Oliphant has shown little remorse for the conduct she has exhibited, an unwillingness to work with Broward County officials to improve the situation and a complete lack of understanding or concern for the consequences of her failure to meet even the minimum standards of care and practice for a supervisor of elections," Hood wrote Bush.

Oliphant and her allies have charged that the questions about her performance are racially motivated because she is the only black politician holding countywide office. Bush and Hood sought to defuse such concern.

Bush advisers had focused on black candidates in seeking a replacement for Oliphant. In choosing Snipes, Bush replaced a black, female Democrat with another black, female Democrat.

"This issue is not about partisanship," Hood said. "It is not about gender or race. It is about the people of Florida, whose rights are expressly granted in our constitution, and of their unwillingness to condone certain conduct from their elected officials."

Oliphant's sister, Robin Darville, saw it differently when she pulled her car in front of the Governmental Center Thursday morning and began screaming at reporters and passersby. "Gov. Bush is playing into the no-good politics of Broward County, the racist politics of Broward County," she said.

Shortly after Oliphant's departure from her office, hundreds of community activists, government employees and political leaders gathered in the lobby of the Governmental Center to welcome Snipes. They included black leaders such as County Commissioner Josephus Eggelletion, Lauderdale Lakes Mayor Sam Brown and Bush confidant Dorsey Miller.

Other prominent black officials expressed sorrow at Oliphant's departure, but said they agreed it was the right move and that Snipes was a good choice to succeed her.

"It's a sad day, but it's a necessity," said U.S. Rep. Alcee Hastings, a Miramar Democrat who long stood behind Oliphant and once threatened mass protests if Bush ousted her.

Snipes pledged at her press conference to move quickly to ensure the office is ready to handle the special election for state House District 91 in January and the presidential primary in March. She faces a difficult task because preliminary work should be underway already, but she said she is confident of success. "If I felt it couldn't be done, I wouldn't have taken the job," Snipes said.