Baldwin pitches 'Made in America' legislation
During the visit, Senator Baldwin unveiled her new Buy American legislation, the Made in America Shipbuilding Act, which supports Wisconsin's manufacturing and shipbuilding industries.

"For decades in Wisconsin, manufacturing jobs have created shared prosperity for generations and strengthened the economic security of the middle class. Companies like Superior-Lidgerwood-Mundy demonstrate the importance of continuing this good story by prioritizing American workers and businesses," Baldwin said. "Strong Buy American standards drive local economic growth and create good paying jobs that support Wisconsin families. The Made in America Shipbuilding Act is about doing right by workers in Wisconsin and across the country, and I am urging my Senate colleagues to support this legislation."

The Made in America Shipbuilding Act strengthens Buy American requirements for the federal government's purchase of ships by expanding current law to cover all federal agencies, all classes of ships and substantially more shipboard components, including items made in Wisconsin, like the hoists and winches manufactured by Superior-Lidgerwood-Mundy. Baldwin will formally introduce the Made in America Shipbuilding Act after Congress returns to session.

This legislation complements Baldwin's past Buy American efforts to ensure American workers and products are prioritized. Recently, the senator led a group of Senators in sending a letter to President Trump urging him to include strong Buy American, Hire American standards in any new infrastructure investment. If U.S. taxpayer dollars are used to purchase any type of vessel, the Made in America Shipbuilding Act ensures that it's made in America by skilled American workers and uses materials, like steel, iron and aluminum, that are domestically produced.

In the fiscal year 2018 National Defense Authorization Act, Baldwin secured Buy American requirements in the final legislation. She also ensured the bill supported Made in Wisconsin manufacturing and shipbuilding programs like Oshkosh Defense's military vehicles and Marinette Marine's Littoral Combat Ship.

For more on the story, pick up Friday's Telegram.