David Brown for Broward County supervisor of elections | Opinion
Change is needed in the leadership of the Broward County Supervisor of Elections office.

Brenda Snipes, 73, is a classy and well-meaning former schools administrator who brought order to a shaky elections office after former Gov. Jeb Bush appointed her 13 years ago.

But today, Snipes, who's subsequently been elected and re-elected, is too disconnected from the office's operations, too unaware of its failings and too slow to make improvements.

The supervisor's office needs new energy and a new emphasis on customer service. It needs someone who will show up at the office every day to shift operations out of cruise control and onto a path that minimizes missteps, while accelerating voter registrations and turnout.

More than the status quo, the elections office needs someone who can actively recruit and properly train an army of volunteer poll workers. It needs someone who can produce an accurate and personalized sample ballot, especially for seniors who don't use computers. And it needs someone whose inner barometer unquestionably knows it's wrong to let the office's legal counsel take sides in political campaigns.

/ David Brown is challenging incumbent Supervisor of Elections Brenda Snipes David Brown is challenging incumbent Supervisor of Elections Brenda Snipes (/) (/)

The question is whether Snipes' challenger, Dave Brown, 65, is the right person to lead an office charged with maintaining accurate voter rolls and conducting fair elections. Brown is the owner of a promotional products and marketing company, and once organized food trade shows with lots of moving parts, much like elections. But he is best known as a political consultant who's run about 100 political campaigns for Democrats over the last 20 years.

Given his reputation for hardball politics, some believe Brown is too partisan to run the elections office. Brown points out that he has an unblemished record with the Florida Division of Elections. He also notes that when attorneys become judges, they leave behind their advocacy roles to assume a higher calling. He assures us he would do the same. And if he doesn't, voters could hold him accountable in four years.

We're also reminded of what Joe Biden likes to say, "Don't compare me to the almighty, compare me to the alternative."

And compared with the alternative in the Aug. 30 primary, Brown is the better choice.

Look at the people backing Brown. They include the mayors of Coral Springs, Coconut Creek, Davie, Parkland, Pembroke Pines and Weston. They include a host of city commissioners and state representatives. They also include former Attorney General Bob Butterworth, Property Appraiser Lori Parrish and School Board member Nora Rupert, among many others.

It's highly unusual for so many people in public life to support a challenger against a longtime incumbent. Brown's list of supporters shows the growing consensus that Snipes is no longer on top of her game.

Brown points out that Broward's voter turnout ranks well below the statewide average. Snipes argues that turnout is not her job, that turnout is driven by inspiring candidates, responsible voters and get-out-the-vote campaigns. She says her job is to provide opportunities to register to vote, and to educate people on the three ways they can vote: by mail, by early voting and on Election Day.

"I have put together a good elections office. It was not functioning," said Snipes, who replaced the disgraced former supervisor, Miriam Oliphant. "I would like to see the office move forward in a positive direction and continue to make progress."

Brown says he will improve turnout by ensuring adequate parking at polling sites, provide covered areas for those in line, and set up a better interior flow to keep people from standing outside in inclement weather. He also would maximize early voting days and hours. He notes that Snipes reduced early voting for the primary, offering fewer days and hours than her colleagues in Palm Beach and Miami-Dade counties.

As a regular customer of the supervisor's office — filing candidate paperwork and petitions, obtaining voters lists and labels, and trying to find records and referendums on a frustrating website — Brown knows up-close how the place could work better.

"I know what it takes to run an election and drive out voters," Brown says. "I want to do that for everyone because Broward County turnout is abysmally low." Unless he improves performance, Brown says he won't accept the pay raise that recently bumped Snipes' annual salary to $169,000.

There's other issues, too, with the elections office:

• The website is hard to use. Until we pointed it out to Snipes, you couldn't find who was on the Aug. 30 ballot for state and federal offices, just those at the county level. Neither is the site quickly updated when candidates or referendums make the ballot.

• Unlike some of her colleagues, Snipes does not offer personalized sample ballots for voters in different parts of the county. Instead, everyone gets the same generic ballot. To send a personalized ballot, Snipes says she'd have to eliminate some of the information on the flier. We'd note that a good chunk of flier includes a personal message from her, plus her photo.

• Snipes's office is slow to respond to media inquiries, to tabulate results on election night and to post updates when candidates or referendums make the ballot. This election, she mailed sample ballots the day after mailing absentee ballots. Wouldn't you think the sample ballot would go out first?

• Too often, there are problems with the ballot. This cycle, her office misspelled a candidate's name and left a GOP state committeewoman off the initial ballot. She also sent inaccurate voter ID cards to Davie residents.

• In the 2012 presidential election, as we said at the time, the Broward elections office demonstrated a lack of preparation, a lack of discipline and a lack of focus on customer service. Along with Palm Beach County, it was the last office to report results, making Florida the last in the nation. And seven days after the election, it found 964 ballots. Also, unlike her counterparts, Snipes forced people to call and make an appointment to pick up absentee ballots during early voting. And before the election, she sent ballots to five felons who had no right to vote, even after she was alerted by the Broward Sheriff's Office.

• In the 2014 gubernatorial election, many people raised concerns about the confusing ballot placement of an important reauthorization question for the Children's Services Council. Snipes said she was simply following the law, which requires a certain order of things. But to settle a lawsuit, her office agreed to have poll workers hand out fliers telling voters where to find the question. But at several sites, numerous people found it wasn't happening.