15 new TPD officers sworn in
Newly sworn in Tallahassee Police officer Shayne Broxie badge is pinned by one of his family members. (Photo: Karl Etters/Demcrat)

Fifteen Tallahassee police officers joined the ranks of the third oldest police force in the country Tuesday.

Their addition, marked in a pinning ceremony attended by friends, family and TPD’s top brass, brings the number of sworn officers to 352.

It also marks a push by local officials to combat violent crime in Tallahassee by hiring more police officers.

But not just any officers.

“It’s not that someone just comes along and says I want to do this and that they walked in the door,” said TPD Chief Michael DeLeo. “We’re looking for men and women that want to be in the Tallahassee Police Department and want to serve this community.”

The 15 officers were whittled from more than 100 applicants. Two are women, four are black males and nine are white males.

By adding more officers for community policing, DeLeo is shifting TPD from being a more reactive agency, an issue he has tried to address since he was hired in 2013.

In September, the Tallahassee City Commission approved a budget that included a 13-percent tax increase of which more than $6 million will pay for at least 18 officers this year. An additional 15 officers are slated to be hired with the help a $1.9 million federal grant from the Office of Community Policing Services Hiring Program.

Buy Photo Tallahassee Police Chief Michael DeLeo swears in 15 officers Tuesday. (Photo: Karl Etters/Democrat)

The 15 officers sworn in Tuesday were not hired using that grant, a TPD spokesman said.

DeLeo said about 40 vacancies remain in the department. Of the 100 applicants, about 20 were interviewed, but only 15 of who were hired.

Buy Photo Newly recruited Tallahassee Police officers pray befoe their swearing-in ceremony Tuesday. (Photo: Karl Etters/Democrat)

“We’re not hiring people just to hire them," he said. "We’re hiring people not only with the right qualifications, but with the right character and right spirit of service.”

Contact Karl Etters at ketters@tallahassee.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/1RyzcU2