Andrew Gillum opens up about cutting ties with lobbyist friend Adam Corey and Mike Miller
Buy Photo Adam Corey, left, and Andrew Gillum (Photo: Tallahassee Democrat)Buy Photo

Feelings of betrayed trust prompted Tallahassee Mayor Andrew Gillum to cut ties with longtime friend Adam Corey when the lobbyist's name and involvement in a federal corruption probe were disclosed last summer.

In his most extensive interview to date, Gillum sat down with the Tallahassee Democrat and spoke on a range of topics related to the federal investigation — from feeling manipulated by Corey into meeting developers who may have been FBI undercover agents to the "purgatory" the city has been sent to as it awaits possible indictments.

More: Adam Corey, lobbyist subpoenaed in FBI probe, severing capital city connections

“I had a trusting relationship and I felt like I allowed people around me who were acquaintances of his because I trusted him,” Gillum said. “And it appears that if these guys were here for an investigation, that the only way they got to me was by leveraging my friendship with Adam.”

The Corey Connection

Corey has been at the heart of the probe that began as early as August 2015, when a self-described developer from Atlanta named Mike Miller, whom sources said was an FBI undercover agent, began hobnobbing with local officials and business people.

Since Corey and others were named in federal subpoenas dropped on City Hall in June, Corey has been seen sporadically in Tallahassee and has put up several properties for sale, including the headquarters for his now-shuttered lobbying firm.

Corey opened doors for Miller and his two associates, who went by the aliases of Brian Butler, who said he was the head of an energy efficiency company, and Mike Sweets, who claimed to be a medical marijuana entrepreneur from out West.

Corey set up meetings between Miller, his pals and city and county officials, including a tapas and cocktails sit-down at the Edison with Gillum in May 2016.

More: 'Mike Miller': Developer or FBI agent?

Mike Sweets brings medical marijuana link into FBI probe

Brian Butler's background full of question marks

'Another day in the office,' say planners who met with mystery developer

Corey and Miller arranged a weekend of outings in New York City in August 2016 during the same weekend that Gillum was in Manhattan for People for the American Way, the nonprofit agency he worked for until just before he announced he was running for governor last February.

The outings included a boat ride to the Statue of Liberty, taking in a Mets game and seeing Hamilton, the Broadway musical. A photo obtained by the Democrat shows Gillum and Corey posing during the boat ride. It was either taken by Miller or Sweets, Gillum said.

The Democrat's intention to publish the photo prompted Gillum's camp to reach out and request a meeting.

A photo obtained by the Democrat shows Tallahassee Mayor and Democratic gubernatorial candidate Andrew Gillum and former lobbyist Adam Corey posing together for a snapshot on a boat ride in New York Harbor near the Statue of Liberty in August 2016. It was one of several events that weekend arranged for Gillum by Corey and Mike Miller, a purported undercover agent posing as a developer from Atlanta. Miller was also on the boat ride but is not shown in this photo. Mike Sweets, another suspected undercover agent who claimed to be a medical marijuana entrepreneur, was also on the boat. (Photo: Special to the Democrat)

The New York trip is the subject of a state ethics investigation, which Gillum said placed some restrictions on what he could say about it.

While Gillum has not confirmed attending the Hamilton show or Mets game, he maintained he took nothing from Corey, and either paid his own way or had his brother Marcus, who was also on the trip, pay some of their expenses.

“From time to time my brother will cover a bill for me and I will cover a bill for him,” Gillum said in a separate phone interview that evening. “I’m not able to say all of those details. That will come out over the course of our ethics investigation.”

Gillum also said if he had to do it over again, he would not have taken that boat trip.

“I had to be there for work, that part of it still would have taken place,” he said. “Would I have taken what I thought was an innocent trip out to the Statue of Liberty at the invitation of a friend? In hindsight knowing what I know, I wouldn’t have done that.”

Gillum assumed there was no cost associated with the boat trip because one of the guys — Miller or Sweets — said the boat belonged to a friend of theirs.

Looking back, Gillum said Corey may have been cooperating with the FBI.

“I don’t know if he had a relationship with these folks or that he thought they legitimately had an interest in Tallahassee or if there was intention toward deception,” Gillum said.

Gillum and Corey have been friends since their days in student government in college. Corey served as his volunteer campaign treasurer in 2014, and Gillum supported the selection of Corey to convert the old Electric Building in Cascades Park into the Edison restaurant with $2.1 million in local aid.

When contacted by text for comment, Corey said: "no thank you."

An 'uncomfortable situation'

The subpoenas issued in June named Corey along with developers and business people J.T. Burnette, Chad Kittrell, Kim Rivers and others. Months later, another subpoena served to the city named City Commissioner Scott Maddox and close associates, including Paige Carter Smith, his former aide and current Downtown Improvement Authority executive director.

When the first subpoenas dropped, Gillum was shocked by the news and subsequent media coverage.

“I was caught by surprise as anybody else was by all of it,” he said. “This was a case of dog biting man, not man biting dog. I didn’t go out there saying 'Hey come try to buy my vote."

Miller and his pals had met with city growth management officials, seeking to move the boundaries of the Community Redevelopment Agency to encompass land they were thinking of buying and developing for a multi-million dollar mixed-use project.

While the CRA voted to expand its boundaries to include part of the identified property, Miller and company never brought a proposal of their own to the CRA or City Commission for approval.

“I didn’t get deep into conversations with them and there was no actual proposal before us,” said Gillum, who wasn't present for the CRA expansion vote.

Most of Gillum's contact was with Miller, not Sweets or Butler.

About a year after Corey introduced Miller to the mayor, the relationship ended abruptly.

"Mike Miller was the guy who was around the most, around the city the most, and around me through Adam the most," Gillum said. "Our communication came to a decisive conclusion because I felt uncomfortable about one occurrence that took place.

"And that was the last time I ever heard from them."

Gillum declined to provide details about the "uncomfortable situation" that prompted him to cut off contact. He said he never suspected the trio of being undercover agents.

A city in 'purgatory'

Gillum said he has been assured by federal authorities he is not a target of the investigation.

"Twenty-plus subpoenas have been issued and not one of them has anything to do with me," he said. There have only been three known federal grand jury subpoenas served at City Hall.

He also said his team has been in touch with federal prosecutors in D.C., who advised him not to comment on the case.

“My guess is that there are probably elements of this investigation are still being wrapped up,” Gillum said. “I have no intelligence on it. This is me making assumptions about what I think is probably the case.”

He drew comparisons to the FBI investigation of the Leon County School District under past superintendent Jackie Pons, which drew a great deal of media attention but has not led to any arrests and has not officially been closed.

"A lot of legal bills were paid, and we still don’t know what happened," Gillum said. "That would be a wholly unacceptable conclusion in this case."

Gillum suspects that this investigation is much larger in scope. Still, he says the current climate of uncertainty is untenable.

“What is taking so long? You’ve been at this two and a half years,” Gillum said, adding that “my respect for their process is not indefinite."

"This is a purgatory. For me individually. For our community. For every name that has been mentioned. For every business mentioned in this. I cannot go anywhere in the state without being asked about this."

Democrat Senior writer Jeff Burlew contributed to this report. Contact Schweers at jschweers@tallahassee.com. Follow him on Twitter @jeffschweers.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tallahassee.com/story/news/2018/01/18/andrew-gillum-opens-up-cutting-ties-lobbyist-friend-adam-corey-and-mike-miller/1037869001/