Chief DeLeo: 'We’re not where we want to be'
Buy Photo City commissioners discussed with Tallahassee Police Chief Michael DeLeo ways to address the city's crime rate. (Photo11: Joe Rondone/Democrat)Buy Photo

Mayor Andrew Gillum called Tallahassee Police Chief Michael DeLeo to task Wednesday night over the city’s crime that has again put a cloud over efforts at creating a safer community.

Directing DeLeo to provide more frequent updates to the city commission, Gillum peppered him with questions about how the chief is using resources between yearly updates on the department’s budget.

Gillum said he would be "frankly happy" to get an update from DeLeo at every other commission meeting "so we can be assured that the steps are being taken and the things that we’re being told are happening in the meantime between budgets…are in fact happening.”

As DeLeo prepared to brief city commissioners on continued efforts to combat crime, two people were hospitalized in a stabbing at the public bus terminal.

That’s indicative of the first six months of the year in which there has been an uptick in violent crime compared to the same timeframe last year, according to data presented at the meeting.

Gillum called on DeLeo to update commissioners on crime fighting efforts a day after self-reported, annual data released June 14 by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement showed that for the third consecutive year Leon County had the highest crime rate in the state. Most of the crime in the county occurs in the city limits.

“We’re not where we want to be and I think everybody recognizes that,” DeLeo said bluntly during the 90-minute presentation. “It’s not an overnight process. It’s not a Band-Aid approach

.”

DeLeo noted improvements in reducing violent crime, which is down 11 percent from last year. Property crime also decreased by about 10 percent and is down for the first six months of the year compared to 2016. The value of stolen property last year was $27.4 million.

Buy Photo Police Chief Michael DeLeo gave city commissioners and update on the efforts to combat crime in Tallahassee at Wednesday's meeting. (Photo11: Joe Rondone/Democrat)

Gillum said crime stats mixed with several weeks of violence in Tallahassee are cause for concern among politicians and the public.

“Folks are right to be anxious,” he said. “I know if we’re anxious then your officers who are doing the line duty every single day have got to share in that level of anxiety, and even greater because their lives are on the line.

“We’ve got make sure that everything that is being done is being done with an eye toward results.”

Related: 'Work to be done' Leon has highest crime rate in Florida again

At the meeting, City Commissioner Curtis Richardson said he was especially discouraged by a spate of violent incidents over the weekend, including a baby being wounded by gunfire.

“I think this community hit an all-time low when we had to hear about an infant being shot in a car, a bullet-riddled car, and an infant alone in that car with a gunshot wound,” he said. “That to me is an all-time low.”

Presentations brought to commissioners in City Hall are well and good, Richardson said, but the difference has to be made on Tallahassee’s streets.

The police force has grown since DeLeo took the helm in 2013. In the last two years 55 officers were added to the force and by the end of 2018 TPD is on track to have 410 sworn officers.

Part of DeLeo’s presentation included the department’s efforts to bolster relationships with the community. Doing that is a long-term process that can lead to people becoming more comfortable working with police to reduce crime.

Concerning for Richardson, however, was that two days before the infant was shot, he and TPD officers participated in an Operation Safe Neighborhoods event in the very area where the shooting occurred.

“We’ve got to redouble our efforts whatever they are because there are neighborhoods that are under siege in this community,” Richardson said.

Commissioner Gil Ziffer said the crime data should be looked at as internal measures, not comparisons.

“Our numbers are not good but it seems like what we need to focus on is how are we doing year over year and are we getting better,” Ziffer said. “Because if were not then we're failing.”

Social ills like poverty, hunger and health care in certain areas all contribute to crime, Ziffer said, and need to be at the forefront when talking about how to make changes.

Also included in DeLeo's report was an updated version of a map police officials compiled in 2014 showing crime “hot spots.”

The map compares where violent and property crimes have occurred between January and June 15, compared to the same period last year.

The comparison shows the same types of crimes are being committed in similar places across the city but — without giving specific numbers of incidents — also shows reductions in offenses in certain areas.

Ziffer and City Commissioner Scott Maddox suggested going after suspects in areas that are known criminal hotspots.

Maddox specifically mentioned a grocery store on the south side that he called a known open air drug market. He also mentioned a string of Monroe Street hotels known for prostitution and the scene of several shootings, most recently two weeks ago.

Putting officers in the right places to arrest the right perpetrators in a targeted effort could make a difference, Maddox said.

“I know it’s the bubble process where if you push down a bubble it pops up somewhere else,” he said. “But at least we’ll get relief from that bubble.”

The number of officers added to the TPD force has increased steadily since DeLeo took the helm in 2013. Since 2015, 55 officers were added to the force. By the end of 2018 TPD’s staff will grow to 410 sworn officers.

Contact Karl Etters at ketters@tallahassee.com or @KarlEtters on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tallahassee.com/story/news/2017/06/29/chief-deleo-were-not-where-we-want-be/435932001/