Twitter tornado offers insight into Hermine response
Twitter comments offer insight to criticism behind city's hurricane response

Buy Photo Gov. Rick Scott works with Florida National Guard members, Florida Department of Transportation crews and volunteers to clean debris off of Southside streets, near the intersection of Lake Mary Street and Orange Avenue on Wednesday. (Photo: Joe Rondone/Democrat)Buy Photo

A day after Hurricane Hermine blew through Tallahassee, a second storm struck the powerless capital.

The Twitter tornado that followed created a political upheaval of its own -- with plenty of finger-pointing in all directions. It lasted several days, and died down before the last customer had power restored.

The first hurricane to hit Florida in 11 years was also the first tracked and commented on via social media. It also fell over a three-day holiday weekend and zeroed in on Tallahassee, the capital of the third largest state in the country, full of affluent power brokers and influential lobbyists and journalists.

“This was a direct hit on a major city, a population center with a lot of trees,” said Barry Moline, executive director of the Florida Municipal Electric Association. “If this was a statewide issue nobody would be paying attention to Tallahassee.”

Left to their own personal devices, a cluster of Republican lobbyists, consultants and political insiders took aim at Tallahassee Mayor Andrew Gillum and the city administrators, questioning the ability of a government-run utility to prepare for and recover from a Category 1 hurricane.

"They are building up opposition against Gillum, even in the middle of a hurricane,” said Nancy Argenziano, a former Republican state lawmaker who chaired the Public Service Commission. “They are concerned."

Ryan Wiggins, a Republican consultant in Pensacola who spent a decade in Tallahassee working for the Governor’s Office, the Office of the Attorney General, and the Florida Department of Transportation, tweeted it looked like an “opportunity to permanently maim the political career of a mayor from the other party. ;-)”

Nobody handled the aftermath of a hurricane worse than the way former New Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin did after Katrina in 2005, Wiggins said in an interview.

“But during the storm and in the immediate aftermath, no one came after him,” Wiggins said.

Nagin was re-elected in 2006.

Brendan Farrington of the Associated Press asked on Twitter whether Hermine would be Gillum’s Katrina.

A photo illustration posted to the Kissimmee Utility Authority's Facebook page. The veneration of linemen as storm soldiers and hurricane heroes aftermath became something of a Kumbaya moment in the politicized Hurricane Hermine response. (Photo: Kissimmee Utility Authority)

Sally Ann West, the regional director of government relations for Walgreens, tweeted that “even if Gillum was incompetent (he isn't) TLH would re-elect him.”

The political Tweeters also seemed to have shaped a narrative of failure, condemning Gillum and praising Scott for stepping into save the day. Scott took up the hero mantle and had days of photo opportunities where he personally assisted in debris removal.

Scott was guided by consultants positioning him for a U.S. Senate race in two years, Wiggins said. “The question I asked on Twitter was how would state representatives and legislators feel if the federal government came down and did what the governor did.”

Rumors and complaints began to swirl Saturday afternoon, after word got around that city officials had rejected help Friday night from Eric Silagy, the president of FPL who had flown up on his own private jet from South Florida. Silagy said he had 500 linemen parked 90 minutes away in Lake City, but they'd go elsewhere if he didn't get an answer from the city.

City officials said they had enough help. They had just accepted crews from eight other utilities, effectively doubling the number of boots on the ground to repair the power grid and reconnect homes and businesses.

By mid-afternoon Saturday, the Tweets were coming fast and furious. Exchanges between lobbyists and news reporters. Heated rants between Republicans and Democrats. Accusations from both sides they were politicizing a disaster. Even St. Petersburg blogger Peter Schorsch couldn't resist the political donnybrook, criticizing the city for its handling of the disaster recovery efforts.

One of the more persistent was Brian Hughes, a former state Republican Party executive and spokesman for Gov. Scott who runs his own consulting firm, Meteoric Media Strategies.

Hughes checked out of Tallahassee Friday night, saying the city was a mess. From his beachside retreat, Hughes asked repeatedly why the city wasn’t accepting outside help, particularly from JEA of Jacksonville, Florida Power & Light, and Duke Energy Florida.

Just as persistent was Hughes’ wife, Rachel Perrin Rogers, communications director for Republican Sen. Wilton Simpson. Rogers repeatedly asked members of the press corps to ask Gillum whether he accepted or rejected help from JEA, FPL and Duke.

“I have firsthand knowledge” of Mayor Curry’s offer of help, Rogers tweeted at one point. Hughes had been one of Jacksonville Mayor Lenny Curry’s chief consultants during the 2015 mayoral race where he ousted incumbent Alvin Brown.

Others chimed in that Gillum was dodging questions and evading responsibility, phrases that echoed accusations made against incumbent Jacksonville Mayor Alvin Brown in 2015. Hughes, a spokesman for Curry, told the Florida Times-Union that Brown was pointing fingers and shirking his own responsibility for the city’s pension mess. “Jacksonville deserves better,” Hughes said.​

City officials and Democrats accused the critics of playing politics with a disaster. Hughes, Leon County GOP Chairman Evan Power, consultant Gus Corbella and others pushed back, saying Democrats were politicizing the concerns of residents speaking out for themselves. They also said they were looking out for the elderly and disabled who had no power.

To which Max Steele, communications director for the Florida Democratic Party, chirped: "yes, surely it’s that simple and your intentions are purely to see that power is restored for Tallahassee residents."

On Monday morning, Labor Day, Hughes tweeted that if you “protest ineptitude ur a Republican shill. So shut up & enjoy day 4 of living like the Third World.”

Christian Camara, southeast regional director for the R Street Institute who goes by the handle @Reaganista, posted several tweets that this illustrated the failure of government-run power companies and led the call for privatization of municipal utilities.

Sam Bell, a retired FPL executive who also ran Tallahassee's utilities, said all power companies follow the same procedures and protocols following a disaster.

A chart produced by FMEA using data from the U.S. Department of Energy and the Florida Division of Emergency Management showed that the Tallahassee utility restored power in six days, quicker than utilities following Hurricane Irene, also a Category 1 storm, and Sandy, which was a tropical storm when it hit the northeast coast.

"People have been calling for hearings and investigations and so on," Moline said "I think this is basic information for everyone to have to compare the various storms that have hit florida and elsewhere.

History of power restoration following hurricanes (Photo: Florida Municipal Electric Association)

Another round of angry tweets flew on Sunday after Scott put out a newsletter saying Gillum and the city had refused help from the Florida Department of Transportation for debris removal. It wasn’t true, and the governor’s office later called the release a “misunderstanding.”

More tweets were generated during and after Tuesday’s special city commission meeting on the hurricane. West, the Walgreens executive, was tweeting that Gillum showed grace under pressure, noting that he was the only one willing to say communication could have been better.

CLOSE Scott: 'It's not an issue of working hard, it's an issue of we've got to get results'

At one point, Democratic consultant Steve Schale said he longed for the days when “public officials settled issues by just picking up the phone.”

At that meeting, Gillum’s patience with Gov. Scott had worn thin. “He said if you want to lead you wouldn’t be doing this in a public meeting with microphones and cameras,” Moline said.

Gov. Scott didn’t apologize, but he did start praising the city more on Twitter. And he spent three days posing for photographs while picking up debris.

By Thursday, six days after Hermine had struck, nearly all the city’s customers had their power restored and the Twitter tornado subsided.​

Jeffrey Schweers can be reached at jschweers@tallahassee.com . Follow him on Twitter @jeffschweers.

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/2d8qoa6