'Who’s calling the shots': Frustration mounts as Leon County commissioners convene
County meeting focuses on communication, response

Buy Photo Leon County Commissioners convene emergency meeting to discuss recovery lagging efforts in the wake of Hurricane Hermine (Photo: Karl Etters/Democrat)Buy Photo

Frustrations about communication and the pace of restoring power in Tallahassee peaked during an emergency meeting of the Leon County Commission.

Commissioners, emergency officials and people trying to get the city back on the grid slogged through a several hour meeting addressing all aspects of recovery, but chiefly power restoration to the more than 14,000 sitting in the dark at sunrise Tuesday.

City of Tallahassee and Talquin Electric crews are slowly making their way to street level and neighborhood outages. By Tuesday morning – five days since Hurricane Hermine blasted through Tallahassee – 90 percent of homes had power.

County Commissioner John Dailey wasn’t one of them.

“Congratulations on the 90 percent mark. I guess I represent the other 10 percent,” said Dailey, the commission’s vice chair, following a power update from Tallahassee General Manager of the Electric Utility Rob McGarrah. “We don’t have power. We’re frustrated. We’re angry. We want answers. We’re not getting answers. This is ridiculous.”

City officials have started to post the daily work order for power crews in an attempt to better communicate to the community where they are headed.

Initial work could not begin until the 325 toppled trees were cleared and charged lines powered down. Eight collector roads and 130 local roads were closed, but by Tuesday, all county roads were open.

A clearly frustrated Dailey was echoing what a lot in the capital city are feeling, a sense of abandonment. Social media pages are flooded with pictures of still down trees and power lines lying across driveways.

“It’s day five, but we’ve got to communicate,” he said.

Commissioner Kristen Dozier said she heard from a family in Waverly Hills, large swaths of which remain without power. The family had called four times about a downed line crossing its driveway. In desperation, they hired a private contractor to remove it so they could get vehicles in and out of the house.

When a city crew arrived, it was unaware the outage had been called in.

The 45-minute wait to report outages, mixed with a general response, has left some people disgruntled as they wait it out in the sweltering heat.

“We fully understand the magnitude and it is clear in the comments I’ve heard the defensiveness of this community,” Dozier said. “If we have a place for people to ask questions and get a proactive response, we're not going to solve every problem, but it will help folks feel a lot better. It is less about how many people were out and what is being done and more about communication.”

The county doesn’t operate power crews. Residents in unincorporated Leon County are served by Talquin Electric, which by Tuesday had restored power to 94 percent of its Leon County customers.

Tallahassee’s widespread outages have become politicized as Mayor Andrew Gillum and Gov. Rick Scott have sparred about the pace of power restoration and the acceptance of outside help.

City officials said they accepted all the help they could use at the time but never refused outside assistance. Utility companies from more than nine municipalities are working alongside city and Talquin crews.

The confusion over who is in charge when the emergency operations center is engaged came up during the county meeting. The county activates the center, but with two local governments trying to help, who to turn to can become murky.

County Commission Chair Bill Proctor, Leon County Sheriff Mike Wood, County Attorney Herb Thiele and County Administrator Vince Long run emergency operations by state statute.

But Proctor said when widespread power outages is the issue, the city, which has electricians, equipment and the resources to make repairs,steps in.

"We don't have the wherewithal to be doing electrical work," Proctor said after the meeting. "We defer to and lean on the city for electricity."

Dailey said that’s one of the main concerns he’s heard on the street. After the recovery, he’d like some clarification of the inter-local agreement.

“You see this press conference and that press conference. We need to remind ourselves, maybe through a joint workshop with the city, when we enter into an emergency situation and we execute that EOC, this is how it works and it’s got to be a vertical chain of command,” Dailey said. “We need to know who’s in charge and who’s calling the shots.”

Crime, despite large areas without power cloaked in darkness, has not been a major issue, Wood said.

“The storm seemed to have impacted our criminals as well,” Wood said.

LCSO’s helicopter crew helped power officials locate downed lines within hours of Hermine moving out of the area.

State officers have pitched in with 20 officers stationed around town to augment the long 12-hour shifts deputies and police officers have been working. Law enforcement presence is more than twice than is normal.

The Consolidated Dispatch Agency fielded 10,000 calls since the storm, 2,500 percent of them 911 calls. No priority 1 calls went unanswered during the storm, Wood said.

“I’m sure we will identify some areas that we’ll do better in,” he said. “The consolidated dispatch, which has been under the spotlight for quite some time, it worked flawlessly. They were the one organization that reports no hiccups. I could not imagine it going any better.”

Contact Karl Etters at ketters@tallahassee.com or @KarlEtters on Twitter.

CLOSE Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HURRICANE HERMINE AFTERMATH (SEPT. 6) Gillum speaks on storm recovery | 2:22 The Tallahassee City Commission met to discuss the response thus far in the wake of Hurricane Hermine Tuesday morning. Alvin McBean/Democrat 1 of 4 CLOSE Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HURRICANE HERMINE AFTERMATH (SEPT. 6) QA with Reese Goad: Am I forgotten? | 1:33 QA with Reese Goad: Am I forgotten? 2 of 4 CLOSE Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HURRICANE HERMINE AFTERMATH (SEPT. 6) QA with Reese Goad: Accuracy of power outage map | 2:09 QA with Reese Goad: Accuracy of power outage map 3 of 4 CLOSE Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HURRICANE HERMINE AFTERMATH (SEPT. 6) Deputy city manager Reese Goad answers questions about Hermine recovery | 28:50 City of Tallahassee deputy city manager Reese Goad answers questions about Hermine recovery 4 of 4 Last VideoNext Video Gillum speaks on storm recovery

QA with Reese Goad: Am I forgotten?

QA with Reese Goad: Accuracy of power outage map

Deputy city manager Reese Goad answers questions about Hermine recovery

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/2cyCCbO