Milwaukee, WI Family Law Attorney
Marty Gagne practices Family Law, exclusively, including complex financial and custody cases. He has over 25 years of experience in cases dealing with the valuation of closely-held businesses, stock options, executive compensation, employee benefits, trusts and gifted and inherited property. He has represented parents in local, interstate and international child custody disputes. As a family law attorney, he offers cooperative divorce and collaborative divorce as well as traditional divorce (with or without litigation). Mr. Gagne has also mediated dozens of Family Law cases since 1990. He practices throughout southeastern Wisconsin, including Milwaukee, Waukesha, Ozaukee, Washington, Sheboygan, Racine, Manitowoc, Calumet, Walworth and Kenosha Counties.

Mr. Gagne has been selected a Wisconsin Super Lawyer in the area of Family Law every year since 2005. Prior to the existence of “Wisconsin Super Lawyer,” he was named one of the best Milwaukee divorce lawyers by Milwaukee Magazine in 1995, 2001 and 2003. He is AV rated by Martindale-Hubbell and has been listed in that publication’s Bar Register of Preeminent Lawyers since 2005. He has also been named in The Best Lawyers in America every year since 2008. He has been a presenter at seminars and classes to attorneys, law students, mental health professionals, and community members on Family Law issues.

Mr. Gagne is a Court Commissioner and member of the State Bar of Wisconsin Board of Governors. He is former Chairperson of the Board of Directors of the Family Law Section of the Milwaukee Bar Association, a former member of the Board of Directors of the Divorce Cooperation Institute, Inc., and is currently a member of the Leander J. Foley Matrimonial Inns of Court, Milwaukee Bar Association, the State Bar of Wisconsin Family Law Section, the Divorce Cooperation Institute, Inc., and the Collaborative Family Law Council of Wisconsin, Inc.

Mr. Gagne is a 1978 graduate of Clark University and a 1981 cum laude graduate of Boston University Law School.