Accusations fly between John Dailey, Dustin Daniels in Tallahassee Mayor race
CLOSE Watch it: Mayoral candidates meet with the Editorial Board. Due to network difficulties, there are few missing clips in first 20 minutes. Tallahassee Democrat

Buy Photo At the Tallahassee mayoral candidate debate, candidates John Dailey (left) and Dustin Daniels (right) speak to the Tallahassee Democrat editorial board. (Photo: Alicia Devine/Democrat)Buy Photo

Except for their matching suits and ties and the fact they have degrees from both Florida State University and the London School of Economics, John Dailey and Dustin Daniels have very little in common.

In temperament. In upbringing. In the way they answer questions.

And biggest of all, in the way they see the big issues facing this community — particularly crime and ethics — and how to tackle them.

But both turned out to be bare-knuckle brawlers when it came to defending their own turf and record at a recent editorial board meeting of the Tallahassee Democrat, even pulling the curtain back to expose their behind-the-scenes braintrust.

Daniels, who was Mayor Andrew Gillum’s chief of staff while an undercover FBI investigation was going on and while the combined city and county crime rate was highest in the state, has tried to portray himself as the solution to the city’s problems without also bearing the blame for failures.

Dailey tried to portray the problems of the city as falling on the lack of strong leadership of the mayor — and by extension Daniels — while Daniels fought back by frequently calling Dailey’s comments “Republican talking points.”

Meanwhile, Dailey tried to portray himself as a “fresh face at City Hall” even though he’s been on the County Commission for 12 years and has developed relationships with the same developers and vendors who do business with the city.

On Crime: Using 'Republican talking points to attack me'

The city’s crime rate has become a political hot potato in the governor’s race, thanks to a campaign flyer Daniels sent out during the primary admitting that Tallahassee had the highest number of murders in its history last year as well as the county having the highest crime rate in the state.

Republicans capitalized on the ad, saying that even Gillum’s chief of staff was critical of the crime problem.

Buy Photo Dustin Daniels for Mayor (Photo: Democrat files)

Back story: Ron DeSantis uses Dustin Daniels' ad to attack Andrew Gillum's record on crime

But Daniels also has been saying that Tallahassee’s crime is at a 20-year low.

“I am completely baffled where you are on this Dustin,” Dailey said. “You send out not one but two pieces of mail, one in the primary and now one in the general, just slamming the crime rate and the problems that we have, making big bold statements.

“But then after the flak hit statewide and national, the message is 'look at all the amazing things.' ”

That’s awkward. Gillum's own chief of staff criticizes Tallahassee crime rate.



If you can’t control crime in a city according to your own team how can you do it over the whole state??? #Florida, wake up and vote for ⁦@RonDeSantisFL⁩

fl #flpolhttps://t.co/FOYFnbJJSl — Donald Trump Jr. (@DonaldJTrumpJr) September 25, 2018

Daniels corrected Dailey that he hasn’t sent out a mailer since the primary.

“I am not going to grab my pearls in disbelief,” Daniels said. “It doesn’t surprise me that Mr. Dailey uses Republican talking points to attack me.”

Reports for 2017 and the first six months of 2018 do show a dramatic downward trend for the community, according to a report TPD Chief Michael DeLeo made before the City Commission.

Daniels told the editorial board that a lot of progress has been made.

“I hesitate to say we should feel good because any sort of crime is unacceptable,” he said. “But we should feel good about the trends we’re seeing.”

Daniels credited the programs initiated by the city commission and mayor, the hiring of 50 new uniformed officers, investing in youth diversion programs and reversing adult recidivism, and addressing community policing.

“I’ve been saying from Day One, what we have done in the Mayor’s Office and city has worked and we need to double down on that,” Daniels said.

Buy Photo At the Tallahassee mayoral candidate debate, candidate John Dailey speaks to the Tallahassee Democrat editorial board. (Photo: Alicia Devine/Democrat)

Dailey agreed that some strides have been made, noting that the Sheriff’s Office “has done an excellent job getting felony warrants off the streets.”

Both agreed statistics are better used as a way to assess trends rather than a snapshot of the moment.

“Data is in the eye of the beholder and it’s arbitrary,” Daniels said. “It’s helpful to use the numbers to compare ourselves from one year to the next and to other communities. But don’t let it be the only measuring stick.”

Related story: Andrew Gillum attends fundraiser for Dustin Daniels' PAC in mayor bid

Both agreed the city still needs to add more officers to its ranks. Officials said the city has 410 officers, 30 short of what it needs.

Things also got testy when Dailey criticized Gillum’s proposal in 2017 to have the police department operate under the sheriff. “Constitutionally that cannot be done,” he said.

Daniels accused Dailey of mischaracterizing the proposal Gillum made. He asked Dailey to enact the emergency operations center last summer so that TPD would be under Sheriff Walt McNeil, who has countywide jurisdiction.

Gillum made his proposal last summer at a time when Tallahassee was facing a spate of violence as the county marked its third year as the highest crime rate per capita.

Back story:

On Ethics: 'If I was Mayor, I would have fired you'

Given a question about how he would change or restructure the city’s Independent Ethics Board, Dailey said he’d conduct a hard scrub of procurement policies and the use of purchasing cards.

“We have abuses of p-cards and not enough checks and balances,” said Dailey, offering as a prime example the $5,000 spent on the purchase of email software used to send out political fundraiser invitations.

A grand jury investigation found that Mayor Gillum had nothing to do with the purchase or use of NGP Van software to pump out politically tinged emails. The grand jury did find that Daniels directed payment of nearly $5,000 in city funds for the software from January 2016 to January 2017 but found no evidence of criminal intent.

Buy Photo At the Tallahassee mayoral candidate debate, candidate Dustin Daniels speaks to the Tallahassee Democrat editorial board. (Photo: Alicia Devine/Democrat)

Gillum paid the city back for the expenditure.

“If I was mayor, I would have fired you. That is not appropriate behavior,” Dailey said, facing Daniels.

Later on, Dailey took the opportunity to say he was extremely concerned by Daniels’ behavior as chief of staff. Not only the grand jury report but also the revelation that Daniels was in Las Vegas in April 2016 with lobbyist Adam Corey and undercover FBI agents.

Back story: 'Nothing to hide': Mayoral hopeful Dustin Daniels opens up about contacts with FBI agents

Dailey also mentioned that when the candidates for City Commission filed to run, they received a letter from the city’s ethics board officer that they shouldn’t email city staff, even though it technically was not illegal or a violation of state ethics law.

“Your comment in the paper was in so many words, ‘I don’t care about anyone’s opinion’,” Dailey said. “I don’t think that is the type of leadership Tallahassee is looking for in your mayor.”

Daniels responded, “There you go back to Republican talking points.”

The Sheriff’s Office, the city’s ethics board and the state ethics commission all looked into the software issue. “All three said no harm was done,” Daniels said.

Then he attacked Dailey’s record — voting to replace Dianne Williams-Cox on the planning and zoning board with Joseph Volpe, a real estate lawyer who held a fundraiser for Dailey.

And he criticized Dailey for taking donations from developer Steve Ghazvini before a controversial vote on Summerbrooke that greatly increased housing density.

“Dailey has been running rampant his entire time at the county,” Daniels said.

Back story: Bannerman Road, Summerbrooke zoning proposal moves forward despite homeowner objections

Dailey voted against the developer’s request. “The developer still thinks I’d make a great mayor and contributed to my campaign.”

Dailey then asked Daniels about Sean Pittman, a lobbyist and lawyer who is helping run Daniels’ campaign and whose staff set up his political committee.

“Pittman is a city vendor who also runs your campaign,” Dailey said.

Daniels said Pittman is not a city vendor, but a subcontractor to Ron Book, who is the city’s legislative lobbyist.

“It’s really laughable when Vancore Jones is running your campaign and is a county vendor,” Daniels said, referring to the public relations and polling firm run by Steve Vancore and Drew Jones.

Jones represents several clients before the county and city and is under contract to provide services for the city’s utilities department. The firm has run campaigns for both county and city commissioner candidates.

More: Dailey, Daniels get into stormy debate over Hurricane Hermine recovery | Video

Contact Jeff Schweers at jschweers@tallahassee.com. Follow him on Twitter @jeffschweers.

Read or Share this story: https://www.tallahassee.com/story/news/2018/10/01/tallahassee-mayoral-race-turns-ugly-editorial-board-meeting/1431332002/