Andrew Gillum: One wounded victim was shot nine times in Tallahassee yoga studio shooting
Buy Photo The Tallahassee Police Department searches a red Chevrolet car parked at Betton Place on the corner of East Bradford and Thomasville roads as part of an investigation into a shooting at Hot Yoga in Tallahassee, Fla., Friday, Nov. 2, 2018. (Photo11: Tori Schneider/Tallahassee Democrat)Buy Photo

Mayor Andrew Gillum left a Shabbat prayer session in South Florida in memory of 11 people killed in a Pittsburgh synagogue gun massacre a week ago to return to Tallahassee to reckon with a hometown shooting that left two people dead and five others injured.

Gillum, who was on the final push of his Democratic gubernatorial campaign, said he had met at Tallahassee Memorial HealthCare — alongside Gov. Rick Scott — with two women who suffered gunshots at Hot Yoga studio on Thomasville and Bradford roads Friday evening.

“It reminds us that these occurrences are far too frequent and often times render us speechless as we try to figure out what’s going on what happened and why,” Gillum said, standing across the street from the plaza where the shooting occurred.

He said he met with a woman who had been shot nine times in the incident and another who had a bullet pass through her body.

Dr. Nancy Van Vessem, 61, and Maura Binkley, 21, were killed in the shooting.

A sad day for our city:

Moments like Friday’s shooting, in which the gunman, 40-year-old Scott Paul Beierle, shot himself, leave an indelible mark on communities.

“We’re still at a traumatic place because when these kinds of events happen all of our hearts go out,” he said. “We all feel a sense of added vulnerability.”

Gillum thanked Scott, a Republican in a fierce battle for U.S. Senate with Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson, whose policies Gillum has frequently criticized on the campaign trail.

“I want to thank him for the care and concern that he has shown at this time and the support that he’s offered to assist law enforcement,” Gillum said.

Gillum encouraged Tallahassee to continue to show love and support as investigators try to piece together what led to the shooting.

“It’s my sincere hope that we’ll all reflect on why that might be,” he said. “But in the immediate term would ask that the community continue to lift up the victims.”

Read or Share this story: https://www.tallahassee.com/story/news/2018/11/03/gillum-leaves-campaign-trail-wake-yoga-studio-shooting/1869438002/