TPD touts drop in crime rate for first half of year
Buy Photo Tallahassee Police Department Chief Michael DeLeo speaks to the CDA management committee at the Public Safety Complex on Thursday. (Photo: Andrew Salinero/Democrat)Buy Photo

The Tallahassee Police Department is touting decreases in the crime rate for the first half of the year — two months before the state typically releases the statistics.

The data, self-reported to the Florida Department of Law Enforcement and compiled annually by the FBI, is not made public until around November.

The stats show overall crime is down a little more than 10 percent for the first six months of the year. Violent crime dropped more than 24 percent from January through June compared to the first six months of 2017, according to city documents. Property crimes dropped nearly 8 percent.

Breaking news Tuesday night: Two injured in another shooting at student apartment complex

Interactive map:Chronicling the shootings of 2018

According to City Commission materials, crime dropped 14 percent in 2017, with the crime rate reaching a five-year low. The trend continued into 2018.

TPD Chief Michael DeLeo is expected to share the statistics with city commissioners during Wednesday's meeting. He wrote about the declines in an editorial submitted to the Tallahassee Democrat.

From the chief: Semi-annual reporting shows TPD methods are working | Opinion

"Meaningful change is occurring in Tallahassee related to public safety. The level of community involvement continues to grow," DeLeo wrote. "I am extremely proud of the dedicated men and women at the Tallahassee Police Department and their ongoing efforts to ensure our safety."

He continued: "The challenges we face as a community were not created overnight, and as we’ve seen, they cannot be solved overnight. Through strong partnerships and a continued focus on community policing, we remain committed to reducing crime in Tallahassee."

Crime rate high in Tallahassee

Crime has been a big issue in Tallahassee in recent years. Figures released in May showed that while the county's crime rate decreased by 15 percent last year, it remained the highest in the state for the fourth year in a row. About 80 percent of crime countywide occurs in city limits.

The FBI, which compiles the crime data annually, warns against using the statistics to make comparisons because specific conditions and community factors vary. In the past, some local officials have downplayed their significance.

The issue has taken on national and statewide significance since Mayor Andrew Gillum won the Democratic nomination for governor last month. In interviews with national media, Gillum has repeatedly been quizzed about the crime problem.

Related: Andrew Gillum faces questions about health care, crime, race and FBI on Sunday talk shows

During a Sept. 2 appearance on CNN, Gillum boasted that the city was seeing a five-year low in the crime rate. He also emphasized he was mayor of Tallahassee, not Leon County.

"We didn’t do that by arresting more people and throwing away the key but by leaning into smart justice, restorative justice, second chances," he said. "We’re very, very proud of I think the very progressive way in which we’ve addressed crime in my city and it’s evident by the numbers. I’d like to see those kinds of strategies scaled up all around the state of Florida.”

How logging crime incidents has changed

In April, TPD changed the way it totals property crimes after a $34,000 audit found, among other things, that the number of incidents affecting the annual data may have been incorrectly reported higher.

Most of the changes centered around how multiple, similar crimes are tallied and reported within the system. For example, a number of vehicle burglaries in the same area, done in the same manner and believed to be committed by the same suspect are logged as one incident. Multiple hotel rooms break-ins in the same building, around the same time and likely by the same suspect are also one case. Only crimes against tenants in extended stay hotels require separate case numbers.

More on Tallahassee's battle with crime

While there are fewer homicides than the record of 22 a year ago, violence continues to plague the city. Since Labor Day weekend, there has been a spate of shootings. One injured a pregnant woman whose baby was delivered and then flown to UF Health Shands as a result of the incident. There were two separate shootings at student apartments in less than three hours on Sept. 1 and 2 while two other people were injured Sept. 2 in another early morning shooting in west Tallahassee.

Late Tuesday, police were on the scene of another shooting at a student apartment complex where two people were shot, one fatally.

According to city agenda materials, there have been 217 fewer violent crimes compared to the same time last year, a 24 percent decrease, and property crimes have fallen by a reported 352 incidents, a reduction of 7.6 percent.

Compared to the first six months of 2017, there was one fewer murder, 70 fewer robberies and 155 fewer aggravated assaults. Nine more rapes were reported. Additionally, 71 fewer burglaries, 239 fewer larcenies and six fewer motor vehicle thefts were reported.

DeLeo has lauded the work of the police department and its partners in their collaborative approach to fighting crime. By introducing a community policing strategy – and adding 54 officers to the force since 2015 – beat cops have worked to make inroads with citizens in the neighborhoods they patrol.

Contact Karl Etters at ketters@tallahassee.com or @KarlEtters on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: https://www.tallahassee.com/story/news/2018/09/12/tpd-touts-drop-crime-first-half-year/1266082002/