City slapped with new FBI subpoena on Edison, Adam Corey
CLOSE Watch it: FBI Investigation Timeline (updated January 2018) Tallahassee Democrat

Buy Photo Adam Corey, right, poses during Tallahassee Memorial Healthcare's annual Golden Gala fundraiser at the Tucker Civic Center Thursday, April 19, 2018. (Photo: Hali Tauxe/Democrat)Buy Photo

A new FBI subpoena delivered to the City Attorney's office Thursday morning seeks more records related to The Edison restaurant, correspondence with its developer Adam Corey, votes related to its investment company and audit reports.

The new subpoena asks for the business plans, staff evaluations, and proposals related to the restaurant undertaken by Cascades Holdings, the LLC formed by Corey and his investors, which include lawyer/lobbyist Sean Pittman and Nick Iarossi.

It also asks for much of the same material previously requested in two subpoenas that hit the doorstep of City Hall almost one year ago — financial transactions and communications between Corey, the city and the Community Redevelopment Agency.

What's new is a request for "copies of approval documents related to Edison including any and all staff evaluations" and documentation of "funding provided to rehabilitate the site now known as the Edison."

And federal investigators want the information by Tuesday.

"Clearly they are still looking for more information to something they're pursuing," said City Commissioner Gil Ziffer, who was briefed on the subpoena and received a copy of it. "I wish they'd move as quickly as possible. We are coming up on one year since the first subpoenas were served. Obviously, they want more information."

Document: Read the May 31 federal subpoena that names Adam Corey, Edison restaurant

Corey was a longtime college friend of Mayor Andrew Gillum and served as his volunteer campaign manager in 2014, before Gillum's current bid for governor.

The Mayor's office said Thursday the city is cooperating fully with the investigation to provide all requested materials in a timely manner.

"The mayor has no tolerance for corruption and wrongdoing, and the city is taking this very seriously," Chief of Staff Jamie Van Pelt said after subpoena dropped.

Gillum cut ties with Corey months ago, saying his trust was broken when Corey brought him into contact with undercover FBI agents in Tallahassee and on a trip in New York in 2016.

"It appears that if these guys were here for an investigation, that the only way they got to me was by leveraging my friendship with Adam,” Gillum told the Democrat in an interview in January.

The New York trip is the subject of a state ethics investigation. Gillum has maintained for almost a year that he is not a target of the FBI investigation.

A spokesman for his gubernatorial campaign went a step further, saying: "It’s been clear for months that this investigation has focused on one of his colleagues and others. The campaign is focused on voters’ priorities like health care and public education.”

TANGLED WEB: For complete coverage of the FBI investigation, click here.

In mid-June 2017, federal authorities demanded the city of Tallahassee produce volumes of records related to top local developers behind some of the biggest projects subsidized by the CRA.

The subpoenas requested emails and other documents from the CRA and a who's who of Tallahassee business leaders, developers and political movers and shakers, including John Thomas "J.T." Burnette and his former partner Chad Kittrell.

A subsequent subpoena and search warrant showed City Commissioner Scott Maddox and his former chief of staff Paige Carter-Smith, the director of the Downtown Improvement Authority, are central figures in the investigation.

Corey is a board member of the DIA whose term ends Friday.

Corey, the Edison and Cascades Holdings LLC, which received $2.1 million in local tax dollars to help renovate the old electrical building in Cascades Park, were among the people and companies listed in the first round of subpoenas.

The restaurant is also at the center of a State Ethics Commission hearing on June 8. Last year, the city’s Independent Ethics Board admonished former City Manager Rick Fernandez for accepting a $5,000 catering discount for his daughter’s wedding reception.

He eventually was ousted amid complaints about the discount and revelations he accepted Florida State University football tickets from a lobbyist in Corey’s lobbying firm, Unconventional Strategies. Fernandez has said he expects a “positive outcome” once facts of the ethics complaint are fully vetted.

Investigative reports:

The June 2017 subpoenas were the result of a two-year undercover political corruption probe that began in 2015 when an agent posing as an Atlanta developer named Mike Miller began meeting with local officials and business leaders.

Miller hired Corey's lobbying firm in 2016, and Corey opened doors for Miller and his two associates, who went by the aliases of Brian Butler, who posed as the head of an energy efficiency company, and Mike Sweets, who claimed to be a medical marijuana entrepreneur from out West.

Corey set up meetings between Miller, his pals and city and county officials, including a tapas and cocktails sit-down at the Edison with Gillum in May 2016.

"It's just more of the same usual suspects," City Commissioner Curtis Richardson said. "We know Adam Corey was very much a part of this investigation from the start, and it appears they're looking for additional information related to the Edison and its business transactions."

Longtime local defense attorney Steve Andrews, who frequently represents clients in federal court, said he's never seen a situation where the FBI issued new subpoenas requesting much of the same information unless the agency was starting a new investigation.

"The only time I've ever seen that happen is when prosecutors take an indictment to the grand jury and they couldn't sign it," Andrews said.

Contact Schweers at jschweers@tallahassee.com. Follow him on Twitter @jeffschweers.

Read or Share this story: https://www.tallahassee.com/story/news/local/fbi/2018/05/31/breaking-city-hit-new-fbi-subpoena-edison-adam-corey/659649002/