Planned Parenthood Response to Governor Rick Scott’s press release defending cuts to preventive services
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

March 30, 2016

CONTACT: Damien Filer / 850-212-1858 / [email protected]

Today, Governor Rick Scott released a press statement titled “FACTS ON ABORTION LEGISLATION” in response to media attention and the outpouring of criticism about a bill he signed into law last week, HB 1411. The Florida Alliance of Planned Parenthood Affiliates (FAPPA) offers the following responses to each of the “FACTS” alleged in the Governor’s press release:

“It continues to be illegal for any facility in Florida to receive taxpayer funds for abortion services.”

FAPPA Response: State and Federal law already prohibits tax payer funding for abortion services except in situations of rape, incest and the health of the woman. This legislation will not change that but does go even farther and denies public funds that reimburse for preventive health care services intended to reduce the rate of unintended pregnancies and the need for abortion. The sponsors of this legislation implied that by providing reimbursements to health centers that choose to offer elective abortion that taxpayers are paying for abortion care. This is incorrect and an offensive position.

“Planned Parenthood receives less than $114,000 in direct state funds for non-abortion services.”

FAPPA Response: When HB 1411 was being debated during the legislative process, it was stated that Planned Parenthood received about $240,000 in reimbursement. The Governor’s is attempting to down play for effects of patients losing access to care by only sharing the state funds that would be prohibited under this legislation. However, because the legislation is broadly written, Planned Parenthood will also lose access to reimbursements from local government entities and federal funding from the Title X program that is contracted through local county Health Departments.

“Over $5 million in state funds are provided for non-abortion services at many charitable clinics and county health departments. HB 1411 makes sure no state funds can indirectly fund abortions by supporting the same institutions that perform them. For Planned Parenthood, this would only affect about $114,000 in funds they get annually.”

FAPPA Response: See answer above. In addition, Studies from other states have shown (Texas and Indiana) that when patients can’t access their normal provider they can’t or don’t seek care elsewhere, putting themselves and others at risk. Almost 70% of Planned Parenthood health centers in Florida are located in medically underserved or physician shortage areas- making them the only places where Floridians can seek preventive services such as contraception, cancer screenings and testing and treatment for sexually transmitted infections including HIV.

“Family planning services are still fully funded at non-abortion facilities, including:

“All 67 county health departments”

FAPPA Response:

Planned Parenthood has had successful public/private partnerships with County Health Departments for many years: In Palm Beach County, this partnership has been in place for over 20 years serving over 2,500 patients a year with low or no-cost contraception, screenings and educational services. In Collier County, Planned Parenthoods health center is located in the Department of Health allowing 3x as many patients to receive care as the Department could treat alone. County Health Departments have chosen to contract with Planned Parenthood because of the high quality and expertise in services they offer.



“Physician offices”

70% of Planned Parenthood Health Centers are located in medically underserved or physician shortage areas, making them sometimes the only place where people can receive publically funded family planning services.

“Federally Qualified Health Centers”

FQHC’s offer excellent health care to many members of our communities. However, many are not experts on reproductive health care.

In addition, the list of FQHCs often referred to by supporters of HB 1411 includes over 50 school based health centers, dentist offices, food banks and other providers who do not offer contraception, cancer screenings or testing/ treating of STIs.

“College Student Health Centers”

A great option for college students but would not help those who are not enrolled at the school.

“Clinics that specialize in family planning services”

Planned Parenthood health centers are the premier provider of choice for 1 in 5 women in American who has visited a Planned Parenthood provider in her lifetime.

“Free and Charitable Clinics”

###