Andrew Gillum: Police build community relationships
Andrew Gillum (Photo11: City of Tallahassee )

Growing up, my mom would occasionally point at a passing police car and say, “Now, if you don’t act right, those guys are going to pick you up.” Her goal in doing this was to keep me out of trouble and help me understand that my actions could have extreme consequences. Despite the purest of intentions, her words instilled in me a sense of caution towards law enforcement during my younger days.

Many years later and now a parent myself, my perspective has evolved. I firmly believe that creating less adversarial and more trusting relationships between police officers and the individuals and families they serve is the best approach. Building strong, collaborative relationships within the community is critical to solving problems, diminishing apprehension, preventing crime and increasing the safety of citizens and police officers alike.

In the early 1990s, the Tallahassee Police Department implemented a Community Oriented Policing (COP) program focused on building such positive relationships. In 1994, with a three-year, $1 million grant from the U.S. Department of Justice, 12 officers were hired to enhance the COP program. By 2000, the program had evolved into an effective combination of community policing and problem-solving. Community Oriented Policing and Problem Solving (COPPS) integrates community relations with finding solutions to help decrease crime.

During the last 10 years, the annual number of calls for service that TPD receives has increased by 38 percent. During this same time, the economic downturn stifled the potential to hire more staff. As a result, COPPS officers were reassigned to keep up with the growing demand for patrol officers. Only one active COPPS squad served the entire city.

In May, under the leadership of Police Chief Michael DeLeo and in response to requests from city leadership and the community, a second COPPS squad was re-established and is dedicated to neighborhoods on the city’s south side. Officers are interacting with residents daily. Neighborhood wave to officers from their front porches. Officers are stopping to introduce themselves, and residents are asking questions — positive signs in terms of building trust.

The COPPS philosophy has been embraced departmentwide. During a recent ride-along, I observed police officers arresting drug dealers. I also saw them investing time to casually interact with everyday citizens and take part in a friendly, impromptu foot race with some of the neighborhood kids. I was impressed with how friendly, approachable, caring and compassionate the officers were in every situation. They exchanged greetings with residents, calling them by name. Even when making an arrest, officers were respectful and made every effort to de-escalate intense situations.

The reality is that some individuals’ only interaction with police is when something bad happens. The COPPS program aims to change this. Officers are making strides to move beyond simply enforcing the law. They want to become community partners whose positive influence helps prevent negative behaviors. This will hopefully teach the next generation to respect police officers, not fear them.

As a step toward creating a safer Tallahassee, the City Commission has approved funding for six new police officers to form the Violent Crime Response Squad. The addition of these officers will cost more than $800,000 the first year. While it may sound expensive to some, we must make a financial investment in our community’s future. With more police officers on the street, there will be more time for personal interaction between officers and citizens, especially children, and therein lies the long-term benefit.

While funding for more police officers is certainly a step in the right direction, there is more to be done. We, as a community, must support the efforts of officers and build on the partnerships forged by COPPS. It will take the continued collaboration of government, faith, business, civic and social organizations. Most importantly, it will take cooperation and engagement from individuals and families. For the sake of my children and yours, I hope you will join me in supporting our law-enforcement officers and investing your time and talents for the betterment of our community. The more we come together and take ownership of this issue as a community, the greater our chances for success.

Andrew Gillum is a Tallahassee city commissioner. Contact him at Andrew.Gillum@talgov.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/1npYqjf