Gillum meeting with FBI undercover agents took shape during Costa Rica trip with lobbyists
Buy Photo Mayor Andrew Gillum listened as his friend lobbyist Adam Corey spoke at the 2015 opening of the city-backed Edison restaurant. (Photo11: D.A. Robin/Democrat)Buy Photo

At the height of an FBI corruption investigation two years ago, Mayor Andrew Gillum vacationed in Central America with lobbyists, close friends and Edison investors Sean Pittman and Adam Corey.

Accompanied by their spouses, Gillum and Pittman joined Corey and an entourage of friends and business associates during the first week of May 2016 at an exclusive, $1,400-a-night luxury resort on Costa Rica's Pacific coast.

Ethics watchdogs said the trip smacks of the appearance of impropriety, and that the public will never know whether city business was discussed. Gillum's friends and staff said the trip was personal in nature.

"No city business was discussed and the mayor paid for all of he and Mrs. Gillum's expenses, including food and drink, and his portion of the villa," said Jamie Van Pelt, the mayor's chief of staff.

But during that Costa Rican vacation,Corey sent a calendar invite to Gillum scheduling a May 16 meetup at the Edison between himself, Gillum and the now infamous undercover FBI agent Mike Miller, according to emails obtained by the Tallahassee Democrat.

The calendar invite was the first reported connection between Gillum, who is now running for governor, and agents working on a wide-ranging public corruption investigation that appears to continue to this day. On Thursday, the FBI dropped a new subpoena on City Hall requesting more records about Corey, the Edison restaurant he developed with taxpayer money, and Cascades Holdings, the LLC formed by Corey and his investment partners to finance the project.

Even without Corey setting up a business meeting during the trip, ethics watchdogs said the trip blurs the lines between friendship and business, especially given the close ties between Gillum, Corey and Pittman and their dealings with the city,

"The mayor seems totally oblivious to even the appearance of a conflict of interest," said Pete Butzin, a board member of Common Cause Florida. "He's got to understand this thing is going to come back and bite him."

'The mayor paid cash'

Corey arranged the trip through Donielle Fish, owner and president of First Class Villas Costa Rica, a website that rents out five villas along the Central American country's coastline.

“Yes, those guys came to Manuel Antonio, Costa Rica!” Fish told a Tallahassee Democrat reporter in a Facebook private message when asked if Corey, Pitman and Gillum were at the Villa. Fish declined to answer any further questions.

Also on the trip were Cody Schwarz, a lobbyist with Corey's agency, Unconventional Strategies, and Mary Kucek, who along with Pittman was an investor in the Edison restaurant that Corey renovated with $2.1million in public funding.

Most of the people on the trip who were contacted by the Democrat didn't want to talk about it.

"I really have no comment," Kucek said. "I have gone on many a trip with Adam as one of my dear friends."

Those who did speak on the record said the trip was personal in nature. Gillum's calendar marked off the time between May 4 and May 8 as vacation around R. Jai Gillum's birthday.

“Everyone paid their own way,” Pittman told the Democrat. “I’m not sure who made the arrangements, but I’m sure everyone paid their way.”

"The mayor paid cash for all of he and Mrs. Gillum's expenses," Van Pelt said. After publication, he clarified that Gillum paid cash for his portion of the villa, but used a credit card for all other expenses.

The fact that the mayor paid cash "sounds suspicious in itself," Butzin said.

"It is just inappropriate to be so cozy with lobbyists," Butzin said. "They really ought to be keeping an arms’ length in social dealings and they are not doing it."

Buy Photo Peter Butzin (Photo11: Democrat files)

Watchdogs: 'It doesn't look good'

Gillum and Corey have been friends since college, and Corey served as Gillum's 2014 volunteer campaign treasurer when he ran his successful bid for mayor. Gillum voted to approve the grant and contract for Corey to renovate the Edison.

Corey has represented many clients before the city for several years before he gave up lobbying last year and held fundraisers at his house for Gillum and other local political candidates.

Gillum cut ties with Corey months ago, saying his trust was broken when Corey brought him into contact with undercover FBI agents in Tallahassee and on a trip in New York in 2016. Since the investigation became public, Gillum has maintained that federal officials have told him he is not a target.

Pittman has worked as a campaign consultant on Gillum's political campaigns and a lobbyist for the city.

“I think that’s a problem,” said Ben Wilcox of the nonprofit watchdog group Integrity Florida, who also was a leader getting the city's ethics ordinance passed. “Not only was Corey a lobbyist with the city, eventually he was a vendor with the Edison contract. It doesn’t look good.”

The property Corey booked, Villa Paraiso, is a five-bedroom villa that sleeps 12 and goes for $1,400 a night in an exclusive, gated community of La Reserva overlooking the Pacific Ocean.

It's the same villa that was offered as an auction item at the Old School Open, a golf tournament run by the Old School Foundation, a private club founded by Corey that caters to Florida State University alumni. Gillum has also done fundraising for the foundation and was even auctioned off at an Old School wine dinner in 2015.

"When these two lobbyists take a mayor or city commissioner on a trip that costs $1,400 a night, it buys access," Butzin said. "And we will never know what was discussed at this so-called vacation."

The trip also shows the need for the community to push for a stronger, more comprehensive ethics code for Tallahassee, said Butzin, who was part of the coalition that pushed for a city ethics ordinance approved in 2014.

This photo shows the three men believed to be undercover FBI agents who used aliases and cover stories as part of an investigation in Tallahassee. Pictured from left are Mike Miller, Mike Sweets and Brian Butler. The Democrat decided to blur the physical characteristics of the men after discussions with the FBI. (Photo11: Special to the Democrat)

From Costa Rica to Tapas with Mike Miller

Corey left Miami for San Jose, Costa Rica, on American Airlines flight 1592 at 12:25 p.m. on May 1, 2016.

Gillum's calendar shows he and his wife were on vacation from May 4 through May 8. His chief of staff confirmed they were in Costa Rica with Corey and Pittman.

On May 5, the day after Gillum arrived, Corey sent an electronic invite to Gillum and an undercover FBI agent posing as Atlanta developer Mike Miller, inviting them to tapas and drinks with another agent known as developer, Brian Butler, at the Edison on Monday, May 16.

"The email was sent to set up a time to meet to discuss city business," Van Pelt said. "The invitation was to nail down a time when they were not vacationing."

The day after he returned from vacation, May 9, Gillum forwarded the email from his People for the American Way email account to one of his aides, confirming the meetup. "I have agreed to this meeting," Gillum said.

Corey had met the bearded newcomer Miller two months earlier, in March, and began setting up meetings for him with city and county officials.

A photograph of Tallahassee lobbyist Adam Corey with "Mike Sweets," an undercover FBI agent, at The Edison restaurant. The Democrat decided to blur Sweets' face after discussions with the FBI. Sweets was among several undercover agents sent to Tallahassee to uncover public corruption. (Photo11: Special to the Democrat)

Anatomy of an FBI Fakeout:

Miller and his two cohorts, Butler, a bald-headed supposed energy efficiency expert, and Mike Sweets, a long-haired purported medical marijuana entrepreneur, spent the next several months meeting and socializing with local officials and business owners.

Miller discussed his interest in a mixed-use development on South Monroe Street and a desire to expand CRA boundaries to include those properties. The CRA, which consists of all five city commissioners and four of seven county commissioners, voted to expand its district lines in June 2016.

A week after he returned from Costa Rica, and a month before that vote, on May 16, Gillum met with Miller and Butler at the Edison. It's unknown what they discussed, but Van Pelt at the time said that it was common for Gillum to meet with developers who wanted to discuss their projects.

Their paths crossed again in New York City in August, when Gillum was up for his job with People for the American Way. Corey and Miller arranged for several outings with Gillum, including a boat trip on New York Harbor. The trip is being investigated by the Florida Commission on Ethics.

A photo obtained by the Democrat shows Tallahassee Mayor and Democratic gubernatorial candidate Andrew Gillum and former lobbyist Adam Corey posing together for a snapshot on a boat ride in New York Harbor near the Statue of Liberty in August 2016. It was one of several events that weekend arranged for Gillum by Corey and Mike Miller, a purported undercover agent posing as a developer from Atlanta. Miller was also on the boat ride but is not shown in this photo. Mike Sweets, another suspected undercover agent who claimed to be a medical marijuana entrepreneur, was also on the boat. (Photo11: Special to the Democrat)

The same questions come to mind for both the New York and Costa Rica trips, Wilcox said. Who paid and what was discussed?

The rules are different for public officials when it comes to their lobbying friends, Wilcox said.

Officials are barred from accepting any gift given to influence a vote or other official action as well as gifts over $100 from a vendor doing business with their agency or a lobbyist who has come before their agency over the preceding year.

"They need to be careful when they’re accepting things from lobbyists," Wilcox said. "We don't know if that’s the case but it sure was an opportunity for it."

GiIlum said he or his brother Marcus paid cash for their own expenses in New York.

But Wilcox said who's to know whether Gillum accepted a meal or two here and there, or had one of his friends pay for some incidental expenses, or if the cash Gillum used to pay his way came from the lobbyists.

"If there were any gifts, did the mayor report them as required?" he asked. "It's a gray area but with lots of potential pitfalls."

Contact Schweers at jschweers@tallahassee.com. Follow him on Twitter @jeffschweers.

Gillum, Corey and the FBI:

Read or Share this story: https://www.tallahassee.com/story/news/local/fbi/2018/06/01/andrew-gillums-costa-rica-trip-irks-ethics-watchdogs/575149002/