Planned Parenthood responds to false charges from Florida Family Policy Council
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

October 1, 2015

CONTACT: Damien Filer / dfiler@50plus1.com

Statement of Laura Goodhue, Executive Director, Florida Alliance of Planned Parenthood Affiliates:

“The Florida Family Policy Council is relying on a long list of false accusations against Planned Parenthood to back up their call for Gov. Scott to further restrict Florida women’s access to health care.

“We have clearly demonstrated that the recent round of politically motivated investigations in Florida uncovered nothing more than continued harassment from Gov. Rick Scott’s health care agency.

“In fact, AHCA has agreed – as we have maintained all along – that, as long as abortion procedures performed are within 14 weeks from the first day of a woman’s last menstrual period (LMP), they do not exceed these health centers’ licenses. We maintain that all procedures performed at these health centers were performed prior to 14 weeks LMP. We’ve reported these procedures the same way for nine years and AHCA never had any concerns before.

“Planned Parenthood, even in the face of these ongoing politically motivated attacks, remains a trusted and vital health care provider in Florida where a third of our counties do not have an OB/GYN provider. Leading experts released an analysis showing that if Planned Parenthood were defunded, other health care providers would be unable to absorb many of the patients affected — leaving people without any access to care.

“Planned Parenthood in Florida is proud to provide reproductive health care services to low income women, men and teens through Medicaid and Title X. We also help teens make healthy and safe decisions through federal education grants. Federal funding prohibits Medicaid reimbursements for abortion care except for in very limited cases – rape, incest and life of the mother.

“What’s more, if the state were to take action to exclude Florida Planned Parenthood affiliates from Medicaid this would be in clear violation of federal law.

“The sixth national poll in just over a month showed that overwhelming majorities of the public oppose defunding Planned Parenthood. We will continue to fight back against these attacks in order to ensure we can provide health care services to Florida families, no matter what.”

###

For additional information please see prior press releases.

Background

Federal law ensures that a person with Medicaid coverage can receive medical services from any health care provider that chooses to participate in Medicaid and provide such services. This provision is called the “any willing provider” or “free choice of provider” provision. As such, states are prohibited from excluding or restricting a qualified family planning provider’s participation in the Medicaid program, including excluding a provider based on their provision of abortion.

Every court to look at this issue has agreed that the Title XIX of the Social Security Act prohibits states from excluding abortion providers from Medicaid. To date, two Circuit courts, the Seventh and Ninth Circuits, have reached the issue, and the Supreme Court has declined to review the Seventh and the Ninth Circuit decisions.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), which Congress charged with interpreting the “any willing provider” provision has made clear that the provision prohibits states from disqualifying abortion providers from Medicaid. In a 2011 Information Bulletin, HHS stated, “Medicaid programs may not exclude qualified health care providers—whether an individual provider, a physician group, an outpatient clinic, or a hospital—from providing services under the program because they separately provide abortion services (not funded by federal Medicaid dollars, consistent with the federal prohibition) as part of their scope of practice.” In 2013, HHS issued a final decision disapproving of Indiana’s proposal to exclude abortion providers.