Giant ad buy rips Rick Scott and his Navy cap
VoteVets, a Democratic leaning veterans' advocacy group backing Bill Nelson for U.S. Senate, is spending $4 million for a tough ad accusing Scott of ripping off the military's health care company when he led a health care conglomerate. The ad will run 10 days in every media market.

It features Navy veteran Alan Madison of Vero Beach sporting his own blue Navy cap suggesting that Scott does not deserve to wear the cap he so frequently does. Scott enlisted in the Navy in 1979 and served 29 months, finishing as a radar technician.

Prior to his political career, Scott led Columbia/HCA, which paid more than $800 million in fines for defrauding Medicare and Medicaid.

"Governor, this hat represents what the Navy stands for: Honor, integrity," Madison says to the camera. "My question for you, sir? Where's yours?"

The Scott campaign responded with statements from other veterans.

Tampa resident Kat Gates-Skipper, USMC & USMCR 20 years, Gulf War Veteran: "As a veteran, I am disheartened to see Bill Nelson and his democrat friends play politics with our military – but their false attacks can't distract from the truth. I have seen firsthand the numerous ways Governor Scott honors our American heroes and their families. He truly goes above and beyond to take the time to recognize all veterans that have served honorably – he cares about our community and it's obvious. I can't wait to see him elected to the U.S. Senate so he can continue to fight for veterans and work to clean up the mess that is Washington."

Rick LoCastro, Colonel U.S. Air Force (Retired) of southwest Florida: "Attacking anyone who has selflessly served our country is out of bounds. Governor Scott has worked hard over the past seven and half years to make Florida the #1 state for veterans. He has taken care of veterans, military members, and their families, and his commitment to ensuring veterans are honored and thanked for their service is unmatched. It is extremely disappointing to see anyone put politics above proud service to our country."