PETITION: Appoint Trey Gowdy as DIRECTOR of the FBI.
(Angry Patriot) – A huge new development in Washington, D.C. may be putting American security back on track. This is great news for American patriots everywhere, and we need to get behind it!

According to various sources, FBI Director James Comey might soon be replaced by the Trump Administration. Even better, Representative Trey Gowdy (R-SC) is already being touted as Comey’s successor, via US Defense Watch.

For those unaware of Gowdy’s many accomplishments, suffice it to say that the South Carolina conservative has been one of the more vocal critics of the Obama Administration for quite some time now.

In 2012, Gowdy was selected as the chairman of the House Select Committee tasked with investigating the failure at Benghazi on September 11, 2012. The committee’s final report offered a damning indictment of the Obama administration’s failure to act in order to save American lives, via The Select Committee on Benghazi.

Even in the face of constant left-wing criticism that Gowdy’s findings did not prove anything substantial, the committee’s report clearly shows that more could have been done in order to save the lives of Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens, Information Officer Sean Smith, and GRS officers Tyrone Woods and Glen Doherty.

In 2013, in the face of the Obama administration’s wanton lawlessness and disregard for American laws regarding illegal immigration, Rep. Gowdy sponsored the ENFORCE the Law Act during the 113th Congress.

More recently, Representative Gowdy has been a voice of reason regarding the Democrat fixation on the idea of President Trump’s supposed connections to Vladimir Putin. He’s even gone on record defending California Republican Devin Nunes from Democrat attacks on his integrity and his ability to properly investigate whether Obama spied on Trump during the 2016 campaign, via Townhall.

A long-time favorite of the Tea Party and other conservative groups, Gowdy is the type of man the Trump Administration needs to clean up the leftovers of the Obama Administration and its “Deep State” allies.

Even better, an FBI headed by Gowdy would turn back the clock on years of questionable investigations and politicized leaks. As FBI director, James Comey infamously refused to investigate Hillary Clinton even though the FBI’s own agents clearly determined that she and her team had broken the law and exposed valuable secrets.

Coincidentally, Comey’s unwillingness to prosecute Clinton may have something to do with the fact that while serving as a top executive at Lockheed Martin, Comey received several lucrative contracts from the corrupt Clinton Foundation, via Independent Journal Review.

Further evidence of Comey’s ties to Democrat Party elites came last week when, during his testimony before the Senate, Comey refused to rule out ties between President Trump and Russia even though both the FBI and NSA have already stated that Moscow did not touch voting results in any way, via The Washington Post.

Trey Gowdy is the right man to restore the FBI to its former greatness. We fully support his appointment as the new director of America’s top law enforcement agency. Let’s all pray this becomes a reality.

www.angrypatriotmovement.com/trey-gowdy-director-of-the-fbi/