Duchess of Cornwall asks J K Rowling for Harry Potter magic
The Duchess of Cornwall’s appearance at the Telegraph Hay Festival was not the only occasion on which she voiced her concern about children’s literacy last week.

Mandrake learns that the wife of the Prince of Wales later held a tête-à-tête in Scotland with JK Rowling, the Harry Potter author.

“They met at Holyrood,” confirms a Clarence House spokesman. “The Duchess held the meeting in her capacity as patron of the National Literacy Trust.”

The spokesman declines to comment on what was discussed at the private meeting at the Palace of Holyrood House in Edinburgh, but it is understood that they plotted ways to combine their efforts to encourage children to read.

Rowling, 45, who has sold more than 450 million copies of her books about the child wizard, is a passionate supporter of efforts to improve literacy.

In 2008, the author, who has an estimated fortune of £530 million, published an 800-word Harry Potter prequel in aid of the charities Dyslexia Action and English PEN. “I think you have a moral responsibility, when you’ve been given far more than you need, to do wise things with it and give intelligently,” she said.

As a supporter of the Shannon Trust, Joanne Rowling, 45, has also visited prisoners learning to read at Saughton jail in Edinburgh.

Last November, Camilla, who turns 64 next month, said she was “thrilled” to become the new patron of the National Literacy Trust.

The Duchess’s father, Major Bruce Shand, wrote a memoir of his war and was a reviewer of military books, while her son, Tom Parker Bowles, is a food author. “I’m a passionate reader,” said Camilla, who is also the patron of the Wicked Young Writers Award.

Rowling’s books have been enjoyed by the Royal family. Prince Charles said he was a big fan and the Queen told the novelist that her granddaughter Princess Eugenie loved them.

The Duchess, who enjoys reading to her five grandchildren, helped prepare Eliza Lopes, her three-year-old granddaughter, for her role as a bridesmaid at the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge’s nuptials by reading her Angelina and the Royal Wedding. In the book, the mouse-ballerina is so busy dancing that she nearly misses the wedding. Happily, Eliza did not get similarly waylaid.