What Marsha Blackburn and Phil Bredesen told Tennessee farmers as they campaign for the US Senate
CLOSE Phil Bredesen and Marsha Blackburn are the leading candidates to replace Bob Corker in the U.S. Senate Michael Schwab/USA TODAY NETWORK - Tennessee

Buy Photo Democrat Phil Bredesen, left, and Republican Marsha Blackburn, will face off in the U.S. Senate race Nov. 6. (Photo: The Tennessean)Buy Photo

U.S. Senate candidates Marsha Blackburn and Phil Bredesen made their cases Thursday to Tennessee farmers, touting their support for rural issues — from expanding access to broadband to tariffs.

The two candidates, in addition to Republican and Democratic gubernatorial nominees Bill Lee and Karl Dean, respectively, made separate appearances at a gathering of the Tennessee Farm Bureau in Franklin.

The event was the first time all four candidates have appeared in the same place since last week's primary.

During his remarks, Bredesen made overt attempts to appeal to supporters of President Donald Trump, vowed not to be a “company man” for his party and briefly noted his opponent’s previous votes on the all-important farm bill.

Blackburn, meanwhile, highlighted her work on several measures in Congress, including the Affordable Care Act, tax reform and her continued talks with the president about the impact of his tariffs.

Phil Bredesen touts his rural upbringing

Noting that he grew up in rural upstate New York, which he called the conservative part of the state, Bredesen said the vast majority of his family voted for Trump.

“I know that they’re not racist and they’re not crazy and they’re not stupid,” he said, noting rural areas are part of a different culture. “It’s a more conservative culture. It’s one that puts a lot of weight on self-reliance. It’s a culture that owns guns.”

Primary victories: Marsha Blackburn and Phil Bredesen coast in primaries, head for Senate showdown

New ad: Phil Bredesen pulls sound bites from Republicans in latest ad in Tennessee US Senate race

Bredesen said his goal in going to Washington, D.C., would be to bridge the gap that exists between the political cultures in America.

“I hate the way our political system has become now,” he said.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-342-8237. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Addressing the criticism that he has faced in the early months of his campaign — that he would be a “tool” for Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, as Trump famously said — Bredesen said the notion of him being a “lapdog or company man to do their bidding … is just silly.”

In an effort to appeal to the audience of farmers, Bredesen was critical of burdensome government regulations while noting that although the country needs to have “safe borders,” the agriculture industry relies on immigrant workers.

The former governor said he thought the issue of worker visas for immigrants has unnecessarily turned into a highly political topic.

“I think of this as a business issue, not a political football,” he said.

Turning to the president’s recently imposed tariffs that have hurt farmers in Tennessee and around the country, Bredesen said the retaliatory tariffs could lead the country down a dangerous path. He cited the embargo of grain sales to Russia during President Jimmy Carter’s administration that led other countries to fill the void.

“This is something that, in my opinion, takes a scalpel and some really carefully targeting of what we’re doing, not just swinging around wildly with an ax and ending up hitting a lot of pieces of our economy in the process,” he said.

Without mentioning Blackburn by name, Bredesen noted the importance of the farm bill to farmers, adding his “competitor was a no vote on the final vote of the last two farm bills.”

“I hope you will consider that as you think about these things,” he said.

Marsha Blackburn hopes trade issue resolved quickly

Speaking to reporters after delivering her remarks, Blackburn explained her votes on the farm bill.

"When you have the bulk of the farm bill going to benefits ... and some of the changes that you wanted to see in the benefit portion were not made, then you do that," she said.

"You vote for and against certain things that are going to be best for Tennessee farmers, and that is what I have repeatedly done," Blackburn said.

New Trump ad: Blackburn highlights Trump endorsement in new TV ad in Tennessee US Senate race

New ad: Marsha Blackburn launches first TV ad in bid for the U.S. Senate

While speaking to the audience, Blackburn, who grew up in Mississippi, pointed out that she went to college thanks to a 4-H scholarship.

Noting the decision to remove the individual mandate requirement in the Affordable Care Act, Blackburn said that will help those who use the Farm Bureau's health care plan.

Blackburn also touched on Congress' passage of tax reform legislation and efforts to pull back on regulations.

"We think that the (Environmental Protection Agency) — we need them off the farm. They don't need to regulate spilled milk, and they for sure don't need to regulate drainage ditches and puddles," she said to applause.

Blackburn also said the latest version of the farm bill, which is still being negotiated between the House and Senate, includes a work requirement component.

Discussing rural broadband, she said it is important for the state's rural communities.

She said some children in her congressional district have to drive to parking lots to access Wi-Fi to do homework. "Hospitals are closing in rural America because they don't have access to high-speed internet," she said.

Blackburn, who did not mention her opponent during her remarks, tried to alleviate the concerns of those in the audience worried about the impact of the president's tariffs.

She said she will continue to talk with Tennesseans while also monitoring "this situation on a daily basis."

"We are hoping that this issue is going to be resolved very quickly," she said.

Questions from the audience

The two candidates also faced questions from the audience.

Bredesen said he wanted to wait for the Senate’s hearing before saying whether he would support Brett Kavanaugh’s nomination to the Supreme Court.

The issues: Where Tennessee's Senate candidates stand on the key issues

When asked if she would support term limits for members of Congress, Blackburn, who has served in the body since 2003, said she supported "term limits for the bureaucracy."

She added that members of Congress face their own form of term limits when they have to run for re-election every two years.

What the candidates for governor told farmers

Speaking separately, Lee and Dean gave a brief overview of their personal history while vowing to support rural Tennessee.

Dean said several counties in West Tennessee are losing population and that is evidence that additional resources are needed in rural areas.

GOP nomination: Bill Lee wins Republican nomination for governor of Tennessee

Democratic nomination: Karl Dean wins Democratic nomination for Tennessee governor in landslide

As he said throughout his campaign for governor, Dean, who noted the closure of nearly a dozen rural hospitals, said Tennessee needs to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

During his remarks, Lee seemed quite comfortable speaking to those present, noting his family, which raised cattle, hails from a rural area.

Reminding the group about his tour around the state on tractor, Lee reiterated his view that the state is one generation from losing its rural way of life.

When asked how he would respond to people who say candidates for office need political experience, Lee's affable response resulted in perhaps the most laughs during Thursday's event.

"I say they're wrong," he said.

Underlining their differences, Lee and Dean offered very different answers when asked how they would support the state's forestry division and firefighting.

Dean said he would work closely with the division and appoint the right people. After a brief pause, Lee admitted he would educate himself on the matter and vowed to give a better answer in the future.

Reach Joel Ebert at jebert@tennessean.com or 615-772-1681 and on Twitter @joelebert29.

Read or Share this story: https://www.tennessean.com/story/news/politics/tn-elections/2018/08/09/tennessee-elections-marsha-blackburn-phil-bredesen-appeal-tennessee-farmers/951109002/