Trump places Nashville rally crowd size above arena capacity, disputes reports
CLOSE President Donald Trump threatens that voters "...won't have a Second Amendment if the Democrats take over" during a rally held at Municipal Auditorium on Tuesday. Ayrika L Whitney, The Tennessean

Buy Photo President Donald Trump's supporters listen to musician Trace Adkins prior to the start of rally for U.S. Rep. Marsha Blackburn held at Municipal Auditorium, Tuesday, May 29, 2018, in Nashville, Tenn. (Photo: Shelley Mays / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

President Donald Trump is touting the size of the crowd at his rally in Nashville Tuesday evening, a day after suggesting the audience was larger than the building allows.

On Wednesday morning Trump said on Twitter that the New York Times estimates about the size of the crowd inside Municipal Auditorium were wrong.

The newspaper reported the crowd to be about 1,000. The article was later updated to reflect the actual size of the crowd, which officials said contained 5,500 people.

The USA TODAY NETWORK-Tennessee confirmed the total with fire officials Wednesday morning.

Despite officials' estimates, the Trump campaign double-down Wednesday afternoon saying there were 8,000 people at the rally.

In his tweet, the president said the audience at the rally was “many times that number.”

The Failing and Corrupt @nytimes estimated the crowd last night at “1000 people,” when in fact it was many times that number - and the arena was rockin’. This is the way they demean and disparage. They are very dishonest people who don’t “get” me, and never did! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 30, 2018

Speaking to those at a fundraiser for U.S. Rep. Marsha Blackburn held at Gaylord Opryland Resort & Convention Center prior to Tuesday’s rally, the president said he heard thousands of people were at Municipal Auditorium.

SUPPORT LOCAL JOURNALISM: From the White House to the city council, get the news that matters to you

“You know we have an event. I hear we have 12,000 people there. They have 12,000 seats. We have 12,000 people,” Trump said according to an audio record obtained by the USA TODAY NETWORK-Tennessee.

“We have a lot of people…we can’t get them in. Unless the fire marshal really treats us good,” he said. “I will say that we do, we have over 12,000 people standing trying to get in and most of them are in now but I’m going there to make a speech.”

More: Trump calls Bredesen 'total tool' for Democrats during Blackburn rally

Bob Skoney, general manager of the auditorium said capacity for Tuesday’s event was 7,500 to 8,000.

Municipal normally holds 9,900, Skoney said.

Joseph Pleasant, a spokesman for the Nashville Fire Department, said the building has a capacity of around 9,600.

"Our Fire Marshal's office counted around 5,500 people who attended the rally last night," he said.

CLOSE President Donald Trump urges voters to vote for Republicans this November to keep America safe during a rally in Municipal Auditorium on Tuesday. Ayrika L Whitney, The Tennessean

In a statement, Michael Glassner, chief operating officer of Trump's campaign, said Trump "hosted over 8,000 patriotic Americans at our rally in Nashville."

A significant portion of the seating area inside the building was blocked off to allow for crowd risers and massive American flags behind the stage where the president spoke.

Trump has repeatedly touted the size of his crowds at various events, including his 2017 inauguration.

After the inauguration, Trump famously — and incorrectly — claimed it “looked like a million, a million and a half people” were there to see him sworn in. At the time, his former press secretary Sean Spicer falsely claimed it was “the largest audience to ever witness an inauguration — period — both in person and around the world."

Joey Garrison contributed to this report.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-342-8237. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Reach Joel Ebert at jebert@tennessean.com or 615-772-1681 and on Twitter @joelebert29.

Read or Share this story: https://www.tennessean.com/story/news/politics/tn-elections/2018/05/30/trump-nashville-rally-crowd-size-above-arena-capacity-new-york-times-reports/655630002/