Blackburn ad attacks Bredesen over driver's licenses; he calls ad 'pure swamp scum'
CLOSE The U.S. Senate debate between Marsha Blackburn and Phil Bredesen in 3 minutes Nashville Tennessean

Buy Photo Republican Marsha Blackburn and Democrat Phil Bredesen debated Tuesday at Cumberland University. (Photo: Lacy Atkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Tennessee's U.S. Senate campaign continued to heat up Friday, with U.S. Rep. Marsha Blackburn and former Gov. Phil Bredesen releasing competing ads related to immigration.

In both ads, the candidates go after each other.

In her ad, Blackburn blames Bredesen for enacting a law before he was governor that gave driver's licenses to immigrants who entered the country illegally.

In Bredesen's, a narrator refers to Blackburn's ad as "pure swamp scum."

Issue over driver's licenses

Blackburn's campaign in the ad cites a law approved by the state legislature more than a year before Bredesen was in office.

A narrator says in the ad that Bredesen gave driver's licenses to "illegal immigrants."

Watch the ad:New ad criticizes Bredesen over driver's licenses

The source for the claim is a measure approved by the General Assembly that became law in May 2001 — when former Gov. Don Sundquist, a Republican who has endorsed Blackburn's Senate bid, was in office.

Bredesen did not take office until January 2003.

The legislation Blackburn's campaign cites in the ad immediately led to confusion and long lines at state licensing offices. The law allowed people without Social Security numbers to obtain driver's licenses.

When she served in the state Senate, Blackburn voted against the measure, which received bipartisan approval, including favorable votes from then-state Rep. Diane Black, Rep. Bill Dunn and Rep. Steve McDaniel and Sen. Randy McNally — all of whom have endorsed her Senate bid — when it was under consideration in 2001.

In the aftermath, Blackburn introduced several unsuccessful bills seeking to reverse the law.

In 2002, Blackburn voted for a compromise bill introduced by Democratic Sen. Roy Herron that would have added "For Driving Purposes Only" in bold on driver's licenses for immigrants without Social Security numbers.

At the time, Blackburn cautioned her state Senate colleagues that the measure would provide a loophole for everyone from terrorists to identity thieves to get a license in the state, according to The Tennessean's reporting at the time.

In 2004 — when Bredesen was in office — he signed a measure that required anyone who could not prove they were in the country legally to obtain a driving certificate, which could not be used for identification purposes.

The measure was introduced to address national security concerns and ensure people driving on Tennessee roads were insured.

After suspending the certificate program in 2006, Bredesen enacted a law in 2007 that repealed it entirely, instead of opting to issue temporary licenses and IDs.

The 2007 legislation was approved with a 86-8 vote in the House and 25-2 in the Senate.

Bredesen's new digital ad, which came out after Blackburn's, notes the issue with the citation in his opponent's ad while pointing out that she's been in office for 16 years.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-342-8237. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"Her latest attack ad is pure swamp scum," a narrator says in the Bredesen ad.

A similar term, "pond scum," was used in 1994 when the campaign manager for then-U.S. Senate candidate Bill Frist referred to his primary opponent Bob Corker.

Bredesen's ad points to the 2007 repeal legislation while noting he worked with President George W. Bush that same year to deploy members of the Tennessee National Guard to the U.S.-Mexico border.

New ad also touches on border wall

In addition to the driver's license issue, Blackburn's new ad notes Bredesen's opposition to President Donald Trump's immigration travel ban. The ad also includes audio of Bredesen saying, "I don't believe the wall is the right answer."

He made the comment during an interview for Grand Divisions, the USA TODAY NETWORK - Tennessee's politics and policy podcast.

Listen now: Grand Divisions Episode 3: Guns and governors, plus a chat with Phil Bredesen

Bredesen's comment came in response to a question about whether he would support a compromise bill that would include fixing the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program with funding a wall along the southern border of the United States.

Bredesen said while the country is entitled to control its borders, he added there are "technologically much sounder and less expensive ways of doing it than building a wall."

"I think that's more political theater," he said, adding if the price for fixing the DACA program was building some piece of the wall he would potentially be in favor of it.

Blackburn closes out the ad vowing to fight to build the wall, end sanctuary cities and "deport criminal illegal aliens." She makes no mention of her views of the DACA program.

During Tuesday's debate, Blackburn said, "There should be a path for legalization for Dreamers."

She added the country needs to secure the border to halt the inflow of drugs, gangs and sex traffickers.

Reach Joel Ebert at jebert@tennessean.com or 615-772-1681 and on Twitter @joelebert29.

More from The Tennessean Facebook | Twitter | Instagram | Subscribe





Read or Share this story: https://www.tennessean.com/story/news/politics/tn-elections/2018/09/28/marsha-blackburn-ad-attacks-phil-bredesen-drivers-licenses-immigrants-bill-enacted-2001/1454157002/