There's Superficial Agreement in Congress on Paid Family Leave
Further, while traditional Republicans tend to balk at the idea of government intervention, the Trump administration has been rather positive about supporting government-mandated paid leave. During the 2016 campaign, the Trump campaign proposed six weeks of partially paid leave as well as a child-care tax deduction. The proposal was said to have been inspired by first-daughter Ivanka Trump, who has personally promoted the need for better paid leave policies. At the time, experts expressed concerns that the policy would be unconstitutional, as it did not include fathers and could lead employers to discriminate against women. Earlier this week, the Washington Post reported that Trump staffers said the initial proposal might be revised and that the issue remains a top priority.

While it seems that there’s consensus that something should be done, there is still concern over how, exactly, paid leave policies should be implemented. For example, advocates for paid leave have come out against Fischer’s bill, saying it doesn’t go far enough. "It's totally optional, and even if they do it it's still insufficient," said Vivien Labaton, co-founder of Make It Work, a national campaign that fights for economic issues that affect women and families, in a phone interview. "It's only two weeks. It's a tax credit for employers, so it still requires employees to win the employer lottery and hope they work some place where an employer wants to do the right thing." The National Partnership for Women and Families has also come out against Fischer’s bills, labelling them “deceptive alternatives” in a statement. In the past, Democrats have also come out against Fischer’s plan on the grounds that it is not as broad as the proposals they’ve put forward.

A small number of states have been making progress on both issues. The District of Columbia passed the most generous paid-family leave law in the country last year, joining four states—California, New Jersey, New York, and Rhode Island—in offering paid family leave.

For those hoping that federal regulation will catch up to states and companies leading the charge on paid leave, it could be a while before any bill, especially one that is substantial enough to herald progress, gets passed. But the details of the bills matter, and that’s why advocates of paid leave strongly prefer the Democrats’ approach: To them, more is better.

We want to hear what you think about this article. Submit a letter to the editor or write to letters@theatlantic.com.