The Paris Attacks: The Latest
—French Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve says 115,000 security personnel have been mobilized after Friday’s attacks. Separately, French air strikes in Syria have targeted the Islamic State, and President Francois Hollande has called for constitutional amendments that he said would make it easier to respond to terrorist attacks.

A raid early Wednesday by French security forces on an apartment St. Denis, a historic northern suburb of Paris, ended in the deaths of three people, including Abdelhamid Abaaoud, the alleged organizer of the Paris attacks, and Hasna Ait Boulahcen, who blew herself up with a suicide vest. Eight people were arrested in the operation, but other suspects remain at large.

The death of Abaaoud was announced just as the lower house of French parliament voted to extend the country’s state of emergency. After passed through the upper house on Friday, France’s emergency powers will now remain in effect for another three months.

Of Wednesday’s raid, Francois Molins, the Paris prosecutor, said security forces had “neutralized a terrorist team planning a new attack.” He added three of the eight arrested were yet to be identified, but declined to name any of the others.

In the aftermath of Friday’s attack, Paris has mobilized 115,000 security forces, carried out multiple raids, and conducted airstrikes over Raqaa, the Syrian city that serves as the Islamic State’s de facto capital. The militant group claimed responsibility for the attacks on a stadium, a concert hall, and restaurants and bars.

On Wednesday, the French government said all 130 victims of the attack had been identified. Marisol Touraine, the health minister, said 195 people were still hospitalized; three of them were in critical condition and 41 in intensive care, she said. The number of people injured in the attacks has been increased to 368, from 352.

“We are at war,” French President Francois Hollande said in a televised address after Wednesday’s raid.

He called for an international coalition against the Islamic State, which he called a global threat. Hollande said he would travel to Washington and Russia next week to meet his American and Russian counterparts to discuss a “large coalition” to fight the Islamic State.

The attacks have increased fears in Europe that militants might be using the refugee crisis to enter the continent. Indeed, Abaaoud, the target of Wednesday’s raid, was a known militant who was believed to have been in Syria. It is unclear how he made his way to Paris.

But Hollande said France would still admit the 30,000 Syrian refugees it had committed to accepting under an EU plan agreed to in September.

“Our country has the duty to respect this commitment,” he said, noting that many of those fleeing the Syrian civil war were being “tormented” by the Islamic State. Not everyone in Europe—or indeed the United States—feels that way as the humanitarian crisis spawned by Syria’s civil war is fast giving way to fears of infiltration by extremists.