Ken Starr and Baylor University Cut Ties
NEWS BRIEF Ken Starr, the former Baylor University president and chancellor who was demoted for his mishandling of rampant accusations of sexual assault on campus, will leave his position as a faculty member in the law school.

The news, announced in a Friday statement released by Baylor, severs Starr’s last tie to the Waco, Texas, university. The statement refers to him as Judge Starr, because he once served as a federal judge. In part, it read:

The mutually agreed separation comes with the greatest respect and love Judge Starr has for Baylor and with Baylor’s recognition and appreciation for Judge Starr’s many contributions to Baylor. Baylor wishes Judge Ken Starr well in his future endeavors.

Baylor demoted Starr from president to chancellor on May 26, then he stepped down as chancellor in June. His fall came after allegations of rape and sexual-assault, mainly against football players, surfaced during court trials. One was in 2015, when former football player Sam Ukwuachu was convicted of raping a student. During that trial, the court learned Baylor had investigated claims of rape against Ukwuachu, but had not punished him. Another was during the trial of Tevin Elliot, another football player, accused by at least five women of rape. He was sentenced in 2014 to 20 years. But more than just those two cases, investigators found an environment at the university that discouraged reporting acts of sexual assault, particularly when the alleged offender was on the football team.

An independent investigation, released May 26, found that:

Baylor failed to take appropriate action to respond to reports of sexual assault and dating violence reportedly committed by football players. The choices made by football staff and athletics leadership, in some instances, posed a risk to campus safety and the integrity of the University. In certain instances, including reports of a sexual assault by multiple football players, athletics and football personnel affirmatively chose not to report sexual violence and dating violence to an appropriate administrator outside of athletics. In those instances, football coaches or staff met directly with a complainant and/or a parent of a complainant and did not report the misconduct.

The report said administrators at the university deterred complaints, but it especially singled out Baylor’s football program, which it said carried a “cultural perception” that it was above the rules. Baylor fired the head football coach, Art Briles, in May.