Would Children Lose Insurance Coverage Under the American Health Care Act?
“In the American Health Care Act, there are two ways that federal funding for Medicaid can be capped,” said Samantha Artiga, an associate director at the Kaiser Family Foundation. One of those ways is a per-person cap on states’ annual funding, which under the AHCA would begin in 2020. The capped amount would increase over time according to inflation, but would not factor in variations among the states in terms of, say, growth of health-care costs or increased spending for public-health crises.

The AHCA would also allow states the option of further capping funding via a block grant specifically for children, pregnant women, and parents. It would dole out a fixed total amount of annual Medicaid funding per state for these groups—on top of enrollees’ per-capita allotment—while leaving an open-ended funding structure for more expensive groups, like people with disabilities. Not only would this option exacerbate the cost concerns of the per-capita cap, but it would also diminish states’ ability to adjust according to increases in enrollment. According to Artiga, that means “that states would be at risk for both higher-than-expected health-care costs,” because they’d have to pick up more of the bill, and “higher-than-expected enrollment.”

Both of these financing-reform mechanisms could slash benefits and enrollment for children on Medicaid. One of the program’s crucial pieces for children is the Early Periodic Screening Diagnosis and Treatment benefit, or EPSDT, which outlines a set of services essential for childhood growth. Those services go beyond those required by law for adults, including testing for lead poisoning and in-home care. Based on the existing AHCA language, that benefit would likely be erased in states that accept the Medicaid block grant, which could translate to children on Medicaid receiving less comprehensive care. The block-grant scenario would also erase protections in place that limit premiums and out-of-pocket spending on behalf of children, which means that states would be free to make up for Medicaid shortfalls by cutting benefits and making kids’ parents pay more. The effects of those changes “could be particularly significant for children with the most extensive health-care needs,” Artiga said.

On the enrollment side, while all the groups of low-income people traditionally covered by Medicaid—disabled people, pregnant women, children, and their parents—have mandatory minimum-income qualifications under the federal program, states are currently free to make theirs more ample. All of the states have made at least some of their minimum thresholds for children more generous than those under Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program. But that means that under the AHCA, and given the volume of kids covered, perhaps the greatest flexibility states have to cut costs comes from children’s expanded eligibility. Under the AHCA, making Medicaid less comprehensive and expansive for low-income children might not just be a necessity for states to make ends meet—because of simultaneous cuts to federal contributions—but it also appears to be incentivized.

The House bill would also change the way health care is delivered to children. Children’s hospitals are reliant on Medicaid funding; half of the patients at these institutions are enrolled in the program. Because they need the money to keep the lights on, slashing covered benefits and enrollees would decrease revenues. It’d diminish the kinds of care these hospitals are able to provide children regardless of their insurance, and reduce their ability to provide uncompensated care for uninsured kids. Also, schools are reimbursed by Medicaid for certain services, such as speech-language pathology and occupational therapy for students with disabilities; a reform like the AHCA would diminish cash-strapped schools’ overall ability to respond to these needs.

Although most of the AHCA’s effects on children would come through its major Medicaid reforms, the law’s reduction of enrollment across different insurance types and its uneven cost distribution would affect children insured through other means as well. Most children receive insurance through their parents’ jobs, and the AHCA is expected to decrease enrollment in employer-sponsored health insurance. And while the law’s tax credits might make private coverage on the exchanges more affordable for young parents, older and sicker parents—or grandparents serving as primary caretakers—might have to do without if faced with skyrocketing premiums. The children who lose coverage under these scenarios might normally enroll under Medicaid, but the program’s ability to function will be necessarily constrained.