What's in—and Out of—the Final Republican Tax Bill
Republicans had wanted to simplify the individual tax code so much that Americans could file their returns on a postcard. But because the GOP ended up retaining more deductions and exemptions than they’d planned to, that might be hard to accomplish. Republicans also failed to fully repeal the estate tax—a levy they’ve long derided as the “death tax.” But they did end up notching a win they didn’t expect: By eliminating the Affordable Care Act’s individual mandate in the tax bill, they’ve taken a step toward fulfilling the repeal promise they broke this year.

Here’s a rundown of where the key provisions ended up in the final tax bill:

Corporate tax rate

Trump wanted 15 percent, which was immediately deemed too ambitious even by the most aggressive tax cutters in Congress. The House and Senate bills each called for 20 percent, with the Senate delaying the change by a year. They settled on 21 percent, to begin immediately, which is still a huge reduction from the current 35 percent.

Individual tax rates

This was one area where Trump, Ryan, and House Republicans lost out on their long-held desire to collapse the current seven-bracket structure down to three or four brackets as part of simplifying the tax code. The Senate kept seven individual income rates, and that’s what prevailed in the final agreement.

Most people will see small reductions in the rate they pay. The bottom rate stays at 10 percent, rising to 12 percent, 22 percent, 24 percent, 32 percent, 35 percent, and finally 37 percent for income above $500,000 for individuals and $600,000 for couples. (The comparable current rates are 10 percent, 15 percent, 25 percent, 28 percent, 33 percent, 35 percent, and 39.6 percent.)

The biggest change was the last one Republicans made, in which they decided to reduce the top marginal rate to 37 percent from 39.6 percent—lower than either the House or Senate originally proposed. There’s a big catch to all of these rates, however: To get the plan under $1.5 trillion in cost, Republicans have set them all to expire at the end of 2025, meaning Congress will have to act before then to extend them.

Standard deduction

This was the one constant in the Republican plans from start to finish: The standard deduction will nearly double, from $6,500 for individuals and $13,000 for families to $12,000 and $24,000, respectively. For many people, this will represent the biggest tax cut in the plan, and for some in high-tax states, it will offset the reduction in the state-and-local tax deduction.

The effect of doubling the standard deduction will be limited, however, by the elimination of the personal exemption. This change is the biggest example of simplifying the tax-filing process for individuals, since it will prompt more people to take the standard deduction rather than itemizing. Like the reduced tax rates, though, this provision also expires at the end of 2025.