US Military Budget: Components, Challenges, Growth
Estimated U.S. military spending is $989 billion. It covers the period October 1, 2019, through September 30, 2020. Military spending is the second largest item in the federal budget after Social Security. The United States spends more on defense than the next nine countries combined.

This estimate is more than the $750 billion announced by President Donald Trump. The United States has many departments that support its defense. All these departments must be included to get an accurate picture of how much America spends on its military operations.

The Four Components of U.S. Military Spending

If you really want to get a handle on what the United States spends on defense, you need to look at four components.

First is the $576 billion base budget for the Department of Defense. Second is $174 billion in overseas contingency operations for DoD to fight the Islamic State group. These two combined total the $740 billion touted by the president.

Third is the total of other agencies that protect our nation. These expenses are $212.9 billion. They include the Department of Veterans Affairs ($93.1 billion). Funding for the VA has been increased by $10 billion over 2018 levels. That's to fund the VA MISSION Act to the VA's health care system. The other agencies are: Homeland Security ($51.7 billion), the State Department ($42.8 billion), the National Nuclear Security Administration in the Department of Energy ($16.5 billion), and the FBI and Cybersecurity in the Department of Justice.

The last component is $26.1 billion in OCO funds for the State Department and Homeland Security.

Congress must pass a spending bill for defense and the other departments by September 30, 2019, to avoid a government shutdown.

Defense Department Base Budget

The defense base budget of $576 billion funds the National Security Strategy and National Defense Strategy. It creates three new initiatives: the U.S. Space Force, the U.S. Space Command, and the Space Development Agency. DoD will spend $9.6 billion on cyberstrategy and expansion of artificial intelligence. It will build a new missile field in Alaska to defend against ballistic missile threats. Employees will receive a 3.1% pay increase.

Congress also provided funds to safeguard bases from climate change. It required facilities in the 100-year floodplain to design for two more feet of flooding. It wants DoD to investigate China’s activities in the Arctic. To that end, it authorized icebreakers.

Overseas Contingency Operations

Ironically, the DoD base budget does not include the cost of wars. That falls under Overseas Contingency Operations. It's budgeted at $174 billion for DoD and $26.1 billion for other departments Since 2001, the OCO budget has spent $2 trillion to pay for the War on Terror.

Military Spending History