Breaking Report: Broward County Deputy Says Civil Rights Attorneys Were Handing Out Absentee Ballots to Inmates AFTER ELECTION? (Update)

This is a SteelTruth Exclusive

By Ann Vandersrteel

A Broward County Sheriff’s deputy says attorneys were collecting ballots AFTER the election last Tuesday.

We are looking into this—



Protesters outside the Broward County Elections headquarters (By Ann Vandersrteel)

Friday Novemeber 9, 2018 5:30pm — Annie Marie Delgado, President of TrumpTeam Florida 2020, conference called Ann Vandersteel with a a current DOJ employee and was a former high ranking Broward County law enforcement officer. He stated at 7:00 AM that same morning he received a call from a deputy in the Broward County jail. The Deputy said there was “corruption going on inside the jail and that he had never seen anything like it.”

Six months prior to this the Supervisor of Elections allowed non-felon inmates awaiting trial in jail to register to vote. This did not occur due to the security risk it posed if civilians were allowed to walk through the jail doing the voter registration and absentee ballot requests.

** It was previously reported that mass murdered Nikolas Cruz was registered to vote from jail in Broward County.

I'm sick to my stomach. 18-1958 murdered 17 students & staff, including my daughter Meadow. Yet in July, Broward Sheriff @ScottJIsrael let people into the jail to get him & other animals registered to vote.The Despicable Democrats have no shame.Can't let them steal this election. pic.twitter.com/qWisidEpek — Andrew Pollack (@AndrewPollackFL) November 10, 2018

The Broward County Deputy explained that on Thursday November 8, 2018, after the midterm election, absentee ballots were delivered to the jail for the inmates and the deputies were told to pass them out.

Civil rights attorneys arrived on last Thursday and demanded to see the inmates. They were not the inmates personal attorneys of record. The attorneys wanted to know if the inmates had received their absentee ballots in the mail. As these attorneys were not the inmates’ attorneys of record, Sheriff Scott Israel should not have granted them access to the inmates. Protocol would have the attorneys sign into the jail, yet there is no record.



Ballots stacked up outside the elections headquarters (By Ann Vandersrteel)

The Deputy stated that the civil rights attorneys providedg the inmates with the narrative that they never received their absentee ballot. The liberal attorneys said the prisoners were denied the right to vote and they were to file a grievance with the deputies at the jail.

Questions to ask the Supervisor of Elections, Brenda Snipes, and local Broward County authorities:

1. All of the incoming and outgoing mail is X-rayed at the Broward jail. Does the Broward County jail show evidence of absentee ballots sent and returned?

2. How many ballots were delivered to the Broward County jail and when were they delivered?

3. If the inmates filled out these absentee ballots after the election ended, will they be counted as provisional ballots like military and oversees ballots? With 6000 inmates and approximately 5000 currently non-felons waiting sentencing, that would be a considerable number of votes.

4. Will a class action civil rights lawsuit be filed against the Supervisor of Elections and the Broward County Sheriff for voter suppression?

** The Gateway Pundit contacted the Broward County Sheriff’s office for comment.

The Broward County Public Information Officer told The Gateway Pundit their office acts as the courier between the local Supervisor of Elections and inmates. The practice of registering inmates for elections is not uncommon in Broward County or in other US jails. Jails and prisons are different — the rights of inmates in jails are different than inmates in prison who lose their rights. She said it was standard practice. She referred us to the local SOE for further comment.

We are still collecting information on the absentee ballot actions after the election.

UPDATE—

Parkland High School shooter, Nikolas Cruz was registered to vote while in jail. That would have to be done by a SOE employee and approved by Sheriff Scott Israel.

Nikolas Cruz, the young man who gunned down 17 students and staff at Marjorie Stoneman Douglas High School in Broward County, was registered to vote. How is this possible? He is in solitary confinement 23 out of 24 hours / day. There are cameras that record anyone coming or going from his cell. Who is the SOE employee that registered him to vote?

We need to see the voter registration card for Nikolas Cruz. Did he sign it? Was the form hand filled out?

How many absentee ballots were sent to the Broward County Jail at 555 SE 1st Avenue?

What date did the SOE send the absentee ballots?

How many people (inmates) are registered to vote at the 555 SE 1st Avenue (Broward Country Jail) address?

Did the attorneys sign in to the jail and can we subpoena the jail video server to see activity on Thursday November 8, 2018?

This story is developing.