John Kerry condemns Republicans over open letter to Iran
Several conservative congressmen and media outlets describe letter as ‘not appropriate or productive’ while others question the legality of its contents

US secretary of state John Kerry angrily condemned and refuted Republicans’ open letter to Iran on Wednesday, expressing shock and rejecting many of its claims, including that a future Republican president would renege on a deal over Tehran’s nuclear program.

“This letter ignores more than two centuries of precedent in the conduct of American foreign policy,” Kerry said, adding that the “irresponsible” letter contained “absolutely incorrect” assertions.

Republican Iran letter not the action of 'reasonable people', says Clinton Read more

Kerry said “there’s no grand bargain” and “we’re not negotiating a legally binding plan”, as the letter alleges. He also said that Congress does not have the right to change an executive agreement whenever it sees fit.

“It purports to tell the world that if you want to have any confidence in dealing with America then you have to negotiate with 538 members of Congress,” he said, after declaring that Barack Obama’s successor would not rescind a deal.

“I’d like to see the next president turn around and just nullify it on behalf of the United States,” Kerry said. “It’s not going to happen.”

Republican senators at the hearing responded angrily to Kerry’s remarks, with Bob Corker, who did not sign the letter, repeatedly interrupting the secretary, and at one point entering into the record that Kerry and then-senator Obama had once sponsored a bill asking for congressional oversight of Iran talks.

Senator Rand Paul, one of the letter’s signatories and a likely presidential candidate, defended the missive, saying “the letter was to you, the letter was to Iran but it should’ve been CC’d to the White House”.

Paul argued that the Obama administration had “trampled the constitution” and needed to listen to congressmen such as himself.

White House press secretary Josh Earnest said the letter’s “most profound impact” was to erode the trust of international partners and allies in the United States.

Earnest said “generations of credibility” were threatened by the actions of the Republicans, and that “that confidence in the United States of America has been undermined” as allies and other nations weighed whether the US would keep its promises.

“It’s not a laughing matter,” Earnest said.

Republicans briefly enjoyed a moment of unity by sending the letter, but their coalition cracked as several conservative congressmen and media outlets described the letter as a folly.

Corker, one of the few Republicans who did not sign the letter, told the Daily Beast that he “immediately knew that it was not something that, for me, anyway, in my particular role, was going to be constructive”.

Republican senator Jeff Flake said the letter was “not appropriate or productive”, and that the matter of Iran’s nuclear capabilities was “too important to divide us among partisan lines”.

Hawkish congressman Peter King also called the wisdom of the letter into question. King told reporters on Tuesday he thought the letter set a poor precedent: “I don’t trust the president on this, quite frankly, though I don’t know if I’d go public with it to a foreign government.”

Flake’s comments echoed those of Democrats who continued to excoriate Republicans over the letter. Senator Debbie Stabenow took to the chamber floor to quote former senator Arthur Vandenberg, a Republican during the second world war who she said “loathed” president Franklin D Roosevelt.

“‘Politics stops at the water’s edge,’” Stabenow quoted Vandenberg. “I can only imagine what senator Vandenberg would say if he were alive today,” she said, about Republicans who had “decided to throw away 70 years of wisdom and stand on the side of the ayatollahs”.

Florida Democrat Bill Nelson also urged Republicans to keep perspective: “We can disagree about the specifics but we still have to honor the institution of the presidency, and when it becomes matters of war and peace then we’ve got to unify.”

The letter to Iran, designed to undermine nuclear program negotiations between the Obama administration, Tehran and European powers, was signed by 47 of 54 Republican senators. The issue, underscored by a speech to Congress by Israeli prime minister Binyamin Netanyahu – at Republicans’ invitation – that railed against the deal, allowed Republicans to briefly unite on a policy point. The party has otherwise been riven by conservative and libertarian factions who disagree about issues such immigration, the economy and foreign intervention.

But the condescending tone of the letter, which suggested that Iranians do not understand the American political process, provoked harsh words from both the Obama administration and even Iran’s foreign minister.

The minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif called the letter a “propaganda ploy” and derided Republicans for failing to understand international and US law. Harvard law professor Jack Goldsmith notes that Zarif has a valid point: the letter incorrectly states that the Senate has the power to ratify treaties, which it does not – a fact stated even on the Senate’s own website.

Obama said that the letter put Republican senators in an “unusual coalition”, saying: “It’s somewhat ironic to see some members of Congress wanting to make common cause with the hardliners in Iran.” US vice-president Joe Biden said the the letter was “beneath the dignity of the institution I revere”.

Conservative media sources such as the Wall Street Journal and Fox News, both owned by Rupert Murdoch, also shied away from the letter. The Journal’s editors published an editorial calling the letter a “distraction”. Fox host Megyn Kelly asked Senator Tom Cotton, the letter’s author: “What’s the point in writing to the Iranian mullahs?”

“They dismissed it already,” she pressed. “You’ve offended the Obama administration and you may have offended some of the Democrats who would have come over with the Republicans depending on what happens with this deal, to have a stronger say in the Senate.”

In Iran, even ayatollah Mahmoud Shahroudi suggested that negotiations deserve a chance to succeed, according to state-owned the Islamic Republic News Agency. Iranian officials “are seeking to advance national interests and we support them”, Shahroudi said in a statement.

Shahroudi’s support reiterates Zarif’s position, which finds Republican intransigence “unfortunate” but is still “certain that there are measures to achieve such a deal”.

Cotton and other hawkish Republican senators have defended the letter, saying that their intention is primarily to prevent Iran from attaining the ability to create a nuclear weapon.

“I didn’t think it was going to further our efforts to get to a place where Congress would play the appropriate role that it should on Iran,” he said.