Rightwing author Jerome Corsi: I expect Mueller to indict me
Roger Stone associate has been under scrutiny in relation to hacking and leaking of Hillary Clinton emails

Jerome Corsi, a rightwing author and conspiracy theorist, has said he expects to be criminally indicted by Robert Mueller, the special counsel.

Corsi, an associate of the longtime Donald Trump adviser Roger Stone, said on his online live stream on Monday that he would soon be charged “for some form of lying” by Mueller’s team, which is investigating Russia’s interference in the 2016 election.

“It’s all blown up and I’m going to be indicted,” Corsi told supporters. He denied any wrongdoing and claimed without evidence that he was being persecuted because he “dared to support Donald Trump” and “opposed the deep state”.

Corsi, a former Washington bureau chief for the far-right website Infowars.com, claimed he was the victim of a “perjury trap” and said he may have inadvertently made a false statement during an estimated 40 hours of questioning by prosecutors over six sessions.

Trump adviser Roger Stone 'probably' American cited in Russia indictments Read more

“I don’t know specifically what I’m going to be indicted for, but at 72 years old I am facing losing my home and being separated from my family,” he said.

Stone, Corsi and several other associates have been under scrutiny from Mueller and the FBI for months in relation to the hacking and leaking of emails from Hillary Clinton’s campaign and the Democratic National Committee. US intelligence agencies have concluded that the emails were stolen in a Russian intelligence operation.

In October, NBC News reported that Mueller’s team had evidence indicating that Corsi knew in advance that the emails had been stolen from the Democrats and were to be published by WikiLeaks, the campaigning website. Corsi denies this.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Roger Stone arrives to testify before the House Intelligence Committee. Photograph: Andrew Harnik/AP

Corsi, who was a leading proponent of the false conspiracy theory that Barack Obama was not born in the US, disclosed in September that he had been subpoenaed to appear in front of the grand jury in Washington considering Mueller’s findings.

In March this year, Corsi abruptly announced on Twitter that Ted Malloch, a conservative academic with ties to the UK Independence party, had been detained and questioned at Boston’s Logan airport by FBI agents working for Mueller.

During his Monday broadcast, Corsi said he and his attorney, David Gray, had been in talks with Mueller’s team for the past two months. He said they dealt with the prosecutors Jeannie Rhee, Aaron Zelinsky and Andrew Goldstein.

Corsi said his brain had been turned “to mush” by the repeat questioning sessions and suggested he may have accidentally misstated something. “You can’t talk to them for two months without having this great confusion,” he said.

Gray, his attorney, declined to comment.