Barack Obama says he is 'deeply troubled' by post-election violence in Iran
Barack Obama, in his first comments since the Iranian elections, said he was "deeply troubled" by the post-election violence. But the president held back from publicly criticising Iran, anxious to avoid accusations from Tehran of interference in internal elections, and derailing Washington's diplomatic overtures to Tehran.

Obama, adopting a softly-softly approach, said it was up to Iran to determine its leaders. But he added: "I am deeply troubled by the violence that I've been seeing on television."

He said the world was inspired by the demonstrators who had taken to the streets to protest at alleged election fraud. "The democratic process, free speech, the ability of people to peacefully dissent – all those are universal values and need to be respected."

He was careful, though, to avoid any confrontational remarks that Iran could use as an excuse to rebuff his call for direct negotiations.

In contrast to the Bush administration, Obama has offered to meet the Iranian leadership to discuss the nuclear stand-off. He wants to try to persuade Iran to suspend what the US claims is a nuclear weapons programme. Iran denies it is seeking nuclear armaments.

US officials and analysts say privately that it does not make a significant difference to US policy whether Mahmoud Ahmadinejad or his challenger, Mir Hossein Mousavi, is president, because nuclear policy is dictated by the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.

Some US officials and analysts argue that Ahmadinejad as president suits the US better than Mousavi because, if the diplomatic route fails, Ahmadinejad as president will make it easier to persuade Russia and China to agree to UN sanctions.

Obama last night repeated his offer to sit down with Ahmadinejad without preconditions. "I have always felt that as deep as the differences that exist between the United States and Iran on core issues, the use of tough hard-headed diplomacy, diplomacy without illusions, is critical when it comes to pursuing a core set of national security interests," he said.

"We will continue to pursue a tough direct ­dialogue between our two countries."

The US president has set December as a rough deadline for Tehran to engage with Washington on the diplomatic route or face sanctions. Tehran has so far refused to agree to negotiations.

The next test of the Obama administration's diplomatic approach will come as early as next week when the secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, is set to attend an international conference in Trieste, Italy, to discuss the crises in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Iran has been invited to attend, but has not yet said whether it will.

John McCain, Obama's presidential opponent last year, expressed disappointment at the apparent outcome of the Iranian election. He told CNN: "We should speak out in opposition to what was clearly a corrupt election."

Michael Leeden, a conservative foreign affairs specialist based in Washington and the author of a forthcoming book on Iran, echoed McCain. "I am sure they feel trapped," he said of the Obama administration. "If they criticise the Iranians, they feel they will lessen the chances of negotiations."

The US and the EU are worried that if the diplomatic route fails, Israel will launch military strikes against Iran's nuclear facilities next year.

Karim Sadjadpour, an Iran specialist at the Washington-based Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, said: "The prospect of some type of military strike on Iran – an Israeli military strike – increases significantly if Ahmadinejad remains president. I don't think there's any doubt about that. I think that's a reality."

The EU called on Tehran to clarify the election results.

French foreign ministry spokesman Eric Chavellier said Iran's ambassador had been summoned to hear French concerns over "the brutal repression of peaceful protests and the repeated attacks on the liberty of the press and freedom of speech".

A German government spokesman, Thomas Steg, said: "The German government believes the allegations of manipulation of the vote must be examined quickly by the responsible bodies to remove the doubts about this result."