Barcelona van attack: suspect named as Driss Oukabir arrested
Suspect apparently told officers that his identification documents had been stolen and he played no part in the attack

Spanish police have arrested Driss Oukabir, a 28-year-old man born in Morocco who was initially named as a suspect in the Barcelona attack.



Barcelona attack: 13 confirmed dead after van hits Las Ramblas crowds – latest updates Read more

Reports suggested that Oukabir hired the white Fiat van used in the attack from a rental company in a town about 15 miles (25km) from the centre of Barcelona.

Later on Thursday evening, reports emerged suggesting that Oukabir had handed himself into police after seeing his photograph being circulated online and in the media. He apparently told officers that his identification documents had been stolen before the attack and that he had played no part in it.

He was then arrested by officers in Ripoll, the Catalonian town where he was living about 60 miles north of Barcelona. Josep Lluís Trapero, of the regional police of Catalonia, said he was not the van driver, who is still on the run.

According to Oukabir’s Facebook page, which was later taken down, he had earlier lived in the French city of Marseilles. Police sources said that he has a NIE – the identity card issued to foreigners who live in Spain.

The Spanish newspaper ABC reported that although a warrant had been issued for his arrest over allegations of domestic abuse, police did not suspect him of any jihadi activity. El País said he had spent time in prison in Figueres, Catalonia, and had been released in 2012.



Counter-terrorism officers told the paper that he had been in Madrid earlier this year, adding that they were looking into where he had stayed in the Spanish capital and who he had met there. He is believed to have arrived in Barcelona from Morocco on 13 August.

Oukabir’s criminal record states that he was born on 13 January 1989 in the Moroccan town of Aghbala.

Facebook photographs show Oukabir taking a selfie and sitting on a beach. His social media profile reveals a man who likes rap music and the TV series Prison Break, and whose favourite book is the Qur’an.

But it also shows his political views, especially when it came to the treatment of Arabs. In late July, he shared a picture apparently showing an Israeli soldier restraining a keffiyeh-wearing boy. The photo was captioned: “What a pity for Arabs. Even kids can’t save themselves from colonisation.”

What we know so far about the Barcelona attack Read more

A couple of months earlier, he had reportedly shared a video claiming that “the lie of Jewish liberation” was being used to promote Zionism and Jewish supremacy.



Not long after his name and photograph emerged, people began posting furious and obscene messages on his Facebook page.

Another man, a Spaniard born in the enclave of Melilla, which borders Morocco, was also arrested on Thursday night in connection with the attack. He was held in the town of Alcanar, where police suspect that two earlier explosions in a house were linked to the attack. A police official said that at least one person died and officers suspected those in the house were “preparing an explosive device”.