Maintenance Manager - Lexington, MO - Remington Arms Company
Position Summary

Directs maintenance organization by performing the following duties personally and through supervision.

Primary Responsibilities

Makes recommendations for, and directs implementation and execution of, maintenance policies and practices throughout all areas.

Develops plans for efficient use of materials, machines, and employees.

Reviews maintenance costs and maintenance quality and modifies maintenance and inventory control programs to maintain and enhance profitable operation of division.

Develops direct reports’ capability to carry out needed operational strategies and improve employee relations.

Makes recommendations to budget and oversees adherence.

Follows all plant safety rules and regulations.

Insures compliance with state and federal regulations and Company policies and procedures.

SUPERVISORY RESPONSIBILITIES

Manages and oversee employees in the maintenance and/or facility upkeep of the operation.

Is responsible for the overall direction, coordination, and evaluation of multiple departments.

Carries out supervisory responsibilities in accordance with the organization's policies and applicable laws

Responsibilities include: training employees; planing, assigning, and directing work, apraising performance, rewarding and disciplning employees, addressing complains and resolving problems

NOTE: This list presents only the principal duties of the position and is not intended to be comprehensive. Other duties and

responsibilities may be assigned as dictated by the business needs and conditions. As an essential function of the job, good

attendance is required.

Skills and Education Required

To perform this job successfully, an individual must be able to perform each essential duty satisfactorily. The requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill, and/or ability required. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.

Bachelor's degree from four-year college or university; preferably in a technical field; five to seven years of progressive, manufacturing maintenance experience and responsibilities in supervisory positions; or equivalent combination of education and experience.

Highly developed leadership skills with demonstrated ability to achieve results through others.

Technical skills in lean manufacturing techniques, process improvement, materials management and maintenance scheduling.

Excellent interpersonal and communication skills, including ability to present information either in written or verbal format to insure understanding.

Ability to plan, organize, manage multiple priorities and make difficult decisions as needed

Ability to define problems, collect data, establish facts, and draw valid conclusions and implement solutions at both a strategic and functional level.

Ability to read, analyze, and interpret general business periodicals, professional journals, technical procedures, or governmental regulations.

Ability to effectively present information and respond to questions from groups of managers, clients, vendors, and the general public.

Experience in managing a union environment preferred.

Proficient in Microsoft Products (Excel, Word, Access)

18-001