Fact Check: Race for the U.S. Senate seat - Mike Braun and pre-existing conditions
INDIANAPOLIS -- In an RTV6 fact check from September, we evaluated a claim from Sen. Joe Donnelly (D), where he claimed his Republican opponent, Mike Braun did not support health insurance coverage for pre-existing conditions.

Now that it's nearly a month later, let's revisit that claim, and that rating from September. In a video posted to Twitter, Donnelly said Braun doesn't support coverage for pre-existing conditions, citing the fact that Braun supports a lawsuit to end the Affordable Care Act.

But Braun's campaign said he does support coverage for pre-existing conditions, he just prefers "market-based" solutions, rather than governmental ones.

Since the first fact check, RTV6 has asked Braun's campaign for more specifics of his health care plan. Braun's campaign has not provided any.

On Friday, Oct. 5, Politco published a story about a health care plan Braun has touted -- the insurance coverage his employees get at his business, Meyer Distributing.

Employees at Meyer Distributing must spend $5,000 a year on health care before their coverage kicks in, and that number jumps to $10,000 for a family, according to the Politico article.

A study from the Kaiser Family Foundation shows that Braun's company's deductibles are more than twice the state average. The insurance also doesn't cover prescriptions for chronic/pre-existing conditions until the deductible is met.

RTV6 again asked for specifics on Braun's plan. His campaign spokesperson sent a political statement, criticizing Donnelly. The statement from spokesperson Josh Kelley reads:

"While Hoosier premiums doubled and all but two insurers fled Indiana on Senator Donnelly's watch, Mike Braun delivered solutions by taking on the insurance companies, holding premiums steady for 10 years running and covering pre-existing conditions before Obamacare. Career politicians Joe Donnelly has meant higher premiums for Hoosiers because he's busy taking cash from the insurance industry, while Mike Braun has been busy delivering affordability and solutions."

We're going back and raising the fact check on Donnelly's claim in the video from a 4/6 to a 6/6. RTV6 will revisit the grade if Braun's campaign provides more specifics.