Lawyer George Papadopoulos Part of Donald Trump’s Foreign Policy Team
NEW YORK – Republican Presidential candidate Donald Trump revealed the names of his top foreign policy advisors on March 21 and they included attorney George Papadopoulos, a global energy expert reportedly based in London.

The team is chaired by Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama and Trump said of Papadopoulos, “He’s an oil and energy consultant. Excellent guy.”

According to www.energystreamcmg.com “From March 2011 to September 2015, George Papadopoulos worked as an analyst and researcher at the Hudson Institute in Washington D.C. His research predominantly focused on the geopolitics and energy security changes of both the Caspian and Eastern Mediterranean and their impact on U.S. strategy. George designed the first ever project in Washington, D.C. think tank history on U.S., Greece, Cyprus and Israel relations at a symposium:

“Power Shifts in the Eastern Mediterranean: The Emerging Strategic Relationship of Israel, Greece, and Cyprus.” The event was widely covered and has provided U.S. policymakers with an alternative approach to responding to the changes in the region. George has consulted for energy companies operating in the Eastern Mediterranean and Caspian and has written reports on both Israel’s and Cyprus’ upstream natural gas market structure that have been briefed to regulatory authorities. George’s work on the topics has been published and cited in the Washington Times, Jerusalem Post, Haaretz, Hurriyet, Arutz Sheva and Phileleftheros. In addition to his work in Washington D.C. and the Eastern Mediterranean, he has spoken at numerous policy and energy conferences in the Middle East: including Lebanon, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar. He has been awarded by the U.S. State Department as a finalist to represent the United States at UNESCO in 2011. He holds degrees from University College London, DePaul University, and l’ Universite Catholique de Louvain. He is currently an independent energy analyst based in London.”

There is at least one other Hellene at the top of the Trump campaign, George Gigicos, who leads the advance team that organizes Trump events and appearances.