Obama Out of Tune? Video
Home > Video > Most Popular

Burrito-Eating Bus Driver Causes Albuquerque Crash Burrito-Eating Bus Driver Causes Albuquerque Crash The city bus driver was caught on surveillance video eating, with both hands off the wheel, before slamming into cars ahead of him.

Twins Born: One Black, One White Twins Born: One Black, One White Parents suffer grief, discrimination because of the medical rarity.

Pope Francis' Personal Invitation to Philadelphians Pope Francis' Personal Invitation to Philadelphians The World Meeting of Families - Philadelphia 2015 releases an invitation by Pope Francis ahead of his visit.

Joyous Mood in Cuba as Pope Francis Visits Havana Joyous Mood in Cuba as Pope Francis Visits Havana Powerful scenes in Cuba as the pope delivered mass, visited with officials, and stood in revolutionary square.

Donald Trump Faces Growing Backlash Over Muslim, President Obama Comments Donald Trump Faces Growing Backlash Over Muslim, President Obama Comments ABC News' David Wright tracks the latest political news from the 2016 presidential campaign trail.

Pope Francis Travels to Cuba Ahead of US Visit Pope Francis Travels to Cuba Ahead of US Visit The pontiff will spend 10 days in Cuba and the United States.

Donald Trump Refuses to Say if Obama Was Born in United States Donald Trump Refuses to Say if Obama Was Born in United States The Republican frontrunner discusses the controversy over his not correcting a questioner who said the president was a Muslim.

High-Speed Train to Zip Between Los Angeles, Las Vegas High-Speed Train to Zip Between Los Angeles, Las Vegas China’s biggest train maker is joining forces with a U.S. company to shrink the 4-hour drive to a 1-hour 20-minute train ride.

Alleged Thieves Get Stuck in Elevator After Diamond Heist Alleged Thieves Get Stuck in Elevator After Diamond Heist A man and woman accused of attempting to steal $86,000 worth of diamonds ran into a problem during their escape.

A Look at the 2016 Republican Field Following the Second Debate A Look at the 2016 Republican Field Following the Second Debate The Powerhouse Roundtable discusses the latest on the Republican candidates.

Cokie Roberts: Would be a 'Mistake' for Joe Biden to Run for President. Cokie Roberts: Would be a 'Mistake' for Joe Biden to Run for President. The Powerhouse Roundable debates if Joe Biden will get into the race, and what that means for the Clinton campaign.

Pope Francis Issues a Video Message to Cuba Pope Francis Issues a Video Message to Cuba The pontiff thanked the nation for praying prior to his arrival.

Mysterious, Iridescent Cloud Spotted Over Costa Rica Mysterious, Iridescent Cloud Spotted Over Costa Rica Ariel Joseph Petit, 11, spotted the iridescent cloud phenomenon on Sept. 15, 2015, in Escazu, Costa Rica.

Donald Trump Under Fire For Way He Handled Comment About Obama and Muslims Donald Trump Under Fire For Way He Handled Comment About Obama and Muslims Trump's opponents say he should have never let the comment slide.

U.S. Prepares for Pope's Visit U.S. Prepares for Pope's Visit Security a major concern leading up to the pope's visit to New York and Philadelphia.