WWE legend Dwayne ‘The Rock’ Johnson one step closer to becoming PRESIDENT as mega fan files official campaign for 2020 election
WWE LEGEND The Rock is a step closer to becoming US President after a superfan filed a "Run The Rock 2020" campaign with the American government's election body.

In May the Hollywood superstar revealed he is considering running for the most powerful political position in the world.

5 Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson has revealed he is considering running for the US presidential election

5 Dwayne Johnson superfan Kenton Tilford of Wheeling, West Virginia has filed forms with the Federal Electoral Commission Credit: Facebook/Kenton Tilford

5 Could the Hollywood superstar take over to the political world? Credit: Getty Images

The cult hero - real name Dwayne Johnson - made the shock announcement in an Instagram post.

Now Kenton Tilford of Wheeling, West Virginia has filed forms with the Federal Electoral Commission to try and get the ball rolling.

He told DailyMail.com: "I'm just a private citizen unaffiliated with Mr Johnson, but I've talked with many who believe he can deliver the leadership America needs."

He added: "While there has been significant discussion of the possibility of The Rock running for President, there is currently no avenue for supporters to channel their energies and get Mr Johnson to notice the groundswell of support he has in the grassroots."

Johnson described the idea of attempting to become the most powerful man in the world in 2020 as "very alluring".

The Rock said he wanted to be president as it was "a great opportunity to help people".

MOST READ IN WORLD NEWS HIDDEN KILLER Model who collapsed died on catwalk 'suffered from undiagnosed heart disease' Latest FATAL HIGH Man who burned himself to death outside White House 'was hallucinating on Spice' HEAD SHOCK Husband turns up at police station with ‘cheating’ wife's HEAD in bag Latest WRATH OF KIM North Korea 'executes top diplomat for failing to get deal with Donald Trump' Exclusive EXPOSED Warning to Brits in Ayia Napa and Magaluf after holiday sex vids shared online BUS-T UP Shocking moment bus tries to run over pedestrian deliberately blocking its way

Talking about an article in the Washington Post, he said: "Interesting piece from The Washington Post on if I ran for POTUS I could actually win.

"Writer Alyssa Rosenberg did some pretty good research into my background (slave descendants fighting for their freedom, Revolutionary War etc).

5 The Rock still competes on occasion in the WWE and comes back for the pay-per-view shows Credit: Getty Images

5 The Rock is the highest paid actor in Hollywood after starring in movies such as The Fate of the Furious Credit: Getty Images

"Much more to uncover but well done. More and more pieces like this are popping up due to the Presidential election and they're cool/fun to read.

He added: "I care DEEPLY about our country... and the idea of one day becoming President to create real positive impact and global change is very alluring.

"Buuuuut until that possible day, the most important thing right now is strong honest leadership from our current and future leaders of this country."

The Rock, 45, is the highest paid actor in Hollywood and worth a staggering £50m-a-year after starring in blockbusters such as The Fate of the Furious.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368