London stabbings 2018 – latest knife crime statistics and attacks in Clapham, Crouch Hill, Hammersmith and Greenwich
STABBINGS in the capital have risen 16 per cent in 2018 as knife crime surges across the UK.

As violent attacks spread from cities to the Home Counties, The Sun Online takes a look at the harrowing statistics that are increasing by the day.

PA:Press Association 2 Knife crime in Britain is on the rise - with London especially seeing unprecedented numbers of stabbings

How many stabbings have there been in London this year?

Figures from London's Metropolitan police showed that knife crime has surged by 16 per cent in the capital — as Britain's crime epidemic continues.

Excluding those killed in terror attacks like London Bridge, Westminster and Manchester, there was still a 12 per cent rise in murders — the highest numbers in a decade.

The total number of offences involving a knife or bladed instrument that have been recorded by cops in the year to March 2018 rose to 40,147, a seven-year-high.

There were 1,299 stabbings in London up to the end of April, according to official statistics from the Met Police.

A glut of cocaine flooding the country has been partly blamed for the country's violent crime.

In February more than 250 knives and swords were seized across London in just one week and 283 people, many of them teenagers, were arrested for carrying them.

By August, stabbings were reported on a nearly daily basis as the summer stabbing spree continued.

Two men in their 20s were found with "slash wounds" in Kensington High Street in West London on June 11.

On the same day, a man in his early 20s was left fighting for his life after being stabbed in Bermondsey, South London.

And on June 12, a man in his 20s was knifed outside Tesco in Kensington, West London, and taken to hospital with stab wounds.

Five days later, a 15-year-old was rushed to hospital after being stabbed multiple times in South East London.

On July 2 a teenage boy was stabbed in the stomach with a 10-inch kitchen knife on a busy Islington street.

Ten days later Katerina Makunova, 17, was found dead in a block of flats in Camberwell after a broad daylight attack.

Witnesses desperately tried to give her first aid before paramedics arrived but she was pronounced dead less than an hour later.

A man believed to be in his 40s was stabbed inside a Leicester Square casino on July 16. The incident took place just before 5pm.

London's air ambulance service flew a man to hospital after he was stabbed in Mill Hill, North London on July 22.

On August 1, a 23-year-old was stabbed to death in Camberwell.

The victim, who was rapper in the drill group Moscow17, was identified only by his stage name, Incognito.

Two other men were also stabbed and were taken to hospital.

On August 5, 2018, a man in his 20s was found dead with multiple knife wounds in Cambridge Gardens, Kingston-Upon-Thames.

On August 17, a teen was "disembowelled with a machete" in Camberwell in a 30-strong gang fight.

And that same day a 42-year-old man was stabbed to death in Waltham Forest, East London, leading to the arrest of a 16-year-old boy and a 35-year-old woman.

On August 24, a 23-year-old was left in critical condition after being knifed in Tulse Hill, South London in a broad daylight attack.

The same day a woman in her 60s was stabbed on Chariot Close around 9.50pm and was taken to hospital with non-life threatening injuries.

Murder squad detectives are investigating whether an attack on a man who was stabbed to death could have been sparked by a row breaking out in a nearby bar.

Zakaria Bukar Sharif Ali, 26, was acting as a "peacemaker" as he stepped in to calm down an argument before being murdered in Shoreditch, East London.

Paul Edwards - The Sun 2 The most recent stabbing occurred in Romford, where a teen was stabbed outside a Lidl supermarket

On Sunday, August 26, a 57-year-old woman was stabbed several times at around 8.30pm and was taken to hospital, but her injuries were not believed to be life threatening.

On August 27, Ivor Collingwood-Williams, 36 of Bow, was charged with two counts of grievous bodily harm with intent and two counts of possession of an offensive weapon.

The same day a man was stabbed on the final day of the Notting Hill Carnival.

On August 28, a man in his 30s was rushed to hospital with knife wounds after a street fight in Camden, North London at 1.30am.

On September 5, a teen was rushed to hospital after receiving multiple stab wounds in a knife attack in Islington.

On November 2, a 17-year-old boy died after being stabbed outside Clapham South Tube station in front of horrified commuters. Malcolm Mide-Madariola, from Peckham, was rushed to a hospital in South London but was pronounced dead shortly after. A 17-year-old boy was later charged with murder and two other men, both 18, were arrested on suspicion of murder.

On Bonfire Night, November 5, 2018, a 16-year-old boy, named as John Ogunjobi, was stabbed to death in Tulse Hill, South London.

The teenager's death marked the 250th fatal stabbing in the UK.

He was known to be a local drill rapper called JaySav and a part of a gang called Lower Tulse Hill (LTH) who rapped about drugs and violence.

On November 10, a man in his 30s was rushed to hospital after being stabbed in Crouch Hill, North London.

The man was rushed to hospital for treatment, but police later said his injuries were not life threatening.

On November 19, four men in their 20s were found with stab wounds in Edmonton.

On November 20, a teen was rushed to hospital after being stabbed in broad daylight outside a Lidl supermarket in Romford.

Three days later a British Transport Police officer was knifed outside Ilford Station at 9.45pm.

The officer was rushed to hospital by the London Ambulance Service for his injuries, which are not thought to be life-threatening.

A man has been arrested and police are asking for witnesses to get in touch.

On November 24, a man in his 20s was fatally stabbed in Hackney as he tried to defuse a fight outside a bar.

On December 8 an 18-year-old man was killed in a stabbing in Greenwich.

Aron Warren, named locally as Aron Murray, was stabbed at around 9.40pm, inside a flat and died 40 minutes later.

On December 11, Jay Sewell, 18, was knifed to death in South London. The bloodshed saw five people arrested. It came just days after Aron Warren, also 18, was murdered three miles away in Greenwich.

And on December 22, a man was stabbed to death in Haringey, North London and died later in hospital.

The following day, A 25-year-old man was stabbed in Tottenham, North London at about 1.20am and died at the hospital.

Then, on December 27, a 16-year-old was stabbed in Hendon, North London.

On December 31, a victim believed to be in his mid-30s was taken to hospital with life-threatening injuries after being stabbed in Hammersmith.

Stabbings in London in 2018

January 1 - Steve Frank Navarez-Jara, 20, Islington

- Steve Frank Navarez-Jara, 20, Islington January 3 - Elizabeta Lacatusu, 44, Redbridge

- Elizabeta Lacatusu, 44, Redbridge January 8 - Daniel Frederick, 34, died in Hackney

- Daniel Frederick, 34, died in Hackney January 9 - Dami Odeyingbo, 18, stabbed in Bromley

- Dami Odeyingbo, 18, stabbed in Bromley January 11 - Harry Uzoka, 25, killed in Shepherd's Bush

- Harry Uzoka, 25, killed in Shepherd's Bush January 28 - Yaya Mbye, 26, stabbed in Stoke Newington

- Yaya Mbye, 26, stabbed in Stoke Newington January 29 - Juan Olmos Saca, 39, stabbed in Peckham

LATEST ON CRIME CRIME COUNT London stabbings 2019 – latest knife crime statistics and attacks CELL-BY DATE Calls to spare arrest for kids under 14 would let off likes of Bulger killers Warning HORROR ABUSE Newborn baby needed artificial anus after sex abuse 'by dad' court told KIM’S JUSTICE WAR Kim K frees 17 inmates in 90 days to help lags with ‘unfair’ sentences MONSTER MUM Mum burnt two-month-old baby son to death because his 'crying kept her awake' Warning SECONDS FROM DEATH 'Hollywood Ripper's only survivor tells how she woke to him stabbing her





Are stabbings on the rise?

Knife crime across the country has risen by a staggering 21 per cent in the 12 months to September 2017, according to quarterly figures released by the Office of National Statistics.

Stabbings in London are at their highest level in six years, with a 23 per cent rise from the previous year.

Overall, crime had continued to fall in England and Wales, consistent with the general trend since the mid-1990s.

Emergency services at scene after a 17-year-old was stabbed to death

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 . You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.