Travellers seize new Ocado warehouse and live high life for 24 hours
TRAVELLERS seized a new Ocado warehouse and lived the high life for 24 hours — until riot cops stormed the building.

More than a dozen caravans were driven into the £250million depot, which delivers Waitrose and own-brand treats.

News Group Newspapers ltd 8 The travellers set up shop before using the warehouse's showering facilities

The trespassers ordered contractors to leave, padlocked themselves in and turned away scores of staff arriving for work yesterday.

Inside the travellers enjoyed the rich pickings from the shelves in the 500,000sq ft warehouse.

Witnesses said cops who tried to speak to them were told to “f*** off”.

News Group Newspapers ltd 8 The trespassers ordered contractors to leave and padlocked themselves in

News Group Newspapers ltd 8 Witnesses said cops who tried to speak with them were told to 'f*** off'

MOST READ IN NEWS Latest WIPED OUT Brit dad says wife, son and daughter 'died instantly with no pain' in bombing Warning SAVAGED BY BEAST Crocodile emerges with missing MAN after killing him by biting his groin MADDIE HOPE Madeleine McCann case could be solved in just ‘ONE week thanks to vital DNA’ TOTAL MONSTER Evil mum burns son, 4, and daughter, 1, alive after being 'fed up with them' BANK HOL BUST-UP Lad strips off and dives into river before he's battered by bouncers FACE OF EVIL Moment Sri Lanka attacker 'calmly' walks into church with deadly suicide bomb

A police helicopter circled above the warehouse during the stand-off, which lasted nearly 24 hours. It ended when riot cops raided the site last night.

They used bolt cutters to get in before ordering dozens of men, women and kids to leave.

Officers with riot shields slammed one man to the ground after he allegedly picked up a chain.

News Group Newspapers ltd 8 Inside the travellers enjoyed the rich pickings from the shelves in the 500,000sq ft warehouse

News Group Newspapers ltd 8 Police arrive at scene in Dartford, Kent, as a helicopter circled during the stand-off

News Group Newspapers ltd 8 The travellers initially ignored requests to leave the site

News Group Newspapers ltd 8 Police officers used bolt cutters to get in before ordering dozens of men, women and kids to leave

News Group Newspapers ltd 8 Officers with riot shields slammed one man to the ground after he allegedly picked up a chain

A witness said: “The travellers got in on Tuesday night by using a van to pull away a giant boulder that was blocking the warehouse entrance.

“Once past the first perimeter they used bolt cutters to break into another fence. They helped themselves to towels, food and drink, and showers.

“They brazenly carried on without a care in the world when people were begging them to leave. More than 50 contractors who arrived for work were told they weren’t getting in. That’s a lot of people who had to go home without being paid.”

Ocado’s depot in Dartford, Kent, will service what is dubbed the biggest online grocery store in the world.

Hundreds of thousands of orders will be processed there when it opens in the near future. The firm did not comment on the invasion.