Government pleads with Prince Harry not to invite Barack Obama to his wedding
GOVERNMENT mandarins are urging Prince Harry not to invite the Obamas to his wedding for fear of infuriating Donald Trump.

Harry and fiancée Meghan Markle have told aides they want the former US president and wife Michelle at their big day on May 19.

6 Prince Harry and President Obama enjoying this year's Invictus Games in Toronto Credit: Getty - Contributor

The 33-year-old prince has become good friends with the Obamas since bonding with them during the Invictus Games.

But Britain’s relations with Trump’s White House have sunk to their lowest ebb since his election last year.

The property billionaire does not hide his loathing of Mr Obama and is expected to be enraged if his predecessor gets the coveted call up when he won’t.

The young Royal couple’s dislike of the new president is well known.

6 Michelle Obama gets in on the fun with Prince Harry as he promoted the Invictus Games Credit: Reuters

6 The First Lady also used her official social media channels to promote the Prince's project

Meghan made disparaging comments about him on social media during his election campaign last year.

There are deep fears among senior Foreign Office and No10 officials that another perceived national snub will make it impossible for Theresa May to meaningfully engage with Trump.

A senior government source said: “Harry has made it clear he wants the Obamas at the wedding, so it’s causing a lot of nervousness.

“Trump could react very badly if the Obamas get to a Royal wedding before he has had a chance to meet the Queen.

Prince Harry and Barack Obama take pictures with fans during the wheelchair basketball at the Invictus Games

6 Harry interviewed the former President in September, and the conversation will be broadcast on Radio 4 on Wednesday Credit: Reuters

“Conversations are ongoing about and ministers will eventually have to decide. If the PM lays down the law, Harry will just have to suck it up.”

As the wedding is not a state occasion, the Government only have a consultative role in its organization and heads of state will not be invited.

The guest list is instead being drawn up in full by Buckingham Palace rather than the Department of Culture, Media and Sport – which presides over national events such as state funerals.

Tensions with Trump are at a high after a series of rows between him and the PM in the Autumn.

6 The couple released their official engagement photos shortly before Christmas Credit: EPA

6 The pair also put on a loved-up display on Christmas day at Sandringham Credit: Newspix

MOST READ IN POLITICS MILK BRAKE Boris Johnson vows to axe plans for hated milkshake tax if he makes it to No10 SACRE BLEU Boris Johnson branded the French ‘turds’ over Brexit in rant censored by BBC GANG CRIME COST Almost £3billion a year is spent tackling the UK's thousands of crime gangs 'sarah's asleep' Jeremy Hunt's baby sister drowned in bath as he sat next to her aged two EXTINCTION REBELLION BoJo warns pro-EU Tories will wipe out party with Brexit block Exclusive DRIVEN OUT Boris' neighbours go into hiding after recording red wine row with girlfriend

It took him 13 days to call back Mrs May after she branded him wrong to retweet far right propaganda, and condemned his decision to recognise the disputed city of Jerusalem as Israel’s capital.

In another sign of their friendship, Mr Obama tweeted his congratulations to the pair when their engagement was announced last month, saying he and the former First Lady were “delighted”.

The 44th American president added: “We wish you a lifetime of joy and happiness together.”

Prince Harry has also interviewed Mr Obama for BBC Radio 4’s Today Programme, which he guest edits on Wednesday.