Prince William may go to FA Cup final after royal wedding as Palace insists they ‘will not clash’
BRITS are set for a busy day on May 19 next year, with the FA Cup Final being held just hours after Prince Harry and Meghan Markle wed.

But no one is set for a busier double whammy than Prince William, who could be Harry's best man AND also carry out his duties as President of the Football Association, which each year sees him dish our the trophy to the eventual winners.

Britain is set for one long party after Prince Harry and Meghan Markle announced their wedding will be on the same day as the FA Cup Final

The royals are tipped to kick off their nuptials at noon with footie’s showpiece starting from 5.30pm.

This means that in theory Prince William could attend both.

A Kensington Palace spokesman said: "We have not gone into the timing of the the wedding but made it clear that the wedding and the FA cup final will not clash."

And The Telegraph has reported that palace aides are working with the FA to see if the future king could attend both events.

AFP Wills is set to have a busy old day

The UK will benefit from the two events being broadcast to an estimated 2.5billion global TV audience.

Expert David Haigh, of Brand Finance, said: “You are looking at it being worth between £500million to £1billion.

“Meghan and Harry are exceptionally popular.

"We had 350,000 tourists for the last royal wedding, and 800,000 for the Diamond Jubilee in 2012.

AFP The royals are tipped to start their nuptials at midday at Windsor Castle's St George's chapel

Getty - Contributor The cup final is then expected to follow at 17.30 - with celebrations lasting long into the night

"Up to £150million could be spent on champagne, food and drink alone.

"It will also provide £100million worth of global advertising for Britain.”

Retail sales leapt 17 per cent in the week of William and Kate’s wedding in April 2011.

The date lands between the May 7 and 28 bank holidays.

Insiders said the royal couple may opt for a noon start.

May 19 timetable TIMES for the big day have not been announced, but the wedding is likely to be late morning and the Cup Final late afternoon. Here’s how you could enjoy it: 9am: Line your stomach with a king-sized Full English breakfast — or American-style pancakes. 11am: Put on the TV and watch wedding guests arrive at Windsor. 2pm: The happy couple and guests are en route to the reception. Time for fizz — or a beer? 3pm: Down the boozer to secure a seat for the footie. 7.40pm: Winners lift Cup and dancing is under way at Windsor. Don your glad rags and hit the town. The night is still young.

A palace source said: “They were looking for a date that would work for as many friends and family as possible.

"We can’t confirm timings yet but are mindful it is cup final day.”

The FA hinted at a 5.30pm kick-off, saying: “May 19 promises to be a wonderful day with such a special royal occasion being followed by English football’s showpiece.”

MOST READ IN NEWS MOWN DOWN Shocking moment man on mobility scooter runs down two old ladies at bus stop ALFIE ANGER Alfie Evans's grieving parents accuse NHS of spending £145k to 'kill' their son 'BEYOND CRUELTY' Boy whose cannabis medication was seized at Heathrow 'battling for life' THRILL ON THE HILL Randy couple snapped having sex next to historic village landmark SPOT OF BOTHER Girl, 15, heartbroken after 'boss gives her written warning over her ACNE' GREAT DIVIDE Brits soak up sun after Storm Hector with 26C mini heatwave to hit next week

Prince William is FA president and author Penny Junor said: “Blood is thicker than William’s ties but he would not have wanted to choose.”

Dan Park, of the Duchess of Cambridge restaurant in Windsor, said: “We’ve already had people asking to book.”

Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's wedding will be held on Saturday 19 May 2018, Kensington Palace has announced

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.