Donald Trump ‘feels unwelcome’ in London but insists real Brits ‘love the President’
DONALD Trump has admitted he “feels unwelcome” in London as a major security operation was launched for his arrival in the UK today.

But the tycoon insists real British people “love the President of the United States”.

4 US President Trump and wife Melania arrived at Stansted Airport for their visit to the UK Credit: AP:Associated Press

Trump Protest: Watch LIVE

Mr Trump told The Sun he will be largely staying away from the capital to avoid huge street protests of up to 200,000 today.

But he blamed them on politicians — singling out his nemesis, Mayor of London Sadiq Khan.

Revealing he has been told of the 20ft “Trump Baby” blimp that will be flown above Parliament Square today, he said: “I guess when they put out blimps to make me feel unwelcome, no reason for me to go to London.

“I used to love London as a city. I haven’t been there in a long time. But when they make you feel unwelcome, why would I stay there?

4 Donald Trump has insisted the British people love him Credit: AP:Associated Press

“And when I say that I am talking about government because the people of the UK agree with me.”

Mr Trump let his true feelings slip during an exclusive interview with The Sun hours before Air Force One touched down at Stansted Airport at 2pm today.

Of his four-day visit, he added: “Many people are delighted. I get thousands of notifications from people in the UK that they love the President of the United States. They want the same thing I want.”

He described a West London pub being renamed The Trump Arms for the duration of the trip as “wonderful”, adding: “I love those people. Those are my people”.

US President Donald Trump talks candidly to The Sun about the British Prime Minister Theresa May and Brexit

4 President Trump said he 'used to love London as a city ' but questioned why he would stay here when he's been made to feel unwelcome. A balloon depicting the President as a baby is due to float over the capital today Credit: PA:Press Association

Huge blimp depicting US President Donald Trump as a baby in a nappy flown at Houses of Parliament

Mr Trump added: “You know, a poll just came out that I am the most popular person in the history of the Republican Party. Beating Lincoln. I beat our Honest Abe.

“But the people of the UK, and I’ll bet if you had an honest poll, I’d be very strong. They want the same thing I want. I love the UK.”

His trip is a lower key working visit rather than the full state visit that The Queen invited him on 18 months ago. Asked why he has failed to visit Britain as President until now, Mr Trump said: “Well, you know the United States has been very busy. We have been doing very well”.

Theresa May hosted a dinner with 150 business bosses at Blenheim Palace for Mr Trump tonight.

4 Donald Trump and Melania arriving for Blenheim Palace dinner Credit: Reuters

The Scots, Irish and Welsh Guards’ bands opened the event with a military ceremony in the Great Court.

Mr Trump and wife Melania are travelling everywhere in his Marine One helicopter to avoid demonstrations — including in and out of last night’s accommodation at the US Ambassador's residence, Winfield House in Regents Park.

Protesters outside mounted a “Keep Trump Awake” rally — banging pots, pans and drums and blowing vuvuzelas from 8pm.

But when an estimated 200,000 protesters meet for the “Together Against Trump March” in central London at 2pm today, he will be at Chequers for talks with Mrs May.

MOST READ IN POLITICS NO DEAL FOE SURVIVES Remainer David Gauke survives no confidence vote by Brexiteer Tories GREEN CASH PM says UK's £14 billion foreign aid budget will be tied to saving the planet AYE AYE DO Couples will be able to get married at sea in plans to scrap outdated laws Exclusive ECO WARRIOR BILL Fury as it emerges Extinction Rebellion's London demos cost £16m to police JEZ NOT UP TO IT 'Forgetful' Corbyn, 70, is 'too frail' to be PM, claim civil servants Exclusive BEEB RAP 'Rude & biased' BBC host rapped by bosses over spat with Brexiteer Spoons boss

The Trumps then fly to Scotland to spend the weekend at his golf resorts in Turnberry and Aberdeen.

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn attacked Mrs May for inviting Mr Trump to Britain while “his dangerous and inhumane policies are putting the lives and wellbeing of millions of people at risk”.