Trump-hating women strip totally naked and pose with US flags in bizarre bid to get voters to back Democrats at the midterms
A GROUP of women have stripped naked to encourage voters to turn on Donald Trump in the upcoming US midterm elections.

The ten campaigners who took part in the raunchy photo shoot, so named after the US President's infamous "by the p****" remark, hope their saucy pics will send people to the polls.

SWNS:South West News Service 9 A group of women have stripped off to encourage voters to vote against Donald Trump

The "Grab Them By The Ballot" shoot features women of different sizes, sexualities and races, including a transgender woman, a Latina, an abduction survivor and a pregnant woman.

It was organised by Harvard Law-educated attorney Dawn Robertson, 48, who was inspired by a similar nude shoot in the lead-up to the 2016 election.

Robertson said: "With the Kavanaugh nomination and Me Too and Trump, women are rising everywhere.

"What the Republicans are doing to transgender rights, the way they are attacking women's reproductive rights and the collective trauma means that women are really coming to the forefront now.

"I hope that the pictures encourage women and marginalised communities to vote. I want them to know that their voice matters".

9 The shoot features women of different sizes, sexualities and races, including a pregnant woman

SWNS:South West News Service 9 Organiser Dawn Roberston hopes her bizarre photos will get voters backing Democrats

SWNS:South West News Service 9 The shoot was inspired by a similar one that took place in 2016

The diverse range of women all posed nude with ballots placed strategically in front of their privates after the rise of the Me Too revelations.

Dawn said: "The difference is we are saying it's not just Trump, it's Kavanaugh and all the alleged abusers who have been exposed by the Me Too movement."

The US midterm elections take place next week and the Democrats are vying for control of Congress with a narrow chance they will wrench the Senate from the Republicans too.

Taking both Houses would allow them to cripple the US President's legislative agenda.

SWNS:South West News Service 9 The Democrats have been tipped to take control of the House

AFP or licensors 9 The US Senate is currently held by the Republicans with a slight majority

Part of that agenda was Trump's decision to ban transgender people from the military last year "in any capacity because of their tremendous medical costs".

His administration also revealed they were considering legally defining gender as a biological, immutable condition determined by genitalia at birth.

Z, a Jewish transgender woman, declared that she took part in the risque shoot to raise awareness of how the transgender community is treated under the Republican government.

She said: "Donald Trump's administration is aggressively trying to define transgender, intersex, and gender non-conforming people out of existence.

"I'm optimistic that this photoshoot will serve as a starting point for more women to claim their bodies."

SWNS:South West News Service 9 The women hope their saucy pics will send people to the polls.

Donald Trump caught out saying lewd comments about women in 2005

SWNS:South West News Service 9 Jewish transgender woman Z hopes to raise awareness of the Trump administration

SWNS:South West News Service 9 Organiser Dawn recruited her models on social media and even on the streets

Poll predictor FiveThirtyEight reckons there is a six in seven chance the Democrats will win control of the House, but a four in five chance the Republicans will keep a majority in the Senate.

Should the Democrats seize control of the House of Representatives, they may start impeachment proceedings against Trump.

He could potentially face charges arising from special counsel Robert Mueller's investigation into alleged collusion with Russia during the election campaign.

Trump addressed the issue of impeachment last month, telling the crowd that if he was impeached it would be his supporters' fault because they "did not go out and vote" in the midterm elections.

Jim Carrey slams Donald Trump for ‘kidnapping children’ during an acceptance speech at the Britannia Awards in Los Angeles

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 . You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.