Fergus Cullen is principal of Fergus Cullen Communications, a research, advocacy, and public affairs consulting company started in 1998. Fergus’s background as a state party chairman, editorial page columnist, think tank director, and high school coach means he brings deep political experience, outstanding communication skills, strong academic credentials, and a team approach to our clients.

Fergus was chairman of the New Hampshire Republican Party in 2007-08, the youngest state chairman in the country when elected at age 34. His term included the nationally-watched First In The Nation presidential primary. In the general election, his party defied national trends by gaining 17 seats in the state legislature. He has managed statewide, congressional, and local political campaigns and was named a “Rising Star” of politics by Campaigns & Elections magazine in 1998.

Fergus is a former editorial page columnist for the New Hampshire Union Leader newspaper and author of Granite Steps: Stumbles, Surprises, Successes on the New Hampshire Primary Trail. Fergus is a frequent contributor to the op-ed pages of several newspapers and has been published in periodicals ranging from The Wall Street Journal to Runner’s World magazine. He appears as a commentator on numerous television and radio programs, including nationally broadcast interviews on C-SPAN, CNN, FOX, MSNBC, and most New England stations. He has an extensive network of regional and national media contacts. He is one of National Journal’s “Political Insiders” polled regularly by the magazine about contemporary political issues. He is on a similar panel for Politico’s caucus.

A proud product of public schools, Fergus is a graduate of Gilford High School (Gilford, NH, 1990), Yale College (BA, History, 1994), and the Harvard Kennedy School of Government (Masters in Public Administration, 2002), where he was named a Littauer Fellow for academic achievement, contributions to the school, and potential in public service. Fergus directed the Yankee Institute, a New England free-market think tank, for five years.

A competitive distance runner with youthful personal bests ranging from 15:23 for 5K to a 2:32 marathon, Fergus has coached high school cross country and track for nearly 20 years. He has hiked the Appalachian Trail across New Hampshire and is a member of the 4,000 Footer Club, having climbed all 48 such peaks throughout the White Mountains. He and his wife, Jenny, are raising three young children.