Cordray opposes Kasich's JobsOhio plan
By MARC KOVAC

Dix Communications

COLUMBUS -- Attorney General Richard Cordray added his voice to the Democratic chorus of criticism over Republican John Kasich's proposal to replace the Ohio Department of Development with a private nonprofit.

"I'm very concerned about the proposal made here to privatize Ohio's economic development efforts and outsource the work away from the Ohio Department of Development," Cordray said Monday during a news conference. "... In my view, this plan would seriously undermine oversight and transparency for job creation efforts in Ohio."

Cordray's comments came in response to Kasich's announcement last week that he would like to establish a nonprofit board made up of business executives and headed by the governor to coordinate the state's economic development activities.

The new group, called JobsOhio, would be responsible for reaching out to existing companies and firms thinking about expanding into Ohio, negotiating economic incentive packages and helping to commercialize research and technologies developed at state universities. The group would receive state funding and would accept donations from private businesses and citizens.

Cordray said Monday the setup would undermine oversight of the state's economic development efforts, as a private nonprofit would not be bound by the state's public records and meetings laws.

"At a time when we need to be focusing all of our efforts on job creation, the Kasich proposal is advocating for job creation efforts in Ohio to take place behind closed doors with diminished transparency and accountability," he said.

But Rob Nichols, spokesman for the Kasich campaign, countered Cordray's criticism.

"Ohioans now know the truth: Ted Strickland and Richard Cordray think bureaucrats -- not businesses -- create jobs, and they want to preserve an economic growth effort that's failed Ohioans," he said in a released statement. "John Kasich's JobsOhio will not only be a transparent, responsive, accountable tool for economic recovery, it's going to get the job done for the people of Ohio, as well."

n Marc Kovac is Dix capital bureau chief. E-mail him at mkovac@dixcom.com.