$585 million incentive apparently not enough
Groundbreaking for SUNY Polytechnic Institute's new 360,000 square foot state-of-the-art computer chip fab at the Marcy Nanocenter on April 20, 2016, in Marcy, N.Y. (Office of the Governor) Groundbreaking for SUNY Polytechnic Institute's new 360,000 square foot state-of-the-art computer chip fab at the Marcy Nanocenter on April 20, 2016, in Marcy, N.Y. (Office of the Governor) Photo: Office of Governor Andrew M. Cuomo Photo: Office of Governor Andrew M. Cuomo Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close $585 million incentive apparently not enough 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

When the flagship project for Gov. Andrew Cuomo's Nano Utica program was canceled last month — the $600 million computer chip factory for Austria-based ams AG — the narrative was that SUNY Polytechnic Institute officials had bungled the construction schedule, forcing the company to abandon the landmark agreement.

The suggestion was that Alain Kaloyeros, founding president of SUNY Poly who resigned in October after being arrested on state and federal bid rigging charges, had mismanaged the project, which was to go on land owned by the school known as the Marcy Nanocenter outside Utica.

But new documents obtained by the Times Union appear to show that the major reason for the collapse was complaints by the firm's Austrian executives that the lucrative incentive package — one of the largest ever in state history — was not sufficient to build the factory, or "fab," that they wanted.

"Big question is the allocation of funds and the overall amount," Thomas Stockmeier, the chief operating officer at ams, wrote SUNY Poly officials in a July 13 email, just a week before the board of directors of Empire State Development, the state's economic development agency, approved $585 million for the project.

At the time, documents show, Stockmeier and other ams officials warned SUNY Poly they were upset about the timing and the size of incentives the firm agreed to a year earlier that would have let it lease the factory for $1. A budget document for the ams project obtained by the Times Union outlining two construction scenarios showed a funding gap of between $98 million and $190 million over the state's commitment.

Under contract terms between ams and SUNY Poly, a "funding notice" was supposed to have been produced by March 30, 2016, but a deal wasn't reached on Cuomo's fiscal 2017 budget until the following day.

"We will experience (a) nine month delay in bringing up the fab, and we have a heavy budget mismatch," Bernd Gessner, head of supply chain management at ams at the time, wrote to SUNY Poly officials on July 12. "... the whole business and our underlying assumptions are not valid anymore ... so I assume that our management board will seriously consider to terminate the contract and stop the project."

The emails appear to run counter to the idea that the project failed because of delays to the construction timeline for the Utica fab caused by mismanagement by Kaloyeros and other SUNY Poly officials before the bidding scandal broke. In fact, SUNY Poly officials were threatening to cancel the project themselves over the summer, upset about the back-and-forth over funding.

"Terminate the contract and let us move to invest (the) $600 million or so of taxpayer $ with another partner," one SUNY Poly executive wrote to ams officials in one email.

Otilia Ayats-Mas, a spokeswoman for ams, declined to talk about whether money was an issue when contacted this week.

"We do not want to comment on that," she said.

Kaloyeros, who has maintained his innocence, and his lawyer did not respond to requests for comment.

State officials have hinted that money was the real issue. In an August letter to the state Public Authorities Control Board, which ultimately signs off on economic development spending, a lawyer for state Comptroller Thomas DiNapoli wrote that Empire State Development "indicated that the project budget (was) still under discussion" though the ESD board had approved the money the month before.

Officials with Empire State Development say the state did all that it could have to save the project. ESD took over management of the Utica project in September just before Kaloyeros was charged.

"New York state offered ams AG a very competitive and generous package to build a fab at the Marcy Nanocenter, including several hundred million dollars to support infrastructure work, construction of a state-of-the-art facility, and the purchase and installation of tools and equipment," Jason Conwall, an ESD spokesman, told the Times Union Friday. "It is our belief and understanding that ams AG ultimately made a business decision, after multiple delays significantly impacted the viability of the project moving forward within the expected time frame."

lrulison@timesunion.com