San Francisco Mayor Breed Leads Call On Tuck To Disavow Dishonest Attacks, Get Back To Issues In State Schools Race
San Francisco – FRIDAY, OCTOBER 26, 2018 – San Francisco Mayor London Breed with Assemblymembers David Chiu and Phil Ting led a coalition of women’s leaders, educators, students, and labor leaders to rally at a press conference yesterday to speak out against dishonest attacks ads and support their endorsed candidate for State Superintendent of Public Instruction candidate Tony Thurmond.

“The reason why I’m supporting Tony is because of his 20 years of service to our kids,” said Mayor Breed. “As an educator, as a social worker, as someone who has worked in the Assembly to fight for funding for our public schools, as someone who has tried to support teachers and students to lift them, Tony Thurmond is the person for the job. He has done so much work over the years. The attacks on him are really sad and unbecoming of someone who is asking to lead our public school system.”

Thurmond has been the subject of attack ads funded by billionaires supporting Tuck. The ads focus on Thurmond’s record as a school board member from 2008-2012 in West Contra Costa Unified School District (WCCUSD).

WCCUSD School Board Member Madeline Kronenberg said:

“Tony was an absolute warrior for change and for our children. When we thought we would have to close these schools, Tony found a creative way to keep schools open by working together with the cities in our district. Tony will bring these skills to the State Superintendent position.”

One of the loudest voices of opposition to false campaign attacks on Thurmond has been Christine Pelosi, Chair of the California Democratic Party Women’s Caucus and a leader in the #MeToo movement. At the press conference, Pelosi reiterated her previous call to Thurmond’s opponent, Marshall Tuck, to disavow the attack ads which are paid for by billionaires supporting his campaign.

Chair Christine Pelosi said: “To Mr. Tuck: Are you going to use other people’s pain to win an election? Are you going to use the unhealed grief of sexual harassment and assault victims without their consent? We need a leader in the school system who is going to respect our children, respect their power of consent and respect their power to tell their own stories. There's only one candidate for this job who earns and teaches that respect and that is Tony Thurmond.”

Thurmond himself addressed the false attack ads, and thanked the dozens of supporters who attended the press conference.

“Today is an opportunity for us to talk about truths,” said Thurmond. “This campaign is supposed to be about education and helping kids and unfortunately there are some in this race who have distorted what this is all about. Today I am calling on my opponent again to help bring this campaign back to the issues, to focus on what we can do to help serve six million students who depend on us every single day to help them be successful.”

View the full press conference here.





###