Why Matt Damon is Supporting Hillary Clinton
In this month's philanthropy-focused issue of Town & Country, Matt Damon shares his fight for clean drinking water around the world, a passion project that has led to his recent political endorsement of Hilary Clinton.

While he feels she's qualified for several reasons, "Just on this issue of water and sanitation," Damon says, "She understands it from a number of different angles—as a national security issue, as a human rights issue, and, obviously, its impact on women and girls. This is not a partisan issue, which is one really good thing about it. We've talked in equal parts to Republican and Democratic senators and congressmen.'"

Proof of the cause's non-partisan mentality? Damon cited George W. Bush's 2008 initiative, the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) as a template for the non-profit he co-founded, Water.org.

"That's absolutely what we need," Damon said. "I've never spoken to Hillary about this, but from what she has done and what she has said, if she wins I'd like to believe that we at least would have an understanding ear. We're not selling snake oil, you know!"

In the story, Damon how celebrity—and his mixed feelings about fame—lead him to found Water.org:

"It's surreal to suddenly wake up one day and have a larger sphere of influence than you ever anticipated," he says. "People started asking me to come to this gala or that. And then I would find my name associated with things that I didn't know anything about. I didn't want to be somebody at whom people rolled their eyes, thinking, What is he doing, getting into the middle of this kind of stuff? And that's why, once my life stabilized a little—my career was going pretty well, my wife was pregnant—I decided to get very serious about one thing."

That "one thing" was clean water, a cause with, perhaps, a bit less sex appeal than saving rainforests. "Water was described to me by the people at DATA as the least sexy of all the philanthropic causes. And then you add in sanitation. Just in case water is not unsexy enough, let's bring shit into it!" Damon jokes.

"We all have family members or friends we've lost to cancer or to AIDS," Damon says. "But sanitation is something we solved here 100 years ago. Maybe we have some vague recollection of a grandfather or great-grandfather who talked about going to the outhouse."

Unfortunately, issues close to home have recently made it easier to raise awareness about the water crisis.

"We don't know anyone who goes thirsty," he continues. "We have faucets everywhere. Our toilet water is cleaner than what 663 million people drink. The crisis in Flint, Michigan, ironically, is one of the first times, at least in my memory, that Americans have become aware of just how necessary clean water is, and the dire consequences of not having it."

The cause has become one of the three most important things in his life. "I have my family, I have my career, and I have this," Damon says

For more on Damon and his work with Water.org, check out Town & Country's cover story.