Obama Plays it Safe on Issue of Guns Video
Home > Video > Most Popular

Dallas Officials Say 11 Officers Have Been Shot, 3 Fatally Dallas Officials Say 11 Officers Have Been Shot, 3 Fatally Police believe there were two snipers who opened fire on officers from elevated positions.

5 Dallas Officers Killed During Police Shootings Protest 5 Dallas Officers Killed During Police Shootings Protest Eleven police officers were shot ambush-style, including five fatally by at least two snipers.

Video Live Streamed Over Facebook Shows the Moments After a Black Man Was Shot Dead By Police Video Live Streamed Over Facebook Shows the Moments After a Black Man Was Shot Dead By Police The Governor of Minnesota said he believes the victim, Philando Castile, would still be alive if he were white.

Protests Erupt After New Video of Minnesota Police-Involved Shooting Protests Erupt After New Video of Minnesota Police-Involved Shooting A woman posted video on Facebook Live after Philando Castile, 32, was shot during a traffic stop.

Gunshots Heard in Downtown Dallas Gunshots Heard in Downtown Dallas Multiple gunshots heard in downtown Dallas during anti-police brutality protests.

Minnesota Shooting Victim 'Was a Good Man,' Girlfriend Says Minnesota Shooting Victim 'Was a Good Man,' Girlfriend Says Diamond Reynolds talks about the life and death of Philando Castile.

Officials Search for Suspects in Dallas Police Shooting Officials Search for Suspects in Dallas Police Shooting ABC News' Pierre Thomas reports on concerns there may have been as many as four suspects.

Obama Speaks Out on Deadly Police Shootings in Louisiana and Minnesota Obama Speaks Out on Deadly Police Shootings in Louisiana and Minnesota Alton Sterling and Philando Castile were killed this week and video of both incidents is sparking outrage.

Eyewitness Describes Scene of Deadly Dallas Shooting Eyewitness Describes Scene of Deadly Dallas Shooting Rev. Jeff Hood was at the Dallas protest when the shooting began and panicked protesters fled.

Dallas Gunman Wanted to Kill White Cops, Police Say Dallas Gunman Wanted to Kill White Cops, Police Say Chief David Brown provides details on alleged motives for the shooting that killed five officers.

Two Cities, Two Days, Two Black Men Killed By Police Two Cities, Two Days, Two Black Men Killed By Police Bystander video captured when police shot and killed Alton Sterling outside a Louisiana convenience store. In Minnesota, a woman livestreamed after...

Minnesota Shooting Victim Died for 'No Reason,' Girlfriend Says Minnesota Shooting Victim Died for 'No Reason,' Girlfriend Says Diamond Reynolds details the alleged events that led to the shooting death of Philando Castile.

Texas Attorney General Addresses Dallas Sniper Attack Texas Attorney General Addresses Dallas Sniper Attack Attorney General Ken Paxton tells "GMA" the latest details on the apparent calculated attack on law enforcement.

Learn Some Ways to Book Summer Trips Cheaper Learn Some Ways to Book Summer Trips Cheaper ABC News' Genevieve Brown discusses saving money during the summer travel season.

Woman Live-Streams After Police Fatally Shoot Boyfriend Woman Live-Streams After Police Fatally Shoot Boyfriend Police in Minnesota have confirmed that a man has died after being shot by an officer Wednesday night while inside a car with a woman and child.