Ukraine-/Russia-related Sanctions
Page Content

Sign up for Ukraine-/Russia-related Sanctions e-mail updates.

Recent Updates:

The Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA) introduces additional sanctions with regard to Ukraine-/Russia. Please visit the link below for more information.

Sanctions Brochures

Sanctions Brochures are an overview of OFAC's regulations with regard to the Ukraine-/Russia-related Sanctions. They are useful quick reference tools.

Frequently Asked Questions

OFAC has compiled hundreds of frequently asked questions (FAQs) about its sanctions programs and related policies. The link below sends the user to the entire list of OFAC's FAQs.

​​Sectoral Sanctions Identifications (SSI) List

The Sectoral Sanctions Identifications List includes persons determined by OFAC to be operating in sectors of the Russian economy identified by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to Executive Order 13662.

Archived Directives

Important Advisories

Advisory Regarding the Obfuscation of Critical Information in Financial and Trade Transactions Involving the Crimea Region of Ukraine (Issued July 30, 2015)

OFAC issues advisories to the public on important issues related to the sanctions programs it administers. While these documents may focus on specific industries and activities, they should be reviewed by any party interested in OFAC compliance.

Interpretive Guidance

Apply for an OFAC License Online - Authorization from OFAC to engage in a transaction that otherwise would be prohibited.

OFAC issues interpretive guidance on specific issues related to the sanctions programs it administers. These interpretations of OFAC policy are sometimes published in response to a public request for guidance or may be released proactively by OFAC in order to address a complex topic.It may be in your and the U.S. government’s interest to authorize particular economic activity related to the Ukraine\Russia-related Sanctions. Visit the link below to apply for an OFAC license.

Guidance on OFAC Licensing Policy

Licenses for Legal Fees and Costs - Guidance on the Release of Limited Amounts of Blocked Funds for Payment of Legal Fees and Costs Incurred in Challenging the Blocking of U.S. Persons in Administrative or Civil Proceedings

Entities Owned By Blocked Persons - Guidance On Entities Owned By Persons Whose Property And Interests In Property Are Blocked

Certain activities related to the Ukraine\Russia-related Sanctions may be allowed if they are licensed by OFAC. Below OFAC has issued guidance and statements on specific licensing policies as they relate to the Ukraine-related Sanctions.

General Licenses

OFAC issues general licenses in order to authorize activities that would otherwise be prohibited with regard to Ukraine. General licenses allow all US persons to engage in the activity described in the general license without needing to apply for a specific license.

Legal Framework for the Ukraine\Russia-related Sanctions

The Ukraine\Russia-related sanctions program represents the implementation of multiple legal authorities. Some of these authorities are in the form of an executive order issued by the President. Other authorities are public laws (statutes) passed by The Congress. These authorities are further codified by OFAC in its regulations which are published the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).

Executive Orders

13849 - Authorizing the Implementation of Certain Sanctions Set Forth in the Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (September 20, 2018)

13685 - Blocking Property of Certain Persons and Prohibiting Certain Transactions with Respect to the Crimea Region of Ukraine (December 19, 2014)

13662 - Blocking Property of Additional Persons Contributing to the Situation in Ukraine (March 20, 2014)

13661 - Blocking Property of Additional Persons Contributing to the Situation in Ukraine (March 17, 2014)

13660 - Blocking Property of Certain Persons Contributing to the Situation in Ukraine (March 6, 2014)

Statutes

Code of Federal Regulations

31 CFR Part 589 - Ukraine-Related Sanctions Regulations

Federal Register Notices

79 FR 26365-14 - Issuance of regulations to implement Executive Order 13660, Executive Order 13661, and Executive Order 13662

​ ​​​​​​​​​​​