Cuba Sanctions
Page Content

Sign up for Cuba Sanctions e-mail updates.

Changes to the Cuba Sanctions - Frequently Asked Questions

Specific Guidance on the Cuba Sanctions

OFAC offers guidance on a variety of subjects related to the Cuba sanctions. Most of this guidance is specific in nature. General guidance on the Cuba sanctions can be found in the Sanctions Brochures section at the top of this page.

Fact Sheet on Recent Changes to the Cuba Sanctions

These Frequently Asked Questions provide an overview of OFAC's regulations with regard to the Cuba sanctions.

Related to Publishing Activities

Related to Travel Between the United States and Cuba

Related to the transfer of claims against Cuba:

Interpretive Guidance

OFAC issues interpretive guidance on specific issues related to the sanctions programs it administers. These interpretations of OFAC policy are sometimes published in response to a public request for guidance or may be released proactively by OFAC in order to address a complex topic.

Applying for a Specific OFAC License

Apply for an OFAC License Online - Authorization from OFAC to engage in a transaction that otherwise would be prohibited.

It may be in your and the U.S. government’s interest to authorize particular economic activity related to the Cuba sanctions. Certain activities related to the Cuba sanctions may be allowed if they are licensed by OFAC. Visit the link below to apply for an OFAC license.

Guidance on OFAC Licensing Policy

Entities Owned By Blocked Persons - Guidance On Entities Owned By Persons Whose Property And Interests In Property Are Blocked

Certain activities related to the Cuba sanctions may be allowed if they are licensed by OFAC. Below OFAC has issued guidance on its licensing policy.

Executive Orders, Statutes, Rules and Regulations Relating to Cuba

The Cuba sanctions program represents the implementation of multiple legal authorities. Some of these authorities are in the form of executive orders issued by the President. Other authorities are public laws (statutes) passed by The Congress. These authorities are further codified by OFAC in its regulations which are published the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Modifications to these regulations are posted in the Federal Register.

Executive Orders

12854 Implementation of the Cuban Democracy Act (Effective Date - July 4, 1993)

Statutes

Code of Federal Regulations

31 CFR Part 515 - Cuban Assets Control Regulations

Federal Register Notices