Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act
Page Content

Sign up for CAATSA-related Sanctions e-mail updates.

On August 2, 2017, the President signed into law the “Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act” (Public Law 115-44) (CAATSA), which among other things, imposes new sanctions on Iran, Russia, and North Korea.

Differing foreign policy and national security objectives may result in differing interpretations of similar language among the three titles of CAATSA. For program specific documents, guidance, and Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) related to Titles I, II, or III, click the links under the relevant titles below.

Title I – Countering Iran’s Destabilizing Activities Act of 2017

Frequently Asked Questions on Title I:

Other Documents Related to the Implementation of Section 105:

Title II – Countering Russian Influence in Europe and Eurasia Act of 2017

Frequently Asked Questions on Title II:

Ukraine-/Russia-related Directives:

Title III – Korean Interdiction and Modernization of Sanctions Act

31 CFR Part 510 - North Korea Sanctions Regulations

Additional CAATSA Guidance and Information

On September 29, 2017 and October 12, 2017, the President delegated authority to the Departments of State and the Treasury and the Director of National Intelligence to implement certain provisions in Titles I, II and III of CAATSA.

The Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control will provide further guidance on the sanctions measures related to CAATSA as they are implemented, and will link such guidance to this page.

Guidance published to date regarding the CAATSA provisions delegated to the Department of State is available at the following:

Executive Orders, Regulations, and Statutes Associated with CAATSA

The CAATSA Sanctions represent the implementation of multiple legal authorities. Some of these authorities are in the form of executive orders issued by the President. Other authorities are public laws (statutes) passed by The Congress. These authorities are further codified by OFAC in its regulations which are published the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Modifications to these regulations are posted in the Federal Register.

Executive Orders

13849 - Authorizing the Implementation of Certain Sanctions Set Forth in the Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (September 20, 2018)

Regulations

Statutes