Our History
We continue to carry out our mission of serving the people of the Tennessee Valley region, to make life better through our work in energy, the environment and economic development.

With power demand growing, TVA turned its attention back to clean nuclear energy, returning an idled reactor to service, and paving the way to finish construction of another. We also launched the first green power program in the Southeast.

A difficult decade affected by rising fuel costs led to innovative thinking about energy conservation. Working successfully to stop a steady rise in energy costs, we paved the way for a long period of stable rates.

Against the backdrop of World War II, TVA launched one of the largest hydropower construction programs ever undertaken in the United States.

With the country reeling from the Great Depression, President Roosevelt created his “New Deal” to help America recover. The Tennessee Valley Authority was founded to help the hard-hit Tennessee Valley, where it was tasked with improving the quality of life in the region.

TVA’s original 1933 purpose—set forth in the TVA Act —was to address the Valley's most important issues in energy, environmental stewardship and economic development. Learn about key moments in our history as we’ve tackled important issues in the Tennessee Valley such as power production, flood control and reforestation, and about how our mission of service lives on today. Click on the dates below to get a more thorough accounting of TVA's history from decade to decade.

TVA Heritage

These in-depth columns tell the story of TVA through the people and events that shaped its history—and indeed life in the Tennessee Valley as we know it today. Read about the vision, conflicts, personal and political struggles that made TVA great.

The TVA Act

Signed in 1933, the Tennessee Valley Authority Act created a public corporation “To improve the navigability and to provide for the flood control of the Tennessee River; to provide for reforestation and the proper use of marginal lands in the Tennessee Valley; to provide for the agricultural and industrial development of said valley...and for other purposes.” Click here to read the act.

Bibliography of TVA History

A comprehensive bibliography for those who want to dig more deeply into the rich and fascinating history of the Tennessee Valley Authority.