8th Congressional District DFL race heads to primary; no endorsement reached at convention
DULUTH — After a deadlocked convention on Saturday in Duluth, the voters will decide a DFL candidate for the 8th Congressional District race.

The stalemate at the Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party’s 8th District convention in Duluth saw the field whittled from five to two, but returned no endorsed candidate.

The 170 delegates failed to give Leah Phifer or Joe Radinovich the party’s nomination after 10 rounds of voting, putting the party on course for an August primary election between Phifer, Radinovich and a defiant Michelle Lee, who was the only one of three deposed candidates who vowed to continue in the race. Jason Metsa and North Branch Mayor Kirsten Kennedy both said they would fold up their campaigns.

“Unfortunately, mine’s not moving forward,” Metsa, the state representative from Virginia, told the assembled delegates.

Phifer, of Isanti, won on every ballot, but never carried the 60 percent required for endorsement. She rose as high as 52 percent and Radinovich topped out at 44.

“We’ll see another day,” Phifer told her supporters.

“We’re not running against anyone,” Radinovich said. “We’re running for our set of values.”

Some brought levity to what was a grueling day — more than 10½ hours.

“We need some fiber in this convention,” said Tom Jones, a visitor (not a delegate) from Ogilvie. “It’s stuck. It’s a constipated convention.”

But others took the lack of endorsement hard.

Related Articles 29-member board named to aid Walz-Flanagan transition at Capitol

U.S. House may change hat ban, ensuring that Minnesota lawmaker can wear headscarf

A Maplewood City Council election was determined by a coin toss. But wait … it’s not over yet.

Jesse Ventura visits Tim Walz, pushes economics of legalizing recreational marijuana

Challenger unseats Rich Stanek in Hennepin County, becoming first gay sheriff in Midwest “I’m angry,” said Andromeda Lee, a Phifer delegate from Duluth. “I don’t think people realize how debilitating an open primary can be.”

Lee was referring to the fact that anyone registered can vote in August’s DFL primary, including Republicans who might want to push for who they think is the more beatable candidate as an election strategy.

Ryan Welle, a Radinovich delegate from Little Falls, told the assembled that a divided party cannot defeat Republican Pete Stauber, who is unopposed and has been building voter and financial support since announcing his candidacy last summer.

Resigned afterward, Welle said, “I guess we’ll find out.”

Phifer, of Isanti, and Radinovich, of Crosby, spent the final seven rounds going toe to toe. Metsa fell off the ballot after the third round. Michelle Lee and Kennedy were ousted after a single round, failing to reach the required 15 percent to continue.

Lee, of Moose Lake, drew hearty boos from the delegates after saying she would not abide by the endorsement process.

“Do I feel rejected by my party? I do,” Lee said. “But as long as I have people writing $10 checks and gas in the tank of my car, I’m going to keep going.”

The day started with the candidates each stumping.

Phifer blasted President Donald Trump, calling him the country’s “greatest threat,” and said she would make sure Stauber is never seated in the 8th District. Radinovich told the harrowing story of a family murder-suicide that took his mother’s life in 2004 and left him to lean on support from the greater community. He said he would prioritize investing in early childhood education.

“It lifts children up,” he said.

Eight hours into the day and six rounds of delegate voting in, Rep. Rick Nolan, who was not at the convention, endorsed Radinovich.

“Joe Radinovich has proven himself, beyond any doubt, to be an extremely effective and experienced progressive leader,” Nolan said in a statement. “He knows how to win tough elections for himself and for others. He knows how to govern effectively. He knows how to unite people and he offers us the best chance to win in November, to be our next great congressperson representing the 8th District.”

In February, Nolan announced his retirement effective at the end of the term. Radinovich had previously been Nolan’s campaign manager in 2016.

Phifer had been set to contest Nolan for the DFL endorsement. But his retirement opened the door for the batch of candidates on hand Saturday.

The Latino Caucus spoke at the convention, reading a letter released last week that said the party should deny Phifer the nomination for starting a 10-year federal law enforcement career with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement. Phifer seemed to diffuse the challenge with a heartfelt response — partly spoken in Spanish.

“I hear you,” she said, explaining she was hired out of college as a translator to advocate for detained immigrants. “I wanted to go to a difficult place where many people don’t have advocates.”

Both Phifer and Radinovich align on many of the issues. They notably differ on mining — a word that seemed forbidden on the day as it was hardly mentioned aloud. While both candidates have a family history in mining, Phifer is not in favor of copper-nickel mining in northern Minnesota, while Radinovich is open to it.

Near the end of the day, State Rep. Mary Murphy, who represents Hermantown, Two Harbors and parts of Duluth, could be seen doing leg lifts in a chair, trying to stay limber. Asked why she thought the deadlock ensued, she said, “People are loyal. They want to stay with the person they’ve been working with since the (February) caucuses. (Delegates) want to stay true to the promises they made to their friends and neighbors.”