Risking it all to escape gang violence and poverty
• 16,000 children from El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras were apprehended in Mexico in the first six months of 2016.

• Data shows unaccompanied children who do not have an attorney in US immigration hearings – 40 per cent – are more likely to be deported than those who do. In recent cases, 40 per cent of unrepresented children were ordered deported, as compared to 3 per cent for represented children.

These vulnerable children, many of whom are travelling without an adult, need protection every step of the way: in their home countries of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras – which have some of the world’s highest murder rates – as they cross Mexico, and when they arrive in the United States, UNICEF said in ‘Broken Dreams – Central American children’s dangerous journey to the United States’.

“It is heart-rending to think of these children – most of them teenagers, but some even younger – making the gruelling and extremely dangerous journey in search of safety and a better life,” said UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Justin Forsyth. “This flow of young refugees and migrants highlights the critical importance of tackling the violence and socio-economic conditions in their countries of origin.”

In the first six months of 2016, almost 26,000 unaccompanied children and close to 29,700 people travelling as a family, mostly mothers and young children, were apprehended at the US border with Mexico. Thousands more never made it to the border – apprehended, kidnapped, trafficked, murdered, or fallen victim of the harsh environment along the way.



Unaccompanied children apprehended in the United States are guaranteed an immigration court hearing, but are not entitled to a court-appointed attorney. Children travelling with a parent risk swift deportation or months of detention.



Those who are deported face the risk of being attacked or killed by the gangs they sought to escape.



UNICEF said that detention of children on the basis of their migration status should be prevented. Children also should have full access to healthcare and other services and should be allowed to live with their families whenever possible.



Together with its partners, UNICEF is working to address the causes of migration by supporting the efforts of governments to improve children’s lives and address communal and criminal violence in countries of origin. UNICEF also works to strengthen services that reduce the vulnerability of children to violence, with a strong focus on education and health. It also advocates for the protection of children’s rights throughout their journey, and for governments to provide assistance to returnee children.



“We must remember that children, whatever their status, are first and foremost children. We have a duty to keep them safe in a healthy and nurturing environment,” Forsyth said.

# # #

The Child Alert ‘Broken Dreams’ and broadcast quality video and photos are available here: http://uni.cf/2aJTg3f

About UNICEF



UNICEF promotes the rights and wellbeing of every child, in everything we do. Together with our partners, we work in 190 countries and territories to translate that commitment into practical action, focusing special effort on reaching the most vulnerable and excluded children, to the benefit of all children, everywhere.



For more information about UNICEF and its work visit: www.unicef.org



Follow us on Twitter and Facebook



For more information, please contact:

Najwa Mekki, UNICEF New York, +1917 209 1804, nmekki@unicef.org

Chris Tidey, UNICEF New York, +1917 340 3017, ctidey@unicef.org

Marisol Quintero, UNICEF, Panamá, Tel: + 507 6569 2718, mquintero@unicef.org

Christophe Boulierac, UNICEF Geneva, +41799639244, cboulierac@unicef.org