Contract of Carriage Document
Current Location within United.com Skip Navigation Links Home

Contract of Carriage

Contract of Carriage Document You are here. Contract of Carriage Document (revised February 16, 2018) Transportation of Passengers and Baggage provided by United Airlines, Inc. and Carriers doing business as United Express, are subject to the following terms and conditions, in addition to any terms and conditions printed on or in any ticket, ticket jacket or eticket receipt. To the extent there is a conflict between this Contract of Carriage and any terms and conditions printed on or in any ticket, ticket jacket or eticket receipt, this Contract governs. By purchasing a ticket or accepting transportation, the passenger agrees to be bound by these controlling terms of this Contract of Carriage, and no covenants at law or in equity shall be implied or incorporated. Note, only the English version of United’s Contract of Carriage governs the transportation of Passengers and Baggage provided by United Airlines, Inc. and Carriers doing business as United Express. Table of Contents Rule 1 Definitions As used in this Contract of Carriage, the following terms, whether or not capitalized, shall have the meanings ascribed below: Add-On-Fare: See “Arbitrary” Adult means a person who has reached his/her eighteenth birthday as of the date of commencement of travel. Africa means the area composed of all the countries on the continent of Africa, other than Algeria, Morocco, Sudan, Tunisia, and Egypt, but including the following Islands: Cape Verde, Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, Reunion, Sao Tome y Principe, and Seychelles. Alternate Transportation means air transportation with a confirmed reservation at no additional charge (by any scheduled airline licensed by DOT), or other transportation accepted and used by the passenger in the case of denied boarding. Animals means, the usual connotation of domestic pets as well as reptiles, birds, poultry and fish. Applicable Adult Fare means the fare which would be applicable to an adult for the transportation excepting those special fares applicable to a passenger’s status, e.g., military fares, adult standby, etc. Airline Designator Code is the two letter identification code that reflects the Marketing Carrier, which may be different from the carrier operating the flight. Arbitrary means an amount published for use only in combination with other fares for the construction of Through Fares. It is also referred to as “Proportional Fare”, “Basing Fare”, and “Add-On-Fare”. Area No. 1 (or “Area 1”) means the area composed of all of the North and South American continents and the islands adjacent thereto, Greenland, Bermuda, the West Indies, the islands of the Caribbean Sea, and the Hawaiian Islands (including Midway and Palmyra). Area No. 2 (or “Area 2”) means the area composed of all of Europe (including that part of the Russian Federation in Europe) and the islands adjacent thereto, Iceland, the Azores, all of Africa and the islands adjacent thereto, Ascencion Island and that part of Asia lying west of and including Iran. Area No. 3 (or “Area 3”) means the area composed of all of Asia and the islands adjacent thereto except that portion included in Area No. 2, all of the East Indies, Australasia, the islands of the Pacific Ocean except those included in Area No. 1, and the Russian Federation (East of the Ural Mountains). Asia means the area composed of Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, the Islands of the Pacific in Area No. 3 north of the equator, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kampuchea, Korea, Krygyzstan, Laos, Malaysia, Maldive Island, Myanmar, Nepal, Outer Mongolia, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian Federation (East of the Ural Mountains), Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Tajikistan, Timor, Thailand, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Viet Nam. Australasia means the area composed of Australia, New Caledonia, New Zealand, New Hebrides, Fiji, Samoa, Cook Islands, Papua, New Guinea, Tahiti and the islands adjacent thereto. Baggage means such reasonable articles, effects and other personal property of a ticketed Passenger as are reasonably necessary or appropriate for the wear, use, comfort or convenience of the Passenger in connection with the Passenger’s trip. Unless otherwise specified, it shall include both checked and unchecked baggage and property of the Passenger. Baggage Check or Baggage Claim Tag mean those portions of the ticket that identify the carriage of a Passenger’s checked baggage and that are issued by the carrier as a receipt for the Passenger’s checked baggage. Baggage Rules mean the conditions associated with the acceptance of baggage, including all applicable service charges, and services incidental to the transportation of baggage. See Rule 23 for more information. Baggage Tag means a document issued by the carrier solely for identification of checked baggage, the portion of which is attached by the carrier to a particular article of checked baggage. Banker’s Buying Rate (“BBR”) means the rate at which, for the purpose of the transfer of funds through banking channels (i.e., other than transactions in bank notes, travelers cheques and similar banking instruments), a bank will purchase a given amount of foreign currency in exchange for one unit (or units) of the national currency of the country in which the exchange transaction takes place. Banker’s Selling Rate (“BSR”) means the rate at which, for the purpose of the transfer of funds through banking channels (i.e., other than transactions in bank notes, travelers cheques and similar banking instruments), a bank will sell a given amount of foreign currency in exchange for one unit (or units) of the national currency of the country in which the exchange transaction takes place. Basing Fare: See “Arbitrary” Cabin Baggage means Carry-On-Baggage that due to its size and nature requires the purchase of a seat on board the aircraft to transport the piece of baggage. Calendar Month means the period of time starting with the start of any day in a month, identified by number, and ending with the start of the same day of the following month. When the same day does not occur in the following month, this period ends on the last day of the month. Calendar Week means a period of seven days starting at 12:01 a.m. Sunday and ending at midnight of the following Saturday, provided that when used in reference to service offered only once a week between points of travel, it shall mean a period of eight days commencing with 12:01 a.m. on the day the flight operates. Caribbean Area means the area composed of Anguilla, Antigua, Aruba, Bahamas, Barbados, Barbuda, Bermuda, Bonaire, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Cuba, Curacao, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Haiti, Jamaica, Leeward Islands, Martinique, Montserrat, Netherlands Antilles, Nevis, Saba, St. Barthelemy, St. Eustatius, St. Kitts, St. Lucia, St. Maarten, St. Vincent, Trinidad and Tobago, Turks and Caicos Islands, West Indies and Windward Islands. Carriage means transportation of Passengers and their baggage by air or ground, either gratuitously or for payment. Carrier means the carrier (air or ground) issuing the ticket and all carriers that carry or undertake to carry the Passenger and/or his baggage thereunder. Carry-on-Baggage means baggage, other than Checked Baggage, carried on board an aircraft by a ticketed Passenger also known as unchecked baggage. Central Africa means the area composed of Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Central America means the area composed of Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama. Checked Baggage means baggage that a ticketed Passenger has requested be carried by the carrier and for which the carrier has issued a Baggage Claim Tag to the Passenger. Child means a person who has reached his/her second birthday but not his/her 12th birthday as of the date of commencement of travel. Circle Trip means travel from a point and return thereto by a continuous, circuitous air route (including journeys comprising two (2) fare components but which do not meet the conditions of the round trip definition), provided, that where no reasonable direct scheduled air route is available between two points, a break in the circle may be traveled by any other means of transportation without prejudice to the circle trip. Civic Aeronautics Board (“C.A.B.”) means the United States Department of Transportation (“DOT”). Codeshare means an arrangement by which UA offers transportation service to a Passenger who is ticketed with the two letter airline designator code “UA” on a flight that is operated by a carrier other than UA. Comparable air transportation means transportation provided by air carriers or foreign air carriers holding certificates of public convenience and necessity or foreign permits. Confirmed reserved space means space on a specific date and on a specific flight and class of service that has been requested by a passenger, and that UA or its agent has verified by appropriate notation on the ticket as being reserved for the accommodation of the passenger. Conjunction Ticket means two or more tickets concurrently issued to a Passenger and which together constitute a single contract of carriage. Connection means a stop at an intermediate point on the route to be traveled where a change of planes is made and which does not fall within the definition of a stopover. Consequential Damages means damages which are the result of an act but are not direct or immediate. Contiguous United States or Continental United States mean the District of Columbia and all states of the United States other than Alaska or Hawaii. Contract of Carriage means the terms and conditions contained in this document, as amended from time to time by the Carrier. Country of Commencement of Transportation means the country from which travel on the first international sector takes place. Country of Payment means the country where payment is made by the purchaser to the carrier or its agent. Payment by check, credit card or other banking instruments shall be deemed to have been made at the place where such instrument is accepted by the carrier or its agent. Days means full calendar days, including Sunday and legal holidays, provided that for the purposes of notification, the balance of the day upon which notice is dispatched shall not be counted; and that for purposes of determining the duration of a validity period, the balance of the day upon which the ticket is issued or the flight commenced shall not be counted. Department of Transportation (“DOT”) means the United States Department of Transportation. Destination means the ultimate point of the Passenger’s journey as shown on the Ticket. Domestic Carriage (“Domestic”) means (except as otherwise specified) carriage in which, according to the Contract of Carriage, the place of departure, the place of destination or stopover, and the entire transportation is between points within the United States, or points within another sovereign state. DOT Hazardous Materials Regulations are those regulations issued by the Materials Transportation Bureau of the Department of Transportation in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 171 through 180 (49 CFR 171-180). Down Line Carrier means any carrier, other than the selecting carrier, who is identified as providing interline transportation to the passenger by virtue of the passenger’s ticket. East Africa means the area composed of Burundi, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Somalia, Tanzania and Uganda. Emotional Support and Psychiatric Service Animals are animals that provide emotional, psychiatric or cognitive support,; promote emotional well-being;, or provide comfort, therapy, companionship, or therapeutic benefits to a Passenger with a Mental or Emotional Disability. Europe means the area composed of Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Azores, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canary Islands, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Gibraltar, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lichtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madeira, Malta, Monaco, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation (West of the Ural Mountains), San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey in Europe and Asia, Ukraine, and the United Kingdom. Fare Component means each local currency fare (except Add-On-Fares) where more than one such fare is used in construction of the total fare for a journey. Flight Coupon means a portion of the Ticket that indicates travel points between which the coupon is good for carriage. Force Majeure Event – any of the following situations: (a) Any condition beyond UA's control including, but not limited to, meteorological or geological conditions, acts of God, riots, terrorist activities, civil commotions, embargoes, wars, hostilities, disturbances, or unsettled international conditions, either actual, anticipated, threatened or reported, or any delay, demand, circumstances, or requirement due directly or indirectly to such condition; (b) Any strike, work stoppage, slowdown, lockout, or any other labor-related dispute involving or affecting UA's services; (c) Any governmental regulation, demand or requirement; (d) Any shortage of labor, fuel, or facilities of UA or others; (e) Damage to UA’s Aircraft or equipment caused by another party; (f) Any emergency situation requiring immediate care or protection for a person or property; or (g) Any event not reasonably foreseen, anticipated or predicted by UA. Foreign Air Transportation means transportation between a point in the United States and a point outside thereof. Half Round Trip Fare means 50 percent of a specified or constructed round trip normal or special fare. In the absence of a specified or constructed round trip normal fare, the one way normal fare is considered to be a half round trip normal fare. If a specified or constructed one way special fare may be doubled to establish a round trip special fare, the one way special fare is considered to be a half round trip special fare. Hawaii means Hilo, Honolulu, Kona, Lihue, and Maui. IATA Rate of Exchange means the published rate of exchange issued by IATA from time to time. Iberian Peninsula means the area composed of Gibraltar, Portugal (including Azores and Madeira) and Spain (including Balearic and Canary Islands). Immediate Family Member means spouse, children, step-children, foster children, legally adopted wards, son/daughter-in-law, grandchildren, parents, step-parents, legal guardians, mother/father-in-law, grandparents, brother/sister, step-brother/sister, half-brother/sister, brother/sister-in-law, aunts/uncles and nieces/nephews. Indian Ocean Islands means Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, Mayotta, Reunion and Seychelles. Indian Subcontinent means the area composed of Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Republic of Maldives and Sri Lanka. Infant means a person who has not reached his/her second birthday as of the date of commencement of travel. Interchange flight means a flight operated over the routes of two or more carriers without change of equipment. Interline Transfer Point means any point at which the Passenger transfers from the services of one carrier to the services of another carrier. Interline Transportation/Interline Agreement means carriage on the services of more than one carrier where carriers agree to accept each other’s tickets and baggage. Interline Itinerary means flights reflected on a single ticket involving more than one carrier. International Carriage (“International”) means any carriage other than Domestic Carriage, however, when the Warsaw and/or Montreal Conventions are applicable, the stated definitions of “International” therein shall prevail. International Sector means a Sector of uninterrupted air travel for which the arrival and departure points are in two different countries. NOTE : For purposes of applying fares under this Contract of Carriage: Travel on a sector between the U.S.A. and Canada is not considered international, and For fare construction purposes, when transoceanic travel is involved in a fare component, travel on the transoceanic sector shall be considered the international sector. Interstate Transportation means transportation between a point in any state of the United States and the District of Columbia and a point in any other state of the United States or the District of Columbia. Intraline Transportation or “On-line” transportation means carriage solely over the services of a single air carrier. Journey means all travel included on a Ticket or group of Conjunction Tickets. Legal Guardian means one who legally has the care and management of an infant/minor. Local Currency Fares means fares and related charges expressed in the currency of the Country of Commencement of Transportation. Major Life Activities means functions such as caring for one’s self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working. Marketing Carrier means the carrier that sells flights under its Airline Designator Code, which code is identified on the first flight segment of the Passenger’s ticket (i.e., Selected/Selecting Carrier for purposes of Interline Transportation to Canada only). Maximum Outside Linear Dimensions means the sum of the greatest outside length plus the greatest outside width, plus the greatest outside height. Medical Certificate means a letter or form from the Passenger’s treating physician or hospital, where applicable, which must be signed and dated within one week of the first affected flight departure by the treating physician, or hospital in the country where the illness or treatment arose and which certifies the nature of the Passenger’s illness and treatment. Mental or Emotional Disability means a mental impairment that, on a permanent or temporary basis, substantially limits one or more Major Life Activities, and includes any mental or psychological disorder, such as an intellectual disability, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities, including but not limited to such conditions as emotional illness, drug addiction, and alcoholism. Micronesia means the area composed of Guam, Johnston Island, Marshall Islands, Caroline Islands, Palau Island and Mariana Islands. Mid-Atlantic Area means the area composed of Anguilla, Antigua, Bahamas, Barbuda, Barbados, Bermuda, Bolivia, Bonaire, Belize, Cayman Islands, Colombia, Costa Rica, Buca, Curacao, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Martinique, Montserrat, Navis, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Puerto Rico, St. Kitts, St. Croix, St. Maarten, St. Thomas, Suriman, Trinidad, Tobago, and Venezuela. Middle East means the area composed of Aden, Bahrain, Cyprus, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Muscat and Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Trucial, United Arab Emirates and Yemen. Military Agencies mean departments of the U.S.A. Army, Navy, and Air Force, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, the respective academies of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Coast Guard, and the National Guard. The Reserve Officer Training Corps is not included. Military Passenger means military personnel of the Military Agencies who are on active duty status or who have been discharged from active military service within seven days of the date of travel. Minor means a person who has reached his/her second birthday but not his/her 18th birthday as of the date of commencement of travel. Montreal Convention means the Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules for International Carriage by Air, signed at Montreal, May 28, 1999. Netherlands Antilles means the islands of Bonaire, Curacao and St. Maarten. Normal Fare means the full fare established for regular or usual service, the application of which is not dependent upon any limited period of ticket validity or other special circumstances. Unless otherwise herein specified, Normal Fares shall be considered to include the following, all year one-way, round trip, circle trip and open jaw trips, First Class, Business Class, Executive Class, Economy Class, Basic Economy, one-class Standard Service, Standard Services, Tourist/Coach Class service, Thrift Class service fares, and on-season and off-season fares. North America means the area composed of Alaska, Canada, the Continental U.S.A. and Mexico. North Central Pacific means all routes between points in Canada/U.S.A. and points in Area No. 3, except points in the Southwest Pacific, via the Pacific Ocean. On-line means air transportation wholly on the same carrier. On-line Tariff Data Base means the remotely accessible, on-line version, maintained by the filer, of (1) the electronically filed tariff data submitted to the “official DOT tariff database,” and (2) the DOT approvals, disapprovals and other actions required by DOT. On-line Transfer Point means any point at which the Passenger transfers from one service of a carrier to another service of the same carrier (bearing a different flight number). Open-Jaw Trip means travel which is essentially of a round trip nature but the outward point of departure and inward point of arrival and/or outward point of arrival and inward point of departure are not the same. Operating Carrier means the carrier that operates the actual flight. Origin means the initial starting place of the journey. Other Charges means charges such as taxes, fees, etc., not to be shown in the fare construction box of the ticket, excluding excess baggage charges. Outward point means the stopover point on the passenger’s itinerary that is the furthest from the passenger’s point of origin. Oversold Flight means a flight where there are more Passengers holding valid confirmed Tickets that check-in for the flight within the prescribed check-in time than there are available seats. Participating Carrier includes both the selecting carrier and the down line carrier who has been identified as providing interline transportation to the passenger by virtue of the passenger’s ticket. Passenger means any person, except members of the crew, carried or holding a confirmed reservation to be carried in an aircraft with the consent of the carrier. Passenger Coupon means that portion of the Ticket constituting the Passenger’s written evidence of the Contract of Carriage. Proportional Fare: See “Arbitrary” above. Qualified Individual with a Disability means any individual who has a physical or mental impairment that, on a permanent or temporary basis, substantially limits one or more Major Life Activities, has a record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment. The phrases used in this definition are further defined in 14 CFR Part 382.3. Related Charges means those charges to be shown in the fare construction box of the ticket and excess baggage charges. Reroute means a change of routing, carriers, fares, class of service, flight or date from that originally provided on the ticket, but does not apply to open tickets. Resident (“a Resident”) means a person whose usual residence is in a certain country, provided that a more restricted definition may apply under local law. Round-Trip means travel from one point to another and return by any air route for which the same normal all year through one way fare of the same class applies from the point of origin, provided that this definition shall not apply to travel for which the same all year through one way fare is established, between two points, in either direction around the world. Routing means the cities and/or class of service and/or type of aircraft via which carriage is provided by the carrier(s) between two points. Scandinavia means the area composed of Denmark, Norway and Sweden. Sector or Segment is the portion of a journey covered by a single Flight Coupon. Selected Carrier means the carrier whose baggage rules apply to the entire interline itinerary. Selecting Carrier means the carrier whose designator code is identified on the first flight segment of the passenger’s ticket at the beginning of an interline itinerary. Service Animal means any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal trained to provide task-specific necessary assistance to a Qualified Individual with a Disability or, a trained animal that assists law enforcement officers in the search of contraband and or other items, or which provides assistance with rescue efforts. Single Ticket means the record of agreement that permits travel from origin to destination, and may include interline, code-share, and intraline segments. South America means the area composed of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, French Guiana, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Surinam, Uruguay and Venezuela. South Asian Subcontinent means the area composed of Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Maldives and Sri Lanka. South East Asia means the area composed of Brunei Darussalam, China, Guam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Kampuchea, Kazakhstan, Krygyzstan, Laos, People’s Democratic Republic of, Malaysia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Province of, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkmenistan, Russian Federation (East of the Ural Mountains), Uzbekistan and Viet Nam. South Pacific means the area composed of all routes between points in the U.S.A./Canada and points in the Southwest Pacific via the Pacific Ocean. Southwest Africa means points within Africa composed of Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa and Swaziland. Southwest Pacific means that area composed of American Samoa, Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, French Polynesia, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Loyalty Islands, New Caledonia, New Hebrides, New Zealand, Papua, New Guinea, Samoa, Society Islands, Tonga, and intermediate islands. Special Drawing Right (“SDR”) means a special unit of currency, the value of which fluctuates and is recalculated each banking day. These values are known to most commercial banks and are reported in some newspapers and in the IMF Survey, published weekly by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C. 20431. Special Fare means a fare other than a normal fare. Stopover means a deliberate interruption of travel by the Passenger, agreed to in advance by the carrier, at a point between the place of departure and the place of destination. For International flights a Stopover will also be deemed to occur at an intermediate point from which the Passenger is not scheduled to depart on the date of arrival, but if there is no connecting departure scheduled on the date of arrival, departure on the next day within 24 hours of arrival shall not constitute a Stopover. If a portion of the routing is traveled by surface transportation, one Stopover shall be deemed to have been taken for such portion. For Domestic flights, a Stopover will also occur when a Passenger arrives at a point and fails to depart from such point on: The first flight on which space is available; or The flight that will provide for the Passenger’s earliest arrival at intermediate or junction transfer point(s) or destination point, via the carrier and class of service as shown on the Passenger’s Ticket; provided, however, that in no event will a Stopover occur when the Passenger departs from the intermediate/junction point on a flight shown in the carrier’s official general schedule as departing within four hours after arrival at such point. Summary Page at the End of an Online Purchase (for Rule 23 I) only) means a page on the Carrier’s website which summarizes the details of a ticket purchase transaction just after the passenger has agreed to purchase the ticket from the Carrier and has provided a form of payment. Surface Sector means transportation by means other than air between two intermediate points in a Fare Component. Through Fare means a fare applicable for travel between two consecutive fare construction points via an intermediate point(s). Ticket means the record of agreement, including electronic tickets, e.g., “United Electronic Tickets” or “eTickets,” for Passenger air transportation provided by UA under certain terms and conditions to the Passenger named on the Ticket and in accordance with applicable governing tariffs and regulations. An “eTicket” is the record of the ticket agreement maintained and processed within the carrier’s electronic reservation system. A receipt is provided to the purchaser of the ticket that contains a reference for retrieving the record within the carrier’s reservation system and summary of the ticket information. The carrier may mandate the issuance of an e-ticket, regardless of market, carrier, form of payment, and customer type. Ticketed Point means points shown in the ‘good for passage’ section of the ticket plus any other point(s) used for fare construction and shown in the fare construction box of the ticket, provided that two flight numbers of two carriers such as for an interchange flight will not be permitted on one Flight Coupon. Transatlantic Sector means that portion of travel covered by a single Flight Coupon from the point of departure in Area No. 1 to the point of arrival in Area No. 2 and vice versa. Transfer means a change from the flight on one carrier to the flight of another carrier, or a change from the flight of a carrier to another flight of the same carrier bearing the same flight number, or a change from the flight of a carrier to another flight that is a service bearing a different flight number of the same carrier, irrespective of whether or not a change of aircraft occurs. Transfer Point means any point at which the Passenger Transfers. Transit Point means any stop at an intermediate point on the route to be traveled (whether or not a change of aircraft is made) which does not fall within the definition of a Stopover. Transoceanic means the portion of travel covering the area over an ocean and may refer to travel that is either transatlantic or transpacific. Transpacific Sector means the portion of travel covered by a single Flight Coupon from the point of departure in Area No. 1 to the point of arrival in Area No. 3 and vice versa. UA means United Airlines, Inc. UA Ticket Stock means tickets printed, imprinted or issued electronically with the UA carrier code (016) as part of the ticket serial number. Ultimate ticketed destination applies only to situations where a passenger’s origin is a non-Canadian point and the itinerary includes at least one stop in Canada, as well as at least one stop outside of Canada. If the stop in Canada is the farthest checked point and the stop is more than 24 hours, the ultimate ticketed destination is Canada. (For Rule 23 I) only). United means United Airlines, Inc. United Express carriers are Carriers not wholly owned or operated by United Airlines, Inc. but operating with the UA designator code under the trade name “United Express.” Unaccompanied Minor means a Child/Minor 5 to 14 years of age when traveling alone or not accompanied on the same flight and in the same compartment by a companion Passenger at least 18 years of age or with a Legal Guardian or parent. United Kingdom (or “U.K.”) means the area composed of England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, Channel Islands and Isle of Man. United States of America (or the “United States” or the “U.S.A.”) means, unless otherwise specified, the area composed of the 48 contiguous states, the District of Columbia, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, Midway, and Wake Islands. United States Department of Defense means the U.S.A. Department of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, and the U.S.A. Marine Corps. Validate means a confirmation that the Ticket has been officially issued by the carrier. Warsaw Convention means the Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules relating to International Carriage by Air, signed at Warsaw, October 12, 1929, or where applicable, that Convention, as amended, including without limitation, by the Protocol signed at The Hague September 28, 1955. West Africa means the area composed of Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Cote D’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Sao Tome y Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Togo and Congo (Kinshasa). Western Hemisphere means the area composed of the Continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, U.S. Virgin Islands, Canada, Greenland, Mexico, Central and South America, and the Caribbean Area. Rule 2 Standard Format of Electronic Rules For Tariff Filing Purpose Rule number reserved for Airline Tariff Publishing Company (“ATPCO”) filings. Rule 3 Application of Contract These rules constitute the conditions of carriage upon which UA agrees to provide Domestic and International Carriage and are expressly agreed to by the Passenger. These Rules are also the tariffs filed by UA in accordance with certain government regulations. This Contract of Carriage is subject to applicable laws, regulations, rules, and security directives imposed by governmental agencies, including but not limited to those imposed during or as a result of a national emergency, war, civil unrest or terrorist activities. In the event of a conflict between the Rules contained herein and such government laws, regulations, rules, security directives and their corresponding effects on UA’s operation, the latter shall prevail. The rules herein are applicable to transportation of Passengers and Baggage provided by UA. See Rule 18 regarding application of these rules to Codeshare services provided by UA on flights operated by a carrier other than UA. Certain International Carriage is subject to the rules relating to liability established by, and to all other provisions of the Warsaw and/or Montreal Conventions. Any provisions of these rules that are inconsistent with any provision of the applicable Convention shall, to that extent, but only to that extent, be inapplicable to International Carriage. Except as otherwise provided within specific fare rules, transportation is subject to the Contract of Carriage and charges in effect on the date on which the Ticket is issued. References to pages, rules, items and notes are coterminous and include revisions, supplements and reissues thereof. Where the Ticket has been purchased and issued before the effective date of an increase in the applicable fare, the increase will not be collected, provided there is no change in Origin, Destination, Stopover point(s), flight(s) or dates shown on the original Ticket. These provisions apply whether an increase results from a change in fare level, a change in conditions governing the fare or a cancellation of the fare itself. UA is responsible only for transportation of Passengers and Baggage provided by UA, which includes Codeshare services provided by UA on flights operated by a carrier other than UA. See Rule 18 regarding application of these rules to Codeshare services. When UA undertakes to issue a Ticket, check baggage, or make any other arrangements for transportation over the lines of any other carrier on an interline basis (whether or not such transportation is part of a through service), UA will act only as agent for the other carrier in these limited capacities, and will assume no responsibility for the acts or omissions of such other carrier, including but not limited to providing flight status information, delays and other acts or omissions that arise from their flight operations. No employee or agent of UA has the authority to alter, modify, or waive any fare rules or any provision of the Contract of Carriage unless authorized by a corporate officer of UA. UA’s appointed agents and representatives are only authorized to sell Tickets for air transportation pursuant to approved fares, rules, and regulations of UA. Failure or delay on the part of either party to exercise any right or power herein shall not operate as a waiver thereof. Unless specifically stated otherwise herein or where any limitation would expressly violate any applicable law, UA shall not be liable for any consequential, compensatory, indirect, incidental or punitive damages arising out of or in connection with the performance of its obligations under these rules. UA’s obligations hereunder extend only to the Ticketed Passenger. There are no third party beneficiaries to these rules. Except where provided otherwise by law, UA’s conditions of carriage, rules and tariffs are subject to change without notice, provided that no such change shall apply to Tickets issued prior to the effective date of such change. The invalidity of any provision herein by local law shall not affect the validity of any other provision that shall remain in full force and effect. If UA makes arrangements for Passengers with any third party to provide any services other than carriage by air, or if UA issues a ticket or voucher relating to transportation or services (other than carriage by air) provided by a third party such as hotel reservations or car rental, UA does not assume responsibility for the ground transportation of any Passenger or his or her baggage. The terms and conditions of the third party service provider will apply, as well as Rule 17 B) below. Except as otherwise provided below, fare rule provisions, local or joint fares, including Arbitraries, contained in the On-line Tariff Database maintained by Airline Tariff Publishing Company on behalf of UA is considered to be part of International Passenger Rules and Fares Tariff No. IPR-2, C.A.B. No. 376, NTA(A) No. 210.I EXCEPTION : For Fares Published by Rule, see C.A.B. No. 737, NTA(A) No. 476. Rule 4 Reservations – Confirmation/Fare Quotes/Disclosures A reservation for space on a given flight of UA is valid when the availability and allocation of such space is confirmed by UA or an authorized agent of UA and entered into the carrier’s reservations system. At the time of reservation, UA requires the full name consisting of full first and last name for each passenger to be entered into the name field of the reservation, and other government mandated information, including but not limited to date of birth and gender.

EXCEPTION : Only one name will be required for reservations for passengers whose passports reflect only one name. Reservations that do not contain the full name of each passenger, other required information, or fraudulent information will be automatically cancelled within 72 hours of reservation confirmation. UA requires ticketing at the time of reservation. UA will allow a 100% refund to the original form of payment if the request is made within 24 hours of ticketing and if the reservation is made one week or more prior to the scheduled flight departure and the ticket is purchased directly through UA. Subject to payment or other satisfactory credit arrangements, a validated Ticket will be issued by UA or the authorized agent of UA indicating such confirmed reserved space provided the Passenger applies to UA or the authorized agent of UA for such Ticket within the Check-In Time Limits specified in Rules 5 D) and E). Such reservation of space is subject to cancellation by UA without notice if the Passenger does not comply with this Rule.

EXCEPTION : Where other rules, including fare rules, provide for the issuance, validation, or purchase of a Ticket within specific time limits, these specific time limits will apply. Once a Passenger obtains a Ticket indicating confirmed reserved space for a specific flight and date either from UA or its authorized agent, the reservation is confirmed even if there is no record thereof in UA’s reservation system.

EXCEPTION : Tickets shall not be valid if reservations are cancelled pursuant to Rule 5 or cancelled by the passenger or his/her representative. Seat assignments, regardless of class of service, are not guaranteed and are subject to change without notice. UA reserves the right to reseat a Passenger for any reason, including from an Economy Plus seat for which the applicable fee has been paid (fees range from 9 USD/CAD to 299 USD/CAD per flight segment per person), and if a Passenger is improperly or erroneously upgraded to a different class of service. If a Passenger is removed from an Economy Plus seat for which a fee has been paid, and the Passenger is not re-accommodated in an Economy Plus seat or a seat of equal or greater value, or if a Passenger is downgraded from a class of service and is not re-accommodated in a seat in an equal or greater class of service for which a fee has been paid, the Passenger will be eligible for a refund in accordance with Rule 27. UA also prohibits Passengers from selling their seat assignments at any time and/or exchanging them at the time of boarding without first advising a member of the crew. UA may limit the number of Passengers carried at any fare level and certain fares will not necessarily be available on all flights. The number of seats which UA shall make available on a given flight will be determined by UA. Rule 5 Cancellation of Reservations UA has the right to cancel reservations (whether or not confirmed) of any Passenger whenever such action is necessary to comply with any governmental regulation, upon any governmental request for emergency transportation in connection with the national defense, or whenever such action is necessary or advisable by reason of weather or other conditions beyond UA’s control, (including, but not limited to acts of God, force majeure events, strikes, civil commotions, embargoes, wars, hostilities, or other disturbances, whether actual, threatened, or reported). UA has the right to cancel reservations (whether or not confirmed) due to the Passenger’s failure to comply with the rules set forth herein, including but not limited to, the Passenger’s failure to pay for the applicable Ticket under the conditions applicable to the fare for such travel. Failure to Occupy Space - If a Passenger fails to occupy space which has been reserved for him/her on a flight of UA and UA fails to receive notice of the cancellation of the reservation before the departure, or if any carrier cancels the reservation of any Passenger, UA may cancel all reservations (whether or not confirmed) held by such Passenger on the flights of UA or any carrier for continuing or return space, provided UA or an authorized agent of UA originally reserved that space. Check-In Time Limits - UA has the right to cancel reservations (whether or not confirmed), deny boarding and/or refuse the acceptance of checked baggage of any Passenger who fails to present himself/herself within the applicable check-in or loading gate time limits for Passengers and/or Baggage. Domestic flights, except those departing Guam: For Passengers who do not need to check baggage, Passenger must complete the purchase of the ticket(s), check-in and obtain a boarding pass at least 30 minutes prior to scheduled departure.

EXCEPTION: At the following airports, Passengers must complete check-in at least 45 minutes prior to scheduled departure: Baltimore, MD and San Juan, Puerto Rico. For Passengers who do need to check baggage, Passenger must complete the purchase of the ticket(s), check-in, obtain a boarding pass, and complete baggage check-in at least 30 minutes prior to scheduled departure. EXCEPTION: At the following airports, Passengers must complete baggage check-in at least 45 minutes prior to scheduled departure: Anchorage, AK; Baltimore, MD; Jacksonville, FL; Tampa/St. Petersburg, FL; Miami, FL; Fort Lauderdale, FL; Phoenix, AZ; Las Vegas, NV; Seattle, WA; Orlando, FL; Philadelphia, PA; Denver, CO; Atlanta, GA; Los Angeles, CA; Orange County, CA; San Diego, CA; Houston, TX; Austin, TX; Newark, NJ; Cincinnati, OH; Cleveland, OH; Chicago, IL; Washington, D.C. (Dulles and Reagan National), VA; Reno, NV; Kona, HI; Maui, HI; Honolulu, HI; St. Louis, MO; Indianapolis, IN; Detroit, MI; Savannah, GA; New York, NY; Charlotte, NC; Aspen, CO; Raleigh-Durham, NC; Greenville/Spartanburg, SC; Dallas (Fort Worth and Dallas Love Field), TX; Pittsburgh, PA; and San Francisco, CA. EXCEPTION: At the following airports, Passengers must complete baggage check-in at least 60 minutes prior to scheduled departure: San Juan, Puerto Rico. All Passengers must be present at the loading gate for boarding at least 15 minutes prior to scheduled departure.

NOTE: If the Passenger’s itinerary includes an international destination, the international time limits in D) 2) below apply to all flights in the itinerary. All non-stop International flights (including flights departing Guam and St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands): Passenger must complete the purchase of the ticket(s), check-in, check baggage, and obtain a boarding pass at least 60 minutes prior to scheduled departure.

EXCEPTIONS: At Dublin, Ireland, Lima, Peru, and for all international flights departing from Honolulu, U.S., Passengers must complete check-in, check baggage and obtain a boarding pass at least 75 minutes (1 hour, 15 minutes) prior to scheduled departure. Within the Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of the Marshall Islands, Caracas, Venezuela, and Brussels, Belgium, Passengers must complete check-in, check baggage and obtain a boarding pass at least 90 minutes (1 hour, 30 minutes) prior to scheduled departure. All Passengers must be at the loading gate for boarding at least 30 minutes prior to scheduled departure.

EXCEPTION: Within locations specified in D) 2) a) (ii) above, Passengers must be at the loading gate for boarding at least 60 minutes (1 hour) prior to scheduled departure. The time limits provided by UA in this Rule are minimum time requirements. Passenger and baggage processing times may differ from airport to airport. It is the Passenger’s responsibility to arrive at the airport with enough time to complete any ticketing, check-in, baggage and security screening processes, and boarding requirements within these minimum time limits. NOTE: Please see www.united.com for more information. UA is not liable for any consequential, compensatory, or other damages when it cancels reservations (whether or not confirmed) of any Passenger in accordance with this Rule, but if the reservation was canceled according to paragraph A) of this Rule, see Rule 24. All of UA’s flights are subject to overbooking which could result in UA’s inability to provide previously confirmed reserved space for a given flight or for the class of service reserved. In that event, UA’s obligation to the Passenger is governed by Rule 25. UA reserves the right to cancel bookings and/or reservations which it deems fraudulent, abusive, illogical, fictitious, which are booked and/or reserved with no intention of flying, or for which the passenger makes a misrepresentation without notice to the passenger or the individual making the booking. The types of improper reservations that UA will cancel without notice include, but are not limited to: reservations made without having been requested by or on behalf of the named passenger; reservations made to hold or block seats for the purpose of obtaining lower fares, MP award inventory, or upgrades that may not otherwise be available; reservations made to circumvent any of UA’s fare rules, policies or provisions; reservations made for the same passenger on flights traveling on or about the same date between one or more of the same or nearby origin or destination cities; and reservations with connections that depart before the arrival on the inbound flight. Rule 6 Tickets When more than one Ticket must be issued to properly reflect all of the information required for a complete flight itinerary, the individual Tickets will be cross-referenced by their Ticket numbers and are considered to be a single Ticket or “Conjunction Ticket.” A Ticket will not be issued, and in any case UA will not be obligated to carry any Passenger until the Passenger has paid the applicable fare or has complied with credit arrangements established by UA. No person will be entitled to transportation except upon presentation of a valid Ticket. Lost Tickets. See Rule 27 F). A Ticket which has not been validated or which has been altered, mutilated, or improperly issued, is not valid. Flight Coupons will be honored only in the order in which they were intended to be used and, in the case of written Tickets, only if all unused Flight Coupons and Passenger Coupons are presented together. Tickets are not transferable unless otherwise stated on the Ticket at the time it was issued. The purchaser of a Ticket and/or the Passenger intending to use such Ticket is responsible for ensuring that the Ticket accurately states the Passenger’s name. Presentation of a Ticket by someone other than the ticketed Passenger renders the Ticket void, and UA is not liable to the owner of a ticket for honoring or refunding such ticket when presented by another person. If a Ticket is in fact used by an unauthorized person with or without the knowledge or consent of the person to whom the Ticket was issued, UA will not be liable for the destruction, damage, or delay of such unauthorized person’s baggage or other personal property, or for the death or injury of such unauthorized person arising from or in connection with such unauthorized use. As used herein, “unauthorized person” means any person other than the person to whom the ticket is issued and who is entitled to be transported or to a refund in accordance with the rules in this Contract of Carriage. A Ticket will be valid only for flight(s) for which reservation(s) have been made and only between the points named on the ticket or applicable Flight Coupons. A Passenger holding an unused open-date Ticket or portion thereof or Exchange Order for onward travel, or who wishes to change a ticketed reservation to another date, shall not be entitled to any preferential right with respect to the obtaining of reservations. Passengers Occupying Two Seats – Upon request, or if determined necessary by UA, and given availability, a Passenger will be permitted to the exclusive use of two seats subject to the payment of two applicable fares for the points between which the two seats will be used. A Ticket will be issued for each seat and the normal Checked Baggage Allowances will apply in connection with each such Ticket presented to UA. The carry-on allowance is limited to the allowance for one individual. Prohibited Practices: Fares apply for travel only between the points for which they are published. Tickets may not be purchased and used at fare(s) from an initial departure point on the Ticket which is before the Passenger’s actual point of origin of travel, or to a more distant point(s) than the Passenger’s actual destination being traveled even when the purchase and use of such Tickets would produce a lower fare. This practice is known as “Hidden Cities Ticketing” or “Point Beyond Ticketing” and is prohibited by UA. The purchase and use of round-trip Tickets for the purpose of one-way travel only, known as “Throwaway Ticketing” is prohibited by UA. The use of Flight Coupons from two or more different Tickets issued at round trip fares for the purpose of circumventing applicable tariff rules (such as advance purchase/minimum stay requirements) commonly referred to as “Back-to-Back Ticketing” is prohibited by UA. The failure to comply with applicable stayover requirements, the failure to meet the purpose or status requirement associated with the Ticket’s fare category, and the purchase or use of a Ticket that UA determines circumvents the applicable fare rules. UA’s Remedies for Violation(s) of Rules - Where a Ticket is purchased and used in violation of the law, these rules or any fare rule (including Hidden Cities Ticketing, Point Beyond Ticketing, Throwaway Ticketing, or Back-to-Back Ticketing), UA, without notice to the passenger, has the right in its sole discretion to take all actions permitted by law, including but not limited to, the following: Invalidate the Ticket(s); Cancel any remaining portion of the Passenger’s itinerary; Confiscate any unused Flight Coupons; Refuse to board the Passenger and to carry the Passenger’s baggage, unless the difference between the fare paid and the fare for transportation used is collected prior to boarding; Assess the Passenger for the actual value of the Ticket which shall be the difference between the lowest fare applicable to the Passenger’s actual itinerary and the fare actually paid; Delete miles in the Passenger’s frequent flyer account (UA’s MileagePlus Program), revoke the Passenger’s Elite status, if any, in the MileagePlus Program, terminate the Passenger’s participation in the MileagePlus Program, or take any other action permitted by the MileagePlus Program Rules in UA’s “MileagePlus Rules;” and Take legal action with respect to the Passenger. UA may mandate the issuance of an e-Ticket regardless of market, carrier, form of payment, or customer type (including mileage plus and participating carrier frequent flyer members). In addition to all applicable charges, UA will assess a 50.00 USD fee for issuance of a paper ticket. UA will assess a 50.00 USD/50.00 CAD fee to assist with a voluntary change on tickets originally issued via any external ticketing source (travel agency, internet agency, other airline, etc.). The fee is non-refundable and applies in addition to all applicable charges. Within the 50 U.S. States and Canada, UA will assess a 50.00 USD/50.00 CAD charge for tickets purchased at any airport location, a 25.00 USD/25.00 CAD charge for tickets purchased through Contact Centers, and a 30.00 USD/30.00 CAD charge for tickets purchased or changed through a City Ticket Office. Charges may vary outside the 50 U.S. States and Canada. These booking service charges are non-refundable and apply in addition to all applicable charges. Unless prohibited by local law, UA may restrict acceptable forms of payment for its tickets, products, or services to debit or credit card. Rule 7 Ticket Validity Period Period of Validity - Except as otherwise provided in this Rule or required by the applicable local law of a foreign jurisdiction, any eligible Ticket issued by UA or its authorized agent on UA Ticket Stock will be valid for transportation for one year from the date on which transportation commences at the point of origin as designated on the original Ticket or, if no portion of the Ticket is used, one year from the date of issuance of the original or reissued Ticket, whichever is later. When an unused published fare Ticket is completely reissued, the new Ticket validity on the reissued Ticket will be determined from the date the Ticket was reissued. When a Ticket includes an excursion or special fare having a shorter period of validity than one year, the shorter period of validity will apply only to the excursion or special fare transportation. When a fare limits the carriage to specific periods of the day, week, month, or year, the Ticket is valid for the specified periods only. When fares are combined to create Round/Circle/Open-Jaw Trips, the most restrictive provisions will apply to the entire transportation.



NOTE: Nonrefundable fares have no value after ticketed departure time. EXCEPTION : When the Passenger cancels the ticketed flight reservations prior to the ticketed departure time, the ticket will be valid for transportation for one year from the date of issuance of the original ticket and will be subject to any and all applicable change fees. Otherwise, the ticket has no value after ticketed departure time. Extension of Validity Period: If the Passenger is prevented from using the Ticket, or a portion thereof during the period of validity specified in this Rule due to a UA flight cancellation or because UA is unable to provide space on the flight, UA will, without additional collection of fare, extend the ticket validity period of such Passenger’s Ticket until the first flight of UA on which space is available in the class of service for which the fare has been paid. If a Passenger is unable to commence or continue travel because of the death or serious illness of the Passenger, the Passenger’s immediate family member(s), or the Passenger’s traveling companion(s), UA may, in its sole discretion, waive or refund any applicable change fees associated with changing the ticket(s). See Rule 27 or visit UA’s website, united.com, for details regarding UA’s Refund Policy. Waiver of Minimum Stay Requirements - Special Fare - In the event of the death of a Passenger enroute, the minimum stay and group travel requirements with regard to any special fares will be waived for Passengers who are immediate family members of the deceased Passenger or were otherwise actually accompanying the deceased Passenger, on the following conditions: The ticket must be endorsed “earlier return on account of death of (name of Passenger)”; and A copy of the death certificate duly executed by the competent authorities under the applicable laws of the country in which death has occurred must be presented to UA at the time of reticketing. Passengers will be accommodated under this provision only in the class of service originally ticketed.

NOTE: If the death certificate is not available at the time the Passenger requests reticketing under this provision, or if documentation satisfactory to UA has not been provided, the Passenger(s) requesting reticketing will be accommodated only upon payment of the fare applicable to transportation actually used and a request for a refund may later be filed with UA with the documents required. Upon receipt of the request for a refund and all supporting documents, UA will determine whether a refund to the Passenger is appropriate. If so, the maximum refund will be the difference between the total fare paid by the Passenger and the amount such Passenger would have paid if a waiver had been originally furnished under the provisions of this Rule. Ticket Issue Date - The date when payment is made by credit card, or the ticket invoice date established when payment is made by other acceptable form of payment, will constitute the date a Ticket is “issued” in determining the validity period under this Rule. Rule 8 Returned Check Charge UA will collect 25 USD/25 CAD for each returned check. This charge is non-refundable and is not subject to any discount. Rule 9 Deleted Rule 10 Transatlantic Surcharges For details concerning transatlantic surcharges, see UA’s International Fare service surcharges filed with ATPCO referencing this Rule. Rule 11 Pacific Surcharges For details concerning transpacific surcharges, see UA’s International Fare service surcharges filed with ATPCO referencing this Rule. Rule 12 Western Hemisphere Surcharges For details concerning Western Hemisphere surcharges, see UA’s International Fare service surcharges filed with ATPCO referencing this Rule. Rule 13 Acceptance of Children/Minors and Infants Children/Minors/Infants Traveling Accompanied Children under the age of five (5) must be “accompanied” by an Adult Passenger or the child’s Parent/Legal Guardian on the same flight and in the same compartment. UA reserves the right to require and charge the applicable service charge for Unaccompanied Minor service when a child age five (5) to fourteen (14) is traveling with a passenger who is not at least 18 years old or the child’s Parent/Legal Guardian. United does not accept infants in incubation (except as permitted under Rule 15C) or infants under seven days old. Lap Children (infants under the age of two years): One Lap Child per passenger age fifteen (15) or older. Additional infants under the age of two years must occupy a seat and be ticketed at the applicable adult fare. Infants under the age of two years for whom a seat at the applicable adult fare has not been purchased, may not occupy a seat.

NOTE : Infants who are carried in an adult’s lap do not require a Ticket for domestic travel. Infants traveling internationally and to and from Canada require a Ticket, which may be discounted off of the applicable fare. In many cases a Ticket is required for an infant to travel on international flights even if no fare is paid. In addition, some international destinations may carry service charges. A USD 0 value or fee only Ticket may be issued for an infant. Children who have reached their second birthday are required to purchase a seat and occupy a seat with a separate seat belt. Infants reaching their second birthday after outbound flights will be required to purchase a Ticket and occupy a seat for continuing/return flights only. Infant/child Seats: Children unable to sit upright with the seat belt fastened must be carried in an approved infant/child seat, if not being held by an Adult Passenger as a lap child. Infant/child seats: Must be FAA approved and be clearly marked with the original NHTSA label, must be approved by a foreign government with a label showing that the seat was manufactured under the standards of the United Nations, or must conform to the Canadian Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (CMVSS) 213 or 213.1 whereby a label of compliance must be affixed to the seat indicating compliance with the same. Must be used in unoccupied aircraft seats and cannot be held in an adult’s lap. Cannot be used in an Exit Row. Must remain properly secured to an aircraft seat at all times unless stored as a carry-on. Proof of age may be required by UA for any child, minor, or infant traveling accompanied. Children/Minors Traveling Unaccompanied UA requires Unaccompanied Minor service for children/minors age five (5) to fourteen (14) who are not accompanied by a passenger who is at least 18 years old or a Parent/Legal Guardian. The policies for UA’s Unaccompanied Minor service apply only to nonstop flights operated by UA and Carriers doing business as United Express. UA does not offer unaccompanied minor service to or from other carriers. Unaccompanied children under five (5) years of age are not accepted on flights operated by UA and Carriers doing business as United Express. UA’s Unaccompanied Minor service is mandatory for unaccompanied children age five (5) to fourteen (14) years old. For minors age fifteen (15) through seventeen (17) for whom UA’s Unaccompanied Minor service is not purchased, UA will assume no financial or guardianship responsibilities beyond those applicable to an adult Passenger. Unaccompanied children/minors age five (5) to fourteen (14) years old can only travel on nonstop flights operated by UA and Carriers doing business as United Express. Unaccompanied children/minors must be brought to the airport of departure by a parent, legal guardian, or responsible adult 30 minutes early (in addition to regular airport processing times shown for the airport). This parent, legal guardian, or responsible adult shall remain with the unaccompanied child(ren)/minor(s) until the unaccompanied child(ren)/minor(s) has boarded and the plane is airborne, and who shall confirm that the unaccompanied child(ren)/minor(s) will be met by another parent, legal guardian, or responsible adult upon deplaning at the final destination and shall furnish UA with that individual’s name, address, and phone number(s). The parent, legal guardian, or responsible adult receiving the unaccompanied child(ren)/minor(s) upon deplaning at the final destination may be required to present a government-issued photo ID that matches the name and address provided by the parent or guardian who delivered the child to the departure airport, and may also be required to complete and sign documentation relating to such unaccompanied child(ren)/minor(s). UA reserves the right to refuse to release an unaccompanied minor to anyone other than the pre-designated individual. When two or more unaccompanied minors are traveling together, the most restrictive age requirement will apply. Proof of age may be required by UA. Unaccompanied Minor Service Charge Service charges for Unaccompanied Minor service is subject to change at UA’s discretion. The fare for Unaccompanied Minor service for children age five (5) to fourteen (14) years old includes the applicable adult fare in addition to a service charge of 150 USD/150 CAD assessed for each one-way journey from the child’s boarding point to the child’s final destination. One service charge assessed for each one-way journey applies to two or more children traveling together on the same reservation. For purposes of this Rule, Unaccompanied Minor service includes reasonable supervision for Unaccompanied Minors from boarding until deplaning at the final destination. Rule 14 Special Services Definition of Non-Ambulatory under this Rule: Persons who are unable to move themselves or need the support of another person to walk or move, but who are otherwise capable of caring for themselves without assistance throughout the flight are considered Non-Ambulatory. If a Passenger uses a wheelchair for convenience, the Passenger is not considered to be Non-Ambulatory. A child or infant is not considered to be Non-Ambulatory merely because of his/her age, except when requiring an Infant Transport System. If the Passenger can move himself/herself from his/her seat to the nearest emergency exit without the aid of another person, the Passenger is not considered to be Non-Ambulatory, regardless of the degree of impairment. Qualifications for Acceptance of Non-Ambulatory Passengers - Non-Ambulatory Passengers are accepted when accompanied by an assistant able to assist the Non-Ambulatory Passenger to evacuate the aircraft in accordance with 14 CFR Part 382.29. See Rule 21. Qualified Individual with a Disability - UA requires a Passenger, including a Qualified Individual with a Disability, to provide up to 48 hours’ advance notice and check-in one hour before the check-in time for the general public for Domestic U.S. flights and for International flights as set forth in Rules 5 D) and 5 E) if such Passenger wishes to receive any of the following service accommodations: Transportation of an electric wheelchair on an aircraft with fewer than 60 seats. Provision by UA of hazardous materials packaging for a battery for a wheelchair or other assistive device. Accommodation for a group of ten or more Qualified Individuals with Disabilities who make reservations and travel as a group. Provision of an on-board wheelchair on an aircraft with more than 60 seats that does not have an accessible lavatory. Transportation of an emotional support or psychiatric service animal in the cabin. Provision by UA of carrier-supplied in-flight medical oxygen (if applicable). Use of a ventilator, respirator, Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) machine, or Passenger’s own Personal Oxygen Concentrator (POC). When Travel Assistance is Required: If UA determines that an assistant is essential for safety, UA may require that a Passenger, including a Qualified Individual with a Disability, meeting any of the following criteria travel with an assistant as a condition of being provided air transportation: A person who, because of a mental disability, is unable to comprehend or respond appropriately to safety instructions from UA personnel, including the safety briefing required by 14 CFR, Part 121.571(a)(3), (a)(4) and 135.117(b); A person with a mobility impairment so severe that the person is unable to physically assist in his or her evacuation of the aircraft; or A person who has both severe hearing and severe vision impairments if the person cannot establish some means of communication with UA personnel adequate to permit the transmission of the required safety briefing.

NOTE : If UA determines that a person meeting the criteria in subparagraphs (a), (b) or (c) above must travel with an assistant, contrary to the individual’s self-assessment that he/she is capable of traveling independently, UA will not charge for the transportation of the assistant.

EXCEPTION : For Passengers traveling to/from Canada, UA will accept a disabled person's determination of his/her self-reliance. NOTE: Flight attendants and other crew members cannot assist with any medical services, assistance inside the lavatory, or in actual feeding. If, because there is not a seat available on a flight for an assistant whom UA has determined to be necessary, a Qualified Individual with a Disability with only one confirmed reservation is unable to travel on the flight, the Qualified Individual with a Disability shall be eligible for denied boarding compensation in accordance with Rule 25. For purposes of determining whether a seat is available for an assistant, the assistant shall be deemed to have checked in at the same time as the Qualified Individual with a Disability. For Rules regarding wheelchairs, see Rules 23 and 28. Rule 15 Medical Services Onboard Medical Oxygen Service - UA may provide on-board medical oxygen service when requested in advance and only in limited markets in the Micronesia area. Passengers requesting on-board medical oxygen service will be required to give UA a minimum 48 hours advance notice and check-in one hour before the check-in time for the general public for Domestic U.S. and International flights as set forth in Rule 5 D) and E). Contact UA to verify availability and additional conditions of service. UA is not liable for failure to provide this service in emergency or other circumstances beyond its control. Passenger-Provided Portable Oxygen Concentrators - Portable oxygen concentrators (POCs) approved by the Federal AviationAdministration (FAA) may be carried and used on boardflights operated by UA worldwide, at no charge, in accordance with specific FAA requirements. Passengers utilizing POCs are required to give UA a minimum 48 advance notice and check-in one hour before the check-in time for the general public for Domestic U.S. and International flights as set forth in Rule 5 D) and E) and must also meet the following conditions: Check united.com for a list of specific POCs currentlyapproved by the FAA. Non-approved POC brands and models that do not contain compressed or liquid oxygen may be carried in the cabin if they meet United’s carry-on size and weight requirements. Alternatively, they may be transported as checked baggage. UA may accept other brands and models for use on board in the future as they become approved by the FAA and UA. Passengers must satisfy specific requirements prior to boarding the aircraft. The Passenger must: provide advance notice in the reservation record that he/she is planning to use a POC on board the flight. have a signed written Doctor’s statement that: states the user of the POC has the physical and cognitive ability to see, hear and understand the device’s aural and visual cautions and warnings and is able, without assistance, to take appropriate action in response to those cautions and warnings. states whether or not oxygen use is medically necessary for all or a portion of the flight(s) listed on the Passenger's itinerary. specifies the maximum oxygen flow rate in liters per minute corresponding to the pressure in the cabin of the aircraft under normal operating conditions. may be reviewed at the airport prior to boarding and must be kept by the Passenger and provided upon request by UA personnel at any time during travel. Passenger's may use and print out the Medical Verification Statement available on UA's website, united.com. ensure that he/she has ample batteries to power the POC for the duration of his/her flight plus 3.0 additional hours to allow for unanticipated delays and any ground connection time where the POC is planned to be used.(NOTE: aircraft in -seat electrical power is not available for Passenger use with POCs). ensure that all extra batteries are properly protected from short circuiting by either: having recessed battery terminals or; packing them so that the batteries do not contact metal objects including the terminals ofother batteries. Failure to meet the requirements will result in denied use of the POC during travel. Passengers planning on traveling with POCs are solely responsible for advising UA as soon as reservations are confirmed, regardless of whether the reservations were made through a travel agent, on the internet or directly withUA, in order to confirm specific requirements and to provide the airline with required information. When travelling on or connecting to or from anyflight other than a UA or a United Express flight, the Passenger is responsible for notifying and making independent arrangements directly with the other airline. POCs are assistive devices for Passengers with disabilities. As such, they do not count toward carry-on or checked baggage limits, whether or not they are used on board. They must be able to fit underneath the seat or in an overhead storage compartment. A Passenger using a POC may not sit in an exit row or bulkhead seat. Additionally, a Passenger using a POC during takeoff and landing may not sit in an aisle seat. UA is not liable for POC equipment failures, failure of the batteries that powerthe POC,or any otherlosses or damages alleged by the Passenger or any other person arising out of the use or possessionof the POC, unlesscaused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of UA. Medical Transport Services - These services are limited and provided only in the Micronesia region. Passengers must provide 48 hours’ advance notice for these services (UA will make reasonable efforts to accommodate Passengers who fail to meet the 48-hour reservation/notification requirement, but will not be obligated to do so). Subject to UA’s approval based upon the availability of space, appropriate equipment, aircraft type, and pursuant to the following conditions: Passengers on Stretchers Passenger must comply with UA’s medical procedures; Passenger must pay for all seats required for stretcher transportation as determined by UA; Passenger must be accompanied by two assistants, provided at the Passenger’s expense, one being a medical escort and the other a family member or guardian; The cost of ambulance service, hospitalization and other ground services shall be paid by the Passenger; The normal Baggage Allowance will apply to each fare paid; and The loading and unloading of the stretcher Passenger is the responsibility of the stretcher Passenger’s assistants and must be arranged by the Passenger at his or her own expense. All necessary medical documentation must be completed and provided to UA prior to flight. Rule 16 Service Animals and Emotional Support and Psychiatric Service Animals Service Animals: UA accepts for transportation, without charge, trained Service Animals for travel with a Qualified Individual with a Disability who requires the animal to assist them in the performance of necessary activities. The animal will be permitted to accompany the Passenger in the cabin, if it meets the conditions of acceptance noted below. Conditions of Acceptance Evidence that an animal is a Service Animal include identification cards, other written documentation, the type of harness or markings on the harness, tags, or other credible assurances of the Qualified Individual with a Disability using the animal. UA, in its sole discretion, will determine if the evidence is sufficient. Service Animals must be properly harnessed or leashed and remain under the direct control of the Passenger. A Service Animal in addition to its owner-Passenger will be denied boarding, removed from the flight by UA, and in UA’s sole discretion, permanently banned if the animal is too large or heavy to be accommodated in the cabin in the space immediately in front of the Passenger, cannot be contained or controlled by the Passenger, or otherwise exhibits behavior that poses a threat to the health or safety of other passengers or a significant threat of disruption. UA accepts for transportation, without charge, a properly harnessed dog trained in explosive detection, drug search, and rescue, or other specific functions, when accompanied by its handler on official emergency business as authorized by an appropriate federal, state, or local government agency. Such official duty status must be documented in writing to the satisfaction of UA. The dog will be permitted to accompany its handler into the cabin, but not to occupy a seat. Local regulations at the Passenger’s final or intermediate destination(s) may apply and impose further requirements or restrictions, including but not limited to, carriage in the passenger cabin, limitations on the designation of Service Animals to dogs only, or the non-recognition of animals as trained and qualified Service Animals. Trainers are permitted to bring one Service Animal onboard free of charge that is training to assist disabled passengers. This service animal must not occupy a seat, and must meet all other conditions specified in this Rule. Trainers transporting service animals who are not in training must check these animals as cargo through the PetSafe® program. Emotional Support and Psychiatric Service Animals: UA accepts for transportation, without charge, Emotional Support and Psychiatric Service Animals for travel with a Passenger with a Mental or Emotional Disability who requires the animal’s assistance. The animal will be permitted to accompany the Passenger in the cabin, if it meets the conditions of acceptance noted below. Conditions of Acceptance Emotional Support and Psychiatric Service Animals must be properly harnessed or leashed and remain under the direct control of the Passenger. If transported outside of a kennel, they must have been trained to behave properly in a public setting. An Emotional Support or Psychiatric Service Animal in addition to its owner-Passenger will be denied boarding, removed from the flight by UA, and in UA’s sole discretion, permanently banned if the animal is too large or heavy to be accommodated in the cabin in the space immediately in front of the Passenger, cannot be contained or controlled by the Passenger, or otherwise exhibits behavior that poses a threat to the health or safety of other passengers or a significant threat of disruption. A Passenger requesting to travel with an Emotional Support or Psychiatric Service Animal will be required to provide to UA the following documentation at least 48 hours prior to each trip: A Completed Emotional Support/Psychiatric Service Animal Request form filled out by a licensed mental health professional (e.g., psychiatrist, psychologist, licensed clinical social worker, including a medical doctor specifically treating the passenger’s Mental or Emotional Disability) stating: (1) the passenger has a Mental or Emotional Disability recognized in the latest Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; (2) the Passenger needs the Emotional Support or Psychiatric Service Animal to assist the Passenger with a Mental or Emotional Disability; (3) the individual providing the assessment is a licensed mental health professional and the Passenger is under his or her current and ongoing professional care; and (4) the date and type of the mental health professional’s license and the state or other jurisdiction in which it was issued; A completed Passenger Confirmation of Liability and Emotional Support/Psychiatric Service Animal Behavior form signed by the Passenger; A completed Veterinary Health Form filled out by a licensed veterinarian; and These three forms must be current, i.e., they can be no older than one year from the date of the Passenger's scheduled initial flight. Any forms that are not current will result in the denial of boarding of the Passenger and the Emotional Support/Psychiatric Service Animal. Local regulations at the Passenger’s final or intermediate destination(s) may apply and impose further requirements or restrictions, including but not limited to, carriage in the passenger cabin, limitations on the designation of Emotional Support or Psychiatric Service Animals to dogs only, or the non-recognition of Emotional Support and Psychiatric Service Animals in their entirety. Service Animals and Emotional Support/Psychiatric Service Animals may not occupy a seat. Certain unusual animals/reptiles pose unavoidable safety and/or public health concerns and UA will not accept snakes, other reptiles, exotic birds, ferrets, rodents, sugar gliders, spiders, and animals with tusks or horns as Service Animals or Emotional Support/Psychiatric Animals. UA reserves the right to expand the list of excluded Service Animals and Emotional Support/Psychiatric Service Animals. Certain Service Animals and Emotional Support/Psychiatric Animals, such as specific breeds of monkeys, must remain in their carriers under the Passenger’s seat at all times. If no other seat accommodation can be made and the animal is too big to fit safely in the cabin, the animal must be transported as cargo through the PetSafe® program. Passengers with Service Animals and Emotional Support/Psychiatric Service Animals will not be seated in emergency exit rows. They may not obstruct an aisle or other area that must remain unobstructed in order to facilitate an emergency evacuation. The Passenger affirms that he or she has no reason to believe that the Service Animal or the Emotional Support/Psychiatric Service Animal poses a threat to the health and safety of others, and assumes full responsibility for the safety, well-being, and conduct of its animal, including the interaction of the animal with crew and other Passengers or Passenger property that may come in contact with the animal while on board the aircraft, and for compliance with all UA and governmental requirements, regulations, or restrictions, including entry permits and required health certificates of the country, state, or territory from and/or to which the animal is being transported. Any Passenger who, by failing to comply with this Section, causes UA or its passengers any loss, damage or expense of any kind, consents and acknowledges that he or she shall reimburse UA for any such loss, damage or expense. Rule 17 Ground Transfer Service UA may provide or procure ground transfer service between airports and city centers, between airports and any point in a Passenger’s itinerary, or to places of lodging. Except where ground transfer service is directly operated by UA, it is agreed that any such service is performed by independent operators. Such independent operators are not agents or servants of UA, and UA assumes no responsibility for the ground transfer of any passenger and/or his/her baggage. Anything done by an employee, agent or representative of UA in assisting the Passenger to make arrangements for such independent ground transfer service shall in no way make UA liable for the acts or omissions of such independent operator. In cases where UA maintains and directly operates local transfer services for its Passengers, the terms, conditions, rules and regulations of UA, including but not limited to, those stated or to which reference is made in UA’s Tickets, Baggage Checks and baggage valuation agreements shall be deemed applicable to such local ground transfer services. No portion of the air transportation fare shall be refundable in the event local ground services are not used by the Passenger. Rule 18 Service Provided by United Express and Other Codeshare Partners UA has arrangements with certain other carriers to enable UA to provide Codeshare services to Passengers on flights operated by these carriers. Transportation provided by UA under a Codeshare arrangement with these carriers is designated by a flight number that includes UA’s two-letter airline designator code, “UA”. NOTE: For travel to or from the European Union and for reservations made in the European Union, UA will indicate the identity of the operating carrier at the time of reservation or as soon as administratively feasible. For Codeshare services on flights operated by another carrier, UA is responsible for the entirety of the Codeshare journey for all obligations to Passengers established in these rules. The rules contained herein with respect to ticketing will apply to UA Codeshare services on flights operated by partner airlines. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the baggage liability provisions set forth in Rule 28 shall govern the liability of UA with respect to any transportation subject to this Contract. When another foreign or U.S. Codeshare partner operates a flight on which UA’s designator code “UA” appears, the operating carrier’s contingency plan for lengthy tarmac delays will apply to that flight. Rule 19 Travel Documents Each Passenger desiring transportation across any international boundary is responsible for obtaining prior to travel and presenting upon request at any time all necessary travel documents, which shall be in good condition, and for complying with the laws of each country flown from, through or into which he/she desires transportation. Any Passenger who, by failing to comply with the laws of each country flown from, through or into which he/she desires transportation, causes UA any loss, damage or expense of any kind, consents and acknowledges that he or she shall reimburse UA for any such loss, damage or expense. UA is not liable for any assistance or information provided by any employee or agent of UA to any Passenger relating to such documents or compliance with such laws, or for the consequences to any Passenger resulting from his/her failure to obtain and present such documents, which shall be in good condition, or to comply with such laws. Where legally permitted, UA reserves the right to hold, photocopy or otherwise reproduce a travel document presented by any Passenger. UA also reserves the right to deny boarding to any Passenger whose necessary travel documents are not in good condition according to UA's reasonable belief, or which otherwise do not comply with laws of the specific country the Passenger is departing from, transiting through, or traveling to. Subject to applicable laws and regulations, the Passenger must pay the applicable fare whenever UA, on government order, is required to return a Passenger to his/her point of origin or elsewhere due to the Passenger’s inadmissibility into/or deportation from a country. The fare will be the applicable fare in effect at the time of the original Ticket’s issuance. Any difference between the applicable fare and the fare paid will be collected from or refunded to the Passenger, as the case may be. UA will apply to the payment of such fares any funds paid by the Passenger for unused carriage or any funds of the Passenger in possession of UA. The fare collected for carriage to the point of refusal of entry or deportation will not be refunded by UA unless the law of such country requires that the fare be refunded. This Rule and its limitations include, but are not limited to, Travel Documents related to travel by minors. Parents/guardians of minors are responsible for compliance with all requirements and procedures for minors travelling internationally, including, but not limited to documentary evidence, such as a notarized letter of relationship and permission for the minor’s travel from the parent or legal guardian not present. Rule 20 Screening of Passengers and Baggage Passengers and/or their baggage are subject to security screening, including but not limited to, security profiling, physical pat-downs and inspections, x-ray screening, manual bag searches, questioning of Passengers, and use of electronic or other detectors or screening or security devices, in the sole discretion of the government, airport or UA, and with or without the Passenger’s presence, consent or knowledge. Neither UA nor its employees or agents is liable for any damage, loss, delay (including refusal to transport), confiscation of property, injury or other harm relating to or arising out of security screening conducted by an agent of the airport or any local, state, or federal agency or a Passenger's failure to submit to or comply with such security screening. Rule 21 Refusal of Transport UA shall have the right to refuse to transport or shall have the right to remove from the aircraft at any point, any Passenger for the following reasons: Breach of Contract of Carriage – Failure by Passenger to comply with the Rules of the Contract of Carriage. Government Request, Regulations or Security Directives – Whenever such action is necessary to comply with any government regulation, Customs and Border Protection, government or airport security directive of any sort, or any governmental request for emergency transportation in connection with the national defense. Force Majeure and Other Unforeseeable Conditions – Whenever such action is necessary or advisable by reason of weather or other conditions beyond UA’s control including, but not limited to, acts of God, force majeure, strikes, civil commotions, embargoes, wars, hostilities, terrorist activities, or disturbances, whether actual, threatened, or reported. Search of Passenger or Property – Whenever a Passenger refuses to submit to electronic surveillance or to permit search of his/her person or property. Proof of Identity – Whenever a Passenger refuses on request to produce identification satisfactory to UA or who presents a Ticket to board and whose identification does not match the name on the Ticket. UA shall have the right, but shall not be obligated, to require identification of persons purchasing tickets and/or presenting a ticket(s) for the purpose of boarding the aircraft. Failure to Pay – Whenever a Passenger has not paid the appropriate fare for a Ticket, Baggage, or applicable service charges for services required for travel, has not paid an outstanding debt or Court judgment, or has not produced satisfactory proof to UA that the Passenger is an authorized non-revenue Passenger or has engaged in a prohibited practice as specified in Rule 6. Across International Boundaries – Whenever a Passenger is traveling across any international boundary if: The government required travel documents of such Passenger appear not to be in order according to UA's reasonable belief; or Such Passenger’s embarkation from, transit through, or entry into any country from, through, or to which such Passenger desires transportation would be unlawful or denied for any reason. Safety – Whenever refusal or removal of a Passenger may be necessary for the safety of such Passenger or other Passengers or members of the crew including, but not limited to: Passengers, Passengers’ Service Animals, or Passengers’ Emotional Support/ Psychiatric Service Animals whose conduct is disorderly, offensive, abusive, or violent; Passengers who fail to comply with or interfere with the duties of the members of the flight crew, federal regulations, or security directives; Passengers who assault any employee of UA, including the gate agents and flight crew, or any UA Passenger; Passengers who, through and as a result of their conduct, cause a disturbance such that the captain or member of the cockpit crew must leave the cockpit in order to attend to the disturbance; Passengers who are barefoot or not properly clothed; Passengers who appear to be intoxicated or under the influence of drugs to a degree that the Passenger may endanger the Passenger or another Passenger or members of the crew (other than a qualified individual whose appearance or involuntary behavior may make them appear to be intoxicated or under the influence of drugs); Passengers wearing or possessing on or about their person concealed or unconcealed deadly or dangerous weapons; provided, however, that UA will carry law enforcement personnel who meet the qualifications and conditions established in 49 C.F.R. §1544.219; Passengers who are unwilling or unable to follow UA’s policy on smoking or use of other smokeless materials; Unless they comply with Rule 6 I), Passengers who are unable to sit in a single seat with the seat belt properly secured, and/or are unable to put the seat’s armrests down when seated and remain seated with the armrest down for the entirety of the flight, and/or passengers who significantly encroach upon the adjoining passenger’s seat; Passengers who are manacled or in the custody of law enforcement personnel; Passengers who have resisted or may reasonably be believed to be capable of resisting custodial supervision; Pregnant Passengers in their ninth month, unless such Passenger provides a doctor’s certificate dated no more than 72 hours prior to departure stating that the doctor has examined and found the Passenger to be physically fit for air travel to and from the destination requested on the date of the flight, and that the estimated date of delivery is after the date of the last flight; Passengers who are incapable of completing a flight safely, without requiring extraordinary medical assistance during the flight, as well as Passengers who appear to have symptoms of or have a communicable disease or condition that could pose a direct threat to the health or safety of others on the flight, or who refuse a screening for such disease or condition. (NOTE: UA requires a medical certificate for Passengers who wish to travel under such circumstances. Visit UA’s website, united.com, for more information regarding UA’s requirements for medical certificates); Passengers who fail to travel with the required safety assistant(s), advance notice and/or other safety requirements pursuant to Rules 14 and 15; Passengers who do not qualify as acceptable Non-Ambulatory Passengers (see Rule 14); Passengers who have or cause a malodorous condition (other than individuals qualifying as disabled); Passengers whose physical or mental condition is such that, in United’s sole opinion, they are rendered or likely to be rendered incapable of comprehending or complying with safety instructions without the assistance of an escort. The escort must accompany the escorted passenger at all times; and Unaccompanied passengers who are both blind and deaf, unless such passenger is able to communicate with representatives of UA by either physical, mechanical, electronic, or other means. Such passenger must inform UA of the method of communication to be used; and Passengers who are unwilling to follow UA’s policy that prohibits voice calls after the aircraft doors have closed, while taxiing in preparation for takeoff, or while airborne. Any Passenger who, by reason of engaging in the above activities in this Rule 21, causes UA any loss, damage or expense of any kind, consents and acknowledges that he or she shall reimburse UA for any such loss, damage or expense. UA has the right to refuse transport, on a permanent basis, to any passenger who, by reason of engaging in the above activities in this Rule 21, causes UA any loss, damage or expense of any kind, or who has been disorderly, offensive, abusive, or violent. In addition, the activities enumerated in H) 1) through 8) shall constitute a material breach of contract, for which UA shall be excused from performing its obligations under this contract. UA is not liable for its refusal to transport any passenger or for its removal of any passenger in accordance with this Rule. A Passenger who is removed or refused transportation in accordance with this Rule may be eligible for a refund upon request. See Rule 27 A). As an express precondition to issuance of any refund, UA shall not be responsible for damages of any kind whatsoever. The passenger’s sole and exclusive remedy shall be Rule 27 A). Rule 22 Smoking Policy Smoking (including use of electronic simulated smoking materials and smokeless cigarettes) is not permitted on any flights operated by UA. Use of betel nut (i.e., betel chewing) is also prohibited on all flights operated by United. Federal law also prohibits smoking in an airplane lavatory and tampering with, disabling, or destroying any smoke detector installed in any airplane lavatory. Federal law provides for a penalty of up to $2,000 for tampering with the smoke detector installed in this lavatory. Individuals are subject to FAA enforcement action and substantial monetary penalties for violation of this law and related regulations. By purchasing a ticket or accepting transportation, the Passenger agrees to comply with UA’s policy on smoking and use of other smokeless materials, as well as applicable federal law, and UA reserves the right to seek reimbursement from any Passenger whose failure to do so causes UA any loss, damage or expense. Rule 23 Baggage General Conditions of Acceptance - Passengers may check Baggage for carriage in the cargo compartment of the aircraft and/or may carry Baggage on board the aircraft subject to provisions in this Rule. UA will accept Baggage subject to the following conditions: Passengers must present a valid Ticket for transportation over the lines of UA or over the lines of UA and one or more other carriers with which UA has an Interline Transportation agreement. UA has the right to refuse to transport Baggage on any flight other than the one carrying the Passenger. UA will refuse to accept property for transportation when the size, weight, character or type of packaging renders it unsuitable for transportation on the particular aircraft which is to transport it, or when the property cannot be accommodated without harming or annoying Passengers or which poses a risk to other baggage or cargo, or which is not suitable or adequately packed to withstand ordinary handling, unless the passenger executes a release form. All Baggage or other property for which UA assumes custody and for which it issues a Baggage Claim Check shall be deemed acceptable for transportation by air. Baggage will not be checked: To a point that is not on the Passenger’s Routing; Beyond the Passenger’s next point of Stopover or, if there is no Stopover, beyond the final Destination of the Ticket; Beyond a point to which all applicable charges have been paid; Beyond a point at which the Passenger is to Transfer to a connecting flight, if that flight is scheduled to depart from an airport different from the one at which the Passenger is scheduled to arrive; or To an intermediate point unless the intermediate point to which the Baggage is to be checked is a permissible Stopover point at the fare paid (except if the Passenger is making a connection to the first available UA flight departing from such intermediate point and the connection exceeds four hours, the Passenger may reclaim his/her Baggage at such intermediate connecting point). UA has the right to refuse to accept Baggage from the Passenger if the Passenger fails to present the Baggage within the Check-in time limits specified in Rules 5 D) and E), or if the Passenger will be voluntarily separated from his or her Baggage (other than those Passengers whose flight is oversold and who volunteer to take a later flight). UA may require a signed release of liability as a condition of Baggage acceptance in these circumstances. It is the Passenger’s responsibility to attach proper identification to Baggage, and UA is not liable for a Passenger’s failure to do so. It is also the Passenger’s responsibility to claim the checked baggage at the baggage claim area, and UA assumes no obligation to verify the identity of the bearer at the destination airport. Checked Baggage will generally be carried on the same aircraft as the Passenger unless such carriage is deemed impractical by carrier, in which event the carrier will make arrangements to transport the Baggage on the next flight on which space is available. All bagga