School of Public Administration
Professor Craig S Maher



MPA Program Director

Professor

Public Administration, Public Affairs and Community Service

CPACS 113

Tel: 402.554.3204

402.554.3204 Fax: 402.554.2628

402.554.2628 Email: csmaher@unomaha.edu

Biographical Information Born in Green Bay, WI. Spent much of my life in the area of Milwaukee, WI. Worked for Wisconsin Taxpayers Alliance after receiving my PhD; four years later I took the position of Assistant Professor at University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh. In 2012, I accepted a position at Northern Illinois University. I married my wife Kerry in 1991; we have three children.

Teaching Interests Public budgeting, public financial management, research methods and research design. I also enjoy teach state and local politics, capstone, policy analysis and introduction to PA.

Research and Creative Interests In broad terms, I focus on fiscal federalism. That is reflected in my research on the effects of intergovernmental aid payments on local spending patterns, k-12 finance, the effects of state imposed spending and revenue limitations on state and local governments. I am currently focused on the measurement and explanation of local fiscal condition, particularly through the Recession of 2008.

Service At the institutional level, I have served as Department Chair, MPA Coordinator, various MPA committees, dissertation committees, personnel committees, graduate council and candidate selection committees (including chairing). Service to the profession includes serving on the Board of Directors for the American Society of Public Administration’s (ASPA) Section on Public Performance and Management, the National League of Cities and Urban Institute’s Advisory Legislating-for-Results Advisory Committee and the Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB) service efforts and accomplishments (SEA) Task Force. I was also appointed to Wisconsin Governor Doyle’s Task Force on Milwaukee County Finances and was elected to the Wauwatosa, WI Common Council, serving from 2004-2009.

Education Ph D - State and Local Politics - American Government, Research Methods

University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (Milwaukee, WI) 1995 MA - International Relations - Economics

University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (Milwaukee, WI) 1992 BA - Political Science

University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (Milwaukee, WI) 1990