2016 UNGA Resolutions Singling Out Israel (71st Session)
RESOLUTION SPONSORS EXTRACTS ANALYSIS

“Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat” – A/Res/71/21 Cttee Vote:

[Straight to Plenary] Plenary Vote:

98 – 9 – 57 Votes in Previous Years 22 OIC countries including Saudi Arabia & Sudan, and others “Requests the Division to continue to monitor developments relevant to the question of Palestine, to organize international meetings and activities in support of the Committee’s mandate … to liaise and cooperate with civil society and parliamentarians, including through the Working Group of the Committee and its associated ‘UN Platform for Palestine’, to develop and expand the ‘Question of Palestine’ website and the documents collection of the United Nations Information System on the Question of Palestine…” The DPR serves the biased special committee and is dedicated to spreading anti-Israel propaganda the world over. Its 16-member staff is grossly disproportionate to the UN’s other four divisions which cover enormous geographical regions. The DPR’s work is counter-productive to the peace process and seeks to coordinate international boycotts against Israel instead of seeking bridges for peace. Excludes from its events any NGO that declines to swear fealty to its hardline politics.

“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine,” -A/Res/71/23 Cttee Vote:

[Straight to Plenary] Plenary Vote:

153 – 7 – 7 Votes in Previous Years 22 OIC countries including Saudi Arabia & Sudan, and others “Expressing its grave concern about tensions, provocations and incitement regarding the holy places of Jerusalem, including the Haram al-Sharif, and urging restraint and respect for the sanctity of the holy sites by all sides…” Blames Israel only for lack of peace. Expresses “concern” that 69 years have passed since the 1947 partition plan, suggesting Israel is at fault when it was the Arab states and Palestinian Arab leaders who uniformly rejected that resolution and initiated hostilities the day after its adoption. Text is redundant to several other resolutions and serves no effect other than demonization. References to terror fail to name its perpetrators, whereas Israel is named and blamed throughout. Uses only the Islamic term “Haram al-Sharif” when referring to Jerusalem’s Temple Mount, ignoring Jewish and Christian religion and history.

“Jerusalem,” – A/Res/71/25 Cttee Vote:

[Straight to Plenary] Plenary Vote:

149 – 7 – 8 Votes in Previous Years 23 OIC countries including Saudi Arabia & Sudan, and others “Expressing its grave concern, in particular, about tensions, provocations and incitement regarding the holy places of Jerusalem, including the Haram al Sharif, and urging restraint and respect for the sanctity of the holy sites by all sides…” Implies that Israeli administration of Jerusalem hinders freedom of religion when in fact the opposite is true—before 1967, Jordan destroyed Jewish holy sites and denied access to Jews, while under Israel all faiths have access to the city and enjoy full freedoms. Uses of uniformly harsh language against Israel that is not used even against regimes like Iran. Repeated passage of annual resolution to address acts from 1980, or matters already covered in other similar resolutions, serve no purpose other than demonization. Uses only the Islamic term “Haram al-Sharif” to describe Jerusalem’s Temple Mount, ignoring Jewish and Christian religion and history.

“The Syrian Golan,” – A/Res/71/24 Cttee Vote:

[Straight to Plenary] Plenary Vote:

103 – 6 – 56 Votes in Previous Years 27 OIC countries including Saudi Arabia & Sudan, and others “Deeply concerned that Israel has not withdrawn from the Syrian Golan, which has been under occupation since 1967, contrary to the relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions…” Redundant to A/C.4/71/L.15 on “the Occupied Syrian Golan.” Oblivious to genocidal massacres taking place now in Syria and its security implications for Israel and the civilians of the Golan Heights. Ignores Syria’s history of shelling Israeli communities, its leader’s calls for a “war of annihilation” against Israel, and Syria’s 1967 aggression that led to its loss of the territory.

“The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East,” – A/Res/71/83 1st Cttee Vote:

165 – 2 – 2 Plenary Vote:

157 – 5 – 22 22 OIC countries including Saudi Arabia & Sudan, and others “Recalling that Israel remains the only State in the Middle East that has not yet become a party to the Treaty…” Resolution singles out Israel while ignoring menacing actions of other states, including Iran’s illegal efforts to acquire nuclear weapons in defiance of Security Council and IAEA resolutions. Ignores overt and repeated threats against the existence of Israel by neighboring states in the region.

“The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,” – A/Res/71/184 3rd Cttee Vote:

170 – 6 – 5 Plenary Vote:

177 – 7 – 4 20 OIC countries including Saudi Arabia & Sudan, and others “Recalling the conclusion of the Court, in its advisory opinion of 9 July 2004, that the construction of the wall by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, along with measures previously taken, severely impedes the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination…” Redundantly asserts a principle that Israel has already recognized. Out of hundreds of self-determination claims worldwide, resolution singles out one: the claim against Israel. Omits Palestinian obligation under the Road Map to dismantle terrorist infrastructure before a state is to be created.