UNGA adopts 20 resolutions against Israel, 6 on rest of world combined
Wednesday, December 21, 2016 7:22 am unwatch 10k

GENEVA, Dec. 21, 2016 – The UN General Assembly has wrapped up its annual legislative session by adopting 20 resolutions against Israel—click here for detailed chart—and only 6 resolutions on the rest of the world combined, with three on Syria (1, 2, 3), and one each on Iran, North Korea, Crimea.

“The UN’s annual assault on Israel with a torrent of one-sided resolutions is surreal,” said Hillel Neuer, executive director of UN Watch, a Geneva-based non-governmental watchdog organization.

“Even as Syrian president Bashar Assad is preparing for the final massacre of his own people in Aleppo, the UN adopted a resolution—drafted and co-sponsored by Syria—which falsely condemns Israel for ‘repressive measures’ against Syrian citizens on the Golan Heights. It’s obscene,” said Neuer.

“While there are total of 20 resolutions against Israel this session, not a single UN General Assembly resolution was even introduced to address the victims of gross human rights abusers such as Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Venezuela, China, or Cuba.”

“At a time when Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas and his state-controlled media incite to the continued stabbing and shooting of Israeli Jews, the UN’s response is to reflexively condemn Israel in 20 separate resolutions, each of them one-sided, each of them utterly silent on Palestinian abuses.”

“The ritual of scapegoating of Israel at the General Assembly underscores a simple fact: the UN’s automatic majority has no interest in truly helping Palestinians, nor in protecting anyone’s human rights; the goal of these ritual, one-sided condemnations remains the scapegoating of Israel,” said Neuer.

“The UN’s disproportionate assault against the Jewish state undermines the institutional credibility of what is supposed to be an impartial international body. Politicization and selectivity harm its founding mission, eroding the U.N. Charter promise of equal treatment to all nations large and small,” Neuer added.

Sign the petition: click here to urge world leaders to stop the U.N.’s anti-Israel bias.

Disable your browser’s Ad Blocker to see the petition.