Edwards Open to New VP Run? Video
Home > Video > Most Popular

Donald Trump In A Minute Donald Trump In A Minute Here's everything you need to know (and probably didn't know) about the 2016 presidential candidate.

Brazilian Authorities Investigate Ryan Lochte Robbery in Rio Brazilian Authorities Investigate Ryan Lochte Robbery in Rio Police are looking for the cab driver who drove Lochte and three of his U.S. swimming teammates when they were robbed at gunpoint.

Trump Shakes Up Campaign With New Manager and CEO Trump Shakes Up Campaign With New Manager and CEO The campaign announced early Wednesday the addition of Stephen Bannon as CEO, while promoting pollster Kellyanne Conway to campaign manager.

7-Year-Old Phenom 'Flying Squirrel' Takes Surfing World by Storm 7-Year-Old Phenom 'Flying Squirrel' Takes Surfing World by Storm Meet quite possibly the best child surfer in the world.

Trump Slams Milwaukee Protests, Appeals to Black Voters Trump Slams Milwaukee Protests, Appeals to Black Voters Donald Trump appealed to African-American voters while addressing the so-called Milwaukee Uprising -- which kicked off Saturday after a police officer...

Playboy Mansion Is in Contract to Be Sold: Report Playboy Mansion Is in Contract to Be Sold: Report A Playboy spokesman confirmed that the mansion is in escrow with Daren Metropoulos, who lives next door to the Holmby Hills estate, but declined to...

Los Angeles-Area Wildfire Spreads to 18,000 Acres, 82,000 Evacuated Los Angeles-Area Wildfire Spreads to 18,000 Acres, 82,000 Evacuated A raging wildfire east of Los Angeles has grown to 18,000 acres, forcing more than 82,000 people to evacuate, fire officials said Tuesday night.

Why This Sea Creature Has Researchers Laughing Why This Sea Creature Has Researchers Laughing The stubby squid with "weird eyes" was spotted off the coast of California at a depth of 2,950 feet.

Donald Trump Blasts Media in New Attacks Donald Trump Blasts Media in New Attacks Trump said he is "running against the crooked media" and on Twitter blamed reporters for his sagging poll numbers.

Video Shows Police Officer Appearing to Lift Woman Off the Ground During Confrontation Video Shows Police Officer Appearing to Lift Woman Off the Ground During Confrontation The woman, who says there were no charges in the incident, was accosted by an officer while arguing with a man.

Obama vs. TV Pitchmen in Health Care Video Mashup Obama vs. TV Pitchmen in Health Care Video Mashup The president follows in the tradition of celebrity endorsements when selling Obamacare.

Man Loses 330 Pounds With Daily Walks to Walmart Man Loses 330 Pounds With Daily Walks to Walmart Pasquale "Pat" Brocco threw out all the food in his home and committed to walking to his local Walmart for his every meal.

6 Children Shocked at Amusement Park in Connecticut 6 Children Shocked at Amusement Park in Connecticut It's the latest in a string of serious incidents at amusement parks this summer.

Tulsa Murder Victim's Family Alleges Hate Crime Tulsa Murder Victim's Family Alleges Hate Crime Khalid Jabara, 31, was allegedly shot and killed by neighbor Stanley Majors, 61, who Jabara's family claims has terrorized them for years.

Overdue Pregnant Woman Wakesurfs to Help Induce Labor Overdue Pregnant Woman Wakesurfs to Help Induce Labor Kolby Fahlsing, of Minneapolis, Minnesota, has gone viral with her incredible wakesurfing skills while pregnant.