Who's in and who's out at the royal wedding
LONDON -- Six stablehands will be there, but President Reagan will not. Nancy Reagan is coming, but the bride's step-grandmother, Barbara Cartland, is not.

Royalty and kindergarten teachers, lords and one-time dates and comedians are all on the guest list for the wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer.

Charles and Diana picked St. Paul's Cathedral rather than the more traditional Westminster Abbey for their July 29 marriage partly because it is bigger -- room for 2,500 guests rather than the Abbey's 1,600. But 2,500 is all too few.

'Unfortunately, some people are being disappointed,' a Buckingham Palace spokesman said. 'It sounds like a lot for a wedding, but when you try to spread them out over the world, and try to represent the various sections of the community, it ends up with too few.'

President Reagan was invited together with the heads of state of NATO, the British Commonwealth and the European Common Market -- including France's new Socialist president Francois Mitterrand, who will be there.

Reagan pleaded schedule problems, though London sources said the nightmare of guarding him securely played a part in the decision.

Buckingham Palace officials listed categories of people invited -- heads of state Prince Charles has met on foreign trips, top members of Britain's political parties, representatives from the church, the civil service, the armed forces and local governments.

Formally this is a family wedding, not a state occasion, meaning there is no automatic invitation to occupants of the world's remaining thrones. But Charles is related to most European royal houses, and there willbe four kings, five queens, five princes and three princesses, plus a grand duke and duchess in the St. Paul's pews.

A few individuals who received the priceless invitations, embossed in gold and white, said 'No, thanks.' One was romantic novelist Barbara Cartland.

'I feel that the wedding is an occasion for younger people,' said the bride's step-grandmother, who turned 80 on July 9. '...I have asked Lord Spencer to give my place to my son, which he has done.'

The new left-wing government of the Greater London Council voted 42-38 to reject its invitation. Not many others did.

Prince Charles was allocated 500 invitations and speedily picked newly knighted comedian Sir Harry Secombe of Charles's beloved 'Goon Show.' Charles also picked people like Joyce Deakin, who has often cooked breakfast for the prince at the stable where he keeps his horses.

Six other stable employees also were invited, as was Kim Wran, an Australian actress who met Charles in 1977. Two beauties Charles once dated, actress Susan George and Sabrina Guinness, will be in the cathedral.

Lady Diana also invited a one-time date, Andrew Widdowson, 23, who escorted her to a ball two years ago. Widdowson will attend in a wheelchair: he broke his back playing rugby last year.

Diana spread her 300 personal invitations among chums at the New England Kindergarten where she was a part-time teacher until her engagement and to the three roommates in her luxury apartment.

Diana's father is divorced, and both his first and second wives will be at the ceremony. Traditional royal stuffiness toward divorced persons has eased of late.

Thus, Lord Harewood, the queen's cousin, was invited with his second wife, though he was not asked to Princess Anne's wedding eight years ago. So was Gerald Lascales, another cousin of the queen, and his first and second wives.

Workers at Althorp, Earl Spencer's stately home, were disppointed that the bride's father was allocated only 50 seats, too few to include them. One of the earl's invitations went to Rita Lachman, the American widow of a cosmetics tycoon and a friend of the earl's second wife, Countess Raine.

One of the oldest wedding guests will be former Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, 87. Lady Diana's great-uncle George Spencer, her eldest relative at 77 and long estranged from the rest of the family, has been invited but doubted he would be strong enough to attend.