Individual Income Taxes

State and Local Backgrounders Homepage

The individual income tax is levied on the wages, salaries, dividends, interest, and other income a person earns throughout the year. The tax is generally imposed by the state in which the income is earned. However, some states have reciprocity agreements with one or more other states that allow income earned in another state to be taxed in the earner’s state of residence.

In 2018, 41 states and the District of Columbia levied a broad-based individual income tax. New Hampshire taxes only interest and dividends, and Tennessee taxes only bond interest and stock dividends. Alaska, Florida, Nevada, South Dakota, Texas, Washington, and Wyoming did not tax individual income of any kind.

How much revenue do state and local governments raise from individual income taxes?

State and local governments collected a combined $368 billion in revenue from individual income taxes in 2015, or 13 percent of general revenue. That was a smaller share than states collected from sales taxes and property taxes but far more than they collected from corporate income taxes.

Individual income taxes are a major source of revenue for states, but they provide relatively little revenue for local governments. State governments collected $336 billion (18 percent of state general revenue) from individual income taxes in 2015, while local governments collected $32 billion (2 percent of local government general revenue).

State and Local Individual Income Tax Revenue, 2015 Revenue ($ billions) Percentage of general revenue States and local governments $368 13 States $336 18 Local governments $32 2

In part, the share of local government revenue from individual income taxes is small because of state rules: only 13 states authorized local governments to impose their own individual income taxes in 2015. In those 13 states, individual income taxes as a percentage of general revenue ranged from less than 1 percent in Alabama, Iowa, Kansas, and Oregon to 17 percent in Maryland.

Which states rely on individual income taxes the most?

Maryland collected 22 percent of its state and local general revenue from individual income taxes in 2015, the most of any state. Connecticut and Massachusetts were the only other states that collected 20 percent or more of state and local general revenue from individual income taxes that year. California and New York had the next-highest shares from individual income taxes (both 19 percent).

Data: View and download each state's general revenue by source as a percentage of general revenue

Among the 41 states imposing broad individual income taxes in 2015, North Dakota relied least on the tax as a share of state and local general revenue (5 percent). In total, seven of these 41 states collected less than 10 percent of state and local general revenue from individual income taxes. In addition, New Hampshire and Tennessee collected personal income tax revenue but from a narrow base: New Hampshire taxes only interest and dividends, and Tennessee taxes only bond interest and stock dividends. Each state collected roughly 1 percent of its general revenue from individual income taxes in 2015.

How much do individual income tax rates differ across states?

The top state individual income tax rates ranged from 2.9 percent in North Dakota to 13.3 percent in California (including the state’s 1 percent surcharge on taxable income over $1 million) in 2018. Hawaii's 11 percent top income tax rate is the only other above 10 percent. In total, eight states and the District of Columbia have top rates above 8 percent.

Data: View and download each state's top individual income tax rate

In the 1980s, many states followed the federal government’s lead and reduced their number of individual income tax brackets. Thus, today most state individual income taxes are fairly flat. And, unlike the federal individual income tax, top state tax rates typically start at relatively low income levels.

In 2018, eight states imposed a single tax rate on all income, while Hawaii had the most tax brackets (12). In states with multiple tax brackets, the threshold for the top tax rate ranged from $3,001 of taxable income in Alabama (with a top rate of 5 percent) to $1,077,550 in New York (with a top rate of 8.82 percent). In 13 states the threshold for the top rate was below $40,000 in taxable income. (These taxable income amounts are for single filers. Some states have different brackets with higher totals for married couples. See this table of state income tax rates for more information.)

In total, 15 states with a broad-based individual income tax had a top rate of 5 percent or lower, including six of the eight states with a single rate. Among those states, Indiana, North Dakota, and Pennsylvania had a top rate below 4 percent.

New Hampshire (5 percent) and Tennessee (3 percent) both levy a tax on nonwage income. Tennessee is phasing its tax out and will completely eliminate it in 2022.

Alaska, Florida, Nevada, South Dakota, Texas, Washington, and Wyoming did not tax individual income of any kind.

What income is taxed?

Most states generally follow the federal definitions of taxable income, but there are exceptions. For example, unlike the federal government, states often tax municipal bond interest from securities issued outside that state. And many states allow a full or partial exemption for pension income. In many states, taxpayers who itemize their federal tax deductions and claim deductions for state and local taxes may not deduct those taxes on their state income tax returns.

The Tax Cut and Job Acts (TCJA) created a new federal deduction for pass-through business income (income earned by sole proprietors, partnerships, and certain corporations). Ohio already exempted some or all pass-through business income from its income tax. Kansas exempted all pass-through income from its tax in 2012, but after budget problems it reversed course and ended the exemption in 2017. In 2018, states that use federal taxable income in their tax calculations will need to decide whether to conform with the new federal deduction or establish separate treatment of pass-through income. The deduction will not flow through to taxpayers in states that define income using federal adjusted gross income. The tax base in these states will not change unless they pass legislation to adopt it.

Eleven states and the District of Columbia also use the federal government’s standard deduction and/or personal exemption amounts in their income tax calculations. (See these tables for every state’s standard deduction and personal exemption amounts). Another 17 states use the number (but not the amount) of federal personal exemptions in their calculations. The TCJA nearly doubled the federal standard deduction and eliminated the personal exemption. Thus, states that use theses federal rules need to decide if they want to continue conforming or decouple and create their own rules. Some states may also choose to follow the federal government’s expansion of the child tax credit or create their own child credit.

Twenty-eight states and the District of Columbia offer an earned income tax credit (EITC), mostly as a percentage of the federal EITC. The TCJA did not change the federal EITC.

How do states tax capital gains and losses?

Eleven states and DC treat capital gains and losses the same as federal law treats them: they tax all realized capital gains, allow a deduction of up to $3,000 for net capital losses, and permit taxpayers to carry over unused capital losses to subsequent years. New Hampshire fully exempts capital gains, and Tennessee taxes only capital gains from the sale of mutual fund shares. Arizona exempts 25 percent of long-term capital gains, and New Mexico exempts 50 percent. Massachusetts has its own system for taxing capital gains, while Hawaii has an alternative capital gains tax. Pennsylvania and Alabama only allow losses to be deducted in the year that they are incurred, while New Jersey does not allow losses to be deducted from ordinary income. The remaining states that tax income generally follow the federal treatment of capital gains but have various state-specific exclusions and deductions (see our table on state treatment of capital gains for more detail). Most states tax capital gains at the same rate as ordinary income, while the federal government provides a preferential rate.

How do states tax income earned in other jurisdictions?

Income tax is generally imposed by the state in which the income is earned. Some states, however, have entered into reciprocity agreements with other states that allow outside income to be taxed in the state of residence. For example, Maryland’s reciprocity agreement with DC allows Maryland to tax income earned in DC by a Maryland resident. As of 2010, 15 states and DC had adopted reciprocity agreements. Typically, these are states with major employers close to the border and large commuter flows in both directions. Most states also allow taxpayers to deduct income taxes paid to other states from what is owed to their home state.

Further reading

See our backgrounder on state earned income tax credits

The Tax Debate Moves To The States: The Tax Cuts And Jobs Act Creates Many Questions For States That Link To Federal Income Tax Rules

Richard Auxier and Frank Sammartino (2018)

Federal-State Income Tax Progressivity

Frank Sammartino and Norton Francis (2016)

The Relationship between Taxes and Growth at the State Level: New Evidence

William G. Gale, Kim S. Rueben, and Aaron Krupkin (2015)

Federal and State Income Taxes and Their Role in the Social Safety Net

Elaine Maag (2015)

Note

All revenue data are from the US Census Bureau’s Annual Survey of State Government Tax Collections. All dates in sections about revenue reference the fiscal year unless stated otherwise.