Concealed Carry Permit Reciprocity Maps v5.1 (Updated Mar. 23, 2019)
Concealed Carry Permit Reciprocity Maps

The Concealed Carry Reciprocity Maps below will show you which states you can carry concealed in as well as which state’s permits and licenses are honored in a particular state. If you have a concealed carry permit or license and want to know which state you can carry in, use the first map under “States That Honor My Permit(s).” If you want to know which permits or licenses are honored in a particular state, click on the “Permits Honored By State” tab. If you need help with these maps or what reciprocity means, click here to view our detailed explanation below.

Select a Map View: Print Clear States That Honor My Permit(s) or Permits Honored By State AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY DC Close this window.

NOTES:

Kentucky Constitutional Carry goes into effect on July 1, 2019.

South Dakota Constitutional Carry goes into effect on July 1, 2019.

Oklahoma Constitutional Carry goes into effect on November 1, 2019.

North Dakota Constitutional Carry for North Dakota residents only.

Idaho Constitutional Carry for Idaho residents only.

Wyoming Constitutional Carry for Wyoming residents only.

Tennessee issues permits to non-residents with exceptions. Read more here.

Texas accepts Ohio ISSUED AFTER 3/22/2015.

Wisconsin only honors the Class A Massachusetts Permit.

Wisconsin accepts Ohio ISSUED OR RENEWED ON OR AFTER 3/22/2015.

Wisconsin accepts Nevada ISSUED OR RENEWED ON OR AFTER 07/01/2011.

Wisconsin accepts West Virginia license ISSUED OR RENEWED AFTER 06/08/12.

Wisconsin accepts Alaska license ISSUED OR RENEWED ON OR AFTER 1/14/2013.

Wisconsin accepts Missouri license ISSUED OR RENEWED ON OR AFTER 08/28/2013. This DOES NOT include any provisional license issued by the state.

Wisconsin only issues non-resident permits to Military stationed in Wisconsin.

Changelog

3/23/2019 – Louisiana and New Mexico no longer have reciprocity.



Difference Between Concealed Carry Recognition and Reciprocity

Some states have reciprocity agreements with other states which means each state honors the other state’s concealed carry permit.

Example of concealed carry reciprocity between two states: State A accepts State B’s concealed carry permit holders to carry in State A and State B accepts State A’s concealed carry permit holders to carry in State B.

There are also some cases where State A will accept State C’s concealed carry permit holders but State C WILL NOT accept State A’s concealed carry permit holders. This is NOT reciprocity.

The Concealed Carry Reciprocity Maps above will show you:

Map 1 – States That Honor My Permit(s):

The first screen on this map shows whether a state is Shall Issue, May Issue, or Right Denied.

Shall Issue: States that are Shall Issue will issue any private citizen a concealed weapons permit as long as they meet all requirements.

May Issue: States that are May Issue have the authority to make the judgment on whether or not they want to issue a concealed weapons permit to a private citizen even after they have met all requirements.

Right Denied: States that are Right Denied DO NOT allow private citizens to carry handguns and do not issue concealed weapon permits.

To view which states accept your concealed weapons permit, just click on the state your permit is issued in. If you have multiple permits, start with your Resident Permit (The permit issued in the state you live in).

You may be asked if your concealed weapons permit is a Resident or Non-Resident permit. Some states issue permits to Residents of their state as well as Non-Residents. On the other hand, some state’s ONLY issue to Residents of their state. And to take it one step further, some states only allow permits issued to Residents of the states they have reciprocity with. This is what the yellow state color means on the map.

If you need to reset the map and start over just click on the Clear Map button.

Map 2 – Permits Honored by State

This map is a quick way to find out what state concealed carry permits a particular state allows. Just click on a state and any states that are blue are allowed within the selected state, red are not allowed, and yellow means only residents of that state that have permits are allowed.

We try to keep the information on this page as up to date as possible but due to changing laws it is your responsibility to verify all information. The information on this page is for informational purposes only and not for the purpose of providing legal advice. You should contact your attorney to obtain advice with respect to any particular issue or problem. Use of and access to this Website, emails or any of the links contained within the site do not create an attorney-client relationship between i156 LLC and the user or browser. The opinions expressed at or through this site are the opinions of the individual author and may not reflect the opinions of i156 LLC.