Caracol Industrial Park
Background Information

With an estimated 40 percent of Haitians unemployed, job creation is key to poverty reduction. The U.S. Government is helping the Haitian government in its goal to create jobs by increasing domestic investment and attracting foreign direct investment. In the early 1980s, the garment sector in Haiti was a significant source of employment. But since then, employment in the sector had dropped dramatically due to embargoes, instability, and lack of investment. Today, however, Haiti’s garment sector is re-emerging as a source of needed employment, thanks in part to U.S. trade preferences enacted through the Haitian Hemispheric Opportunity through Partnership Encouragement Act (HOPE), HOPE II, and Haiti Economic Lift Program Act of 2010 (HELP) legislation, which have made Haiti a more attractive place to invest. As a result, the apparel industry has created jobs for more than 35,000 Haitians and is growing.

Caracol Industrial Park

In its 2010 National Action Plan, the Government of Haiti prioritized the creation of centers of economic development outside of Port-au-Prince to spur economic growth and bring jobs to underserved regions. The Caracol Industrial Park (CIP) is an important step toward achieving this goal by creating a new source of investment and job creation in Haiti’s northern region. The CIP is a mixed-use light manufacturing facility that began operating in 2012 in the commune of Caracol. At 246 hectares, it is one of the largest and most modern facilities of its kind in the Caribbean. Owned by the Government of Haiti, the CIP is managed by the National Society of Industrial Parks (SONAPI) under Haiti’s Ministry of Commerce and Industry. Conceived as a public-private partnership, it was constructed with the support of the Government of Haiti, the Inter-American Development Bank, the U.S. Government, and Sae-A Trading Co. Ltd.― Korea’s leading garment manufacturer and the park’s anchor corporate tenant.

U.S. Government Support