Register to Vote and Check or Change Registration Learn if you're eligible to vote, how to register, check, or update your information. Find the deadline to register to vote in your state.

Voting Rules in the U.S. Are Different in Every State Federal and state elections in the United States are run by the states, according to Article I and Article II of the Constitution. No two states run their elections exactly the same. Contacting your state or local election office is the best way to find out about your state’s unique election rules. The Basic Steps to Vote are the Same in Most States Despite the differences in how states run elections, the basic voting process is the same almost everywhere. Every state except North Dakota requires you to register to vote.

Every state has absentee voting.

Most states assign you a specific polling place, or voting location. A few states have ballot drop sites instead. Voting Guides Explain the Basics These voting guides explain the basics of voting, no matter where you live: A Voter’s Guide to Federal Elections 14 Facts About Voting in Federal Elections

Video: Guide for the New Voter If you're getting ready to vote for the first time, this short video can help. It goes over the basic requirements for voting in the U.S., and explains why it's important to know your state's specific rules for voting. Show the Video Transcript Are you ready to vote for the first time? If you’re a U.S. citizen, meet your state’s requirements, and will be 18 by Election Day, you can vote. But first, you need to register before your state’s deadline. Check with your local election office. You can register there or you may be able to register online, at the Department of Motor Vehicles, or using the National Mail Voter Registration Form. Your election office may send you a voter registration card listing your polling place. On Election Day, that’s where you’ll go. When you get there, you may need to show an ID to vote. Then, fill out your ballot. If you don’t know how, ask a poll worker. If you know you won’t be able to get there on Election Day, you may qualify to vote by mail. Remember, voting rules are different in every state. Learn more about voting at USA.gov/voting

Voter Registration Deadlines Every state except North Dakota requires citizens to register if they want to become voters. Depending on your state, the registration deadline could be as much as a month before an election. Check the U.S. Vote Foundation to find your state's deadline for registering. You can also check your state or territory's election office for more details.

Video: Guide for Checking Your Registration If you have already registered to vote, you may want to check your registration to make sure it is up-to-date. This short video will explain why it is important to check and how easy it is to do. Show the Video Transcript Is your voter registration up-to-date? Even if you voted before, from time to time, states and local election offices purge their voter registration lists. They delete people who have moved or who haven’t voted in a long time. And sometimes there’s just an error.



That’s why it’s a good idea to check your registration now to make sure you can vote on Election Day.



Start by finding your local election office at usa.gov/election-office. You may be able to check your registration Online

By phone

By mail or

In-person



When you’re reviewing your voter registration, here’s what to look for:



Your name is correct and still on the voter list

Your address and party affiliation are up-to-date and

You’re going to the correct polling place



If you can’t find your name on the voter list or your information is wrong, contact your election office right away to correct the error.



Did you recently move or change your name? Depending on where you live, you’ll need to update your registration or re-register. Ask your election office. Sometimes just moving a few blocks away can actually change your polling place.



And check your registration if you have not voted in the past couple of elections or you didn’t mail back a postcard from your election office. They might consider you inactive and purge your name from the voter registration list.

Don’t wait until Election Day to discover you can’t vote. Check your registration now. And learn more about voting at USA.gov/voting.

Share This Page:

Do you need help? Ask us any question about the U.S. government for free. We'll get you the answer or tell you where to find it. Call USA.gov

Chat with USA.gov

Last Updated: June 5, 2019