Melania Trump defends red Christmas trees that have Twitter crying 'Handmaid's Tale'

CLOSE The 2018 White House holiday decor features a theme of “American Treasures.” USA TODAY

Thanksgiving is over, so it's time for store owners to hang twinkly lights, my neighbor to put a giant red bow on a bush outside and the first lady to present decorations out of a nightmare.

At least that's how a bunch of Twitter users are describing Melania Trump's 2018 holiday furnishings.

On Monday, Trump unveiled the White House's Christmas decor, which includes a hall of crimson trees without any ornaments and a wreath made out of unnecessarily sharpened "Be Best" pencils, in honor of her anti-bullying campaign.

In "town hall" on Wednesday, she defended her trees and wreaths.

"We are in (the) 21st Century and everybody has a different taste,'' she said. "I think they look fantastic. I hope everybody will come over and visit it. In real life, they look even more beautiful."

According to a press release from the first lady, this year's Christmas theme is "American Treasures," which has the White House shining "with the spirit of patriotism."

Red for patriotism? On social media, the trees' color was received differently.

Some thought the trees looked like the handmaids' red outfits in dystopian series "The Handmaid's Tale."

Here Melania- someone fixed the red trees for you! pic.twitter.com/bToSYTL4V6 — Tiny Dancer (@ReelDancing) November 26, 2018

Open up twitter today to see that Melania has installed comrade red handmaid christmas trees in the Kremlin annex. Happy Monday! pic.twitter.com/VGjIz8Js2w — Dani Shaw (@deeshaw) November 26, 2018

Others thought the unadorned trees called to mind horror films like "The Shining."

Checking out FLOTUS decorations at the White House like... pic.twitter.com/J0hcBD3DvG — Young Democrats of America (@youngdems) November 26, 2018

And there were those who thought of Dr. Seuss' story about deforestation, "The Lorax."

the Lorax must be ENRAGED pic.twitter.com/T9Ab69J5Li — Alexandra Petri (@petridishes) November 26, 2018

At least Trump's new decorations, which also include green trees and a National Mall made out of gingerbread, appear to be an improvement from 2017, which was less than warm and inviting with its barren white branches in a hall and a video of the first lady uncomfortably watching ballerinas.

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/life/entertainthis/2018/11/26/white-house-christmas-handmaids-tale/2120935002/