This week in Jim Carrey art: A dessert-obsessed Trump; an elephant out for revenge
CLOSE Actor Jim Carrey has received backlash for a caricature painting of who many believe to be White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders. Wochit

Jim Carrey is at it again, tweeting his latest portrait of President Trump. (Photo: AP/EPA)

Jim Carrey clearly remembers Time's "Donald Trump after hours" story, in which the magazine noted that the president alone gets two scoops of ice cream at dessert, because he just worked that detail into his latest portrait of POTUS.

The comedian's new dessert-themed work, which looks to have been drawn with markers, features Trump wearing the bathrobe that he claimed not to own, being titillated by his after-dinner treat.

"Dear Smithsonian National Portrait Gallery," Carrey tweeted Thursday. "I know it’s early but I’d like to submit this as the official portrait of our 45th president, Donald J. Trump. It’s called, You Scream. I Scream. Will We Ever Stop Screaming?"

Dear Smithsonian National Portrait Gallery @NPG, I know it’s early but I’d like to submit this as the official portrait of our 45th President, Donald J. Trump. It’s called, 'You Scream. I Scream. Will We Ever Stop Screaming?' pic.twitter.com/LrCmlXXpv7 — Jim Carrey (@JimCarrey) March 29, 2018

Considering that Trump signed a bill banning the use of taxpayer money to pay for oil paintings of government officials on Wednesday, Carrey has a slightly better shot at seeing his work in the Smithsonian. He just needs to offer to donate it.

We're betting the comedian would probably be willing to donate his whole series of Trump administration art, including one featuring the president as the Wicked Witch of the West Wing and another of him in flagrante delicto, in order to make that happen.

You Scream. I Scream. Will We Ever Stop Screaming? wasn't Carrey's only artistic output this week.

He also shared one of an elephant getting revenge on the president's big-game-hunting sons, Donald Jr. and Eric.

There was this one of Trump bathing in "cultural sewage":

Did anyone watch 60 minutes last night? Hell of a piece about a poor kid from Greece named Giannis Antetokounmpo who’s making it big in the NBA. America still has some magic. Pity you have to wade through so much cultural sewage to find it. ;^} pic.twitter.com/H4BTPcw8bu — Jim Carrey (@JimCarrey) March 27, 2018

And there was also one of National Rifle Association CEO Wayne LaPierre.

They're saying the NRA took Russian money to support the Republican party in the last election. Maybe that's why Trump and his flying monkeys are so accommodating? Is Wayne LaPierre also Putin’s stooge -- or just another run of the mill demon from hell? #BanTheNRApic.twitter.com/7r0J9NP2ng — Jim Carrey (@JimCarrey) March 28, 2018

More: Mike Huckabee calls Jim Carrey a 'Christaphobe' after tweet about his daughter

Opinion: Celebrities like Jim Carrey and John Oliver show bigotry toward Christians

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2E5jN9g