What about her reputation? Taylor Swift's politics draw praise, backlash
CLOSE

Taylor Swift performs at Nissan Stadium in Nashville, Tenn., Saturday, Aug. 25, 2018. (Photo: Andrew Nelles / Tennessean.com)

Were you ready for it?

It seems nobody expected Taylor Swift to ever get political, and her Sunday night post on the upcoming Tennessee Senate race sent shock waves through social media.

The 28-year-old superstar took to Instagram on Sunday night to weigh in on Tennessee’s closely contested Senate race between Democratic former Gov. Phil Bredesen and U.S. Rep. Marsha Blackburn, the Republican nominee.

She endorsed Bredesen and offered a harsh rebuke of Blackburn, saying "her voting record in Congress appalls and terrifies me."

Of course, reaction was ... swift, with many Blackburn and GOP supporters blasting the singer for playing politics as well as an outpouring of praise for doing the same thing.

There's a lot to unpack from the response to Swift's comments, so let's dive in:

Shut up and sing

Her endorsement of Bredesen marks the first time Swift has spoken publicly about politics.

In the post, Swift said she has been has been "reluctant to publicly voice my political opinions, but due to several events in my life and in the world in the past two years, I feel very differently about that now."

Some believe she should have stayed silent:

@taylorswift13 Respectfully, be quiet and sing! I guess you’re more pop than country now anyway. You’re country fans are gonna be disappointed. Now you’re on the level of Katie Perry. — janice (@theemporersnew) October 8, 2018

@taylorswift13 Bad move. Politics just ruined your career. You picked the wrong side. We are never ever getting back together. Unfollowed. — EnchantedApril (@EnchantdApril) October 8, 2018

I am very disappointed in @taylorswift13's recent comments about great candidate for US Senate @MarshaBlackburn. Does every pop star/actor have to voice their political opinions to the world? Newsflash: we don't care. Never have, never will. #VoteMarsha — Aaron Farris (@AaronFarrisMN) October 8, 2018

@taylorswift13 the one reason why I liked Taylor Swift as an artist was because I believed that she did not need to voice her political opinions. I am very disappointed as a black man whose daughter idolizes you. Why does everyone feel a need to voice their political opinion? — Karl Haynes (@karlhaynes) October 8, 2018

@taylorswift13 So disappointed that you decided to play politics:(. I thought you were brilliant when you said, I am not going to tell people who to vote for, but I will encourage them to vote. With all the divide in this country, you were only place where politics didn't matter. — beatio (@beatio) October 8, 2018

Hey @taylorswift13 -



You just endorsed a Democrat in the Tennessee senate race with a ridiculous statement saying Marsha Blackburn, a woman, is against women



You have absolutely no idea what you are talking about



Your career has never recovered since Kanye ended it — Charlie Kirk (@charliekirk11) October 8, 2018

Taylor Swift vs. Kanye West, Part 2

Many were quick to point out how Swift's comments contrast with Kayne West and his outspoken support of President Trump, including wearing a "Make America Great Again" hat and delivering an impromptu speech after "Saturday Night Live".

So... Kanye is MAGA and Taylor Swift is endorsing Democrats in TN. This screening of Interstellar 2 is fascinating. Buy a lottery ticket. Anything is possible in this timeline. — roxane gay (@rgay) October 8, 2018

The 2018 midterm election is officially a proxy war between Taylor Swift and Kanye West. pic.twitter.com/fahGqZA9OQ — hiraj sashmi (@SirajAHashmi) October 7, 2018

Wow, Taylor Swift just got political on Instagram. Liberal queen coming to snatch Kanye’s red hat of his bald head — mcoop (@mcoop) October 8, 2018

Taylor Swift cares more about black people than Kanye West and now I need to lay down because I got a headache just from tweeting that. — Ragnarok Lobster (@eclecticbrotha) October 8, 2018

Someone should probably start a support group for those of us who originally picked the wrong side of the Kanye/Taylor Swift debate. — Kashana (@kashanacauley) October 8, 2018

If you had told me two years ago Kanye would be running around in a MAGA hat while Taylor Swift was endorsing democratic candidates, I would have smacked you to the ground and stolen your wallet for wasting my time. — KB (@KaraRBrown) October 8, 2018

Taylor Swift wrote a thoughtful post about racism, sexism & LGBTQ Rights on Instagram. Its either a sign of personal growth...OR SHE FOUND A WAY TO DESTROY KANYE. — Hari Kondabolu (@harikondabolu) October 8, 2018

Taylor Swift gets political?

But really, a lot of people were just shocked. Many praised the singer for finally voicing her opinion and encouraging people to vote.

Wow. Taylor Swift never gets political and has gotten backlash for it. So her speaking out is a huge deal. — Stephanie. (@qsteph) October 7, 2018

Taylor Swift just posted an extremely political post on Instagram & I'm so happy. She has held back from that kind of stuff for years & I'm so glad shes using her huge platform for good and speaking out. — Hannah🌙 (@Jazzypineapples) October 7, 2018

i’m so proud of taylor swift this is all i’ve ever wanted from her my political activist queen — ✧ 𝖑𝖎𝖑𝖆 ✧ (@staticspaceluv) October 7, 2018

AT LONG LAST TAYLOR SWIFT HAS RELEASED HER POLITICAL VIEWS INTO THE WORLD AND MY GOD THEY ARE GLORIOUS THANK THE LORD I CAN SLEEP WELL KNOWING I HAVENT BEEN UNKNOWINGLY SUPPORTING A REPUBLICAN FOR 11 YEARS. — Lindsey (@lindseydee14) October 8, 2018

taylor swift finally speaking up about her political views after her stadium tour ended so she could snatch the republicans’ money is honestly such a power move — veronika (@chloegirI) October 8, 2018

i‘m crying because taylor swift finally took a political stance what is wrong with me — tessa ♡ (@hotdamnitstessa) October 8, 2018

In the end, we can all agree that the whole situation might best be described by tweets like these:

Taylor Swift: Look what you made me do.



GOP: You belong with me?



Taylor Swift: Bad blood.



GOP: Don't blame me.



Taylor Swift: We are never ever getting back together.



GOP: Reputation?



Taylor Swift: Ready for it.



GOP: Shake it off?



Taylor Swift: End game.



GOP: Blank space — Palmer Report (@PalmerReport) October 8, 2018

Contributing: David Jackson

More: Taylor Swift's end game includes opening this month's American Music Awards

More: Taylor Swift steps out in a sheer dress for rare public outing with boyfriend Joe Alwyn

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/life/people/2018/10/08/taylor-swift-political-phil-bredesen-endorsement-marsha-blackburn/1563958002/