Tainted romaine lettuce deaths hit 5, cases encompass 35 states
CLOSE You've heard the warnings, but here's why this strain of E. coli is particularly hard to avoid. USA TODAY

Romaine lettuce is displayed on a shelf at a supermarket on April 23 in San Rafael, Calif. (Photo: Justin Sullivan, Getty Images)

Four more people have died and 25 more have gotten sick as a result of E. coli-tainted romaine lettuce since its last report May 16, the Centers for Disease Control said Friday.

The case has swelled to include victims in 35 states, believed to be the most in any case yet, the CDC said.

The overall toll stemming from those who ate the leafy vegetable grown in the Yuma, Ariz., region is now five deaths and 197 sickened.

The last day of the Yuma romaine lettuce harvest was April 16, reports the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, based on reports from the Arizona Department of Agriculture. Romaine lettuce from the region is no longer being distributed and little, if any, remains at stores or restaurants due to its 21-day shelf life.

More: Trump tweet on jobs report may have breached a 1985 federal directive

More: Last Dodge Challenger SRT Demon, king of the muscle cars, rolls off the line

More: Apple's next iPhone and iOS 12: Here's what Apple should change

"Most of the newly reported cases are people who became sick two to three weeks ago, still within the window when contaminated romaine was available for sale," the CDC said, The most victim got sick on May 12. "Some people who became sick did not report eating romaine lettuce, but had close contact with someone else who got sick from eating romaine lettuce."

Of the 187 victims for which information was available 48% had been hospitalized, including 26 who developed kidney failure, according to federal investigators. The sick range in age from 1 to 88 years, with a median age of 29. Some 68% are female. Two of the deaths were in Minnesota and one each in Arkansas, California and New York.

What's causing the problem is a bacteria called E. coli O157:H7, which produces produces Shiga toxin, or STX. It can make STX1 and STX2, but the strain that produces STX2 -- seen in the latest romaine cases -- makes people even sicker.

Here's what happens: An average of three to four days after consuming the bacteria in lettuce, people start exhibiting symptoms. They include diarrhea, which often is bloody; severe stomach cramps and vomiting. While most people recover within a week, more severe cases take more time.

CLOSE There are many rules for food safety and one that’s probably very well followed is the 5-second rule. Buzz60's Maria Mercedes Galuppo has more. Buzz60

Follow USA TODAY reporter Zlati Meyer on Twitter: @ZlatiMeyer

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2xAs07l