Senate hikes per diem pay by 31 percent
Wisconsin Capitol (Photo: KAREN BLEIER, Getty Images)

MADISON - A benefit that allows state senators to collect extra pay whenever they work in Madison just got a little sweeter.

Senate leaders on Monday approved a 31 percent hike in how much may be claimed for each day working in Madison. Senators may now claim up to $115 per day for travel allowances known as per diems, up from $88 per day last year.

The Senate's organizational committee approved the hike 4-1 by ballot vote as part of updates to the chamber's policy manual. No public meeting was held.

Voting in favor were Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald, R-Juneau; Senate President Roger Roth, R-Appleton; Senate Asst. Minority Leader Leah Vukmir, R-Brookfield; and Senate Minority Leader Jennifer Shilling, D-La Crosse. Asst. Minority Leader Janet Bewley, D-Ashland, voted against the raise.

The hike could cost taxpayers thousands over the state's next two-year legislative cycle. Senators claimed about $486,000 in travel allowances during the past cycle. Increasing that amount by 31 percent translates to an additional $150,000.

Email the I-Team: tips@gannettwisconsin.com

Or call our Investigations Hotline: 920-455-5025

Per diems have been provided to Wisconsin legislators for decades. Legislators get the money on top of their $51,000 annual salaries and they say it helps reimburse travel costs, such as meals and lodging. But no receipts of expenses are kept and leftover cash may be pocketed as income.

Senators who live near Madison and those in leadership roles typically claim the most in per diems annually. Fitzgerald received about $14,000 last year and could have claimed an additional $4,600 under the new higher rate.

USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin first reported that Senate leaders were considering a hike in per diems on Jan. 27. Fitzgerald has previously backed the changes, saying through a spokeswoman that a hike would allow senators to "evaluate their individual office schedules and travel requirements along with their in-district obligations to set a rate that makes sense for each senator."

Aides to Roth and Vukmir indicated that the senators supported a raise because the higher rate would be more in line with federal per diem limits. Federal workers visiting Madison this year may claim up to $115 for lodging and up to $59 for meals and incidentals. Their maximum lodging rate has gradually increased over the past four years from $89.

RELATED STORY:How Dane County legislators got a pay boost

RELATED STORY: 18 lawmakers benefit from per diem hike

The federal government’s per diem rates are based on contractor estimates and daily averages. Unlike Wisconsin legislators, federal workers may be reimbursed for lodging that exceeds per diem rates and they must submit receipts for any expenses over $75.

Federal policies also include stricter limits on how much may be claimed and how the money may be used. While federal workers may claim up to a maximum rate to recoup their travel costs, state legislators may claim the maximum rate every day in Madison and keep any leftover cash.

Charlie Eggen, president of a Madison hotels trade group, said lodging rates have been climbing nationwide and have risen 12 percent in Madison over the past two years. Increased consumer demand, renovations and growing labor costs are generally driving the trend, he said.

"I understand the desire to increase per diems," Eggen said. "State and federal employee and legislator reimbursement per diems, even with increases, have not kept pace with economic growth and demand. This result is federal and state travelers frequently get 'turned away' in high demand areas unless occupancy rates are low. The only way to change that is to make the reimbursement rates market appropriate."

Hotels within walking distance of the state Capitol typically offer rooms for prices near or above the $88 rate that senators could previously claim, leaving little or no cash for meals. Other hotels further from the Capitol, such as several on the city’s east side, typically offer lower prices but would be less convenient for state business.

The Senate hike comes two years after Assembly leaders increased their per diem rates for overnight visits and lowered rates for single-day visits. Representatives may claim up to $138 per day for overnight trips and up to $69 per day otherwise.

The law around legislator per diems can be confusing. While a 2001 state law sets legislator per diems to 90 percent of federal worker rates, the constitution allows legislators to ignore that law and set rates however they see fit, according to the state's nonpartisan Legislative Reference Bureau.

Legislators' salaries are also handled a little differently than per diems. Legislators are prohibited by state law from boosting their own salaries. Changes go into effect after the next general election. But they are allowed to boost their own per diems.

Lawmakers who live within 50 miles of the Capitol must pay federal income tax on per diems. No legislators are required to pay state income taxes on per diems.

Keegan Kyle is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin. He enjoys writing about powerful people, injustice and what the government does with your money. What should he write about next? Send tips to kkyle@gannett.com or reach him on Twitter @keegankyle.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/2m99gWb