Division of Finance
TAMU > Finance > SBS > Tuition & Fees > Tuition, Fee and Financial Information

Tuition and Fee Schedule, Academic Year 2012-2013

Table of Contents

General Information

Educational expenses for nine months will vary according to personal needs and course of study. The estimated cost for new students including tuition and fees, books, supplies, transportation, room and board, incidental and living expenses will be approximately $20,782. Total expenses for returning students during an academic year should be slightly less than those for new students. The cost for new nonresident and international students is approximately $36,672. All tuition and fee amounts provided herein represent the most accurate figures available at the time of publication and are subject to change without notice. Students are expected to meet all financial obligations to the University by designated due dates. Failure to pay amounts owed may result in cancellation of the student's registration and their being barred from future enrollment and receiving official transcripts. Students may pay all obligations to the University with a personal check unless otherwise restricted. Checks for tuition and fees may not exceed the student's Texas A&M; University account balance. Checks written in excess of the amount owed will be posted to the student's account and any refund will be delayed a minimum of 15 working days from the date the check is posted. The refund process for checks posted in the current term will not begin until after the add/drop period of the current term. Payment of tuition and fees with a bad check may result in cancellation of the student's registration and restrictions on use of personal checks on campus if not cleared within the time period given. Tuition, most required fees, room, board and parking are payable in full, or in four installments with one-fourth payable prior to the first day of classes and the remainder payable in three equal payments during the semester. A $15 service charge to cover the cost of handling will be assessed to each student who chooses to use the installment plan. Students may pay their account in full any time during a semester; however, the service will not be refunded once a payment is made under the four-payment installment plan. State law requires that tuition and fees be paid prior to the first day of classes. Students who wish to pay fees in installments can select this option through Howdy. The installment plan is an option students must select each semester. There are penalties for failure to pay installments by their specified due dates. A $25 late payment penalty is assessed for each payment not received on or before its installment due date. Students may also be subject to late registration charges and cancellation of courses if payment is not made by the late after date. If a payment is delinquent when a semester ends, the student will be removed from the rolls of the University and will not receive credit for academic work performed. Students will not be readmitted to the University until all past due balances, including late charges, are paid. If a student is removed from the rolls of the University or is withdrawn for failure to pay amounts owed the University, a $50 reinstatement fee will be assessed in addition to any other late fees or penalties already incurred and must be paid before the student will be reinstated. Payments can be made online at Howdy.

Prior to the 20th class day (15th class day for summer term), the University reserves the right to cancel registrations not paid by their due date in order to free the classroom spaces for other students and insure the most efficient utilization of University resources.

Once a student has registered for classes, they must take one of the following courses of action to remain in good standing with the University:

Pay all amounts due by the specified due date

Contact their Dean's Office and request that their registration be cancelled

This is especially important for students who have been awarded scholarships or financial aid since the aid may automatically pay tuition and fees and cause the registration to be held even though the student has decided not to attend. Failure to contact their Dean's Office and request cancellation of an unwanted registration may result in grades of F or I in all courses for the semester. The student will be required to reimburse the University for scholarships and other financial aid applied to his or her account and will be held responsible for paying all fees for the semester, regardless of whether he or she attended classes.

Back to Table of Contents

Tuition and Required Fees

Tuition-Resident

Resident students pay $176.55 per semester credit hour (consists of $50.00 state minimum and $126.55 designated tuition). Graduate students pay an additional $50.00 per semester credit hour. Flat rate tuition will be charged to all undergraduate students registered full time (12 hours or more) at a rate of $2648.25.

Tuition-Nonresident/International

Nonresident and International students pay $727.55 per semester credit hour (consists of $401.00 state minimum and $126.55 designated tuition and a $200 differential tuition). Nonresident and International graduate students pay an additional $50.00 per semester credit hour. Flat rate tuition will be charged to all undergraduate students registered full time 12 hours or more) at a rate of $10,913.25.

College/Department Differential Tuition



COLLEGE/DEPARTMENT RATE Agriculture & Biological Engineering (Majors, BAEN & AGSM) $400 Architecture $204 Engineering $400 Mays Business School $610 Veterinary Medicine $3000 Education (Majors, TLAC,HLKN & EPSY during JR./SR. year $300

Distance Education Differential Tuition

The rate to be charged for distance education courses will range from a minimum of $40/SCH to a maximum of $550/SCH. Each academic department will have an individual rate that will be approved annually by the President of Texas A&M; University. The following are the initial rates (only departments above the $40 minimum rate are listed):

DEPT RATE Agriculture Agriculture Leadership, Education, and Communications $99 Entomology $150 Ecosystem Science and Management $60 Poultry Science $181 Soil & Crop Sciences $41 Wildlife and Fisheries Sciences $71 Nutrition & Food Services $200 Recreation, Parks & Tourism Science $262 Architecture Landscape $150 Urban Planning $320 Urban and Regional Sciences $150 Business Finance $454 Education Educational Administration and Human Resource Development $133 Educational Psychology $153 Health and Kinesiology $144 Teaching, Learning & Culture $137 Engineering Engineering Technology & Industrial Distribution $540 Industrial and Systems Engineering $540 Petroleum Engineering $540 Safety Engineering $540 Bush School Bush School $503 Science Mathematics $53 Statistics $69

Course Specific Fees (Instructional Enhancement Fee (All Colleges))

For more information, please go to Course Specific Fees

Distance Education Administration Fee

This $30.00 per semester credit hour administrative fee is assessed to Non-Funded Out-of-State students taking distance education courses.

Field Trip Fees

Field trip fees are assessed to cover the cost of providing trips and vary depending on the course taken and expected expenses.

Health Center

This $72.50 per semester fee ($25.00 per summer five week term) is required ` of all students for the purpose of operating, maintaining and equipping the University Health Center and entitles the student to its services. These services do not include surgical operations or charges for consultations with outside physicians requested by parents.

International Student Services (ISS) Fee

This $46 fee is required of all students who are not US citizens or who are not US permanent residents to offset the cost of specialized services International Student Services provides to these students, such as immigration advising, certificate of eligibility document issuance (I-20/DS-2019), verification and monitoring of legal status, status changes, extensions of legal status, approve or help with the approval of on and off campus work authorizations, social/academic adjustment, orientation programming, administration of special scholarships and programs for these students.

Laboratory

The University is required to assess and collect a laboratory fee not less than $2 nor more than $30.00 for each laboratory course to cover in general the cost of laboratory materials and supplies used by a student.

Late Penalties

Students who fail to pay fees and installments when due are assessed a $25.00 late payment fee for each payment or installment paid late.

Late Registration/Add Penalties

Students who register on or after the first day of classes, but before the thirteenth day of classes (before the 4th class day for summer sessions) are assessed a $100 late registration fee. Students who register after the twelfth class day are assessed a $200 late registration penalty (4th class day for summer sessions). Students who add classes after the Census Date (12th class day for fall and spring term and 4th class day for summer sessions) that result in a net increase in hours enrolled are assessed a $50 late add fee. This includes students who do not pay by these dates. Note: The University reserves the right to cancel registrations not paid by their due date, or by the official census date for semester or summer term, to comply with state laws requiring payment of tuition and fees. The late registration fee and late add fee will be applied to student accounts that are required to reenroll because their registrations were cancelled for non-payment. Registrations are subject to cancellation and/or financial penalties if sufficient payment is not received before 5:00 p.m. on the last business day before classes begin and on the Census Date (12th class day for fall and spring term and 4th class day for summer sessions), to free the classroom spaces for other students, and to ensure the most efficient use of University resources.

Student Recreation Center

This $106.00 per semester fee ($53.00 per summer five week term) is assessed to all students enrolled at Texas A&M; University to provide funding for operation and maintenance of the Student Recreation Center.

Student Center Complex

This $100.00 per semester fee ($50.00 per summer five week term) is required of all students for operating, maintaining, improving, and equipping the Student Center Complex.

Reinstatement Fee

Students who fail to pay all fees by the last day of the semester will be administratively withdrawn from the University and charged a $50 reinstatement fee.

Returned Check Penalty

If a check or electronic check accepted by the university is returned by the bank on which it is drawn, the person presenting it will be required to pay a returned check service charge of $30.00. If the check is for tuition or fees, the student registration for that semester or term may be canceled.

Supplementary Fee for Non-Funded Courses Attempted More than Twice at TAMU

A course that is repeated by a student more than twice at a public institution of higher education in Texas may not be reported for state funding. As a result, the institution must either pass the non-funded portion to all students, or charge a supplementary fee to the student that is repeating the course. (Regulation: §13.25 Formula Funding Exceptions, http://www.thecb.state.tx.us/Rules/tac2.cfm?Chapter_ID=13)

A student attempting certain courses more than twice at Texas A&M; University will be subject to a supplementary fee of $125 per semester credit hour ($375 for a 3 hour course) for the repeated course, in addition to tuition and required fees associated with the course. For more information, go to http://admissions.tamu.edu/Registrar/General/ThreePeat.aspx.

University Advancement Fee

The University Advancement Fee is a required fee charged to all Texas A&M; University students. The Advancement fee funds services such as advising, the Career Center, Writing Center, technology and libraries as well as administrative services such as ID services, the campus bus system, billing and refunds, access for students to discounted software and many of the services provided through the Division of Student Affairs.

Back to Table of Contents

Optional Services

Athletic Events

Football Tickets Only ($200.00) Student tickets for home football games. (Fall only, College Station and Galveston students)

All Sports with Football ($325.00) Student tickets for all home sports. (Fall & Spring)

All Sports Pass without Football ($175.00) (Fall & Spring)



For more information, please go to http://mysportspass.tamu.edu.

Golf Memberships

Playing golf at Texas A&M; is easier than you think. Students can join with a semester or annual membership with a fee option when they register and faculty/staff can utilize memberships.

Membership at the Texas A&M; Golf Course allows the holder almost unlimited access. Members may play any time space is available. There are also a number of member events throughout the year. With no long term commitments, no initiation fee and a variety of payment options, we are confident we can get students on the course for just over $2 per day.

To reserve a tee time or for more information, please contact the Texas A&M; Golf Course at (979) 845-7826.

Membership Fees and Payment Options

Membership Fees and Payment Options Semester Annual Student $299 $799 Faculty/Staff $380 $1100 Senior (60+) $305 $810 Community $380 $1100

Semester and Annual memberships may be paid for with cash, check or credit cards.

Full-time faculty/staff may also choose to pay for their annual memberships through payroll deduction. Come by or call the Pro Shop for details.

Students may purchase the semester or annual membership through their fee options when registering for classes.

Family membership options are also available. Come by or call the Pro Shop for details.

Membership provides for golf rounds and does not include range balls, carts, pull carts, etc. Golf rounds are limited to space available. It is highly recommended players call in advance to reserve a tee time.

Dining Plans

For Dining Plan rates, please access the University Dining webpage at http://dining.tamu.edu, and click on Dining Plans. Please note that University Dining follows the University Tuition and Fee Adjustment schedule.

MSC OPAS Tickets

See the best of Broadway, music, dance and more for only $200 per year! By adding this service option to your registration, MSC OPAS will provide you with vouchers to claim your six tickets. For more information, please contact MSC OPAS at (979) 845-1661 or logon to www.mscopas.org. Due to seating capacity, limited number of students will be able to purchase this option.

Parking Permit

Required of all students who park motor vehicles on campus. (Rates are subject to change.)Permits may be purchased online. For further information regarding parking or transportation at Texas A&M;, please visit Transportation Services website at http://transport.tamu.edu/, call (979) 862-PARK, or email parking@tamu.edu.

Residence Hall Room Rates

All students living in residence halls are required to pay room rent. Rooms are furnished with beds, mattresses, desks, chairs and dressers. Students are expected to furnish their own pillows, blankets and linens. Room rents include heat, lights and cleaning of common areas. (Rates are subject to change.) For more information, please contact Residence Life at housing@tamu.edu.

Residence Hall Rates for 2011

http://reslife.tamu.edu/housing/

Student Directory

The cost is $3.25 and includes sales tax.

Yearbook

The cost is $59.95 including tax. For more information, please go to http://aggieland.tamu.edu/.

Back to Table of Contents

Other Fees

Application Fees

Graduate -$50

Undergraduate -$60

International, Undergraduate and Graduate -$90

Bush School of Government and Public Service Graduate Program Fee

The graduate program fee of $1,000 is assessed each semester of the Bush school graduate degree programs, beginning with those students who enter fall 2008 and later. The fee is used to support high quality, unique educational program elements; special student services and support activities; student scholarships; and the various activities of the Bush School graduate programs.

Cooperative Education Fee

$75 charged to students participating in Cooperative Education to support program services.

Diploma Fee

A non-refundable fee of $47.50 per degree sought is assessed the semester a student applies for graduation. This fee is payable each time a student applies for graduation. The diploma fee is $90 for those who apply after the set deadline.

Master of Real Estate Program Fee

The fee structure is $1650 per semester for each fall and spring semester for continuing MLER majors, and $2000 to new majors. It will be used to further enhance the program through the support of career services, student advising, curriculum development, and enrichment experiences.

Mays MBA Program Fee

The fee structure is $3500 per semester for each of the three semesters of the Mays MBA Program for continuing BUAD majors, and $5000 to new majors . The fee is used to support the MBA Program office, Graduate Business Career Services, and the various activities of the Mays MBA Program.

Mays Masters' Programs Fee

The fee structure is $600 for continuing students,and $700 to new students for each fall and spring semester and $200 for each five week summer session. The fee supports the Graduate Business Career Services office and other placement and admission resources for Mays Masters students.

Teacher Education Admission Fee

$200 charged to students entering the teacher education program. For more information on this fee and program requirements, please see Teacher Certification on the web at http://www.cehd.tamu.edu/articles/teacher_certification.

Thesis/Dissertation/Record of Study Fee (Processing Fee)

This fee includes the review, processing and archiving of each thesis/dissertation/record of study. Archival formats include microfilm or digital storage. The fee does not include binding of personal copies. Information on binding personal copies is available at the Thesis Office or on the Web site thesis.tamu.edu.

Masters fee: $110

Doctoral fee: $170

Independent International Study Fee

A $100 fee covering services provided by Study Abroad Programs associated with students who elect to go abroad and transfer credit back to Texas A&M.; Such services include advising students and departments on key issues and procedures before, during and after programs abroad; overseeing transfer credit paperwork; maintaining library and computer resources for those who want to pursue independent opportunities abroad; and overseeing issues related to affiliated programs abroad.

New Student Orientation

A non-refundable new student orientation fee of $75 is charged to all students who attend a new student conference.

New Graduate Student Fee

A non-refundable new graduate student fee of $50.00 is charged to all new graduate students. The fee is used to support the Graduate Studies office related to recruitment and new graduate student activities.

New International Student Orientation

A non-refundable new international student orientation fee of $35 is charged to all new international students.

ROTC Uniform Rental

Cadets enrolled in Army, Air Force or Naval ROTC will be furnished the basic cadet uniforms. Cadets who are not enrolled in ROTC (Drills and Ceremonies Cadets) are required to pay a rental charge per semester for use of uniforms. For more information on corps uniforms, please see Corps of Cadets.

Sponsored International Students

An administrative fee not to exceed $500 per semester or summer session (all or part thereof) will be required to support international sponsored students whose programs are coordinated through Sponsored Student Programs, unless these fees are waived as part of negotiated contractual agreements.

Back to Table of Contents

Deposits

General Deposit

A deposit of $100 is required of every student to insure the institution against losses, damages, and breakage for which the student is responsible, or to be used to offset in part amounts owed by the student to the institution. General deposits are returned to students, less any such amounts owed to the institution, within a reasonable period after the date of the student's withdrawal or graduation from the institution, not to exceed 180 days. The deposit retention period provides the University sufficient time to identify all amounts owed, and to determine if the student intends to enroll in the semester or summer session immediately following the student's withdrawal or graduation or, if the student withdraws or graduates in the spring semester, in the next fall semester. If a student leaves the University without graduating or officially withdrawing, they must submit a written request to Student Business Services to receive a refund of their deposit. Deposits for students that do not graduate, withdraw or otherwise request a refund remain on file for four years. Those deposits are forfeited to the University’s General Deposit Scholarship Fund, after deducting any amounts owed the University.

Room Deposit

A deposit of $300 is required to apply for a room in a residence hall. It will be retained as a deposit against damage or late cancellation or to keep the application on an active waiting list. A reservation may be canceled and the deposit refunded upon request prior to signing a housing contract. After a housing contract has been signed for the next academic year, deposit refunds are made according to the following proposed schedule: up to April 1 for $300 (100%); April 2 -15 for $225 (75%); April 16 - May 1 for $150 (50%); May 2 - May 15 for $75 (25%). After May 15 the housing deposit will not be refunded. Any cancellation after July 15th is subject to additional penalties.

College of Business Administration Masters Enrollment Deposit

$500 applied to first semester registration charges for students who complete enrollment. Deposit is forfeited for students who fail to enroll for classes.

Back to Table of Contents

Refund Policy

Fee Adjustments for Courses Dropped and Added

A student may drop courses during the first five days of a fall or spring semester (first four days of a summer term). Students also may drop classes with special permission of the dean between the 6th and 12th class days. Full refunds will be given for courses dropped during these periods provided the student remains enrolled in at least one class. Refunds will not be issued for classes dropped after the 12th class day. Any credit balance on a student account as a result of dropping courses will not be refunded until after the fifth class day. As of the first day of the semester, students may not drop all of their courses through the drop/add process, but instead must go to the office of their Dean to officially withdraw. A student may add courses during the first seven days of a fall or spring semester.

Withdrawal from the University

Once the University has accepted payment for tuition and fees, a student is considered officially enrolled unless otherwise restricted from enrolling.

Stopping payment on a check for fees or allowing the check to be returned unpaid by the bank for any reason does not constitute official withdrawal. The withdrawal process is done in the Dean's Office of the college in which a student is registered. A withdrawal form will be issued in the Dean's Office that will explain exactly what the student needs to do. Failure to follow procedures for withdrawing from the University may result in financial penalties and delays with future enrollment in the University. Once a student registers, he or she is responsible for the total fees assessed regardless of whether the installment option is used. Refund percentages are applied to total fees assessed and not the amount paid. This means that students who withdraw before paying all installments may, in the event of withdrawal, still owe the University.

International students must go by the International Student Services Office before withdrawing to determine if doing so will affect their visa status.

Financial Aid Recipients should talk to a Financial Aid Counselor before withdrawing. Students receiving funds awarded by the Scholarship and Financial Aid Department should be aware of policies regarding withdrawal from the University. These policies are consistent with Federal regulation. Calculation of tuition and fee refunds due to withdrawal are based on all charges the University has assessed the student. When a student has elected various optional services charged to their fee statement, the total dollar value of these optional services will also be used to determine whether repayment of any grant or Federal Perkins Loan will be required. Federal regulations require a pro-rata refund calculation for all first time students who receive Title IV and certain State student aid at a post-secondary institution of higher education who withdraw during a payment period (semester). The length of time during which a refund must be calculated is up to 60% of the payment period. First time students include freshmen and transfers.

Athletes should see their academic advisor in the Athletic Department before initiating the withdrawal process.

Any credit balance on a student account as a result of officially withdrawing from the university will be held for 30 days after the official withdrawal date. The reason for the delay is so that all charges and fines may be totaled from the various departments and applied to the refund.

Tuition and Fee Adjustments

*Tuition and fee adjustments shall be made to students officially withdrawing from the University for charges listed below according to the following refund schedule: Tuition and required fees.

Fall and Spring Semester and 10 Week Summer Session



Time Period Refund By 5 p.m. on the last business day before the first day of class 100 percent During the first five class days 80 percent During the second five class days 70 percent During the third five class days 50 percent During the fourth five class days 25 percent After the fourth five class days None

Summer Term of more than 5 weeks but less than 10 weeks



Time Period Refund By 5 p.m. on the last business day before the first day of class 100 percent During the first, second or third class day 80 percent During the fourth, fifth or sixth class day 50 percent Seventh day of class and thereafter None

Summer Term of 5 weeks or less



Time Period Refund By 5 p.m. on the last business day before the first day of class 100 percent During the first class day 80 percent During the second class day 50 percent During the third class day and thereafter None

Residence Hall Rent/Deposit

If a student withdraws, moves off campus or in any other way terminates the academic year housing contract, a refund of residence hall rent may be made according to the above schedule. Any changes to the rent refund schedule will be detailed in the housing contract. The academic year contract period is from the time the contract is signed to the end of the fourth week of classes in the spring semester. Exceptions to this policy may be made for students who cancel their contract for the following reasons: co-op or student teaching assignment, academic restriction, graduation and medical withdrawal with necessary paperwork. Any cancellations made after the first day of classes for the fall semester, will result in additional late penalties.

Athletic Refunds

Refunds are not allowed for individual games or games missed. Prorated refunds will be given only in the event of withdrawal from the University. For information on refunds, contact the Athletic Business Office at (979) 845-2313.

Board

No meal plan refunds or conversions will be allowed after the fourth week of class.

Identification Card

No refunds are given for the ID Card Fee.

Parking

Customers wanting to park only for a portion of the year may return the permit any time before July 31 for a prorated refund. NOTE: Customers who return their permit lose their priority as a previous customer. See Assignment Process

Yearbook

Yearbook charges are refundable in full during the semester in which payment is made. Thereafter, no refunds will be made on canceled orders. Yearbooks must be picked up during the academic year in which they are published. Students who will not be on campus when the yearbooks are published, usually by September 1, must pay a mailing and handling fee. Yearbooks will not be held, nor will they be mailed, without payment of the mailing and handling fee. Refunds will not be made on books not picked up within one semester of the publication date. Refunds will not be made before 21 days from the date of payment. *Refund policies contained herein reflect policies in effect at the time of publication and are subject to change.

Reductions in Rates for Late Entry to the University

No reduction will be made in the charge of room rent and board in case of entrance within 10 days after the opening of a semester or summer term, nor will a refund be made in case of withdrawal during the last 10 days of a semester or summer term, or the last days for which payment is made.