Wis. doctor who went missing after fight with wife ruled a suicide
Dr. Jeffrey Whiteside (Photo: Courtesy of the Door County Sheriff’s Department)

STURGEON BAY, Wis. — Dr. Jeffrey Whiteside took his own life the day he went missing in late June, the Door County Sheriff’s Department said Tuesday.

The Grand Chute doctor was last seen June 29 leaving the Ephraim Yacht Harbor Marina following an argument with his wife, Kathi.

His body was found more than three weeks later on an uninhabited property in the Town of Liberty Grove, following extensive searches by the Door County Sheriff’s Department, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, Headwaters Search and Rescue, local landowners and Fox Valley volunteers.

The Brown County Medical Examiner’s Office performed an autopsy on July 23 and determined that Whiteside died by suicide sometime on June 29, the sheriff’s department statement said. Alcohol and drugs were not factors in his death. The medical examiner’s office completed its report on Aug. 14.

The Door County Sheriff’s Department waited until the medical examiner’s office finished its investigation to release the cause of Whiteside’s death, said Chief Deputy Pat McCarty.

“There’s a process that needed to be followed and it would have been premature for us to comment on this case,” he said. “We have been in consultation with the medical examiner’s office since the autopsy and decided to allow this investigation to follow its course before we commented on it.”

A . 22-caliber handgun recovered at the scene was purchased at an Iowa sporting goods store in 1963, and is believed to have belonged to Whiteside’s father.

Sheriff’s deputies found a gun case on Whiteside’s boat with “an impression mark that matched the revolver,” and interviews with Whiteside’s siblings revealed that their father frequented the store where the gun was purchased, the statement said.

An alert sent out shortly after Whiteside was reported missing said one of his guns was missing. The sheriff’s department later said all the firearms had been accounted for.

McCarty told the Appleton Post-Crescent the state doesn’t require people to register their firearms, and there were varying opinions among the doctor’s family members as to how many guns he owned.

“There was some confusion in regards to ... how many guns and the disposition of the guns owned by Dr. Whiteside,” he said.

Law enforcement officers also recovered a cellphone at the scene of Whiteside’s death. An analyst from the Brown County Sheriff’s Department examined the cellphone’s contents, but it “was not successful,” the statement said.

The sheriff’s department obtained additional search warrants for the contents of the cellphone after Whiteside’s body was recovered, McCarty said. “I don’t know if it was due to damage or if it was the internal security system in the phone, I just know that the examination was unsuccessful,” McCarty said.

Authorities will continue to investigate the cellphone and the handgun.

Whiteside, 63, was a pulmonary and critical care physician who worked in the Fox Valley for more than 30 years. He helped found Fox Valley Pulmonary Medicine and served on the ThedaCare Board of Trustees and the executive committee.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1NDTl5Z