El Chapo's lawyers call just one witness and rest their case
CLOSE After his extradition to the US from Mexico, drug kingpin Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman Loera pleaded not guilty to a 17-count indictment. Video provided by Newsy Newslook

NEW YORK – Lawyers for Joaquín "El Chapo" Guzmán responded to dozens of government witnesses and weeks of damning testimony by calling a single witness on Tuesday, and questioning him for less than half an hour.

Then they rested their defense.

The alleged former Sinaloa Cartel leader is accused of bringing millions of dollars worth of cocaine and other drugs into the United States. He initially was charged with 17 criminal counts, including drug trafficking an engaging in a continuing criminal enterprise.

However, the Brooklyn federal court jury in his case is expected to deliberate over 10 charges. If convicted on the most serious counts, Guzmán could be sentenced to life in prison.

The flamboyant defendant, who gained worldwide notoriety by twice breaking out of Mexican jails, told U.S. District Judge Brian Cogan Monday that he would not testify in his own defense. His lawyers instead called FBI Agent Paul Roberts to testify.

Roberts discussed notes he took during a 2017 debriefing of Jorge Cifuentes Villa, a Colombian drug trafficker who testified he was a major cocaine supplier for Guzmán.

Defense attorney Jeffrey Lichtman tried to highlight discrepancies between the written summary prepared by Roberts and the account Cifuentes gave while testifying as a government witness.

In this undated photo provided by the United States Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of New York, Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman, left, poses with an unidentified man. Text messages sent by the Mexican drug lord known as El Chapo about narrowly avoiding capture in 2012 have become the latest damaging evidence at his U.S. trial. Prosecutors presented the texts Wednesday, Jan. 9, 2019 in federal court in Brooklyn, where Guzman has pleaded not guilty to drug-trafficking charges. (United States Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of New York) ORG XMIT: NYR201 (Photo: AP)

The brief defense presentation contrasted with the 56 witnesses – including 13 alleged former drug trafficking associates of Guzmán – who were called to the witness stand by federal prosecutors over the 11 weeks they presented their case.

Apart from questioning Roberts, Guzmán's legal team focused on raising credibility questions about the prosecution witnesses. They repeatedly characterized the government cooperators as witnesses who would say anything to win potential leniency for their own crimes.

With evidence presentation completed, the defense team's final chance to sway the anonymous jury of seven women and five men will come during closing statements later this week.

CLOSE Prosecutors have started presenting evidence to jurors in the trial of the notorious drug smuggler known as El Chapo by giving them a video tour of a tunnel between Mexico and an Arizona warehouse. (Nov. 14) AP

Prosecutors asked Cogan in a motion filed Monday to bar the defense team from arguing that the U.S. and Mexican governments singled out Guzmán for prosecution rather than alleged drug traffickers such as Ismael "El Mayo" Zambada, another alleged leader of the Sinaloa drug cartel.

Allowing jurors to hear such an argument could give them the impression that the United States helped as Mexican leaders corruptly allowed some alleged drug dealers to operate, even as they cracked down on others.

The trial featured claims that drug cartels paid bribes to former President Felipe Calderon and to a campaign worker to current President Andrés Manuel López Obrador.

One witness testified that Guzmán paid a $100 million bribe to former President Enrique Peña Nieto.

The officials denied the allegations.

More: Feds rest case against Joaquín 'El Chapo' Guzmán; accused drug lord won't testify in his own defense

More: Witness: El Chapo cursed, tortured and shot enemies, ordered one buried alive

"Defense counsel’s claim that there is a conspiracy between the United States and Mexican governments to cover up Mexican government corruption is not only patently false and without any basis — it is also utterly irrelevant to the defendant’s guilt," prosecutors argued.

The government team is scheduled to present closing statements on Wednesday. The session is expected to take much of the day.

Guzmán's legal team is slated to present their closing on Thursday. Lichtman estimated the presentation would last roughly two hours.

Prosecutors will have an opportunity to rebut the defense presentation, and then Cogan is expected to give jurors legal instructions.

The panel could begin verdict deliberations as early as Friday.

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2019/01/29/joaquin-el-chapo-guzman-defense-rests-sinaloa-cartel-federal-trial/2709936002/