House edits rules to help members facing ethics probes
CLOSE

Congress convened for the first time in 2015 on a snowy Tuesday in Washington. (Photo: Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images)

WASHINGTON — In one of its first actions of the new year, the House of Representatives on Tuesday approved rules changes that could give lawmakers a new defense against ethics investigations.

The new language, added Monday night to the sections that establish the House Ethics Committee and the independent Office of Congressional Ethics, says the two bodies "may not take any action that would deny any person any right or protection provided under the Constitution of the United States."

The language also states that a person subject to a review by the Office of Congressional Ethics "shall be informed of the right to be represented by counsel and invoking that right should not be held negatively against them."

The OCE, created in 2008 by the then-new Democratic House majority, reviews ethics matters and refers cases to the Ethics Committee for adjudication, with a recommended course of action. It has proven wildly unpopular among lawmakers in both parties, in part because the OCE's reviews and recommendations become public even if the Ethics Committee concludes that the lawmaker did nothing wrong.

Lawyers for lawmakers who have been investigated by the OCE have argued that the office does not protect the due process rights of those under investigation. In particular, lawyers have complained that accused lawmakers do not get to see the evidence that has been gathered against them.

"From Day One of the OCE's existence, there have been serious concerns about lack of due process," said Elliot Berke, managing partner at the law firm Berke Farah, who has defended several Republicans in ethics cases. "The OCE has done little to assuage those concerns. So I think this is simply a recognition that the OCE needs to respect fundamental principles of due process like all other investigative authorities."

A federal lawsuit filed by Rep. Charlie Rangel, D-N.Y., seeks to overturn his 2010 censure by the House for ethics violations, claiming the Ethics Committee violated his due-process rights during the consideration of his case.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-872-0001. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"Clearly (the new language) was put in there to allow members of Congress to restrain certain activities of the ethics committees based on their own interpretation of what the Constitution means," said Craig Holman, government affairs lobbyist at the watchdog group Public Citizen.

Constitutional protections already apply in congressional ethics cases, Holman said, but the new language "looks like it could provide quite a bit of room for mischief."

Rep. Steve Pearce, R-N.M., inserted the new language in the rules. His office did not respond to a request for comment.

Ethics Committee spokesman Tom Rust declined to comment on the rules change.

Omar Ashmawy, staff director and chief counsel of the OCE , said "The OCE's work has always been and will always be fair, thorough and consistent with all laws and legal rights. Any suggestion to the contrary ignores more than five years of professionalism and dedication to the reputation of the House of Representatives."

The rules package also creates a requirement for new members of Congress — but not returning memebrs — to undergo ethics training.

The rules changes, part of a broad package of House rules that included an extension of the special House committee investigating the 2012 attacks on the U.S. compound in Benghazi, Libya, was approved on a party-line vote with no Democratic support.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Bwg1AI