Senator probes her own office's bungling on VA care
CLOSE Sen. Tammy Baldwin said Wednesday she is conducting a comprehensive review of how her office handled a critical inspection report questioning the prescribing of opiates to veterans at the Tomah Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Wisconsin. VPC

In this Nov. 18, 2014, file photo, Wisconsin Democratic Sen. Tammy Baldwin leaves a strategy session on Capitol Hill. (Photo: J. Scott Applewhite, AP)

WASHINGTON — Sen. Tammy Baldwin, D-Wis., says she has begun a comprehensive review of why her office failed to act on reports of excessive prescriptions of opiates to veterans at a VA medical center where a veteran died of an overdose last summer.

USA TODAY reported in January that her office got a critical inspection report regarding the Tomah, Wis., veterans facility in August but didn't do anything with it, despite repeated e-mails from a former Tomah employee in asking her to investigate.

Baldwin has declined to comment on the issue for weeks, but she said Wednesday, "I am in a very detailed and careful fashion, comprehensive fashion, seeking to understand everything that happened in my office in terms of the handling of a whistle-blower case. And I will have lots more to say when we come to the end of that process."

Baldwin didn't call for an investigation until last month, after news reports revealed the August death and other problems at the facility.

Baldwin did not indicate when her internal review will be completed, saying only "as soon as we can."

"Right now our major focus is on the investigation that's ongoing into Tomah," she said. "Our veterans deserve the highest quality health care. We've got to get to the bottom of the problems in Tomah."

Baldwin fired her top aide in Wisconsin following the USA TODAY report and offered the aide a severance agreement that included a cash payout and confidentiality clause. The aide, Marquette Baylor, rejected the deal earlier this month.

Baldwin still has not said whether she read or was briefed on the VA inspector general report her office obtained which showed Tomah providers were among the most prolific prescribers of opiates in a multistate region, raising "potentially serious concerns." And she hasn't said what she knew when about a whistle-blower's e-mails late last year imploring her to take action.

Baldwin, who has faced rising criticism in the state for her inaction, said Wednesday that no matter what her internal review finds, she takes full responsibility. She pointed to an opinion column she submitted to newspapers across Wisconsin a few weeks ago.

"I put out a statement some weeks ago accepting responsibility for not acting swiftly enough on a whistle-blower case," she said.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1BAUNnS