Sen. Richard Shelby cast ballot for 'distinguished Republican'
CLOSE On Monday night, in the small town of Henagar, Alabama, Republican Senate candidate Roy Moore spoke to about 100 supporters, denying the sexual allegations and adding that he, too, wants to “Make America great again" alongside President Trump. (Nov. 27) AP

Alabama Democratic Senate candidate Doug Jones speaks during a campaign stop in Troy, Ala. The words of prominent Republicans are being used against Alabama's GOP Senate nominee Roy Moore in a campaign ad. The ad by Jones features statements made by Attorney General Jeff Sessions, Sen. Richard Shelby and Ivanka Trump responding to allegations of sexual misconduct against Moore. (Photo: Aly Grice, Troy Messenger via AP)

WASHINGTON — Alabama Republican Sen. Richard Shelby said Tuesday he had cast his absentee vote in the state’s Senate election, but instead of voting for GOP nominee Roy Moore, he opted to write-in the name of another Republican.

“I wrote in a distinguished Republican," said Shelby, the state’s senior senator. “It was not Judge Moore.”

Shelby declined to say whose name he wrote on the ballot instead of Moore.

Moore, a former Alabama chief justice, defeated incumbent Sen. Luther Strange in September for the state’s Republican nomination. Moore will face off Dec. 12 against Democrat Doug Jones.

Shelby, who voted while he was home over the Thanksgiving holiday, had originally endorsed Strange, a long-time friend.

Many Republican senators, including Shelby, said last month that they would support the GOP nominee. But Moore has since come under fire after several women earlier this month accused him of sexual misconduct when they were teenagers and he was in his 30s.

Moore has vehemently denied those allegations and vowed not to bow out of the race.

Read More: For Roy Moore, even victory in Alabama Senate race may not be the end of his struggles

More: President Trump attacks Roy Moore's opponent: 'Jones would be a disaster'

More: Roy Moore makes nice with Senate Republicans he railed against in campaign

More: Awkward: Sen. Luther Strange avoids Roy Moore on Capitol Hill

With only two weeks until the election, some Republican senators are still calling for Moore to step aside and allow another Republican to try to retain the seat once held by Jeff Sessions. Sessions is now the U.S. Attorney General

Republicans seem to have abandoned talk of launching a write-in campaign in part for fear it might split the GOP vote and give Jones an advantage.

There is still some talk of trying to expel Moore if he is elected.

Shelby said the courts have already ruled that if a person is elected to the Senate he must be seated.

With “any process in the Senate you wait to see what happens,’’ he said Tuesday. “If you’re in the Senate you should go by the rules."

Sen. James Lankford, R-Okla., said Monday the easiest route would be for Moore to step down.

“The easiest thing is to be able to have someone else running in that spot,’’ he said on CNN. “Roy Moore even if elected this will continue to dog him the entire time that he’s in the Senate. It never goes away and it never gets better.’’

Other Republicans, including South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham, have urged President Trump to ask Moore to get out of the race.

“What I would tell President Trump: If you think winning with Roy Moore is going to be easy for the Republican Party, you're mistaken," Graham said.

Despite backing Moore, the White House said Monday Trump doesn’t plan to go to Alabama to campaign for him. Trump campaigned for Strange earlier this year, but later backed Moore when he won the primary.

Trump has blasted Jones, calling him weak on crime and other issues.

"The last thing we need in Alabama and the U.S. Senate is a Schumer/Pelosi puppet who is WEAK on Crime, WEAK on the Border, Bad for our Military and our great Vets, Bad for our 2nd Amendment, AND WANTS TO RAISES TAXES TO THE SKY," Trump tweeted Sunday. "Jones would be a disaster!"

The last thing we need in Alabama and the U.S. Senate is a Schumer/Pelosi puppet who is WEAK on Crime, WEAK on the Border, Bad for our Military and our great Vets, Bad for our 2nd Amendment, AND WANTS TO RAISES TAXES TO THE SKY. Jones would be a disaster! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 26, 2017

--

Contributing: Julia Fair, Jessica Estepa, USA TODAY

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2BjWszS