Ban on slaughtering horses for meat gets last-minute renewal in spending law Trump signed
Two horses play in their paddock close to the small Bavarian village of Puchheim near Munich, southern Germany. (Photo: CHRISTOF STACHE, AFP/GETTY IMAGES)

WASHINGTON — A ban on slaughtering horses for meat has been renewed after a group of bipartisan animal lovers in Congressgot it included in a massive spending bill that President Trump signed last week.

“The slaughter of horses for human consumption is a barbaric practice that must end,” said Rep. Vern Buchanan, R-Fla., co-chairman of the Animal Protection Caucus, a bipartisan group of more than 100 members of Congress.

Although eating horse meat is considered taboo in the United States, customs are different in parts of Europe and Asia. China is one of the largest consumers of horse meat.

The last three horse slaughterhouses — two in Texas and one in Illinois — were closed in 2007. Opponents of horse slaughter fear that lifting the ban would result in those plantsre-opening.

A temporary ban on horse slaughter was set to expire Friday, until the Animal Protection Caucus convinced congressional leaders to insert it at the last-minute onto page 129 of a sweeping 2,232-page, $1.3 trillion spending bill that Congress passed late last week. The House Rules Committee had earlier refused to allow a separate vote on the provision.

“Our American values support the protection of these animals; our federal policies should continue to reflect that,” the caucus wrote in a December letter to House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., and House Appropriations Chairman Rodney Frelinghuysen, R-N.J.

Banning horse slaughter has become an annual fight, prompting Buchanan, caucus co-chairman Rep. Earl Blumenauer, D-Ore., and more than 200 bipartisan co-sponsors in the House to introduce a bill to permanently bar the practice.

The bill was also introduced in the Senate by Sens. Bob Menendez, D-N.J.; Lindsey Graham, R-S.C.; Sheldon Whitehouse, D-R.I.; and Susan Collins, R-Maine.

Their bill, the Safeguard American Food Exports (SAFE) Act, would also outlaw the export of live horses to Mexican and Canadian slaughterhouses.

Supporters of the legislation point to a 2012 poll conducted by Lake Research Partners on behalf of the ASPCA animal rights group that showed 80% of Americans oppose to the slaughter of U.S. horses for human consumption.

The Humane Society of the United States, which has endorsed the bill, estimates that more than 100,000 horses are bought at auctions by people who transport them to slaughterhousesin Canada and Mexico.

However, the American Veterinary Medical Association does not support the ban, saying it is worried what will happen to unwanted horses if they cannot be sold for meat.

"Removing slaughter as a humane option will leave many horses with nowhere to go and no one to care for them," the association says on its website. "There will likely be an acute rise in abuse, neglect, and abandonments with corresponding negative impacts on horse welfare."

The Humane Society says that most of the horses sent to slaughter are young and healthy and could have productive lives if rescue groups were not outbid at auctions by "kill buyers" who often abuse the animals before they are slaughtered.

"Slaughter is a brutal and terrifying end for horses, and it is not humane," the society says in a statement on its website. "Horses are shipped for more than 24 hours at a time without food, water or rest in crowded trucks. They are often seriously injured or killed in transit."

The renewed ban on horse slaughter in the U.S. will continue at least until Oct. 1, when the just-passed funding bill expires.

"I hope we can build on this success and...permanently end the practice," Buchanan said.

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2GtxGmM