Congress passes spending bill to avoid shutdown, sends it to Trump for his signature
CLOSE House Speaker Nancy Pelosi rallied against the possibility of President Donald Trump declaring a national emergency. She says Republicans “should have some dismay to the door that they are opening." USA TODAY

WASHINGTON – A bill providing $1.375 billion for a physical barrier along the U.S.-Mexico border easily cleared Congress on Thursday and is heading to President Donald Trump, who is expected to sign it and then declare a national emergency to get more funding for his promised border wall.

“President Trump will sign the government funding bill, and as he has stated before, he will also take other executive action – including a national emergency – to ensure we stop the national security and humanitarian crisis at the border," White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said in a statement.

The stunning announcement came just before the Senate voted 83-16 to approve the funding measure, which will avert another government shutdown and offer $1.375 billion for a 55-mile border barrier – much less than the $5.7 billion that Trump has demanded for a wall along the southern border.

Hours later, the Housevoted 300-128 to approve thebill and send it to Trump.

Trump is expected to sign the measure on Friday and at the same time declare a national emergency to access additional funds for a border wall. Late Thursday, the White House announced the president would be making remarks about national security and the southern border in the Rose Garden at 10 a.m. EST.

His decision to declare a national emergency angered Democrats and even some members of his own party and set the stage for a possible legal challenge.

At a news conference, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., railed against the possibility of Trump declaring a national emergency, saying Republicans “should have some dismay to the door that they are opening, the threshold they are crossing.”

“The precedent that the president is setting here is something that should be met with great unease and dismay by the Republicans and, of course, we will respond accordingly,” Pelosi said.

Pelosi said an emergency declaration opens the door for other presidents to do “an end run around Congress.”

“Just think of what a president with different values can present to the American people,” Pelosi added.

She didn't say specifically how Democrats would respond but said that they would “review our options.”

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., said that Trump declaring a national emergency would be "a tremendous mistake" and "a gross abuse of the power of the presidency" to distract from the fact that he failed to deliver on his campaign promise that he'd make Mexico pay for the wall.

But Sen. John Kennedy, R-La., who voted for the bill, said he supports Trump’s plan to declare an emergency.

“The president’s not exercising any power that Congress didn’t give him,’’ Kennedy said. “Had Congress done its job instead of playing politics, he wouldn’t have to do it.”

Earlier Thursday, before the White House announcement, lawmakers were praying Trump would sign the funding bill. Literally.

Just after the morning prayer in the Senate, Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, added a quick prayer of his own: "Let's all pray that the president will have wisdom to sign the bill, so the government doesn’t shut down."

More: Trump's emergency declaration would trigger a drawn out legal fight

CLOSE Here's the latest for Wednesday February 13th: Trump not happy with border security plan; Friendly fire kills NYC police detective; China trade talks underway ahead of possible tariff hike; Joaquin 'El Chapo' Guzman convicted. AP

The legislation, which was released late Wednesday night, would spend $1.375 billion to fund the barrier along the Texas border. It requires the structure be made of previously deployed designs. That rules out concrete, but it can be made of steel slats.

The agreement also provides $7.6 billion for the Immigration and Customs Enforcement. Some of that would go toward funding a goal of 40,520 detention beds by the end of the year. That number is what was previously appropriated but ICE had exceeded it, detaining closer to 50,000 people. ICE cannot use the funding to hire more people to apprehend and remove undocumented immigrants.

The bill won the support from the majority of both parties, but some conservatives and progressives announced they would vote no.

"The Department of Homeland Security does not deserve an increase in funding," Democratic Reps. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, Ilhan Omar of Minnesota, Ayanna Pressley of Massachusetts and Rashida Tlaib of Michigan said in a joint statement Thursday announcing their intention to vote against the legislation.

The Rev. Jennifer Butler, CEO of Faith in Public Life, and other faith leaders gathered Feb. 14, 2019, across from the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C., to protest a measure that would, among other things, provide funds for a border barrier. (Photo: Deborah Barfield Berry, USA TODAY)

Ahead of the Senate vote, some faith leaders gathered across from the Capitol to protest funding included in the measure for a barrier and more detention beds. They urged lawmakers to instead work on legislation to better protect immigrants.

“If we have $5 billion that we can find, we ought to spend it on reunifying those children who were separated at the border instead of building a wall that’s not going to do anything for anybody except perhaps to stroke someone’s ego and someone’s racist white supremacist ideology,” said the Rev. Leslie Copeland-Tune, director of the Ecumenical Advocacy Days for Global Peace with Justice.

The group later visited the offices of congressional leaders, including Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, where they prayed in the lobby.

More: How congressional Democrats could fight a Trump wall national emergency declaration

Trump’s demand for a border wall – a signature promise of his presidential campaign – was at the center of a budget standoff that triggered a record 35-day government shutdown late last year. The shutdown ended in late January when lawmakers passed a temporary funding bill to buy them time to work out an agreement on border security.

On Monday, a bipartisan group of budget negotiators from the House and Senate announced an agreement “in principle” on the border security deal.

Trump has suggested he could get the rest of the money for a wall by declaring some sort of a “national emergency” – allowing him, in theory, to use defense money for wall construction, but also inviting legal challenges from opponents who say the president lacks the legal authority to declare an emergency in this case.

Members of the hard-line House Freedom Caucus, a conservative group close to the president, sent a letter Thursday urging him to use his executive powers to declare a national emergency and build the rest of the wall.

"The conference committee deal is bad," the group wrote. "If you feel the need to sign the legislation, we also urge you to immediately use your authority ... to access funds to begin building a much-needed border wall. "

Acting White House chief of staff Mick Mulvaney and other officials also have suggested another option: moving existing money from other accounts to fund walls, fences or other sorts of barriers.

Trump must sign the new border security bill by midnight Friday or federal funding will lapse, triggering another government shutdown.

Contributing: Deborah Berry, Christal Hayes

More: What to know about national emergencies and their role in US history

More: Government shutdown stymied frozen tax refunds, tied up IRS phone lines, report shows

More: In government shutdown aftermath, federal workers still hurting, survey finds

More: Can the middle-class revival under Trump last?

More: Lawmakers don't want any more government shutdowns; they just can't agree on how to prevent them

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2019/02/14/government-shutdown-border-security-measure-expected-clear-congress/2859363002/