Barack Obama seems to denounce President Trump: 'Unlike some, I actually try to state facts'
CLOSE Former President Barack Obama called out President Trump and Republicans without mentioning any names. Obama implied the current administration lacks honesty and lawfulness. USA TODAY

LAS VEGAS, NEVADA - OCTOBER 22: Former U.S. President Barack Obama speaks as Clark County Commission Chairman and Democratic gubernatorial candidate Steve Sisolak (L) and U.S. Rep. and U.S. Senate candidate Jacky Rosen (D-NV) look on during a get-out-the-vote rally at the Cox Pavilion as Obama campaigns for Nevada Democratic candidates on October 22, 2018 in Las Vegas, Nevada. Early voting in Clark County, Nevada began on October 20 and has recorded the highest turnout during the first two days of early voting in a midterm election. (Photo by Ethan Miller/Getty Images) ORG XMIT: 775243510 ORIG FILE ID: 1058138532 (Photo: Ethan Miller)

As former President Barack Obama hit the campaign trail Monday night, he appeared to take a veiled swipe at his successor.

Without mentioning President Donald Trump by name, Obama emphasized his belief in facts.

"Unlike some, I actually try to state facts — I believe in facts — I believe in a fact-based reality, a fact-based politics," he said at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas rally. "I don’t believe in just making stuff up. I think you should say what’s true."

Trump's remarks, whether at campaign rallies or in tweets, are often called into question.

Obama's trip to Nevada came just days after Trump himself visited. The two were focused on the competitive Senate race between Democrat Jacky Rosen and Republican Dean Heller — the sole Republican incumbent up for re-election in a state Hillary Clinton carried in 2016.

The former president said he hoped Democrats would "restore some sanity to our politics," lambasting politicians who "promise to fight for the little guy," then "start undermining institutions essential to our democracy."

Obama also went after Republican healthcare policy, referencing a key issue of Rosen's campaign.

"I know you can bet on anything here in Vegas, but you don't want to bet that Republicans are going to protect your healthcare," he said.

Additionally, he urged Nevadans to turn out in a race that could come down to slim margins, reminding them that early voting is already underway.

"There is only one real check on abuses of power, one real check on bad policy," he said. "It's you and your vote."

Former Vice President Joe Biden also visited Nevada over the weekend.

Last month, Obama campaigned in California for congressional Democratic candidates.

More: Midterms: These Senate races will decide control in President Trump's Washington

More: Donald Trump bashes Democrats during Nevada rally, predicts GOP success in midterms

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/elections/2018/10/23/barack-obama-rally-donald-trump-jacky-rosen-dean-heller/1736800002/