Alleged gunman James Hodgkinson volunteered on Bernie Sanders' campaign

CLOSE Independent Senator Bernie Sanders, speaking on the Senate floor Wednesday, said the Alexandria shooter was someone who "apparently volunteered on my presidential campaign." (June 14) AP

The suspect in Wednesday morning's shooting at Republicans' congressional baseball practice in Alexandria, Va., "apparently volunteered in Iowa" for Sen. Bernie Sanders' 2016 presidential campaign, according to his staff.

The shooting injured Louisiana congressman Steve Scalise and at least three other people. The shooter was identified by a law enforcement official who spoke on condition of anonymity as James Hodgkinson of Belleville, Ill.

CLOSE Authorities identified James T. Hodgkinson as the man who shot Rep. Steve Scalise and several others during a congressional baseball practice in Alexandria, Virginia. USA TODAY

Sanders was informed this morning and issued a statement:

"I have just been informed that the alleged shooter at the Republican baseball practice is someone who apparently volunteered on my presidential campaign. I am sickened by this despicable act. Let me be as clear as I can be. Violence of any kind is unacceptable in our society and I condemn this action in the strongest possible terms. Real change can only come about through nonviolent action, and anything else runs against our most deeply held American values.



"My hopes and prayers are that Representative Scalise, congressional staff and the Capitol Police Officers who were wounded make a quick and full recovery. I also want to thank the Capitol Police for their heroic actions to prevent further harm."

Read more:

Trump says shooting suspect has died from injuries​

Scalise and others shot at GOP baseball practice: Here's what we know

'I was doing what I could to not get killed': Scene at GOP baseball shooting

Who is Steve Scalise? Congressman rose quickly through GOP ranks

Giffords on baseball practice shooting: 'My heart is with my former colleagues'

Police beef up security around Capitol in wake of shooting

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2sp3nXi