Fox News' Shepard Smith: 'Why is it lie after lie after lie?' on Russia meeting

CLOSE

Fox News Channel chief news anchor Shepard Smith on the Fox News Deck before his "Shepard Smith Reporting" program, in New York. (Photo: Richard Drew, AP)

Fox News host Shepard Smith slammed what he called "lies" and "deception" pushed by Donald Trump Jr. in a fiery Friday rant over emerging details of Trump Jr.'s meeting with a Russian lawyer last summer.

On Friday's Shepard Smith Reporting, the host launched into a tirade over Trump Jr.'s stance the meeting equated to nothing even as new details showed it included eight people. Several congressional committees and a special counsel are investigating whether Trump associates colluded with the Russians during the presidential campaign.

"We're still not clean on this, Chris," Smith told fellow Fox anchor Chris Wallace. "Why all these lies? Why is it lie after lie after lie? If you clean, come on clean."

Shep Smith: "The deception, Chris, is mind-boggling...why are we getting told all these lies?"



Chris Wallace: "I don't know what to say" pic.twitter.com/DQKOAC8a2o — Leanne Naramore (@LeanneNaramore) July 14, 2017

Smith, who has chided President Trump for his treatment of the media, continued.

"The deception, Chris, is mind-boggling," he said. "And there are still people out there who believe we're making it up and one day they're going to realize we're not."

The diatribe left Wallace speechless.

"I don't know what to say," he said. "I think there's a lot of truth to everything you've said."

Smith's statements quickly spread across the Internet, where some called for his firing.

Anti-Trump, Shepard Smith is a Fungus !!



RETWEET If you agree @FoxNews should Send Him PACKING !!#SaturdayMorning Kick Him to the Curb👇✔️ pic.twitter.com/Y6D62fNxe7 — 💎STOCK MONSTER💎 (@StockMonsterUSA) July 15, 2017

It would be so great if Shepard Smith left foxnews and went to either CNN or MSNBC where he can be with liberal journalists like himself. — Lonman (@Lonman06) July 14, 2017

Smith went on the offensive against Trump and his administration earlier this year. In February, Smith defended CNN as "not fake news," an accusation often lobbed by the president and his supporters.

Follow Sean Rossman on Twitter: @SeanRossman

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2uukVmx