Trump's had some very different views on government shutdowns over the years

President Trump stands in the colonnade as he is introduced to speak to March for Life participants and pro-life leaders in the Rose Garden at the White House on Jan. 19, 2018, in Washington, D.C. (Photo: Mark Wilson, Getty Images)

WASHINGTON — It's axiomatic in Washington that the arguments never change — just which side is making them.

As recently as last May, Trump seemed to relish a spending fight with Democrats.

"Our country needs a good 'shutdown' in September to fix mess!" he tweeted, after reaching a compromise with Democrats to avoid a filibuster over a spending deal.

White House press secretary Sarah Sanders explained what he meant this week: "He said it would be good politics. "Look, that's never been a preference of this administration. It wasn't then; it isn't now."

More: No immediate resolution to spending impasse after Trump, Schumer met on shutdown

More: Need a drink? D.C. bar to offer shutdown cocktails (if the government shuts down)

More: Trump cancels Mar-a-Lago trip as government shutdown deadline approaches

Look back a few years earlier — when then-President Barack Obama was sitting where Trump is now and Trump was sitting on the set of The Apprentice — and Trump seemed to have very different ideas about a government shutdown.

On who benefits politically

Then: "Obama & the Democrats want this shutdown. They think it helps their electoral prospects for 2014. Don’t believe!" (Via Twitter, Oct. 1, 2013)

Now: "Shutdown coming? We need more Republican victories in 2018!" (Via Twitter, Friday)

On whether a shutdown hurts essential services

Then: “'Here’s the truth, the gov't doesn’t shutdown.' ... All essential services continue. Don't believe lies." (Via Twitter, Sept. 23, 2013)

Now: "A government shutdown will be devastating to our military ... something the Dems care very little about!" (Via Twitter, Thursday)

On the impact to the economy

Then: "Stocks rose yesterday during the first day of government shutdown. Markets like being left alone for a day." (Via Twitter, Oct. 2, 2013)

Now: "It also means jobs. You see what's happening with respect to jobs. ... So our tax cuts and our tax reform has turned out to be far greater than anybody ever anticipated, and I'm sure the Democrats would like to blunt that by shutting down government." (Remarks to reporters at the Pentagon Thursday)

On shutting down over policy issues

Then: "Congratulations to @SpeakerBoehner on standing strong and tying government shutdown to defunding ObamaCare." (Via Twitter, Sept. 20, 2013)

Now: "The Democrats want to shut down the Government over Amnesty for all and Border Security." (Via Twitter, Tuesday)

On what a president should be doing during a shutdown

Then: "Government is shut down yet Obama is now harassing the privately owned @Redskins to change its name. He needs to focus on his job!" (Via Twitter, Oct. 7, 2013)

Now: Trump has canceled his planned visit to Mar-a-Lago this weekend while spending talks continue. Whether he'll remain focused on the shutdown remains to be seen, but history suggests otherwise.

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2DwpEIA