Trump cites support for health care bill from mystery senator in hospital

CLOSE Senator Lindsey Graham says Senate Republicans will focus their healthcare reform efforts on a proposed block grant that will take power away from Washington. USA TODAY

WASHINGTON — Even though Senate Republicans abandoned plans for a health care vote this week, President Trump says he's got it in the bag — including support from an unnamed senator that triggered a mystery on Wednesday.

"With one Yes vote in hospital & very positive signs from Alaska and two others (McCain is out), we have the HCare Vote, but not for Friday!" Trump tweeted Wednesday, one day after Senate Republicans' last-ditch proposal to unwind the Affordable Care Act collapsed.

With one Yes vote in hospital & very positive signs from Alaska and two others (McCain is out), we have the HCare Vote, but not for Friday! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 27, 2017

Yet it was not immediately clear whether any senators are currently in the hospital. Sen. Thad Cochran is recuperating from what his office referred to as treatment for a urological issue back home in Mississippi, but, as he later pointed out in a tweet, he isn't in the hospital.

Thanks for the well-wishes. I'm not hospitalized, but am recuperating at home in Mississippi and look forward to returning to work soon. — Senator Thad Cochran (@SenThadCochran) September 27, 2017

White House officials speaking under condition of anonymity said they believe Trump was referring to Cochran.

Later on Wednesday, the president again spoke of a senator in the hospital while talking to reporters.

"He can't vote because he's in the hospital," Trump said. "We have two other votes that are coming and we will have them, but the problem is we can't have them by Friday because reconciliation ends on Friday. So we'll have to do it in January or February."

While Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., is undergoing cancer treatment, Trump appears to discount his support elsewhere in the tweet as McCain has opposed the plan Trump backed to repeal and replace President Obama's health care plan

Rep. Steve Scalise, R-La., is still recovering from gunshot wounds — but he is not a member of the Senate.

Read more:

Obamacare overhaul efforts are dead for now. What does that mean if you're an Obamacare consumer?

Republicans abandon Obamacare repeal bill, resume bipartisan talks on repairs

Trump himself has not ID'd the hospitalized senator.

Since the election, Republicans have been struggling to round up enough votes behind a plan to repeal and replace Obama's health care law. They are racing against the clock; after Sept. 30, the chamber's rules change and lawmakers won't be able to pass a new bill with just 50 votes. This is critical, since past health care efforts to overhaul health care have failed even with 52 Republicans.

"We will have the votes for Healthcare but not for the reconciliation deadline of Friday, after which we need 60. Get rid of Filibuster Rule!" Trump tweeted.

We will have the votes for Healthcare but not for the reconciliation deadline of Friday, after which we need 60. Get rid of Filibuster Rule! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 27, 2017

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2xBvbIn