Candace Owens fumes at Rep. Ted Lieu's use of her Hitler comments

CLOSE Candace Owens says Rep. Ted Lieu misrepresented her comments on Adolf Hitler, that he must think "black people are stupid" and won't watch the clip. USA TODAY

WASHINGTON – Rep. Ted Lieu was not happy that his Republican colleagues on the House Judiciary Committee invited conservative commentator Candace Owens to speak at a hearing on the rise in hate crimes and white nationalism.

To explain why, the California Democrat pulled out his smartphone and played a clip of Owens making some controversial comments about Adolf Hitler.

"In congressional hearings, the minority party gets to select its own witnesses. And of all the people Republicans could have selected, they picked Candace Owens," Lieu said during the Tuesday hearing.

"I don't know Ms. Owens. I'm not going to characterize her. I'm going to let her own words do the talking," he said.

In the clip, Owens, the communications director for Turning Point USA, explains that she thinks the word "nationalism" has been "poisoned" by "elitists that actually want globalism" and who conflate the word with Hitler's Nazi agenda.

Candace Owens of Turning Point USA testifies during a House Judiciary Committee hearing discussing hate crimes and the rise of white nationalism on Capitol Hill on April 9, 2019 in Washington. (Photo: Zach Gibson, Getty Images)

Candace Owens: Democrats' hate crimes concerns are just '2020 election strategy'

Hitler comment: After backlash, Owens clarifies viral Hitler comment

"You know, he was a National Socialist, but if Hitler just wanted to make Germany great and have things run well, okay fine," she said. "The problem is he had dreams outside of Germany. He wanted to globalize. He wanted everybody to be German."

Lieu did not ask Owens to respond, but rather asked another panel member, Eileen Hershenov from the Anti-Defamation League, "When people try to legitimize Adolph Hitler, does that feed into white nationalist ideology?"

"It does, Mr. Lieu," Hershenov replied. "I know that Ms. Owens distanced herself from those comments later but we expressed great concern over the original comments."

In February, Owens had tried to clarify her comments, which had then gone viral. She explained that she considered Hitler "a homicidal, psychotic maniac" and that her point was that he was not a nationalist. But she added, "I stand by my statements. And that is that.”

Candace Owens interview: Her rapid rise defending two of America’s most complicated men: Trump and Kanye

All the 2020 candidates: The Democrats challenging Donald Trump

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-872-0001. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"I think it's pretty apparent that Mr. Lieu believes that black people are stupid and will not pursue the full clip in its entirety," Owens said Tuesday when she did get a chance to respond. "He purposely presented an extracted clip."

Her response prompted a rebuke from Judiciary Committee Chairman Jerry Nadler, D-N.Y., who mistakenly thought she had called Lieu "stupid."

"I didn't refer to him as stupid, that's not what I said. That's not what I said at all. You didn't listen to what I said," Owen said, prompting a shrug from Nadler.

Owens then continued, saying Lieu was "trying to present as if I was launching a defense of Hitler in Germany when, in fact," she was trying to say that Hitler should not be characterized as a nationalist.

"A nationalist would not kill their own people," she said.

She said Lieu was trying to "create a narrative" and that it was "similar to what they do to Donald Trump."

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/onpolitics/2019/04/10/candace-owens-fumes-after-ted-lieu-plays-clip-her-remarks-hitler/3420977002/