Josh Hawley for Attorney General
OPINIONS (Photo: JULZ PETERSEN)

One of our core functions at Citizens United is advocating against increases to the size and scope of the federal government while fighting for our core constitutional principles. We believe — as do our 500,000 members nationwide — that for decades our government has grown so bloated that it’s now flat-out malfunctioning. Instead of doing the few constitutionally mandated things well, our government has taken control over countless matters outside its purview and is handling most of them with unmatched incompetence. Our Founding Fathers warned us about this.

The Obama presidency has only exacerbated the problem. Barack Obama has been dangerously successful not only in allowing government to encroach into more aspects of our daily lives, but also in abusing executive power with little consequence. The First Amendment — both freedom of speech and freedom of religion — are under daily attack from government forces. The Second Amendment and our fundamental right to keep and bear arms have never been so embattled. The Tenth Amendment and our system of federalism are becoming more and more obsolete.

The legislative branch’s refusal to confront President Obama’s executive overreach in any meaningful way has forced states to resort to the judicial branch in a last ditch effort to thwart it. On other occasions, it’s been an activist judiciary that has unilaterally rewritten laws instead of merely interpreting the law. These events have given rise to the importance of electing conservative state attorneys general who are grounded in constitutional principles, federalism and the promise of “We the People.”

That’s why Citizens United, through its political arm Citizens United Political Victory Fund, is supporting Josh Hawley for Attorney General. Hawley and Citizens United have something in common. We’ve both successfully fought government overreach at the U.S. Supreme Court. Citizens United beat back unconstitutional restrictions on free speech in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission and Hawley served as co-counsel in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby fighting against Obamacare’s unconstitutional contraceptive mandate.

That being said, Josh Hawley is acutely aware of the danger of an out of control federal government, an unchecked chief executive and a judiciary becoming far too comfortable with legislating from the bench. Every day, Hawley will be a great advocate for the people of Missouri and the rule of law. When necessary, Hawley will band together with other like-minded state attorneys general to fight for Missouri’s citizens on issues like political targeting abuses at the IRS, job-killing regulations at the EPA, unconstitutional executive orders involving immigration and amnesty and federal overreach on marriage. Hawley is right when he stated, “It was a sad day for federalism and personal liberty when five unelected (Supreme Court) lawyers pronounced millions of voters from across the nation wrong for adhering to a definition of marriage held by humans for millennia.”

Josh Hawley is a principled constitutional conservative and that’s why we are supporting him. He’s a citizen-politician who is running for office because he’s fed up with government abuse and loves his country too much not to do something about it.

David N. Bossie is the President of Citizens United

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1p1drjF