What Matthew Whitaker must do to protect the Justice Department: Alberto Gonzales
While Matthew Whitaker's appointment may be lawful, it is not in the best interests of the Justice Department. He must promise to leave Mueller alone.

Acting Attorney General Matthew Whitaker (Photo: Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images)

President Trump’s appointment of Matt Whitaker as acting attorney general has generated controversy among scholars, members of congress and the public. Now the controversy has moved to the courts. The central question is whether an acting attorney general, with all the power and authority of a Senate-confirmed attorney general, is a principal officer and thus required under our constitution to be an individual presently holding a position with the consent of the Senate.

The attorney general is charged by statute to advise the executive branch on legal matters. That authority has been delegated by the attorney general to the Office of Legal Counsel in the Justice Department, and the legal opinions of the OLC are binding on the executive branch. In my previous government positions I relied upon, and was guided by, OLC opinions. So, I accept the OLC’s judgment that the Whitaker appointment is lawful even though he is not Senate confirmed. I do so with understanding that OLC opinions are sometimes wrong and overruled by the courts.

Whitaker may be legal, but still not good for DOJ

While the appointment may be lawful there are some who believe it is not in the best interests of the Justice Department. For almost two years the department has been under siege with constant and public criticism by the president of both then-Attorney General Jeff Sessions and of the Mueller investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election.

To their credit, DOJ employees have stayed above the drama and distractions. But one has to wonder why the president is willing to add the additional controversy of the Whitaker appointment when there are Senate-confirmed appointees in the line of succession at the Justice Department who are capable of serving as acting attorney general. The interim appointment of Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein (next in the line of succession), for example, certainly would not have generated the type of second guessing, or litigation, as the Whitaker appointment.

More: Whitaker will break public trust and federal law if he controls Mueller investigation

Matthew Whitaker is loyal to Donald Trump. That's refreshing, not disqualifying.

Matthew Whitaker's Supreme Court positions are incoherent, may cause constitutional crisis

At the core of most of the concern over the appointment is Whitaker’s authority to now oversee the Mueller investigation; an investigation that the acting attorney general has openly questioned and criticized. Whitaker’s previous statements would appear to call into question his open-mindedness with respect to this investigation. Justice Department rules regarding recusal from a matter are intended to preserve the integrity of an investigation and to safeguard the reputation of the Justice Department from even the appearance of bias or prejudgment. A prosecutor’s desire to oversee a prosecution — even one who is the acting attorney general — must always give way to the needs of the Department.

As a general matter I recognize the president’s authority to decide who serves in the executive branch. There may be legitimate legal authorities and precedents that I am unaware of which support the Whitaker appointment. Furthermore, the president may be aware of circumstances and hidden talents that make Whitaker uniquely qualified and absolutely necessary for this interim appointment. However, until such information is revealed there are certain public assurances Whitaker could provide that further affirm his commitment to the Justice Department and demonstrate his fidelity to the rule of law.

Whitaker can assure Americans on his interests

►First, Whitaker could confirm that he has consulted with the career ethics professionals in the Justice Department and sought their advice as to whether he should recuse himself from overseeing the Mueller investigation. He could also reveal the recommendation and confirm that he will follow that recommendation, or if not, why not.

►Second, if Whitaker does not recuse himself he could reassure the American people that he will not directly or indirectly stop or interfere in the Mueller investigation in any way that protects or shields the president, or his family, close associates and businesses from present or future criminal liability or embarrassment.

►Third, Whitaker could confirm that during the course of the Mueller investigation he will not directly or indirectly share any law enforcement-sensitive information or findings with the White House or outside parties that implicate the president, his family, close associates or businesses. He could also commit to inform Congress immediately if asked by the White House for information or findings relating to the president, the president’s family, businesses, or close associates that might be embarrassing or relate to possible criminal activity.

Granted, it is not customary for an appointee to a position with prosecutorial discretion, even one serving in an interim capacity, to give such public assurances. But this is not your normal appointment. While these public assurances are unlikely to persuade skeptics that the Whitaker appointment is lawful, they might ease concerns about the president’s motives in choosing Whitaker for this very important position at this particular time.

Alberto R. Gonzales, former U.S. attorney general and counsel to the president in the George W. Bush administration, is the dean and Doyle Rogers Distinguished Professor of Law at Belmont University College of Law. You can follow him on Twitter: @argonzales

You can read diverse opinions from our Board of Contributors and other writers on the Opinion front page, on Twitter @usatodayopinion and in our daily Opinion newsletter. To respond to a column, submit a comment to letters@usatoday.com.

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2018/11/28/acting-attorney-general-matthew-whitaker-mueller-investigation-donald-trump-column/2119736002/