Enforce our laws and secure our borders
CLOSE A 1-year-old undocumented immigrant is required to make a court appearance before being reunited with his family. Buzz60

Illegal immigration is the most significant crisis of our time: Opposing view

Kelli Ward (Photo: Ross D. Franklin, AP)

As a mother and family physician, I understand that no American wants to see children separated from their parents. However, as elected officials, our first priority must be to enforce our immigration laws, secure our borders and protect American families. Because it contributes to violent crime, drug and human trafficking and the opioid epidemic, illegal immigration is the most significant crisis of our time.

Ignoring the facts and spreading faux outrage only distracts us from solving it.

This year, we’ve seen our southern border flooded with more than 50,000 illegal immigrants each month. Since May of last year, we’ve seen a 329 percent increase in unaccompanied children and a 435 percent increase in family units entering the country illegally. As a resident of a border state, I’ve personally seen families destroyed and communities ravaged by illegal immigration.

OUR VIEW: Family separation combines cruelty, incompetence

The only viable solution is border security — and President Donald Trump understands this. For too long, Democrats and Republicans have prioritized the interests of persons here illegally at the expense of American citizens. House Speaker Paul Ryan has proposed legalizing at least 2.2 million immigrants who are here under President Obama’s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program.

But amnesty does nothing to discourage illegal immigration, while leaving American citizens vulnerable to unspeakable crimes. Since 2012, nearly 60,000 previously screened DACA recipients have been arrested while in the United States. Almost 95 percent of foreign-born inmates in American prisons are here illegally.

The establishment’s deafening silence demands a change in leadership. That’s why I’m running for U.S. Senate. That’s why I support President Trump’s border wall, America’s border wall. Only securing the border can deter illegal immigration so we can make America safe again.

Dr. Kelli Ward, a physician and former state senator, is seeking the Republican nomination to run for the U.S. Senate in Arizona.

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2u7v0Uw