Hill Letter on U.S. Mandatory Country-Of-Origin-Labeling (COOL) Rule
October 30, 2014

TO THE MEMBERS OF THE UNITED STATES CONGRESS:

The undersigned stakeholders are gravely concerned about the negative impact that the existing U.S. Mandatory Country of Origin Labeling (COOL) rule for muscle cuts of meat will have on the U.S. economy. On October 20, 2014, a World Trade Organization (WTO) Compliance Panel released a report determining that the rule violates obligations the United States has undertaken as a member of the WTO with regard to our two largest export markets, Canada and Mexico. While there is an opportunity for the United States to appeal this decision, final adjudication should occur early 2015. At that time, if the Compliance Panel’s original findings are found to be valid, both Canada and Mexico could subject an array of U.S. exports to retaliatory tariffs. A finding of non-compliance would surely result in serious economic harm to U.S. firms and farmers that export to our neighbors.

Canada has already issued a preliminary retaliation list targeting a broad spectrum of commodities and manufactured products that will affect every state in the country. Mexico has not yet announced a preliminary retaliation list, but has implemented retaliatory tariffs in the past which may be indicative of future tariff opportunities. It is expected that U.S. industries would suffer billions in lost sales if retaliation is allowed. We invite you to review the state-by-state retaliatory analysis available at www.COOLReform.com

Given the negative impact on the U.S. manufacturing and agriculture economy, we respectfully submit that it would be intolerable for the United States to maintain, even briefly, a rule that has been deemed non-compliant by the WTO. With little potential for quick Congressional action after a WTO final adjudication, we request that Congress immediately authorize and direct the Secretary of Agriculture to rescind elements of COOL that have been determined to be noncompliant with international trade obligations by a final WTO adjudication. Such action by Congress would not undermine COOL to the extent COOL is consistent with international trade obligations nor would it weaken the U.S. defense of COOL in WTO litigation.

Thank you for your attention to this very important matter and for protecting American food production, agriculture and manufacturing from economic harm.

Sincerely,

Abbott

Agri Beef Co.

Altrius Group, LLC

American Bakers Association

American Beverage Association

American Chamber of Commerce of Mexico, A.C.

American Feed Industry Association

American Frozen Food Institute

American Fruit and Vegetable Processors and Growers Coalition

American Meat Institute

American Seed Trade Association

American Soybean Association

American Peanut Product Manufacturers, Inc.

Anheuser-Busch

Animal Health Institute

Appvion

Archer Daniels Midland

Auto Care Association

California Chamber of Commerce

California Cherry Export Association

California Pear Growers Association

California Table Grape Commission

Campbell Soup Company

Cargill, Incorporated

The Coca-Cola Company

ConAgra Foods, Inc.

Consumer Electronics Association

Corn Refiners Association

Dart Container Corporation

Dr Pepper Snapple Group

Emergency Committee for American Trade (ECAT)

Fashion Jewelry and Accessories Trade Association

Food & Consumer Products of Canada

Food Marketing Institute

General Mills

Georgia Food Industry Association

Glanbia USA

Grocery Manufacturers Association

Hawaii Food Industry Association

Herbalife Ltd.

The Hershey Company

Hills & Company

Hilmar Cheese Company Inc.

H.J. Heinz Company

Hormel Foods Corporation

Independent Bakers Association

Information Technology Industry Council (ITI)

Ingredion Incorporated

International Dairy Foods Association

International Franchise Association

International Sleep Products Association

Kellogg Company

Kraft Foods Group, Inc.

The Latino Coalition

Leprino Foods Company

Louisiana Retailers Association

Mars, Incorporated

Metals Service Center Institute

Midwest Food Processors Association

Mondelez Global LLC

National Association of Egg Farmers

National Association of Manufacturers

National Beef Packing Co., LLC

National Cattlemen's Beef Association

National Confectioners Association

National Corn Growers Association

National Council of Farmer Cooperatives

National Foreign Trade Council

National Grain and Feed Association

National Grocers Association

National Oilseed Processors Association

National Pork Producers Council

National Renderers Association

National Retail Federation

Nestlé USA

Nestle Waters North America

North American Equipment Dealers Association

North American Export Grain Association

North American Meat Association

Northwest Food Processors Association

Northwest Horticultural Council

NPES The Association for Suppliers of Printing, Publishing and Converting Technologies

Peanut and Tree Nut Processors Association

Penford Products Co.

Pennsylvania Food Merchants Association

PepsiCo

Pet Food Institute

Produce Marketing Association

Red Gold, Inc.

Remy International, Inc.

Roquette America

Sargento Foods Inc.

The Schwan Food Company

Smithfield Foods

Snack Food Association

Sweetener Users Association

Tate & Lyle Americas

Transportation Intermediaries Association

Tyson Foods, Inc.

Unilever

United Egg Producers

United Producers, Inc.

U.S. Chamber of Commerce

U.S. Premium Beef

United States Council for International Business

USA Rice Federation

The Walter Bagehot Council

WineAmerica

Wine Institute