U.S. Marshals Service Defendants in Custody and Prisoner Management,
Defendants in Custody and Prisoner Management

The U.S. Marshals Service houses and transports all federal prisoners from the time they enter federal custody until they are either acquitted or convicted and delivered to their designated federal Bureau of Prisons facility.

The Marshals Service assumes custody for all prisoners charged with a federal offense, no matter which agency made the arrest.

Detaining federal prisoners is challenging in its diversity and complexity. For example, the Marshals Service is responsible for:

Taking DNA samples of individuals arrested by the Marshals for an FBI database

Managing prisoners with terminal illnesses and contagious diseases

Deciding whether to grant the transfer of prisoners to state or local authorities when ordered through state writs

General Management Issues

Public Defender's Handbook - Provided to assist the attorney when dealing with a fact witness.

- Provided to assist the attorney when dealing with a fact witness. Prisoner Photographs - Guidelines on Publicity and Photography of Federal Prisoners

- Guidelines on Publicity and Photography of Federal Prisoners Prisoner Marriages - Guidelines and Procedures

- Guidelines and Procedures Writs and Special Productions

Bureau of Prisons - This website provides a variety of information including a directory of all federal prisons and community corrections centers, an inmate locator, inmate information and inmate programs/services.

Medical Care

The Marshals Service relies on state and local jails as well as Bureau of Prisons detention facilities to provide medical care inside the facilities. However, the Marshals Service is responsible for providing a secure escort and for paying for care when a prisoner must go to medical facilities in the local community.

Health care standards utilized for prisoners and defendants in custody

Custody and Detention

Individuals who are arrested or detained for violation of federal statutes must be brought before a magistrate or judge for an initial hearing. After the hearing, prisoners may be released or remanded into the custody of the respective U.S. Marshal to stand trial. If convicted at the actual trial, it is the agency's responsibility to deliver the prisoner to an institution to serve the imposed sentence. Read more about detention services and management.

The Marshals Service is dependent upon state or local governments for the provision of detention space and services for federal prisoners. In support of this requirement, agreements are established with local and state governments willing to provide detention space for federal prisoners. Further Guidance on e-IGA procedures

Criteria used to evaluate fixed per diem rates based on actual and allowable costs will be in accordance with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-87, Cost Principles for State, Local, and Indian Tribal Governments. OMB Circular A-87 establishes principles and standards to provide a uniform approach for determining costs and will be strictly adhered to.