Supreme Court Blocks Signature Obama Climate Rule
Exhaust rises from Mitchell Power Station, a coal-fired power plant outside Pittsburgh. Jeff Swensen/Getty Images

The Supreme Court put a temporary halt to the administration's signature climate rule Tuesday, pausing the implementation of the first federal limits on heat-trapping carbon emissions from power plants.

The ruling was 5-4, with the court's conservative justices voting as a bloc to stop the Environmental Protection Agency's Clean Power Plan as lawsuits proceed through federal appeals court.

More than two dozen states, joined by industry groups and some utilities, sued last fall, arguing the EPA exceeded its authority in implementing the regulation. They trumpeted the court's decision Tuesday.



"Make no mistake – this is a great victory for West Virginia," West Virginia Attorney General Patrick Morrisey said in a statement. "We are thrilled that the Supreme Court realized the rule's immediate impact and froze its implementation, protecting workers and saving countless dollars as our fight against its legality continues."

Finalized by the EPA last summer, the rule sets the first federal limits on heat-trapping carbon emissions from existing power plants. The plan aims to reduce carbon emissions from U.S. power plants 32 percent from 2005 levels by 2030. It was also instrumental in bringing other nations – especially heavy polluters like China and India – to agreement on an international accord on climate change in Paris in December.

States did not have to begin complying until 2022, but the rule did require them to submit plans by September for how they'd meet their emissions targets.

The Obama administration, in a statement, said it disagrees with the Supreme Court decision and vowed to press forward – not only in its legal its defense of the Clean Power Plan, but with other climate initiatives, too.



"The Clean Power Plan is based on a strong legal and technical foundation, gives states the time and flexibility they need to develop tailored, cost-effective plans to reduce their emissions, and will deliver better air quality, improved public health, clean energy investment and jobs across the country, and major progress in our efforts to confront the risks posed by climate change," press secretary Josh Earnest said. "We remain confident that we will prevail on the merits."

By applying emissions standards for each state, the Clean Power Plan pushes utilities, policymakers and state politicians to transition from coal to cleaner-burning natural gas and zero-emissions renewables like wind and solar. That's provoked an outcry from fossil fuel companies, as well as states like West Virginia, Kentucky and Wyoming that rely heavily on coal mining and coal-fired electricity generation.

The ruling casts doubt on the future of the Clean Power Plan – any decision by the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals is expected to be appealed to the Supreme Court. Environmental groups still aimed to remain upbeat, arguing a range of states and utilities were already well on their way toward achieving the Clean Power Plan's goals.



More than 30 states are on track to be half way toward achieving their emissions targets in five years, and 21 states will already surpass them, according to the Union of Concerned Scientists, a scientific advocacy group that supports climate action.

"The electricity sector has embarked on an unstoppable shift from its high-pollution, dirty-fueled past to a safer, cleaner-powered future, and the stay cannot reverse that trend," said David Doniger, director of the climate and clean air program at the Natural Resources Defense Council. "Smart industry, financial, and governmental leaders will not count the Clean Power Plan out."