The Latest: Walker Would Call Special Session on Insurance
MADISON, Wis. (AP) — The Latest on the Wisconsin governor's race (all times local):

3:05 p.m.

Gov. Scott Walker's campaign says he would call a special session of the Legislature if necessary to pass a bill guaranteeing health insurance coverage for people with pre-existing conditions.

That guarantee is already provided under the federal health care law Walker wants to see repealed.

But the Republican says he likes that provision and earlier this year called on the state Legislature to enact a protection. The bill did not pass.

Walker spokesman Brian Reisinger says Friday that "if something were to change" and people with pre-existing conditions were no longer covered in Wisconsin, "Walker would call a special session in a heartbeat and get it passed."

Democratic candidate Tony Evers says Walker has no credibility on the issue since he's long been an opponent to the national law that includes the protection.

___

8:10 a.m.

Democratic candidate for governor Tony Evers and Republican Lt. Gov. Rebecca Kleefisch are clashing over health care.

Both Evers and Kleefisch are cancer survivors.

Kleefisch has a new television ad out Friday that says as long as she and Gov. Scott Walker are in office, people with pre-existing conditions will be guaranteed health insurance.

But Evers says Walker has no credibility on the issue because he's been an ardent opponent of the Affordable Care Act, which guarantees coverage for people with pre-existing conditions.

Walker this year called on the Legislature to pass a state law that would provide protections for pre-existing conditions at the same time he was advocating for repeal of the national law known as "Obamacare."

___

8:02 a.m.

Republican Lt. Gov. Rebecca Kleefisch is defending Gov. Scott Walker on health care in a new ad that notes her status as a cancer survivor.

Kleefisch says in the ad released Friday that people in Wisconsin with pre-existing conditions are covered now and will be as long as Walker is in office.

The ad is in response to a TV spot that attacked Walker on health care.

Walker has long supported repealing the federal health care law known as "Obamacare" that provides protection for people with pre-existing conditions. But this year he called on the Legislature to pass a state law to guarantee coverage for people with pre-existing conditions.