After Tax Overhaul, GOP Sets Sights on Medicare, Social Security
House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., is among a handful of GOP lawmakers in recent days to express interest in potentially retooling spending on Medicare and Social Security. J. Scott Applewhite/AP

Republican lawmakers are working through the finer details of a tax overhaul expected to emerge in the coming weeks from a bicameral conference – setting the stage for a final series of votes that could advance a bill to President Donald Trump's desk in time for Christmas.

But some Democrats have warned that the GOP is already telegraphing its next legislative priority: spending cuts to programs like Social Security and Medicare that would partially blunt their tax bill's impact on American debt.

"What's coming next is all too predictable: The deficit hawks will come flying back after this bill becomes law," Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., said on the Senate floor last week. "Republicans are already saying entitlement reform and welfare reform are next up on the docket. But nobody should be fooled – that's just code for attacks on Medicaid, on Medicare, on Social Security, on anti-hunger programs."

There's concern among Democrats that GOP lawmakers could turn around after the expected passage of their tax bill – which by nonpartisan estimates is expected to add more than $1 trillion to America's debt burden over the next 10 years – and demand massive cuts to government spending on social programs they have long opposed in the wake of mounting deficits.

Those fears appear to be well-founded, as a stable of Republicans have come out in recent days advocating for some sort of spending overhaul. House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., told radio host Ross Kaminsky on Wednesday that he and his colleagues will "have to get back next year at entitlement reform, which is how you tackle the debt and the deficit."

Less than a week prior, Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, complained on the Senate floor that he has "a rough time wanting to spend billions and billions and trillions of trillions of dollars to help people who won't help themselves."

Even Trump got in on the action, promising to cheers from an audience attending a tax-focused speech in Missouri last week that Republican lawmakers are "going to go into welfare reform" after he signs their eventual tax bill.

Advocating for a smaller government and reduced expenditures is hardly new to Republican orthodoxy – but the idea of maintaining fiscal responsibility while slashing government revenues through a partisan tax overhaul that's not expected to pay for itself has been attacked by Democrats as hypocritical.

"The story will be that America can't afford these [support] programs. They'll say: 'Just look at the deficit,'" Wyden said. "But the American people have seen this movie before. The first big legislative push after the Bush tax cuts was an all-out assault on Social Security. And the fact that it was stopped back then doesn't mean Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid or any other safety net program will be safe this time around."

Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., broke down what appears to be the GOP's current perspective on the government's budgetary obligations during an event last week hosted by Politico. He theorized that two primary ingredients were required to properly balance a budget.

"You have got to generate economic growth, because growth generates revenue. But you also have to bring spending under control," he said. "If you just do [tax cuts] and you don't do the other piece, you're going to have a debt problem. That's a fact. And we've got to do both."

Passing tax legislation effectively accomplishes the first part of the equation, Rubio said, as he and his colleagues predict their broad corporate and personal tax tweaks will help kick-start economic growth in the coming years.

But independent analysts have argued that the GOP is overestimating the amount of economic growth accompanying their legislation – which means the tax overhaul would not pay for itself, setting up the possibility of even steeper spending cuts down the road to balance the federal budget once a new tax bill is signed into law.

"This is a terrible fiscal situation we've gotten ourselves into. The administration is doing a tax cut and a spending decrease, but he's doing them in the wrong order. What we need right now is a focus only on reducing debt," former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan told CNBC's " Squawk on the Street " Wednesday.

Still, reining in government spending is likely to be as complicated as overhauling the tax code – if not more so, considering what's expected to be sharp pushback from certain special interest groups and funding recipients.

It's unlikely many within the Republicans' ranks would advocate for across-the-board cuts that would, for example, limit military spending, considering the party's 2016 platform committed to "rebuilding the U.S. military into the strongest on earth, with vast superiority over any other nation or group of nations in the world."

Instead, the most likely targets for cuts and restructuring in the coming months are likely to be Medicare and Social Security benefits. Rubio last week indicated "the driver of our debt is the structure of Social Security and Medicare for future beneficiaries."

Ryan issued a similar assessment just a few days later, noting that "health care entitlements … are the big drivers of our debt." He also expressed optimism when asked by Kaminsky specifically if he thinks he's "making a little bit of an impact on [Trump] when you talk to him about the importance of Medicare reform," considering the president has repeatedly vowed to leave untouched programs like Medicare or Medicaid while he's in office.

"I think the president is understanding that choice and competition works everywhere in health care, especially in Medicare," Ryan responded.

So what exactly would these cuts look like?

It's hard to say at this point, though work requirements for initiatives like the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, formerly known as the food stamp program, are likely. Funneling fewer federal dollars to Medicare during budgetary deliberations is also on the table, as a budgetary blueprint that managed to pass both the House and Senate earlier this year carved out room for hundreds of billions of dollars of cuts to Medicare spending.

The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities also notes a "$1.3 trillion [cut] primarily in Medicaid and subsidies to make coverage affordable through the [Affordable Care Act] marketplaces."

"The budget resolution also proposes $653 billion in cuts to income security programs, a large share of which includes basic assistance to struggling families," a group of the center's researchers said in a report released in October. "Roughly one-quarter (or $1 trillion) of these entitlement cuts are unspecified, meaning that cuts in a range of programs would be significantly deeper than the budget resolution portrays."

There's also the possibility that the government raises the retirement age for full Social Security benefits, given that the program's funding is expected to run dry in the years ahead and force recipients to collect a fraction of what they otherwise would have.

Americans are living and working longer in 2017 than they were several decades ago, so some have argued that raising the retirement age would be one way to limit the amount of money the government pays out over time. Republicans have broadly promised they wouldn't touch the benefits of current program recipients or soon-to-be retirees.

But Rubio, who to this point has perhaps discussed the GOP's next step the most candidly, indicated younger Americans are likely to see some changes.