Veterans Choice Program (VCP)

The Veterans Choice Program is one of several programs through which a Veteran can receive care from a community provider, paid for by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). For example, if a Veteran needs an appointment for a specific type of care, and VA cannot provide the care in a timely manner or the nearest VA medical facility is too far away or too difficult to get to, then a Veteran may be eligible for care through the Veterans Choice Program. To use the Veterans Choice Program, Veterans must receive prior authorization from VA to receive care from a provider that is part of VA’s VCP network of community providers. The authorization is based on specific eligibility requirements and discussions with the Veteran’s VA provider. VA must authorize care that is needed beyond the scope of the first authorization.







Eligibility

Veterans may be eligible to receive care through the Veterans Choice Program based on one or more of the following conditions:

VA can’t provide the services the Veteran needs

VA can’t make an appointment for the Veteran at the nearest VA medical facility within 30 days of the clinically indicated date (the date the Veteran and their VA provider agree should be the next date the Veteran is seen for care)—or, if VA can’t determine this date—the date the Veteran prefers to be seen next

Veteran lives more than 40 miles (driving distance) from the nearest VA medical facility with a full-time primary care physician

Veteran has to travel by air, boat, or ferry to get to the nearest VA medical facility

Veteran faces an excessive burden in traveling to the nearest VA medical facility (such as geographic challenges, environmental factors, or a health problem that makes it hard for you to travel)

VA will work with the Veteran to determine eligibility based on the above conditions and the Veteran’s specific circumstances.

News

Health Net Federal Services Contract has Ended — The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) contract with Health Net Federal Services (HNFS) ended on September 30, 2018. HNFS was the third party administrator for the eastern region of the Veterans Choice Program (VCP) and Patient-Centered Community Care (PC3) network. When the contract with HNFS ends, VA will take over all activity previously performed by HNFS. The end of the VA contract with HNFS does not affect the VA contract with TriWest Healthcare Alliance, which administers the western region of the VCP and the PC3 network. VA will work with Veterans, community providers, and VA staff to transition care coordination from HNFS to your local VA medical facility as seamlessly as possible. No immediate action is needed on your part. However, if you are requesting care in the community, please contact your local VA medical facility to coordinate all care after September 30, 2018. If you are unaware of whom you should contact, visit the VA Facility Locator to find your local facility. Please view the annoucement below for more information. Fact Sheet: Community Provider Claim Submission to HFNS – Information for Veterans Facility and Service Locator

Replenishment of Choice Funds Notice — The VA Maintaining Internal Systems and Strengthening Integrated Outside Networks (MISSION) Act of 2018, signed into law by the President on June 6, 2018, appropriated $5.2 billion in mandatory funding for the Veterans Choice Program to continue to provide care to Veterans until the new, consolidated Veterans Community Care Program is operational. (Posted June 19, 2018)

Exhaustion of Choice Funds Notice — The Veterans Choice Program (VCP) will have exhausted all of its funding as early as May 31, 2018, and possibly as late as June 15, 2018, due to the unique nature of health care and the variability in health care costs. Once the funds are exhausted, VA will no longer be able to provide services under VCP. VA is publishing this notice of the exhaustion of funds as required by the Veterans Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014, P.L. 113-146. VA has also published a notice in the Federal Register regarding the exhaustion of the VCP’s funds. (Posted May 11, 2018)



Federal Register Notice Doc. 2018-10058