Dancing Queen Goes Behind the Mask of Drag Superstar Alyssa Edwards
Justin Dwayne Lee Johnson has two lives. In one, he is Alyssa Edwards, famed drag queen and fan-favorite contestant on RuPaul’s Drag Race. In another, he is the owner of Beyond Belief Dance Company—the subject of Netflix’s Dancing Queen, out Friday. The show dives into the drama of the dance world, replete with helicopter moms and impressively skilled young performers who get teary-eyed at the slightest critique. Thankfully for Johnson, navigating parallel identities keeps him too busy to get bogged down in all that.

“I think too it’s easier for me, because I have a whole other life,” Johnson said in an interview. “I do my shows and my touring, and I kind of go home. Alyssa stays up in her room, and I put on my dance-teacher hat. So I don’t really have the time or the energy [to deal with drama].”

The show does find ways to merge Johnson’s two personalities: in a scene that finds him playing mediator with a roomful of stage moms, for example, commentary from Alyssa stops the action every now and then. Johnson refers to his drag persona as the “fairy godmother,” popping in once in a while to sprinkle her fairy dust on the show.

Generally speaking, though, Dancing Queen is not about Alyssa and her pageant-queen drag style. “We’ve all gotten to know Alyssa—this is now taking you into the life of the man behind the mask,” Johnson said. “Under the dress, and behind the door of my home and the walls of the studio. My family life.”

The first two episodes tell viewers more about Johnson than they’ve learned in the 17 years he’s been performing as Alyssa. On-camera, Johnson officiates a wedding of two close friends (in full Alyssa drag) and signs the papers to buy the first home he’s ever owned. He also visits his small childhood home in Mesquite, Texas, a solemn sequence in which he reflects on his time there with his mother, who died a few years ago. In an especially poignant moment, he points out the front porch where his mother first told him she knew he was gay.

Homosexuality can still be a touchy topic in Texas, particularly outside the liberal oasis of Austin. Johnson worried that some of his dance students’ parents would not like their children being taught by a gay man who does drag—something they were unaware of until Drag Race’s season 5 promos were released in 2013. But their reaction ended up surprising him.

“I got an e-mail from one of the dads that said, ‘You know, Justin, I’m very thankful and grateful that my daughters are studying underneath someone that is so talented and so creative and innovative,’” he said. “Everybody was really gracious, and they were kind and they were open.”

The Beyond Belief crew even joined Johnson in the Dallas Pride Parade this past summer, and showed up for brunch at his house before the event. His dancers walked with Alyssa in the parade, wearing Dancing Queen shirts to promote the new show.

Even still, some of the youngest dancers—or “minis,” as they are called at Beyond Belief—don’t totally understand that their dance teacher is famous. Johnson said that he makes a point of being part of these girls’ lives, going to dinner with their families and attending their school functions. When Alyssa fans come up to him at dance competitions, though, the girls are confused.

“Even the 8, 9, and 10-year-olds are like, ‘Mr. Justin, why do they want to take pictures with you?’” he said. “I’m like, ‘Because they think I’m a crazy, fun guy.’ And they’re like, ‘Oh, O.K.’”