Demi Moore on Why the Arts Are More Valuable than Ever After the Election
Donald Trump’s presidential victory has been met with both protests and rejoicing, proving, to many observers, just how divided the American people are. At a screening of director David O. Russell’s short film Past Forward, which he helmed for Prada, in Los Angeles on Tuesday evening, several attendees expressed the sentiment that fashion and the arts will be more important than ever in helping heal a divided America after an ugly election.

“We are living in a really uncertain time, and sometimes when we are being faced with too much negative reality, we need a little bit of a break,” Demi Moore told Vanity Fair. “I really believe the arts can bring people together, and it has the power to affect change. With so much uncertainty, fashion and films and art offer beauty and hope.”

American Horror Story’s Sarah Paulson strongly believes that the arts offer a perspective on individuality that leads to finding shared experiences and common ground.

“I certainly think fashion is an incredible opportunity to express yourself, and certainly, now more than ever, we’ve realized that we are more divided than we ever knew,” Paulson acknowledged to Vanity Fair moments before the screening. “The only solace that we can find sometimes is our individuality, and then sometimes that brings us together with other people with their individual take on dressing, eating, movie watching, book reading, all of it. So I think in times likes this, it can be an interesting respite.”

Actress Connie Britton is hopeful that the United States can be united once again.

“The next four years and right now, we are going to completely rely on the arts to tell our stories and to be really revolutionary,” she said. “Unfortunately, I think it’s going to be necessary. Through the arts, people have freedom to make change, and that’s empowering. So now more than ever we need to support each other, love each other, and keep our values clear. I’m really hopeful.”

Besides talking about politics, Britton celebrated by joining castmates Allison Williams, Freida Pinto, and Sacha Baron Cohen, and guests including Jamie Bell, Kate Mara, Christoph Waltz, and Mandy Moore to toast designer Miuccia Prada and Russell on their collaboration at downtown L.A.’s sprawling Hauser Wirth & Schimmel Gallery. The black-and-white, silent short film—an Alfred Hitchcock–like thriller with the cast replaying scenes in three shifting combinations—was screened for the first time in its entirety. Pieces of Past Forward were used in Prada’s runway show during the label’s Spring/Summer 2017 collection presentation in Milan last September.

For Demi Moore, the Past Forward screening party was a fun night to honor and support others in an industry that she highly regards: fashion. Long considered a style icon, Moore said she gets her flair for fashion from being comfortable in her own skin. But she admits she’s had a few fashion misses over the years.

“Style comes as an evolution of comfort in one self, but I’ve had many of those ‘What was I thinking?’ moments,” she said with a laugh. “I can look back at my closet from many moments in the 80s and the early 90s and wonder, What I was thinking?”

Moore’s favorite dress is a sexy, low-cut, sheer emerald silk ruffle dress that she showed off at the Charlie’s Angels: Full Throttle premiere in 2003 with her former husband, Ashton Kutcher.

“I do have a lot of favorites, but one in particular was a Tom Ford for Yves Saint Laurent that I wore to a premiere in New York,” she revealed. “I still have it in my closet.”