Kurt Russell and Goldie Hawn’s “Bizarre” First Date Involved the Police
In a town where five-year marriages constitute long-term relationships, Kurt Russell and Goldie Hawn comfortably reign as one of Hollywood’s longest-lasting couples. In the 34 years since they connected romantically while filming Jonathan Demme’s war drama Swing Shift, the actors have refrained from going into details about the beginning of their relationship. But on Friday, while promoting The Fate of the Furious, Russell seemed to have a change of heart—opening up about his somewhat scandalous first date with Hawn.

Russell had been cast in Swing Shift as a musician who charms Hawn’s character. To prepare for their roles, Russell and Hawn hatched a plan to go out dancing.

“She said, ‘We should go somewhere and dance to that kind of swing music [that will be in the movie],” Russell explained on Harry Connick Jr.’s talk show Harry. “I said, ‘I’ll find that.’ The Playboy Club was the only place that had that. So we went to the Playboy Club, and I just immediately was having a great time with this girl, Goldie.”

Afterward, the pair agreed that “the night wasn’t over yet” and changed locations—to a home that Hawn had recently purchased to renovate. The actress did not have her key, though, so the actors were left to their own devices to get inside—by breaking in.

“We eventually found our way upstairs, looking around at imaginary furniture, and we were in the imaginary bedroom, now, and we are realistically having sex,” Russell continued, laughing. But the two were interrupted—by police, who had heard about the break-in.

The two didn’t let the interruption deter them, though—Russell revealed that, although the incident was “bizarre” and “weird,” the actors just continued by getting a hotel room.

“That was our first date,” Russell said. “It was a lot of fun, I’ll tell you what. I can’t believe it was a long time ago.”

Two years ago, Hawn opened up about her and Russell’s decision not to get married.

“I would have been long divorced if I’d been married,” Hawn told Loose. “Marriage is an interesting psychological thing. If you need to feel bound to someone, then it's important to be married. If you have independence, if you have enough money and sense of independence and you like your independence, there’s something psychological about not being married because it gives you the freedom to make decisions one way or the other.

“For me, I chose to stay,” Hawn continued. “Kurt chose to stay, and we like the choice.”

Next month, both Russell and Hawn return to the screen—for him, with Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2, and, for her, Snatched.