Catching up with Robert Redford at Sundance, Talking Barbra, the 70s, and the Future of Indie Film
Amid the frenzy, flurries, and fun of the 32nd annual Sundance Film Festival, I had the opportunity to chat with Mr. Sundance himself, Robert Redford, admittedly my artistic icon. The Academy Award–winning actor, director, and producer opened up about change, Netflix, Babs, and The Revenant.

Krista Smith: I’ve been coming here for two decades and I’ve seen so many great films at Sundance—Welcome to the Dollhouse is celebrating its 20th anniversary this year too. Every year it’s the same flood of new faces and new ideas—it’s amazing.

Robert Redford: And remember, Sex, Lies, and Videotape.

It still holds up. With all the changes that have happened here at Sundance, the very heart of it is still exactly the same—which is incredible 36 years later.

It is when you consider nothing these days really stays the same. Very little does. That’s been our challenge here. It started in ’85 and there was no support at all. There was one theater, The Egyptian. Maybe three restaurants in town. I wasn’t sure it was going to work. It looked like a risk, it wouldn’t pay off. Just a few people came, maybe a hundred people wandered around wondering what was going on in this theater, and we had maybe 25 films, six documentaries, and that’s how it started. So for three years we really struggled. Until Sex, Lies came through. Then suddenly word got out that something’s going on over here.

Well, that movie and this festival changed the business.

Once it started to catch on, I realized that audiences were coming because they were going to see something they couldn’t see in the marketplace. Suddenly, we had a two-way street opportunity. Once globalization came in in the early 90s, we went to bring films from other countries, and the filmmakers. Suddenly we were international. I didn’t anticipate any of this stuff. What I also didn’t anticipate was that it would grow to the point where it would almost start to choke itself, which is kind of where we’re at now because Park City’s developed. There are now 12,000 submissions.

There are more submissions every year . . .

The selection committee has to start looking in late June, early July. It’s very gratifying. I just hadn’t anticipated it would be that much. The question is, how long can you keep doing this? What changes are you going to have to make in order to maintain the integrity of your original idea? That to me is going to be the challenge. How do you maintain the integrity of something you want to be independent, and you want to be diverse without seeming like you were attacking the mainstream. That was the other thing I had to live with, I was accused of attacking the mainstream. I said, “No, we’re too small. You have the mainstream, that’s fine, I’ve been part of that. I’m not against it. If we put independent filmmaking up, it’s not meant to destroy it. It’s meant to add on.” And that got misinterpreted.

Oscar-nominated films like Whiplash came out of here, Little Miss Sunshine, Brooklyn . . . every year there’s a film.

How about Liz Garbus with [best-documentary Oscar nominee] What Happened, Miss Simone?

Right, I just interviewed her yesterday with Anderson Cooper for their documentary about his mother, Gloria Vanderbilt, Nothing Left Unsaid.

I opened the film last night for their documentary. Liz grew up in my apartment in New York.

Did she really? How is that?

She did because her father, Marty Garbus, is my lawyer. When I was a young, struggling actor in New York, raising a family, starting a career, he became my lawyer. His daughter would be at our apartment. Marty would come over and we’d run old movies, like Singin’ in the Rain, and he’d bring his daughter. She was just this kid wandering around, you know? When she grew up and became a filmmaker, it was wonderful. Now I can bring her to Sundance and premiere her first film, so we premiered every one of her films.

Courtesy of Fox Searchlight.

Speaking of old movies, my kids were watching Captain America: The Winter Soldier and my son, who’s eight, shouts, “Mommy, that’s Robert Redford!” Of course he knows who you are because I made him watch Jeremiah Johnson. And I have to say, even seeing The Revenant, which is a great film . . .

You can see the trace of Jeremiah Johnson.

Absolutely. I still think Jeremiah Johnson is incredible. And completely holds up. I loved The Revenant, I think it’s fantastic, but I still love that Jeremiah Johnson.

I haven’t seen The Revenant, but I’m sure it was great because it has a lot of talent involved. For Jeremiah Johnson, nobody wanted to make that film. I went to Sydney Pollack, and I said, “Sydney, I live in the mountains, and I would like to make a film about a person that had to exist in the mountains and survive in the mountains.” So we had this script by John Milius and we decided to take it on. I brought him up to Sundance—I had property there at that time—I said, “I’d like to film it here, because it’s an all-natural environment, you’ve got the mountains . . . ”

You’ve got the snow . . .

Yeah. Anyway, to make a long story short, we got involved, we got a script that Sydney and I revamped to make it more of an original script. This film should have a lot of silence in it. It shouldn’t be a very talky script, because who was there to talk to? Should be a little crazy, because I think they were crazy. We got ahold of this book about Jeremiah Johnson, it’s called Liver-Eating Johnson, because he ate livers. And that was true. A lot of the story was true. Anyway, we made the film. Very proud of it. We made it for $3 million. The studio said, “We don’t think we can make it for under five.” We said, “We think we can.” They didn’t want to do it. They said, “We don’t think we can sell it with you in the beard and the traps and all, we don’t think we can sell that.” It was a real hard film to make, but it was good to make. When it was over, we were both proud of it. Really, really proud of it. It had been very physical, and we had gone through the various seasons, and been in the snow. When I was over there, the studio came and said, ”Hey, we really like this film. It’s different.” We were thinking, “Well, great.” And they said, “Well, that’s our problem.” We said, “What do you mean?” They said, “We don’t know how to sell it. We don’t know how to market it.” I said, “Well, can’t you market it as something different?” “No, you don’t understand the business.” Three and a half years it sat on the shelf without being released.

What finally happened?

Finally we just had to force it and they agreed. But they started at little theaters way off the beaten track. Those theaters began to draw in people that they weren’t expecting. Once they realized there was a seed or something there . . . but it was ’74 or ’75. We made it in 1970. It was 1974 before it ever really reached the marketplace.

Well it still holds up. I don’t know if you’ve seen it recently.

I haven’t.

I hear that you’re re-uniting with Jane Fonda. I asked her once if there’s one person she would want to work with again, and she named you.

Our career spans a long period of time. The first film we did together was 1965, it was The Chase, which Arthur Penn directed, Marlon Brando and a big cast of people. That’s where she and I first interacted. We got along extremely well. Wonderful connection. The next thing we did was Barefoot in the Park, and that was 1967. She went away to become a renegade. Went to Paris and decided America was full of shit. When she came back to America, we did The Electric Horseman. There were three films covering 1965, 1967, and 1979, and now here we are. Basically we’re aging in front of the audience, you know. I thought that was O.K. The story is a lovely story, it’s called Our Souls in the Night. It’s about two people. Two neighbors who were married and had families in a small town in Colorado where people don’t leave, and there it has that tight community. They live a few blocks from each other, sort of knew each other, but not really. The husband and wife die, so they’re living alone separately and she walks up to his door and knocks on the door and she says, “Listen, this is going to sound weird, but would you like to come sleep with me and just talk? Just come lie with me at night, just for comfort so I have someone to talk to in the dark.” He says, “Well let me think about it. Can I get back to you on that?” So that’s what happens. They cuddle together, and they lie together, and they talk. It’s a beautiful story. That’s what we’re going to do.

Are you thinking of directing again?

Not that.

Something else?

What I would like to do is a thriller. I’ve been wanting to do that for a long time, but one that was not at all dependent on special effects. Just purely psychological, but will scare the hell out of you. That’s what I would like to do. I have not found it yet.

I was watching The Way We Were recently with my nieces. They were bawling, and I thought, Isn’t it amazing so many of your films hold up, like The Candidate, Three Days of the Condor, Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid? Anyway, that narrative, that kind of story of wanting something so badly but yet not being able to make that work. It was kind of a beautiful thing to see.

I loved making that film. I loved working with Barbra. Everybody warned me, “Oh, Streisand, she’s a pain in the ass.” I said, “Well, I’m not going to judge her before, but I think she’s talented.” I met her and I liked her. Once we finished working together I really liked her. She was a joy to work with. When you’re making a movie, you don’t think about the outcome. That’s something I’m grateful for, whenever I go and do a new project, I never think about the outcome. It’s always just about the work at hand. That’s the fun part. The other part is always something I’ve had a struggle with, which is promoting the film. I know it’s important. For me, it can never match the fun of the work itself.

Do you have a favorite decade, artistically?

The 70s. I think that was a wonderful time. That was a time when the mainstream allowed independent films to be made under their banner. You had it all together. There’s experimenting with new things like Hair, all kinds of new stuff was going on. There was a change going on. The 60s had kicked into gear. The 60s had started something that finally landed in the 70s. I was part of that. . . .That was my growth period. For me, it was really an exciting time.

I was recently talking to Spike Lee, and he is a professor at N.Y.U. and he said he was definitely inspired by the kids coming through. Do you get inspiration from the generations coming through Sundance?

Absolutely. You just hit on the part I love the most. Nothing’s more enjoyable to me than having created something you hope would create opportunities for other people to keep something alive. When the mainstream starts to tighten up and put its forks into what it thinks is going to make money, things get narrowed down, and you miss some of the more experimental films. For me, when people come into that new category—actors, directors, whoever—and something hits, I can’t tell you how thrilling that is. When I see someone like Ryan Coogler with Fruitvale Station. . . .That was developed in our lab. It went through three, four different directions with the script. It was hard work. To see that, to see documentaries come through, to see Liz Garbus come through, to see these people grow and achieve, to me that’s thrilling. That’s my reward, it really is.

This year it’s The Birth of a Nation, directed by, written by, and starring Nate Parker. That’s another project that came through the lab.[The film sold to Fox Searchlight at the festival for a record $17.5 million]

The lab has been, maybe, the best of all of it. The festival is great, it went way beyond my expectations, but the festival is about showcasing work. The lab is the heart and soul of Sundance. That’s where things get developed. That’s where new people come in that wouldn’t have a chance. Then we work with them. Then we bring my colleagues in, the screenwriters, actors, directors. From Oliver Stone to George Roy Hill [director of Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid and The Sting]—who’s not with us anymore—those people come and contribute. Then you have screenwriters that come. Started with Frank Pierson, Ring Lardner Jr., but now they’re all gone. They came because they were willing to give up their time to help somebody new. That development allowed these filmmakers to come through a process. Why don’t we make this like breaking film into pieces on an assembly line? What do you have first? The story, the script. You get actors, you call colleagues of yours to come up and be a part of this. New actors. Then you go to cinematographers. Then you go to staging. Then they come up and say, “O.K., we’ll help film.” Then you go and bring editors up and then you screen it, and you say, Well that was a bunch of shit. Let’s try it all again. Go back and do it all over again.

That’s great.

That process of refinement is what’s exciting. To me, there’s nothing more exciting than our lab.

Thank you for talking with me.

Always.

I always enjoy catching up. I couldn’t resist checking in with you.

I’m so glad you did.