Kamala Harris Is Dreaming Big
IT’S A COLD JANUARY NIGHT in D.C., and I’m at the Hart Senate Office Building, trailing U.S. Senator Kamala Harris into a conference room. Inside, a group of young Latino congressional staffers has gathered to meet the Democratic star from California. When she enters, flanked by aides, and dressed in a navy suit, matching ruffled blouse, black pearls, and stilettos that give her petite five-feet-four frame a few extra inches of height, the staffers immediately rise from their chairs.

Harris has an air of celebrity that, under normal circumstances, a freshman senator wouldn’t have had time to acquire. But this year has been anything but normal. She greets the 20-somethings as though they’re relatives at a family reunion: “Hi, everybody! Hi, guys!” Then she notices that one of the staffers is still seated, and her voice drops a full octave: “Stand up, man!”

The startled staffer springs to his feet. “Kevin,” he says, extending a hand.

“What’s your last name?” demands Harris.

“Figueroa.”

“Thank you!” She shakes his hand. “Kamala Harris.” (That’s pronounced “comma-la,” by the way, and you’d better get it right.)

Harris is a courtroom litigator. This means that, although she is warm and funny, she is also comfortable with confrontation—at home with it, even—and a casual conversation can become a rapid-fire deposition without warning. But exchanges like this one are also tutorials. In Figueroa’s case: Here is how you greet an elected official. He’s going to need to know this, you see, if he runs for office, or applies to law school, or makes any of the life choices Harris expects of him.

She settles into a chair and tells the group—they are all policy fellows with the Congressional Hispanic Caucus Institute—that, in her sophomore year of college at Howard University, she worked as an intern for the senior senator from California at the time, Alan Cranston. “So you’re looking at your future,” Harris says. “He was succeeded by Barbara Boxer, and I succeeded Barbara Boxer. So you neva know!”

Tonight is the State of the Union. In two hours, at the Capitol Building, President Trump will address the fate of DACA—the legal protections that the Obama administration granted to some 700,000 undocumented immigrants, and which Trump rescinded in September. Harris reads the room. “You guys are living in a pivotal moment in the history of our country, and you’re witnessing something we’ve never seen before.” The group nods solemnly. Harris says she’s resolved to leave anger behind. “At the end of the year, I thought back to 2017, and I was like, ‘Bye, Felisha.’ ” The Friday reference draws big laughs. “This year, I’m just gonna be a joyful warrior.”

Harris calls on the staffers to say what they’re working on. It’s a heavy list: deported veterans, bail reform, Puerto Rico relief, affordable housing. One staffer from Arizona reports that she is investigating the dangers posed to pregnant women in immigration detention centers. “Arpaio—is he running?” Harris asks, referring to Joe Arpaio, the former sheriff of Maricopa County known for vigilante-style roundups. Yes, the staffer responds, Arpaio has announced his campaign for Senate. “Another reason to be a joyful warrior!” Harris exclaims.

The meeting ends. Before Harris heads to the Capitol, she must first stop by her office to welcome the date she’s bringing along, a DACA recipient named Denea Joseph, who emigrated from Belize at the age of seven and grew up in South Los Angeles. (She cofounded a Facebook group called “Slay, Kamala, Slay.”) At Harris’s office, Joseph is waiting on a beige couch, wearing a graphic-print blouse, black slacks, and heels. Harris settles down next to her while an aide runs through Joseph’s lineup of media interviews. “It’s about you, but it’s not about you,” Harris says to calm her nerves. “Think of all the people who are counting on you to deliver your message.” Before they leave, Joseph asks to take a selfie with the senator. I pretend not to be listening as Joseph, fumbling with her phone, tells Harris: “You’re my Beyoncé.”

HARRIS’S POLITICAL CAREER—seven years as district attorney in San Francisco and then another six as attorney general of California—amounts to an extraordinary run of firsts. She was the first woman and the first person of color to be elected to both positions, and she is now America’s first Indian-American senator and California’s first black senator. In 2012, Harris spoke in prime time at the Democratic National Convention. More Americans learned her name the following year, when President Obama apologized for saying Harris was not only “brilliant,” “dedicated,” and “tough,” but that she “also happens to be, by far, the best-looking attorney general in the country.”

And yet in the seventeen months since Donald Trump was elected president, Harris has been propelled into an altogether different stratum of political celebrity—one that raises certain questions about her future. (Questions she is well practiced at deflecting. “I honestly am focused on 2018,” she tells me when I ask her for her thoughts about a presidential run. But you haven’t ruled it out, I say. “I’m not focused on it,” she repeats.) It’s not just that she’s outspoken on social media, which she is, or that she holds an all too rare demographic appeal, which she does. Rather, Harris has become a force due to her authority on the very issues Trump warps for his own gain: crime and immigration. A robust body of research has established that immigrants are less likely than native-born citizens to commit crimes, including violent ones. As the state’s former top cop, Harris knows this better than anyone. From the moment President Trump delivered his inaugural address, linking immigration to crime in a macabre vision of “American carnage,” Harris was—to put it bluntly—uniquely poised to call bullshit. “It’s fearmongering,” she tells me. “Let’s be realistic. It’s easier to sow hate and division than it is to offer people a meaningful, sustaining solution.”

Harris says that she feels a particular duty to protect DACA recipients. “The DACA population was given something that this president arbitrarily took away,” she says. “September 5, he decided to rescind DACA. Arbitrarily put in the date of March 5 if it’s not done.” She begins to speak in a methodically persuasive manner, eyebrows raised and eyes locked on mine, that I can only assume she developed while delivering closing arguments to a jury. “This is a population of people we’re not talking about giving some new right to,” she says. “They had to qualify for their status. They didn’t just say ‘I want it’ and they got it. They had to be vetted.” Harris pauses. “They come to my office every day panicked. These DACA kids don’t know what tomorrow will bring, except that it will require them to leave the only place they’ve ever known to go somewhere they have no recollection of ever being.”

Plenty of national politicians wax poetic about Dreamers. Few can defend them with Harris’s command. “She’s the strongest ally we have in the fight,” says Eric Garcetti, the two-term mayor of Los Angeles, the city with the most Dreamers in it. At the same time, Harris has signaled that she won’t support a fix that comes with hard-line anti-immigration measures. For months, she has been pushing for a “clean” Dream Act—legislation that would offer DACA beneficiaries a path to citizenship, but would do so without being tied to other policies, in particular funding for Trump’s border wall.

This stance has been applauded by some progressives and immigrant rights groups. It’s unclear how it’s going over with her colleagues. In February, when Harris voted against a bipartisan compromise bill that would have put Dreamers on a path toward citizenship and provided $25 billion for Trump’s border wall, her “no” drew audible gasps on the Senate floor. (Some news outlets pointed out that Harris withheld her vote until it was clear that the bill wouldn’t pass.)

“There is clear bipartisan support to protect Dreamers from deportation, but this White House has repeatedly stood in the way,” Harris says in an email. “Let’s not forget, the White House created this crisis when they callously ended DACA and it has worked at every turn to sabotage Congress’s efforts to resolve it.”

HARRIS WAS BORN to two Berkeley graduate students in the fall of 1964. Both were immigrants—her mother, Shyamala Gopalan Harris, a nutrition and endocrinology student from southern India, and her father, Donald Harris, an economics scholar from Jamaica—and they met “in the movement,” says Harris; they often took Kamala and her younger sister, Maya, to civil rights marches. They divorced when Kamala was seven, and though the sisters made regular visits to Palo Alto, where Donald lived as a Stanford professor, it was Shyamala who became the guiding force in Harris’s life.

Shyamala set “incredibly high expectations,” Maya says. The Harris girls sang in an Oakland church choir, mastered Indian cooking, and cleaned test tubes in their mother’s lab. They were allowed to watch cartoons only if they simultaneously did something productive, like needlepoint or knitting. “I have no idea how many blankets Kamala must have crocheted,” Maya tells me. “She was the mad crocheter.” Harris describes her mother, who died in 2009, as “a force of nature—all five feet of her,” she says. “She had a code.” I glimpse some of the same intensity in Harris when I ask if her urge to protect the vulnerable comes from being raised by a single mom. “I don’t play a violin about my childhood,” she says firmly.

The sisters traveled regularly to Jamaica and India, and Harris can recall sitting on the porch of her grandmother’s house in Jamaica for hours, chewing on sugarcane and listening to her father and uncles talk politics. In India, the girls stayed in Chennai with their grandfather, a government diplomat, and their grandmother, who in the 1940s was known for driving through small Indian villages in a Volkswagen Bug, brandishing a bullhorn, and informing women about how to get birth control. “She was the purest form of the Harris women,” Harris says. “We’re all diluted versions of my grandmother.” Right after Harris was first elected district attorney, she traveled to India and found that her grandmother had organized a party and press conference. One by one, people came to pay homage. “It was like a scene out of The Godfather,” Harris says with a laugh.

In 1982 Kamala enrolled at Howard University, where she ran for student council, pledged a sorority, and served as chair of the economics society. This was the Reagan era, and the war on drugs and anti-apartheid movement dominated campus politics. Her college friend Sonya Lockett describes their Howard years as formative. “You saw these false narratives being shaped around poor people, African-Americans, drug users,” Lockett says. “It did affect you.” Lockett remembers Harris as a charismatic member of the debate team—with a fun side. One day, they were sitting on the campus yard with other students. “Parliament-Funkadelic came on. All of a sudden she jumps up and just starts dancing,” Lockett says. “Nothing we had to say mattered. It was just like: ‘I’m sorry, Parliament’s on. Why are we talking?’ ”

Harris settled in Oakland as a prosecutor, and later joined the San Francisco D.A.’s office. By the time she decided to run for district attorney, she had a reputation for fearlessness. Entering the race meant running against her former boss, Terence Hallinan. It also meant weathering press scrutiny over a public relationship she’d had with San Francisco’s mayor, Willie Brown, a decade earlier, when he was California Assembly Speaker. (Brown was married.) Harris rebuffed questions about Brown with typical forcefulness. “I refuse to design my campaign around criticizing Willie Brown,” she told a local reporter. “I have no doubt that I am independent of him—and that he would probably right now express some fright about the fact that he cannot control me.” Harris won.

As D.A., Harris quickly drew criticism for not pursuing the death penalty on a case involving the shooting of a police officer. (Senator Dianne Feinstein criticized her decision at the officer’s funeral.) She became better known for her rehabilitation program for low-level offenders, Back on Track, even as she pushed for harsher sentencing for other crimes, such as gun possession. (She has been a long-standing advocate for what she calls “smart” gun-safety laws—including an assault weapons ban and tightening background checks.) Gregory Barge, an attorney who worked for her in San Francisco, remembers the dressing-down he received for failing to pursue a stiff sentence in one such gun case. “She got about four inches from my nose and said, ‘We talked about this before. Do we have to talk about it again?’ I was taken to the woodshed real fast,” Barge says. “She has a strong moral compass. It’s not B.S.” Harris won reelection in 2007. Three years later, despite a scandal on her watch at the San Francisco crime lab involving a technician found to have been stealing drug evidence, which led to some 700 cases getting dismissed, she narrowly won her race for attorney general.

When Harris attracts criticism now, it is usually from people who say that she did not do enough to reform the criminal justice system as attorney general. She has been faulted for not taking a stronger stance on efforts to reduce California’s prison population and for not doing more about prosecutorial misconduct. Her supporters point to her work after the financial crisis. Under political pressure from homeowners to accept a $4 billion settlement from the country’s five largest mortgage servicers, Harris refused. Californians eventually got $20 billion instead. “It’s not just about how much money was in the settlement,” says Senator Elizabeth Warren. “It’s how aggressively Kamala and her team stayed after the banks to make sure they followed through.”

Halfway through her tenure as attorney general, Harris was set up on a blind date with Douglas Emhoff, a prominent entertainment and intellectual-property lawyer in Los Angeles. They married the following year (Maya officiated), and Harris moved in with Emhoff in Brentwood. Harris grew close with his two children, who call her their “S-Mamala.” (The elder, Cole, graduated Colorado College last May and is working as an assistant at William Morris Endeavor. The younger, Ella, is a freshman at Parsons School of Design.) When they weren’t working, Emhoff played golf and maintained his fantasy football team, named Nirvana (yes, after the band), and Harris planned elaborate meals to cook for the extended family on weekends, which she still does. “She spends days thinking about the menu, grinding her own pepper, driving all over town just to find that one ingredient that we need,” Emhoff says. “I’ve gotten pretty handy in the kitchen as her sous-chef.”

When a Senate seat opened up in California for the first time in nearly a quarter of a century, Harris decided to run. The election-night party should have been doubly sweet: Maya had spent two years working as a senior campaign adviser for Hillary Clinton, and was texting with her sister from the Javits Center. Harris won 54 out of 58 counties, but scrapped her prepared speech when the national electoral map turned red. From the stage in L.A. she spoke off the cuff: “When our ideals and fundamental values are being attacked, do we retreat or do we fight? I say we fight.” Later that night, Harris says, at home in Brentwood, she turned to her “go-to stress food,” a jumbo bag of Nacho Cheese Doritos: “I sat on our couch. I didn’t share one chip with anyone. I was just like: This. Can’t. Be. Happening.”

IT IS EASY NOW to forget how fast things did happen. “The Muslim ban came down in January and my phone started burning up,” Harris remembers. “Lawyers calling me from the airports saying, ‘Come. We’re here.’ Lawyers I know saying, ‘We’re at the airport and they will not let us talk to the families.’ ” That night Harris phoned then–Secretary of Homeland Security John Kelly. “His first response was, ‘Why are you calling me at home with this?’ ” Harris says, pausing to register her disbelief. And so it went for months. “In reflection, it was just rapid-fire, and almost everything was unpredictable. There was no preparing for it in any way, strategically or mentally or emotionally.”

Harris’s first piece of legislation was aimed at guaranteeing access to legal counsel for anyone detained entering the U.S. Later, she cosponsored with Senator Bernie Sanders the Medicare for All bill—but she’s teamed up with Republicans as well, notably Senator Rand Paul on a bipartisan bill to reform the cash bail system. She also joined Kirsten Gillibrand in calling for Senator Al Franken to resign amid allegations of sexual misconduct. “Listen, I was reluctant,” Harris says now about that decision. “I felt a bit conflicted about it. But ultimately I think the issue is something that has to be addressed wherever it occurs.” Harris rejects the notion that the #MeToo movement is merely a women’s issue. In fact, she questions what that category even means: “People come up to me, ‘Oh, what’s it like being the first woman blah blah blah.’ And I’m like, ‘I don’t know what to tell you. I’ve always been a woman.’ Or even at the Women’s March. People come up to me, ‘Oh, talk to us about women’s issues.’ And I look at them and I’m like, ‘You know what? I’m so glad you want to talk about the economy.’ ”

Without question, it has been her role in the Senate Intelligence Committee hearings that has brought Harris the most attention. In June, Harris pummeled Attorney General Jeff Sessions with questions about his contacts with Russians during the Trump campaign. “I’m not able to be rushed this fast,” he complained. “It makes me nervous.” When she didn’t let up, Senators John McCain and Richard Burr interrupted and admonished Harris. At the time she thought nothing of it. “I was just looking at the clock like, ‘I only have so many more minutes to keep asking these questions,’ ” she says.

Others saw the moment differently. “Boo-hoo,” says Senator Warren of Sessions’s “nervous” comment. “This was a tough woman doing her job. Period.” The exchange also resonated with Gillibrand. “They were trying to silence her the way that President Trump tried to silence me in his nasty tweets,” Gillibrand says. “That was an effort by the committee chairman to keep her quiet because her questioning was so good and so effective.”

Later, Harris watched the video clips and understood the furor they caused. “I certainly saw how it appeared, and completely appreciated how everyone responded,” she says. When I ask Emhoff about the Sessions hearing, he jokes: “Welcome to Tuesday night at my house.”

IT’S AN INDICATION of how dysfunctional Washington has become that not one but two of my interviews with Harris have to be moved at the last minute because of government shutdowns. I catch up with her again on a bright Sunday morning in L.A., at a charter school in Boyle Heights co-run by Homeboy Industries, the gang-intervention organization founded by Father Gregory Boyle. Harris has known Boyle, a revered figure in L.A., since her D.A. days, and Homeboy Industries later became a primary partner in her effort to bring Back on Track to other cities. Today she is here to meet with a group of Dreamers and to be photographed for this profile. Among the people milling around are Harris’s campaign manager, Juan Rodriguez, and her State of the Union date, Denea Joseph. Shortly after eleven, everyone gathers in the parking lot, in front of a large mural that says “Jobs Not Jails.”

Though she is running on two hours of sleep, Harris is visibly energized by the Dreamers. She is wearing a black U.S. Olympic team jacket, dark jeans, and sneakers. Someone puts on music—a Spotify list Harris released last summer that begins with A Tribe Called Quest’s 1991 classic “Check the Rhime.” When it becomes clear that some of the younger Dreamers don’t know who A Tribe Called Quest is, Harris delivers an impromptu treatise—then another one on Biggie Smalls.

I am beginning to appreciate what Henry R. Muñoz III, the finance chairman of the Democratic National Committee, describes as the “aura of respect” that Harris commands. “Let’s call it the phenomenon of Kamala Harris,” Muñoz says, recalling the first time he met her, at a fund-raising event in San Francisco: “She walks into a room with gravitas.” The Phenomenon of Kamala Harris has become something of a rainmaker for the Democratic Party. In the past year alone, the Senator has traveled to Virginia, Florida, Ohio, Rhode Island, Georgia, and Texas to help raise money for other Democrats. In all, Harris has been responsible for bringing in more than $2 million for Democratic candidates since November 2016.

But her value extends beyond fund-raising. “Almost 100 years after women fought for the right to vote, the country—and for sure the Democratic Party—is looking to the leadership of people like Kamala Harris,” says Muñoz. “It’s not only to raise money, and not just to lean in, but to reach out and bring other women and minorities and people of color to the table—to register, to vote, and to run.” He adds: “You know that old saying, ‘You can’t be what you can’t see’? Well, now you can see it.”

Which again raises the question: Might this new symbol be preparing for a presidential run in 2020? Despite her reticence on the subject, she is on every short list, and there is already voluminous speculation over whether she could win the support of Bernie Sanders progressives. In February after the Parkland, Florida, shooting she spoke forcefully about gun control and took repeatedly to Twitter (“We cannot . . . live in a country with pride when our babies are being slaughtered” and “I am not going to be silenced by attacks from the NRA or anyone else”). Meanwhile, the gun-lobby head Wayne LaPierre attacked her by name from the podium at the Conservative Political Action Conference, a sure sign that the right sees her as a threat. I check in with FiveThirtyEight, and a researcher reports that her Trump Score, which measures how many times a Congress member has voted with the president, is among the lowest of Democratic senators. Her score on a voting-record scale called the DW-Nominate ranks Harris as the second-most-liberal senator, behind only Elizabeth Warren.

Most of the names who appear on the short list alongside Harris decline to discuss 2020 with me, with the notable exception of Senator Cory Booker. “If she did run, what a gift to the country that would be,” he says. “When have you seen someone with her qualifications, her competency, her natural gifts as a leader—and who happens to be a black, Asian, biracial woman?” He adds, “I told her this before she got here: Should she choose to become a senator, she would immediately be on the short list for president or vice president for the next 20 years.”

In this story:

Sittings Editor: Jason Rider.

Hair: Nikki Providence; Makeup: Fara Homidi.

Produced by Connect the Dots; Mural by Alex Kizo and Carlos Muñoz.