What are the arguments for and against the Medicaid expansion?
Card 5 of 8

What are the arguments for and against the Medicaid expansion?

Supporters of the Medicaid expansion argued that it was the only affordable way for many low-income people to get health insurance. Obamacare's design created a coverage gap — people with incomes below the federal poverty level made too little money to qualify for subsidized private insurance from the exchanges, but didn't qualify for traditional Medicaid. And studies showed that in states refusing to implement the expansion, millions of people would remain uninsured.

Furthermore, supporters argued that when it comes to costs, the states were getting an incredibly good deal. The federal government was set to pay the entire expansion tab from 2014 to 2016, and at least 90 percent every year afterward. So the states could have gotten quite a lot of uninsured people covered for a relatively small investment on their part. The Congressional Budget Office estimated that over the next decade, states expanding Medicaid would only see their state costs rise 1.6 percent more than states that didn't expand.

Also, supporters pointed out that if a state refuses to participate, its residents' tax dollars would still go toward funding the expansion in other states, but they'd get nothing out of it themselves. Finally, some argued that their health systems will save save money by reducing uncompensated care.

But the Medicaid expansion was criticized for two main reasons: cost and quality. First, many conservatives argued that the promise of federal funding will prove illusory, and that the states could end up being forced to shoulder more of the bill. They maintain that federal government could or would draw back funding over time. For instance, if Obamacare was to be repealed, as conservatives hoped, those federal funds would vanish. Furthermore, many conservatives viewed Obamacare generally as an undesirable expansion of spending that should be repealed — so the Medicaid expansion would naturally be repealed along with it.

Second, many critics said that Medicaid is dysfunctional, and that it should be reformed rather than expanded — Avik Roy of the Manhattan Institute called it "America's worst health care program." Medicaid's very cheapness means that it has to reimburse doctors at lower rates, and as a result, it's sometimes difficult to find a doctor who accepts Medicaid. Critics also point to a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine that didn't find much improvement in the health of Oregon Medicaid recipients. But that study has itself been criticized, and it did show that Medicaid recipients had better self-reported physical and mental health, less depression, and increased financial security.