Staff
WASBO Staff

Woody Wiedenhoeft - Executive Director

The WASBO Board hired Woody Wiedenhoeft as the WASBO Executive Director in September 2006. Prior to joining WASBO Woody completed a 35-year career in public education as a teacher, school business official, and school consultant. He has been active in WASBO since 1974 and served a term as the President of WASBO. Woody continues to be active in many education-related organizations and is also a member of the Wisconsin Society of Association Executives and ASBO International.

Jeanne Deimund - Associate Executive Director

Jeanne joined WASBO in October 2002. Jeanne is a graduate of Southeast Missouri State University where she majored in accounting and finance. Prior to joining the WASBO staff she served as the Business Operations Supervisor for Liberty Public Schools in Liberty, Missouri. While in Liberty she was also a member of Missouri ASBO.

Conference programming and event logistics

WASBO Mentorship Program

WASBO conference committees

Regional organization committees

ASBO International activities

WASBO Board of Directors activities

Clare May - Marketing Communications Coordinator

Clare joined WASBO in August 2016. She graduated from the University of Wisconsin - Platteville where she majored in Public Relations and Marketing. Prior to joining the WASBO staff, she served as a Marketing Campaign Manager for a healthcare marketing firm.

Conference sponsorship, exhibit and webinar opportunities

Marketing collateral and conference promotion

Advertising contracts and article submissions for Taking Care of Business newsletter

Member communications and press releases

WASBO website and social media content

Kaitlyn Peters - Professional Development and Member Services Coordinator

Kaitlyn joined WASBO in August 2015. She graduated from the University of Wisconsin - Stout, where she majored in Hotel, Restaurant, and Tourism Management. She previously worked at the Holiday Inn Madison at the American Center, where she was the Catering Sales Manager.

Conference speaker information, session handouts and set up needs

WASBO p-Card program

Conference programming

WASBO Facility Manager Certification Program

WASBO conference committees

Tina Hafeman - Accounting and Technology Coordinator

Tina joined WASBO in 1997 and worked as Associate Executive Director until 2015, when she transitioned into a consulting role. In July 2016, she began her current position as Accounting and Technology Coordinator. Tina is a graduate of UW-Madison, having majored in Elementary Education. She is a 2013 recipient of the Tina Hafeman Friend of WASBO Award, which was renamed in her honor.

Accounts payable

Accounts receivable

Human Resources

Technical issues with the WASBO website and online conference registration

Peer to Peer Communication Forum

Electronic Resource Center

GoToMeeting and conference calling needs

Kristin Hauser - Membership Coordinator

Kristin joined WASBO in April 2013. She is a graduate of Western Washington University and majored in Communications. Kristin has worked with several non-profits in the state of Washington as Program Manager, Special Events Coordinator and Community Outreach and lived in the Northwest for 10 years, before returning to her home state of Wisconsin.