School board prevents trans student from using girls' restroom
Members of a Virginia school board last week voted unanimously to prevent a transgender student from using the bathroom that corresponds with her gender identity.

Members of the Stafford County School Board by a 6-0 vote margin on March 24 approved the new policy that requires the fourth-grader at Hartwood Elementary School to use what the Stafford County Sun described as a “single-stall, staff or boys’ restroom” instead of the girl’s facility that she had been allowed to use.

Irene Egan, a member of the school board from the Aquia District, did not attend the vote.

The Stafford County Sun reported that many of the nearly two-dozen people who spoke out against the fourth-grader using of the girls’ restroom were from a group of parents who call themselves Save Our Schools. NBC Washington said a man who identified himself as the student’s father also spoke during the meeting.

“We respect every other mother and father in here,” said the man, according to NBC Washington. “I only implore all of us…that we don’t trade understanding for fear.”

James Parrish, executive director of Equality Virginia, a statewide LGBT advocacy group, was among those who also attended the meeting.

“This is a new and confusing topic for many people, and unfortunately misunderstanding took the limelight last week,” Parrish told the Washington Blade in a statement. “Transgender children, like all children, are balancing academic requirements with extracurricular activities and a social life. They are managing relationships with parents, teachers, and friends, and they are thinking about their future. Being stigmatized for who they are should not be part of any child’s growing up.”

Mara Keisling, executive director of the National Center for Transgender Equality, a national trans advocacy group, on Monday blasted the school board.

“It is inhumane and probably illegal to have six adult elected officials vote on whether to allow a young child to use any restroom with other children,” Keisling told the Blade. “They have immorally voted to stigmatize this child because of a handful of self-righteous parents who are making decisions based on prejudice rather than what is best for all children and even their own children. Eventually they will be ashamed of themselves.”

A spokesperson for the Stafford County School Board on Monday did not return the Blade’s requests for comment.

The Gloucester County School Board in December approved a policy that requires students to use restrooms and locker rooms that correspond to their “biological genders.” The American Civil Liberties Union and the ACLU of Virginia later filed a complaint with the Educational Opportunities Section of the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division on behalf of Gavin Grimm, a trans student at Gloucester County High School, on the grounds the regulation violates Title IX that prohibits schools that receive federal funds from discriminating on the basis of sex.

Virginia Attorney General Mark Herring earlier this month said local school boards have the authority under state law to include sexual orientation and gender identity in their non-discrimination policies.