Immigration complicates life for red-state Democratic incumbents
Even amid controversy over the unpopular family separation policy, vulnerable red-state Democrats opened themselves up to a potent line of attack this week.

Republicans battling Democratic incumbents in states President Trump won saw an opportunity in Sen. Dianne Feinstein's, D-Calif., "Keep Families Together Act," a bill aimed at resolving the family separation problem that has unanimous Democratic support in the upper chamber. But even Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, has called the legislation "far too broad," arguing "it would essentially prevent arrests within 100 miles of the border even if the person has committed a serious crime, or is suspected of terrorist activity."

Sens. Joe Manchin, D-W.Va., Jon Tester, D-Mont., Claire McCaskill, D-Mo., and Bob Casey, D-Pa., were all slammed by their Republican opponents for supporting the Feinstein bill. "Joe Manchin is putting the interest of illegal immigrant criminals and the agenda of liberal Washington elites ahead of West Virginia families," Patrick Morrisey said in a statement.

"While Missouri families are struggling to pay for their health insurance and keep up with rising costs," wrote Josh Hawley in a fundraising email, "Claire McCaskill is working to help illegal immigrants."

Matt Rosendale accused Tester of "want[ing] to let illegal immigrants flow freely into this country without consequence." And Rep. Lou Barletta, R-Pa., "commend[ed]" Casey for "finally showing his true colors as a supporter of this dangerous open border policy."

"Red state Democrats don't have a message on immigration, and siding with failed open-border policies and opposing Trump on one of his signature issues won't bode well for them," a Republican communicator familiar with the 2018 Senate races told the Washington Examiner on Wednesday.

While public opinion was broadly against family separation, Republicans support President Trump's immigration policies at rates much higher than the general electorate. A Quinnipiac poll released Monday found 55 percent of Republicans supported the family separations policy. The border wall, according to that survey, is opposed by 58 percent of all voters but supported by 77 percent of Republican voters. Fifty percent of voters also said the Trump administration has been "too aggressive in deporting immigrants who are here illegally." Only ten percent of Republican voters agreed.

Republicans also tend to prioritize immigration higher than Democrats, making it a priority for GOP candidates running in Red states. Beyond the problems of scope Sen. Collins identified, these numbers make the unanimous support for Feinstein's bill an odd strategy for vulnerable Democratic incumbents running in Red states.