Bipartisan opioid bill would boost treatment, without the funding advocacy groups wanted
Republicans and Democrats on Capitol Hill hope to combat the opioid epidemic in part by expanding access to addiction treatment, a key part of the major legislative package unveiled late Tuesday.

But some advocacy groups say that the specific way the legislation addresses the problem — through grants — isn’t enough, and that a more lasting funding stream is needed.

The legislation, the Substance Use Disorder Prevention that Promotes Opioid Recovery and Treatment for Patients and Communities Act, is the final bipartisan, bicameral compromise version of legislation both chambers have passed, and appears headed to President Trump's desk soon after final votes in the House and Senate.

While the legislation addresses various facets of the opioid epidemic, a majority of its measures are meant to expand treatment for addiction.

Inadequate addiction treatment has been a massive problem that has exacerbated the opioid crisis, according to the federal government and advocates for addicted people.

Only one in 10 Americans with addiction get treatment in a given year, according to the 2016 National Survey on Drug Use and Health. That same year, more than 42,000 people died of opioid overdoses, according to the National Center for Health Statistics.

Accordingly, the final legislation includes several provisions aimed at boosting the number of people who receive care.

Most notably, the bill codifies an increase in the number of prescriptions that a given doctor can make for the addiction treatment drug called buprenorphine. Buprenorphine prescribing is regulated because the drug itself is a risk for abuse. A doctor could, under the bill, prescribe buprenorphine for up to 275 patients overall, up from 100.

Further, the bill would allow nurse practitioners and physician assistants to prescribe buprenorphine. Currently, they are banned from doing so. It also includes a measure to encourage medical schools and hospital residency programs to train more new doctors on the guidelines for prescribing addiction treatments like buprenorphine and methadone.

To alleviate a shortage of treatment providers, the legislation also would allow the government to repay student loans up to $250,000 for people who agree to work as substance abuse treatment professionals.

Lawmakers are also seeking to cut back regulatory barriers to coverage. One provision of the bill would repeal a decades-old rule that limits the amount of mental or addiction patients hospitals can care for.

Currently, under Medicaid rules, hospitals cannot allow more than 16 patients with mental illnesses or addictions to stay at the hospital. Going over this limit endangers Medicaid reimbursements for the facility.

The bipartisan legislation would repeal this rule, called the Institute for Mental Disease, or IMD, exclusion, for five years.

Addiction treatment advocacy groups cheered the move to temporarily end the IMD exclusion and the other parts of the bill aimed at expanding access to treatment.

“The 5-year lifting is definitely going to help,” said Jeremiah Gardner, director of communications and public affairs for the Hazelden Betty Ford Foundation, an addiction treatment and advocacy organization.

Gardner added that the legislation, which includes a swath of measures aimed at stopping shipments of illicit fentanyl to expanding treatment access, “touches on all aspects of the problem. But at the same time the opioid crisis was years in the making and it is not going to end overnight.”

But while addiction recovery groups praised Congress' effort, they critiqued its execution.

For instance, the legislation reauthorizes grants that are targeted at the states hit hardest by the opioid crisis.

But the legislation doesn’t include a lot of new funding for the crisis. Lawmakers have instead turned to annual spending bills to boost spending. For instance, the House passed on Wednesday an appropriations bill that included $6.7 billion earmarked for fighting the epidemic.

However, the use of grants instead of systemic changes could limit the reach of new funding, some advocates say.

“Small competitive grant authorization, even for worthy initiatives, won't have sufficient scope or reach to show a broad impact outside of local communities that benefit from them,” said Daniel Raymond, deputy director of planning and policy for the Harm Reduction Coalition, a treatment advocacy organization.

The grants could also only last for a few years, another treatment advocate said.

“It is really problematic to me to see this opioid crisis that has been decades in the making addressed through the provision of time-limited grant programs that will only reach certain pockets of the country,” said Rebecca David, vice president for policy and advocacy for the National Council for Behavioral Health, which represents mental health and addiction providers. “We can’t expect a nationwide solution to the opioid crisis if we are not investing in nationwide solutions.”

David called for changes in how Medicaid pays for addiction services as a more lasting way of combating the opioid crisis.

She referenced a bill that expands the Excellence in Mental Health and Addiction Treatment Act, which is a two-year, eight-state initiative to expand access to addiction and mental health treatment services. The program boosts Medicaid reimbursements to centers that meet certain standards for providing addiction treatment.

David said the program should be expanded. Currently only eight states can participate in the program, but the bill would allow another 11 states to participate.

“In contrast to the grant-based approach, a program like the excellence act fundamentally changes the way that addiction services are paid for that makes it sustainable over the long term to expand capacity and treat patients,” she added.