There's a Giant Fungus Among Us
This is a reading comprehension exercise for children. It is written by Susan Fineman, a reading specialist in the New Haven, Conn., school district.

Walking through the Malheur National Forest in eastern Oregon, you would be hard-pressed to notice it. But a fungus spreading through the roots of trees now covers 2,200 acres, making it the largest living organism ever found.

Popularly known as the honey mushroom, the Armillaria ostoyae started from a single spore too small to see without a microscope and has been weaving its black shoestring filaments through the forest for an estimated 2,400 years, killing trees as it grows.

"When you're on the ground, you don't notice the pattern; you just see dead trees in clusters," said Tina Dreisbach, a botanist and mycologist with the U.S. Forest Service's Pacific Northwest Research Station in Corvallis, Ore.

The outline of the giant fungus, strikingly similar to a mushroom, stretches 3 1/2 miles across and an average of three feet into the ground. It covers an area as big as 1,665 football fields. No one has estimated its weight.

"There hasn't been anything measured with any scientific technique that has shown any plant or animal to be larger than this," said Gregory Filip, associate professor of integrated forest protection at Oregon State University and an expert in Armillaria.

Until now, the largest known organism was another Armillaria ostoyae found in 1992 in Washington state. It covered 1,500 acres near Mount Adams.

"We just decided to go out looking for one bigger than the last claim," Filip said.

Forest Service scientists are interested in learning to control Armillaria because it kills trees, Filip said, but they also realize that the fungus has served a purpose in nature for millions of years.

The discovery came after Catherine Parks, a scientist at the Pacific Northwest Research Station in La Grande, Ore., heard in 1998 about a large numbers of trees dying from root rot in the forest east of Prairie City, Ore.

Using aerial photos, she staked out an area of dying trees and collected root samples from 112.

She identified the fungus through DNA testing. Then, by comparing cultures of the fungus grown from the 112 samples, she determined that 61 were from the same organism, meaning a single fungus had grown bigger than anything anyone had ever described.

On the surface, the only evidence of the fungus are clumps of golden mushrooms that pop up in the fall with the rain.

"They are edible, but they don't taste the best," Dreisbach said. "I would put lots of butter and garlic on them."

Quiz

1. A huge fungus was discovered in Oregon:

a) more than 2,000 years ago.

b) at the Pacific Northwest Research Station.

c) in Malheur National Forest.

2. After hearing about large numbers of trees dying in the National Forest, scientist Catherine Parks:

a) took a few courses at Oregon State University.

b) collected and tested 112 root samples.

c) took photographs of all the dead trees.

3. Parks discovered that 61 of the samples:

a) couldn't be identified through DNA testing.

b) were too small to see.

c) came from the same organism.

4. The Armillaria ostoyae, or honey mushroom, in Oregon is:

a) the largest living thing ever found.

b) about the size of a football.

c) very easy to notice.

5. The giant organism started:

a) from a single, tiny spore (cell).

b) growing 2,400 years ago.

c) both of the above.

6. Armillaria extends into the ground by growing structures that look like:

a) yellow leaves.

b) black shoestring filaments (threads).

c) bunches of rotting roots.

7. As it spreads, the giant fungus:

a) reaches heights of three feet.

b) weaves colorful patterns in the soil.

c) kills trees.

8. The mushroom-like mass:

a) covers 22,000 acres.

b) is bigger than 1,600 football fields.

c) measures 35 miles across.

9. A fungus uncovered in 1992 in Washington state was:

a) bigger than Oregon's Armillaria.

b) located 1,500 miles from Mount Adams.

c) the largest known organism at that time.

10. Forest Service scientists hope to find a way to:

a) control the spread of Armillaria.

b) get rid of all types of fungi.

c) keep a tree alive for a million years.

Answer Key: 1. c, 2. b, 3. c, 4. a, 5. c, 6. b, 7. c, 8. b, 9. c, 10. a