Calls Yield Delegates To Mondale
Alabama Gov. George C. Wallace had been expecting "the call" for about three weeks, his press secretary said. It came early yesterday morning. From the governor's mansion in Montgomery, Wallace told Walter F. Mondale what Mondale wanted to hear and what Wallace had known for at least three weeks: Mondale could count on the governor's vote at the Democratic National Convention in San Francisco.

Nashville Mayor Richard Fulton also had been waiting in the wings. Mondale southern coordinator Jim Quakenbush made "the call" yesterday morning, telling Fulton that Mondale needed his public support now rather than later this month. Fulton agreed to step forth.

Several Mondale supporters, including former Democratic national chairman Robert S. Strauss, placed "the call" to Rep. Gillis W. Long (D-La.) yesterday morning. By then--and by the time Mondale telephoned later--"I was already writing out the statement," Long said.

With relentless drive and only a few minutes to spare before Mondale's self-imposed deadline of 11:59 a.m. CST, his campaign organization secured the critical public support of what it said were 40 previously uncommitted delegates in less than six hours of telephoning. At last Mondale could claim that he had the 1,967 delegates needed for the Democratic presidential nomination.

But many of those who joined the fold yesterday and in the weeks before, when Mondale cut deeply into the ranks of the uncommitted to pad his lead in the race for the nomination, were far more skeptical of Mondale and the party's prospects yesterday than their apparent rush to the front-runner would suggest.

Taken together, their words drew a mixed portrait of late comers to the Mondale camp--some of them old friends waiting for the right time to come aboard, others much more tentative in their support for the candidate most likely to carry the party's banner in the fall.

Their statements suggest that some might be considered "soft" supporters of Mondale at a convention whose delegates are free to vote as they please and perhaps as logical targets of delegate raiders acting on behalf of Mondale's chief rival for the nomination, Sen. Gary Hart (D-Colo.).

Huntsville, Ala., lawyer J.R. Brooks, elected as a supporter of Sen. John Glenn (D-Ohio), came into the Mondale fold Monday, after assurances that Mondale would not support a proposal to do away with runoff primaries and after turning down an offer to talk to the candidate.

"Of the announced candidates, he would be my choice," Brooks said of Mondale yesterday. "It would not be fair to say that I am a committed Mondale supporter . . . I have committed, and I will vote for him. But in the sense of a deep commitment to him as a candidate--I wouldn't say I have that at this point."

Cynthia Thompson of Elgin, S.C. endorsed Mondale after three telephone calls from the candidate's wife, Joan, left Thompson persuaded that Mondale's position on women's issues and control of the federal deficit make him the right person for the job.

She has formally promised to support Mondale on the first ballot, but says, "I will support him after that," too.

State Rep. Alex Harvin III, majority leader of the South Carolina General Assembly, came aboard after Mondale tracked him down Monday with a call to Harvin's beach house in Myrtle Beach.

Harvin had been inclined to go with Hart, who had been endorsed by Sen. Ernest F. Hollings (D-S.C.). But after the long, bruising nomination contest, Harvin said he decided that "to really have a fair shot" at defeating President Reagan, "the nomination process has to be closed down now, Hart or not."

"You can see the handwriting on the wall," he said of Hart's prospects. "He's not going to win. He's at a point when he can either make it for himself or he can break it for himself.

"I don't know what Mondale is going to be able to do," Harvin said. "I hope he wins."

Several of those who climbed aboard the Mondale bandwagon in the closing days of the primary campaign said they were motivated by his first-place standing and the view that the party must unite.

"The man has won the votes. He's so close, it's tantamount to victory," said Sen. Howard M. Metzenbaum (D-Ohio). "It would be better if the nominee were successful in every primary. But politics isn't like that."

Metzenbaum, elected as an uncommitted "super delegate" from Congress, said he had been leaning toward Mondale all along but had not endorsed him because four of the eight original candidates were fellow senators.

Sen. Frank R. Lautenberg (D-N.J.), another "super delegate," said he leaned toward Mondale but remained publicly uncommitted because all three remaining candidates had strong support in his state, though voters went solidly for Mondale in Tuesday's primary.

Brooks, who had served as a U.S. attorney for northern Alabama in the Carter administration, said he rejected the first requests that he support Mondale, but changed his mind because of what he considered Hart's attacking Mondale through what he considered relentless criticism of Carter.

"To tell you the truth," Brooks said of Hart's attacks, "it just got under my skin . . . . I didn't like it when Glenn did it."

In Mondale's rush to gather enough delegates to claim the nomination, some announced pledges of support apparently were overstated.

Virginia Democratic Chairman Alan Diamonstein was the first person Mondale called yesterday for support, and he was announced as a convert at Mondale's news conference in St. Paul, Minn.

"It's not true," said Diamonstein, who along with Virginia Gov. Charles S. Robb, was elected as an uncommitted delegate. "I indicated I was certainly friendly toward the vice president's candidacy, as I always had been, but . . . I'm chairman of a delegation that has very strong feelings for three different candidates."

Rep. Stephen L. Neal (D-N.C.) also demurred. "I remain uncommitted and intend to go to the convention uncommitted, regardless of the delegate count," Neal said through a spokesman yesterday afternoon. "If the balloting were taking place tomorrow, I'd probably vote for Mr. Mondale . . . . This does not mean I do not intend to go to the convention pledged to one candidate or another."

Many of the uncommitted converts announced yesterday were important gains for Mondale, including Atlanta Mayor Andrew J. Young and Nashville Mayor Fulton, outgoing president of the U.S. Conference of Mayors.

Hart won the Nevada caucuses, but Gov. Richard H. Bryan yesterday endorsed Mondale. Hart won the Ohio primary, but Lt. Gov. Myrl Shoemaker came out yesterday for Mondale, too.

Long came from a state in which Mondale finished third in the primary. The Louisiana Democratic Chairman, Jesse Bankston, also declared for Mondale yesterday, along with South Dakota State Chairman Bob Williams, whose primary Hart won Tuesday.

While South Carolina Gov. Richard Riley is expected to endorse Mondale soon. Kentucky Gov. Martha Layne Collins, who commands a bloc of 25 uncommitteds, remained neutral, as do most of Virginia's uncommitted delegates.

State Del. Dorothy S. McDiarmid of Fairfax County said she's firmly uncommitteed and is refusing to return "the call"--a message left on her answering machine by Mondale.