Ethics panel says Rep. Laura Richardson broke federal law, obstructed probe
The House Ethics Committee called for the full chamber to reprimand Rep. Laura Richardson on Wednesday, accusing the California Democrat of breaking federal law, violating House rules and obstructing the committee’s investigation.

The House will vote Thursday on adopting the bipartisan Ethics Committee’s findings, which include a formal reprimand of Richardson and a $10,000 fine. Richardson agreed to the panel’s conclusions in a negotiated settlement. The committee also said that it had issued letters of reproval to two of Richardson’s aides, Chief of Staff Shirley Cooks and Deputy District Director Daysha Austin, after negotiated settlements with them.

One Richardson aide, the panel found, was told by Cooks that the aide “would probably not have a job” unless the aide agreed to work on Richardson’s campaign. The aide was also directed to volunteer, using a fake name, to work for Richardson’s opponent to gather information about the rival’s campaign. And Richardson has continued requiring congressional staff to work on her current reelection campaign, even though she has been under investigation for more than 18 months.

“Representative Richardson takes this matter with the utmost seriousness and takes full responsibility for her actions and those that were done by anyone else under her employ,” Richardson’s office said in a statement, adding that she had decided not to ask for an adjudicatory hearing because one “would consume many more months and considerable time and attention.”

The Ethics panel also released Richardson’s official response to the committee’s findings, stating that the lawmaker “did not intend that her staff feel compelled or coerced to work on her campaign” and that she did not “ever intend to obstruct the Committee’s investigation in any way.”

Richardson, who has faced repeated controversies since she was elected in 2007, is already in a difficult political spot. The California redistricting process has pushed her into a tough reelection fight against fellow Democratic Rep. Janice Hahn, with Hahn favored to win in November.

The Ethics panel report on Richardson comes just two days before the start of the August recess. Traditionally, the panel does not release information about investigations in September or October, in order to avoid influencing the November elections. The committee still has a handful of other matters pending, including high-profile probes of Reps. Shelley Berkley (D-Nev.), Vern Buchanan (R-Fla.) and Maxine Waters (D-Calif.).

The Ethics Committee voted to launch a full investigation of Richardson last November, though its initial inquiries began in October 2010. The panel cleared Richardson of wrongdoing earlier in 2010 after a separate probe into whether she improperly benefited when a bank canceled the sale of a foreclosed home Richardson owned in Sacramento.

In her response to the committee’s findings released Wednesday, Richardson argued that the Ethics panel deprived her of “a fair and objective process” because it “improperly influenced witnesses,” and that from the very start of the probe, the committee staff “already believed Rep. Richardson was guilty of some violation.”

The Ethics report fired back sharply at that suggestion, finding a “disturbing irony ... given the horrendous picture so many of her own current and former staff described of their time in her employment, and her own attempts to intimidate them on a regular basis.”

Overall, the committee said, “Richardson’s views weave an elaborate fabrication out of threads of decontextualized evidence and outright prevarication, in an absurd attempt to rebut the majority of the tremendous evidence against her.”

This post has been updated since it was first published.