A laughable backlash against the New York Times article on Trump’s treatment of women
Here are six times Republican presidential contender Donald Trump has insulted women, from Rosie O'Donnell to Ted Cruz's wife, Heidi. (Sarah Parnass and Nicki DeMarco/The Washington Post)

“Fox & Friends” co-host Ainsley Earhardt needs to spend more time examining the complicated matter of Donald Trump, women and her own network’s recent history.

Today on her morning program she interviewed Rowanne Brewer Lane, one of the many women interviewed for a New York Times Sunday front-page story on Trump’s womanizing. Reporters Michael Barbaro and Megan Twohey turned one of Lane’s experiences into the story’s lede. Here it is:

Donald J. Trump had barely met Rowanne Brewer Lane when he asked her to change out of her clothes. Donald was having a pool party at Mar-a-Lago. There were about 50 models and 30 men. There were girls in the pools, splashing around. For some reason Donald seemed a little smitten with me. He just started talking to me and nobody else. He suddenly took me by the hand, and he started to show me around the mansion. He asked me if I had a swimsuit with me. I said no. I hadn’t intended to swim. He took me into a room and opened drawers and asked me to put on a swimsuit. –Rowanne Brewer Lane, former companion Ms. Brewer Lane, at the time a 26-year-old model, did as Mr. Trump asked. “I went into the bathroom and tried one on,” she recalled. It was a bikini. “I came out, and he said, ‘Wow.’ ” Mr. Trump, then 44 and in the midst of his first divorce, decided to show her off to the crowd at Mar-a-Lago, his estate in Palm Beach, Fla. “He brought me out to the pool and said, ‘That is a stunning Trump girl, isn’t it?’ ” Ms. Brewer Lane said.

In addressing that formulation with Earhardt, Lane attacked the New York Times. It was “upsetting” to read the article, said the former companion of Trump: “The New York Times told us several times that they would make sure that my story that I was telling came across,” Lane told Earhardt. “They promised several times that they would do it accurately. They told me several times and my manager several times that it would not be a hit piece. And that my story would come across the way that I was telling it and honestly. And it absolutely was not.” Asked what the newspaper got wrong, Lane said this: “Well, they did take quotes from what I said and they put a negative connotation on it. They spun it to where it appeared negative. I did not have a negative experience with Donald Trump. And I don’t appreciate them making it look like that I was saying it was a negative experience, because it was not.”

The record does indeed show that the New York Times used Lane’s anecdote to make this point:

Donald Trump and women: The words evoke a familiar cascade of casual insults, hurled from the safe distance of a Twitter account, a radio show or a campaign podium. This is the public treatment of some women by Mr. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee for president: degrading, impersonal, performed. “That must be a pretty picture, you dropping to your knees,” he told a female contestant on “The Celebrity Apprentice.” Rosie O’Donnell, he said, had a “fat, ugly face.” A lawyer who needed to pump milk for a newborn? “Disgusting,” he said. But the 1990 episode at Mar-a-Lago that Ms. Brewer Lane described was different: a debasing face-to-face encounter between Mr. Trump and a young woman he hardly knew. This is the private treatment of some women by Mr. Trump, the up-close and more intimate encounters.

Should the New York Times have reported that Lane considered this something other than a negative experience? Sure, if she’d made that clear in the interviews. Pressed on the story on “CBS This Morning,” New York Times reporter Barbaro said that Lane said she was “taken aback” by the events at Mar-a-Lago. Lane’s recollections are one thing; the bare facts of the situation are another: The New York Times is entitled to judge and interpret the goings-on. By any standard of decency toward women, the act of ogling a 20-something model, inviting her to change into a bikini and then proclaiming her a “Trump girl” when paraded around the pool is piggish. The New York Times can and should say so. (It conducted more than 50 interviews over six weeks.)

Now let’s move into the guts of Lane’s complaint. “It is the tale of two stories,” Earhardt said in introducing the interview, “the New York Times targeting Donald Trump in what he calls a hit piece, detailing his relationships with women, quoting more than a dozen former employees, girlfriends and pageant queens from his past. But now, one of those women is speaking out, saying she was totally misquoted. Here she is now to set the record straight.” Regarding the quoting, Lane said, “I don’t know how many other girls feel that they were misquoted, but I know that for a fact I was misquoted and I don’t want that out there. That’s not how it was, how it felt …”

Over a six-minute-plus interview, however, Lane couldn’t muster a single example of her being misquoted. Her gripe centered on how the New York Times “spun” her experiences with Trump. “He was a very good guy, Donald, and I think he’s doing a good job in this race and I think that some people have a problem with that,” Lane told Earhardt.

Perhaps blinded by the pro-Trump biases of “Fox & Friends,” Earhardt asked Lane, “Why do you think the left, the mainstream media, is so obsessed with just creating this negative headline about how Donald Trump treats women?”

Peak comedy, considering that it was Fox News itself that created thousands of negative headlines about how Donald Trump treats women. Just check the transcript of the Aug. 6, 2015, GOP debate, at which host Megyn Kelly let loose with this question:

Mr. Trump, one of the things people love about you is you speak your mind and you don’t use a politician’s filter. However, that is not without its downsides, in particular, when it comes to women. You’ve called women you don’t like “fat pigs, dogs, slobs, and disgusting animals.” Your Twitter account … has several disparaging comments about women’s looks. You once told a contestant on Celebrity Apprentice it would be a pretty picture to see her on her knees. Does that sound to you like the temperament of a man we should elect as president, and how will you answer the charge from Hillary Clinton, who was likely to be the Democratic nominee, that you are part of the war on women?

It just so happened that “Fox & Friends” this morning invited Kelly to speak about her upcoming series on Fox broadcast television — as well as about this whole New York Times spat. After watching clips from Lane’s interview, Kelly held forth:

This is one of the intriguing things about Donald Trump, one of the many intriguing things about Donald Trump. Because, what are we proving with that sound bite that the Times maybe misled when it came to this woman’s story? But is there any dispute about whether Trump has used controversial language about women. There is not, there isn’t. So what does this tell us about him? That is in the mind of the beholder. The campaign has said many times, ‘Look, women are not going to vote based on these words that he has used about women.’ They’re going to vote based on policy, based on terrorism, based on concern about their kids and their budget … and I think history has proven that is true. But the thing that’s so unusual about Trump is we’ve never seen a presidential candidate who’s taken the risks he’s taken and said the kinds of things he’s taken so will that disapproval rating he has right now with women, including Republican women, carry through or as they get closer to November, will they vote on something different?

Hey, what happened to the no-nonsense Megyn Kelly? Is “fat pigs, dogs, slobs and disgusting animals” really just “controversial language,” Kelly? Or is it misogynistic, despicable and unacceptable? Though Kelly didn’t get into it, she herself has been a very public target of Trump’s misogyny. Fox News even once issued a statement: “Donald Trump’s vitriolic attacks against Megyn Kelly and his extreme, sick obsession with her is beneath the dignity of a presidential candidate who wants to occupy the highest office in the land.”

Away from the confines of the “Fox & Friends” couch, Donald Trump himself was tweeting:

That was an amazing interview on @foxandfriends – I hope the rest of the media picks it up to show how totally dishonest the @nytimes is! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 16, 2016

Wow, Rowanne Brewer, the most prominently depicted woman in the failing @nytimes story yesterday, was on @foxandfriends saying Times lied — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 16, 2016

The @nytimes is so dishonest. Their hit piece cover story on me yesterday was just blown up by Rowanne Brewer, who said it was a lie! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 16, 2016

And on CNN just minutes ago, Barbaro said, “none of the facts are in dispute.”

A New York Times spokesperson has issued this statement: “Ms. Brewer Lane was quoted fairly, accurately and at length. The story[nytimes.com] provides context for the reader including that the swimsuit scene was the ‘start of a whirlwind romance’ between Ms. Brewer Lane and Mr. Trump.”