Tina Turner formally ‘relinquishes’ U.S. citizenship
This item just in via an “activity” report from the U.S. Embassy in Bern, Switzerland, headlined “Soul Legend Relinquishes U.S. Citizenship.”

“Long-time Swiss resident Tina Turner” was in the embassy Oct. 24 to sign her “Statement of Voluntary Relinquishment of U.S. Citizenship under Section 349 (a)(1) of the INA” — the Immigration and Naturalization Act.

Turner, who turns 74 in a couple weeks, retired from the concert stage in 2009. She had an abusive, 14-year marriage to Ike Turner (they divorced in 1976), with whom she recorded Jessie Hill’s classic “Ooh Poo Pah Doo,” and John Fogerty’s “Proud Mary.”

Turner has lived in Switzerland for nearly two decades. In July, she married her boyfriend of 27 years, German music producer Erwin Bach (unclear if related to Johann Sebastian). Turner had taken the oath of Swiss nationality April 10. She’s fluent in German, the report said, and she declared that she no longer has any strong ties to the United States “except for family, and has no plans to reside in the United States in the future.”

The key word in the embassy report apparently is the term “relinquishment.” That means, a knowledgeable source told us, that she did not “formally renounce her U.S. citizenship under 349(a)(5) Immigration and Nationality Act, but took Swiss citizenship with the intent to lose her U.S. citizenship.” As opposed to formal renunciation — a much more complex process, we were told — there are no “tax or other penalties for loss of citizenship in this fashion.”

So “Proud Mary” will no longer be rolling on the Mississippi, but on the Aar?

1 of 11 Full Screen Autoplay Close Skip Ad × Tina Turner and other famous Americans who gave up citizenship View Photos What’s citizenship got to do with it? Tina Turner is just one in a long line of folks who have turned their back on the blue passport. Here are a few others. Caption What’s citizenship got to do with it? Tina Turner is just one in a long line of folks who have turned their back on the blue passport. Here are a few others. Tina Turner The Queen of Rock, born in Nutbush, Tenn., relinquished her citizenship in October after gaining Swiss nationality. Her husband is German. Read the story Jean-Pierre Muller/Agence France-Presse Buy Photo Wait 1 second to continue.

Read more:

WorldViews: Want to move abroad? Here are the best and worst places to be an expatriate

No more ‘Sweet Caroline’ — Kennedy now the U.S. representative to Japan

PHOTOS: Caroline Kennedy — From first daughter to U.S. ambassador