Names & Faces: Donald Trump’s for-profit school under investigation; Pete Doherty is back in jail; Marion Cotillard has a baby boy
Gallery director Earl A. Powell III, FAPE chairman Jo Carole Lauder,artist Martin Puryear, and artist Brice Marden pose with Hillary Clinton. (Mary Hilliard/ National Gallery of Art)

— The New York State attorney general’s office is investigating whether Donald Trump’s business school, formerly known as Trump University, is engaging in illegal business practices, the New York Times reports. Trump-U is not the only so-called school coming under the microscope — the effort is part of a broader inquiry into for-profit education, which is also examining Career Education Corporation, Corinthian Colleges, Lincoln Educational Services, and Bridgepoint Education.

But the school — which is known to charge up to $35,000 a course — has its share of unsatisfied alums. Last year four former students sued the company in a federal court in California, seeking class-action status. New York and Maryland have also forced Trump-U to drop the word “university” from its title (as of 2010, the school has been renamed Trump Entrepreneur Initiative) . In 2010, the Better Business Bureau gave it a D-minus, its second lowest score, after getting 23 complaints. That has to hurt.

Recently, the school has suspended new classes in order to revise its curriculum. What could bring academic integrity back to Trump-U? More of the Donald, obviously. “The one thing is that they really wanted me involved, instead of the teachers,” Trump said in an interview last week.

— Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton did a stop-and-speak at the National Gallery of Art on Thursday evening, delivering opening remarks for the annual FAPE dinner. Never heard of it? It’s a non-profit organization that tries to get works by American artists into U.S. embassies around the world.

The dinner was a multi-purpose event — a schmooze-fest for art-world big-wigs and wealthy donors (Queen Noor, actress Anna Deveare Smith, artist Joel Shapiro were there), an award presentation ceremony (philanthropist Agnes Gund received an award for furthering diplomacy through art), and also an unveiling (a mock-up of a Martin Puryear sculpture that’s supposed to stand near the U.S. Embassy in Beijing, it looked a like a giant iron jump rope).

Clinton — in a pantsuit, as per usual, but with a glittery gold jacket — gave a quickie speech on how artists are, you know, the real ambassadors. “You are engaging with citizens of other countries and you help us tell the story of America,” she said. After posing for a few photo ops, she was out of there.

Incarcerated: Pete Doherty, front man of The Libertines (they’re like the Strokes, but British) , will serve six months in prison for possession of cocaine, Reuters reports. The singer, 32, was arrested in January by police investigating the suspected overdose death of heiress Robyn Whitehead. This will be Doherty’s third stint in the big house.

Born: A boy for “Inception” star Marion Cotillard, 35, and her partner, actor/director Guillaume Canet, 38, People reports. It’s the first kid for the couple, who have been dating since 2007.