Congressman J. Randy Forbes
Did you know? US doesn’t have an official language Posted by Randy



I recently cosponsored The English Language Unity Act (



One note – this bill is not to say that immigrants to our country should abandon their native roots. It is important for immigrant families to teach their children where they came from and encourage knowledge of their native language. Likewise, it is equally important for young Americans to study the language and culture of other nations so that they can become well-read and informed citizens. Instead, the purpose of this bill is simply to encourage all residents to become fully proficient in English.



As a nation of immigrants created by a common thread of language, it is important that we protect the unity that the English language affords us. Without it, we will cease to be e pluribus unum—one nation out of many. Did you know that the U.S. is one of the very few nations in the world without an official language?I recently cosponsored The English Language Unity Act ( H.R. 997 ), to declare English as the official language of the United States, and require the U.S. government to conduct all official business in English materials. It’s a commonsense step, and also serves to promote the idea of unifying our country around a common language.One note – this bill is not to say that immigrants to our country should abandon their native roots. It is important for immigrant families to teach their children where they came from and encourage knowledge of their native language. Likewise, it is equally important for young Americans to study the language and culture of other nations so that they can become well-read and informed citizens. Instead, the purpose of this bill is simply to encourage all residents to become fully proficient in English.As a nation of immigrants created by a common thread of language, it is important that we protect the unity that the English language affords us. Without it, we will cease to be—one nation out of many.