Congressman J. Randy Forbes
1,000 Days Without a Budget Posted by Randy



Despite this fact, today marks the 1,000th day since the Senate has passed a budget for our federal government. In fact, when the Senate last passed a budget on April 29, 2009, the total national debt (including inter-governmental debt) was



We cannot afford to continue putting off until later what needs to be done today. Real accountability lies in the now, not when problems are swept under the rug and left to be addressed at a later time. It is time Washington stopped skirting its most basic duties. Passing a federal budget should be the minimum obligation of elected leaders, especially in times of such economic uncertainty.



Over the past year, I have joined with my colleagues in passing several key solutions focused on removing government barriers to economic growth. You can read about those bills The national debt is equal to $48,700 for every American or $128,300 for every U.S. household . It is now equivalent to the size of our entire economy. The simple truth is our national debt is skyrocketing and it is unsustainable.Despite this fact, today marks theIn fact, when the Senate last passed a budget on April 29, 2009, the total national debt (including inter-governmental debt) was $11.15 trillion . Today, the total national debt is $15.2 trillion We cannot afford to continue putting off until later what needs to be done today. Real accountability lies in the now, not when problems are swept under the rug and left to be addressed at a later time. It is time Washington stopped skirting its most basic duties. Passing a federal budget should be the minimum obligation of elected leaders, especially in times of such economic uncertainty.Over the past year, I have joined with my colleagues in passing several key solutions focused on. You can read about those bills here . Additionally, you can read about a resolution I have cosponsored ( H.Res. 516 ) noting the national importance of passing a federal budget.