Congressman J. Randy Forbes
Costs of New EPA Rule Could Top $50 Billion a Year Posted by Randy



“Our analysis shows that Americans will pay significantly more for electricity,” the Institute for 21st Century Energy’s



Bottom line: ineffectively attempting to conserve our environment, at the expense of our economy and American families, is unacceptable. Bypassing the democratic process and Congress, who serves to represent the voice of the American people, to do so, is simply inexcusable.



This session, I cosponsored the Regulations from the Executive in Need of Scrutiny (REINS) Act (

$586 billion. That is the amount by which consumers’ disposable income could decrease, as a result of the estimated $289 billion more in electricity costs incurred if the Environmental Protection Agency’s planned regulations at the center of the President’s climate change initiative are enacted, according to a new study released by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce’s Institute for 21st Century Energy. The Obama administration’s proposal to impose new limits on greenhouse gas emissions from power plants could exceed $50 billion in annual costs through 2030.“Our analysis shows that Americans will pay significantly more for electricity,” the Institute for 21Century Energy’s page reads, “see slower economic growth and fewer jobs, and have less disposable income. Potential EPA regulations would result in a very slight reduction in carbon emissions, which would be overwhelmed by global increases.” The study goes on to report that as many as 224,000 jobs would be eliminated annually through 2030 under the proposal.ineffectively attempting to conserve our environment, at the expense of our economy and American families, is unacceptable. Bypassing the democratic process and Congress, who serves to represent the voice of the American people, to do so, is simply inexcusable.This session, I cosponsored the Regulations from the Executive in Need of Scrutiny (REINS) Act ( H.R. 367 ), which requires that Congress take an up-or-down vote on every new, major rule issued by a federal agency before it can be enforced on businesses and the American people. I also supported the ALERRT Act ( H.R. 2804 ), which put measures in place to eliminate excess regulations, and requires more transparency from federal agencies.