What Republicans and Democrats have disagreed on, from 1856 to today
Platform length over time, in words

50K 25K 0 0 25K 50K Shortest platform at 372 words Shortest platform at 895 words Longest platform at 38,180 words across six chapters Longest platform at 41,275 words. One-third of it focused on terrorism 50,000 25,000 25,000 50,000 0 0 Shortest platform Shortest platform at 372 words at 895 words Supported investigating effect of Asian immigration First mentioned opposition to Asian immigration First mentioned abortion and conceded the party was split on the issue. First promised to ban capital punishment Longest platform at 38,180 words across six chapters Supported marriage equality and recognized gay rights as human rights Longest platform at 41,275 words. One-third of it focused on terrorism 50,000 25,000 0 0 25,000 50,000 Shortest platform Shortest platform at 372 words at 895 words Supported investigating effect of Asian immigration First mentioned opposition to Asian immigration First mentioned abortion and conceded the party was split on the issue. First promised to ban capital punishment Longest platform at 38,180 words across six chapters On trade, suggested NAFTA would remove incentive for illegal immigration Supported marriage equality and recognized gay rights as human rights Longest platform at 41,275 words. One-third of it focused on terrorism

The drafts of the 2016 party platforms taking shape suggest that political polarization continues to widen. The Republican document appears to further the party’s conservative and evangelical momentum, despite Donald Trump’s sometimes divergent views. The Democrats’ platform seems set to tilt left as Hillary Clinton consolidates supporters of former candidate Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont. Here’s how some of those issues have evolved.

Immigration At different points in history, the parties have portrayed immigration as a danger or a boon to the nation’s economy.

What the parties said about Immigration The party opposed Asian immigration, calling those workers “the incursions of a race not sprung from the same great parent rock.” 1876 The platform opposed quotas and supported policies “to eliminate discrimination and to enable members of scattered families abroad to be united with relatives already in our midsts.” 1960 The party supported immigration policy that was “pro-family, pro-work, pro-responsibility, and pro-citizenship” and opposed blaming immigrants for economic and social problems. 1996 1876 The government’s “immediate duty” is to investigate “the immigration and importation of Mongolians on the moral and material interests of the country.” “Republican conscience and Republican policy require that: The annual number of immigrants we accept be at least doubled.” 1960 Calls to limit public benefits for illegal immigrants and deny citizenship to U.S.-born children whose parents arrived illegally. 1996 The party opposed Asian immigration, calling those workers “the incursions of a race not sprung from the same great parent rock.” The government’s “immediate duty” is to investigate “the immigration and importation of Mongolians on the moral and material interests of the country.” 1876 1876 The platform opposed quotas and supported policies “to eliminate discrimination and to enable members of scattered families abroad to be united with relatives already in our midsts.” “Republican conscience and Republican policy require that: The annual number of immigrants we accept be at least doubled.” 1960 1960 Called to limit public benefits for illegal immigrants and deny citizenship to U.S.-born children whose parents arrived illegally. The party supported immigration policy that was “pro-family, pro-work, pro-responsibility, and pro-citizenship” and opposed blaming immigrants for economic and social problems. 1996 1996

What they’re saying now

Democrats A platform draft says immigrants already in the U.S. “who are assets to their communities and contribute so much to our country, should be incorporated completely into our society.” Republicans The proposed platform includes Trump’s signature issue: A wall between the United States and Mexico border.

Gun control Gun control arose as an issue following the 1963 assassination of then-President John F. Kennedy, who was killed by shots from a mail-order rifle. It gained momentum following the 1968 fatal shootings of Martin Luther King Jr. and then-Sen. Robert F. Kennedy.

What the parties said about Gun control Praised the 1968 Gun Control Act, which banned mail-order sales, as a “step toward putting the weapons of wanton violence beyond the reach of criminal and irresponsible hands.” 1968 Supported tighter gun control, saying most police officers were killed with handguns. Mentioned the May shooting of then-Alabama Gov. George Wallace during a campaign stop in Maryland. 1972 Democrats said they would protect “Americans’ Second Amendment right to own firearms.” 2004 Supported laws to “control indiscriminatet availability of firearms, safeguarding the right of responsible citizens to collect, own and use firearms for legitimate purposes.” 1968 Opposed federal firearm registration and supported removing provisions in the 1968 Gun Control Act that don’t “significantly impact on crime but serve rather to restrain the law-abiding citizen in his legitimate use of firearms.” 1980 Continued support for gun ownership and condemned “frivolous lawsuits against gun manufacturers.” 2012 The platform supported laws to “control indiscriminate availability of firearms, safeguarding the right of responsible citizens to collect, own and use firearms for legitimate purposes.” Praised the 1968 Gun Control Act, which banned mail-order sales, as a “step toward putting the weapons of wanton violence beyond the reach of criminal and irresponsible hands.” 1968 1968 1972 Supported tighter gun control, saying most police officers were killed with handguns. Mentioned the May shooting of then-Alabama Gov. George Wallace during a campaign stop in Maryland. Opposed federal firearm registration and supported removing provisions in the 1968 Gun Control Act that don’t “significantly impact on crime but serve rather to restrain the law-abiding citizen in his legitimate use of firearms.” 1980 Democrats said they would protect “Americans’ Second Amendment right to own firearms.” 2012 Continued support for gun ownership and condemned “frivolous lawsuits against gun manufacturers.”

What they’re saying now

Democrats Supports expanding background checks, closing loopholes, holding gun dealers and manufacturers accountable and banning assault weapons. Clinton’s stand on expanding concealed-carry permits is unclear. Republicans Continues to oppose an assault weapon ban and limits on clip or magazine capacity. Trump says he has a concealed-carry permit and favors expansion.

Trade Both parties in the past have favored international trade agreements. But now, both Clinton and Trump oppose the pending Trans-Pacific Partnership deal, and support for trade in both platforms has softened.

What the parties said about Trade The party supported multilateral trade agreements that “can advance our economic interests by expanding the global economy” as long as they protected workers and the environment. 1992 The Clinton administration “has signed over 200 trade agreements … to open markets worldwide to American products.” 1996 2012 “We are on track to finalize the Trans-Pacific Partnership … that will address new and emerging trade issues.” “In creating new economic opportunity in Mexico, a [North American Free Trade Agreement] removes the incentive to cross the border illegally in search of work.” 1992 “A new Republican government committed to NAFTA can enlarge it into a vision for hemispheric free trade, drawing nations closer.” 2000 “A Republican President will complete negotiations for a Trans-Pacific Partnership to open rapidly developing Asian markets to U.S. products.” 2012 The party supported multilateral trade agreements that “can advance our economic interests by expanding the global economy” as long as they protected workers and the environment. “In creating new economic opportunity in Mexico, a [North American Free Trade Agreement] removes the incentive to cross the border illegally in search of work.” 1992 1992 The Clinton administration “has signed over 200 trade agreements … to open markets worldwide to American products.” “A new Republican government committed to NAFTA can enlarge it into a vision for hemispheric free trade, drawing nations closer.” 1996 2000 “We are on track to finalize the Trans-Pacific Partnership … that will address new and emerging trade issues.” 2012 2012 “A Republican President will complete negotiations for a Trans-Pacific Partnership to open rapidly developing Asian markets to U.S. products.”

What they’re saying now

Democrats “America has signed too many trade deals that have not lived up to the hype.” Republicans Trade deals should reflect a policy of “America First.”

The death penalty Republican platforms have more consistently favored the death penalty, while positions of Democrats have shifted since Bill Clinton was president.

What the parties said about The death penalty The party supported abolishing the death penalty, an “ineffective deterrent to crime.” 1972 Boasted the party had established the death penalty for nearly 60 violent crimes and enacted a law that would limit appeals. 1996 “The death penalty should must not be arbitrary.” Supported wider use of DNA testing and ensuring defendants have effective counsel. 2012 The platform supported allowing states to decide whether to impose the death penalty for certain crimes. 1976 “We support strong penalties, including the death penalty for major drug traffickers.” 1988 The party opposed a Supreme Court’s decision to ban the death penalty for the rape of a child, calling it an “unwarranted interference … for the benefit of savage criminals whose guilt is not at issue.” 2008 The platform supported allowing states to decide whether to impose the death penalty for certain crimes. The party supported abolishing the death penalty, an “ineffective deterrent to crime.” 1972 1976 Boasted the party had established the death penalty for nearly 60 violent crimes and enacted a law that would limit appeals. “We support strong penalties, including the death penalty for major drug traffickers.” 1988 1996 2008 The party opposed a Supreme Court’s decision to ban the death penalty for the rape of a child, calling it an “unwarranted interference … for the benefit of savage criminals whose guilt is not at issue.” 2012 “The death penalty should must not be arbitrary.” Supported wider use of DNA testing and ensuring defendants have effective counsel.

What they’re saying now

Democrats Platform says abolish the death penalty, a cruel and unusual punishment. Clinton says she favors it only for limited, heinous crimes. Republicans Support for the death penalty is unwavering.

Abortion The parties have been split on abortion for decades, and narrowing of that difference seems unlikely.

What the parties said about Abortion The party opposed a constitutional amendment to overturn the Supreme Court decision that extended a right of privacy to a woman’s decision to have an abortion. 1976 Platform stated abortion rights are deemed “a fundamental constitutional liberty.” 1992 “Abortion is an intensely personal decision between a woman, her family, her doctor, and her clergy; there is no place for politicians or government to get in the way.” 2012 Abortion makes its first appearance, but the platform concedes that the party is split on the issue. 1976 1980 The issue is considered settled, and the GOP seeks a constitutional amendment protecting “the right to life for unborn children.” Opposed using public money to promote or perform abortion or to fund organizations that perform or advocate it. Opposed subsidizing health care that includes abortion coverage. 2012 Abortion made its first appearance on the platform, but it conceded that the party is split on the issue. The party opposed a constitutional amendment to overturn the Supreme Court decision that extended a right of privacy to a woman’s decision to have an abortion. 1976 1976 The issue is considered settled, and the party seeks a constitutional amendment protecting “the right to life for unborn children.” 1980 Platform stated abortion rights are deemed “a fundamental constitutional liberty.” 1992 Opposed using public money to promote or perform abortion or to fund organizations that perform or support it. Opposed subsidizing health care that includes abortion coverage. “Abortion is an intensely personal decision between a woman, her family, her doctor, and her clergy; there is no place for politicians or government to get in the way.” 2012 2012

What they’re saying now

Democrats “We will continue to oppose—and seek to overturn—federal and state laws and policies that impede a woman’s access to abortion.” Republicans Includes for emphasis the full text of the Hyde Amendment, which bans using federal funds for any form of abortion. Trump has made conflicting statements.

LGBT issues Since 1992, Republican platforms have used only the word “homosexual,” while Democratic platforms have almost always use the words “gay” and “lesbian.”

What the parties said about LGBT issues “A Democratic Administration will work vigorously to address, document, and end” violent acts of “bigotry, hatred and extremism” aimed at gay and lesbian people. 1984 The party opposed discrimination based on sexual orientation. But in September, Congressional Democrats supported the Defense of Marriage Act, limiting marriage to a man and a woman. 1996 The platform supported marriage equality. Recognized gay rights as human rights and promised to combat “efforts by other nations that criminalize homosexual conduct.” 2012 “We support the continued exclusion of homosexuals from the military as a matter of good order and discipline.” Dropped in 2012. 1992 The party praised Congressional Republicans for passing DOMA, which allowed states to not recognize same-sex marriages. DOMA was struck down in 2013. 1996 2012 “We condemn the hate campaigns, threats of violence, and vandalism by proponents of same-sex marriage against advocates of traditional marriage and call for a federal investigation into attempts to deny religious believers their civil rights.” “A Democratic Administration will work vigorously to address, document and end” violent acts of “bigotry, hatred and extremism” aimed at gay and lesbian people. “We support the continued exclusion of homosexuals from the military as a matter of good order and discipline. ” This position was not included in 2012. 1984 1992 The party opposed discrimination based on sexual orientation. But in September, Congressional Democrats supported the Defense of Marriage Act, limiting marriage to a man and a woman. The party praised Congressional Republicans for passing DOMA, which allowed states to not recognize same-sex marriages. DOMA was struck down in 2013. 1996 1996 2012 The platform supported marriage equality. Recognized gay rights as human rights and promised to combat “efforts by other nations that criminalize homosexual conduct.” 2012 “We condemn the hate campaigns, threats of violence, and vandalism by proponents of same-sex marriage against advocates of traditional marriage and call for a federal investigation into attempts to deny religious believers their civil rights.”

What they’re saying now

Democrats Applauds the Supreme Court decision allowing same-sex marriage. Favors “comprehensive federal non-discrimination protections for all LGBT Americans.” Republicans Endorses state laws to limit restroom access to gender identity at birth. Calls for reversing the Supreme Court’s marriage decision. Trump calls gays “tremendous people.”