What we know about the Paris attacks and the hunt for the attackers
French authorities suspect three teams carried out the attacks, but not all have been identified. Here is what we know so far:

[Suspected architect Abdelhamid Abaaoud of the Paris attacks is dead, according to two senior intelligence officials]

Abdelhamid Abaaoud

Abaaoud was the suspected mastermind behind the Paris attacks and several others, and French authorities suspected he was planning a new attack near Paris when he was killed. Abaaoud was one of Europe's most wanted men before the Nov. 13 attacks, but he slipped from the radar of intelligence services and was widely thought to be in Syria, where he starred in grisly propaganda videos. One counterterrorism expert said he had “a big role” in recruiting French-speaking jihadists.

“Ahmad Almohammad”

A Syrian passport bearing this name was found near one of the suicide bombers at Stade de France, but was later deemed fake by authorities. His fingerprints matched those of an asylum seeker who arrived from Turkey to the Aegean island of Leros with 198 Syrian immigrants on Oct. 3. He was later found to have gone through Athens, Macedonia and Serbia; his identity remains unknown.

Foued Mohamed-Aggad

Mohamed-Aggad was identified by French authorities on Dec. 9 as a suicide bomber at the Bataclan music hall, the deadliest scene of the attacks in Paris. The 23-year-old was from Strasbourg, in northeastern France, according to AFP, which reported that Mohamed-Aggad went to Syria in late 2013 with a brother and several friends. AFP and Le Parisien reported that most of those who he traveled to Syria with were arrested in spring 2014 when they returned to France, but Mohamed-Aggad stayed longer. Reports quoting French authorities said he was identified via DNA that matched his mother, who received a text message confirming his death.

[French authorities identify third attacker from Paris concert hall]

Bilal Hadfi

According to two European intelligence officials, Hadfi had fought in Syria. Belgian law enforcement new he returned from the Middle East to Belgium, but couldn't find him.

Ismael Omar Mostefai

A former petty criminal with family ties to Algeria, Mostefai is believed to have crossed into Syria in 2013, a French police official said. The Associated Press reported he lived with his family in Chartres and frequented the Anoussra Mosque.

Samy Amimour

The former bus driver was questioned by French officials in 2012 about links to a network of terror sympathizers, prosecutors said. He was placed under judicial supervision in France in 2012 after attempting to travel to Yemen. After Amimour went to Syria, his father told Le Monde that he tried but failed to get him to return home in June 2014.

Brahim Abdeslam

Abdeslam grew up in the Brussels neighborhood of Molenbeek and spent a month in a Belgian prison in 2003 for stealing and reselling official ID cards. He was charged in 2010 with fencing stolen goods and falsifying papers, according to Belgium’s federal prosecutor. Abdeslam, who ran a sketchy café in Molenbeek, was interrogated by Belgian federal police and released in February after he was sent back from Turkey.

Salah Abdeslam

A younger brother of Brahim, Abdelslam was caught Friday after a massive manhunt. Authorities suspect he helped with logistics during the Paris attacks. He was stopped near the Belgian border after the attacks but not arrested; an alert called him “dangerous” and his whereabouts remain unknown. In February 2011, he was convicted of breaking and entering along with a friend, Abdelhamid Abaaoud. Earlier this year, Abdeslam was questioned by Belgian federal police; authorities said they knew he had been radicalized but didn’t think he was a terrorist.

A ninth suspect

French officials confirmed they are seeking another individual in connection with Friday’s attack.