UWGB faculty vote 'no confidence' in Cross, UW regents
GREEN BAY (WLUK) -- The University of Wisconsin-Green Bay's faculty senate has passed a resolution expressing "no confidence" in UW System President Ray Cross and the UW Board of Regents.

The vote Wednesday afternoon was 24-1.





According to an agenda on the university's website, the Faculty Senate resolution calls for UW leaders "to recommit themselves to the Wisconsin Idea by carrying out their responsibilities and working with us to strengthen the quality of our state universities, in particular by working with the state legislature to make a positive case for improved access, affordability, and educational resources for our students."





UW faculty have said Cross should have fought harder against the $250 million cut in the latest two-year state budget. Faculty were also angered by a budget provision that weakened job protections.

"I don't expect any sort of radical change to come, but it needs to go on the record," said Harvey Kaye, a history professor at UW-Green Bay. "People need to know that they are not alone on the various campuses that citizens out there are not alone in their concern for the state of the university."

UW-Green Bay Chancellor Gary Miller doesn't have a vote on the senate faculty, but told the group he was against the resolution.



"I would hope that we would move toward a different kind of approach, a harder approach, committing to evidence-based action, constructing dialogue, an appreciation of the full range of views and working the problem," said Miller.

Similar votes have been held recently on other campuses, including UW-Madison and UW-Milwaukee.

Gov. Scott Walker responded to the similar vote at UW-Milwaukee in a series of posts on Twitter. He said the faculty "fail to grasp reality."

Walker's office also provided these arguments in opposition to the UWGB vote:

On Tuesday, in anticipation of the UWGB vote, a spokesperson for Cross and the UW Regents pointed FOX 11 to statements from last week.

RELATED STORIES: