What Trump has undone
Despite Trump's claims, several presidents have signed more legislation than he has at this point in their terms. (Meg Kelly/The Washington Post)

President Trump has repeatedly argued that he’s done more than any other recent president. That’s not true, as measured by the amount of legislation he’s been able to sign. It is true, though, that Trump has undone a lot of things that were put into place by his predecessors.

Since Jan. 20, Trump’s administration has enthusiastically and systematically undone or uprooted rules, policies and tools that predated his time in office. Below, a list of those changes, roughly organized by subject area.

Updated as of Dec. 15. Did we miss something? Let us know.

The economy

Withdrew from the Trans-Pacific Partnership. The trade deal would have established a trade partnership between the United States and countries on the Pacific Rim.

Revoked a rule that expanded the number of people who could earn overtime pay.

Reversal of a rule that would mandate that oil and gas companies report payments to foreign governments. The Securities and Exchange Commission will no longer receive this information.

Stopped a rule that would require large companies to report worker incomes by race and gender. The rule was aimed at reducing pay disparity.

Reversed an interpretation of the Civil Rights Act that provided protection to transgender workers.

Ended a rule that barred employers from taking some or all of the tips given to service employees.

Canceled a rule mandating that financial advisers act in the best interests of their clients.

Ended a rule that allowed consumers to file class-action suits against financial companies.

Ended limits on the ability of states to drug test those seeking unemployment benefits.

Reversed a policy allowing states to develop their own work requirements for welfare recipients.

Revoked an executive order that mandated compliance by contractors with laws protecting women in the workplace. Before the 2014 order, a report found that companies with federal contracts worth millions of dollars had scores of violations of labor and civil rights laws.

Repeal of a rule allowing states to create retirement savings plans for private-sector workers.

Appointed Mick Mulvaney, a fierce opponent of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, to serve as its interim leader. Mulvaney once said the Bureau was a “joke.”

Blocked implementation of a rule that would have made it easier for farmers to sue big agricultural companies.

Repeal of a bill that mandated that employers maintain records of workplace injuries.

Removed information about worker injuries from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration website.

Killed a rule mandating that government contractors disclose past violations of labor law.

The justice system

Rescinded a President Obama effort to reduce mandatory sentences. Attorney General Jeff Sessions ordered that prosecutors seek the most stringent penalties possible in criminal cases.

Canceled a phaseout of the use of private prisons.

Reversed restrictions on providing surplus military gear to police departments. Those restrictions were implemented by the Obama administration after the unrest in Ferguson, Mo.

Reversed a ban on civil forfeiture. Law enforcement officials are now once again able to seize assets from suspects who haven’t been convicted of any crime.

Reversed the government’s position on a voter ID law in Texas. Under the Obama administration, the Justice Department argued that the law had discriminatory intent. Under Sessions, Justice withdrew that complaint. On Wednesday, a federal court threw out the law.

Reviewed Justice Department efforts to address problematic police departments. An effort to address concerns in the Baltimore Police Department was delayed.

Requested a review of the convictions of Blackwater guard for killings of unarmed Iraqi civilians in 2007. At the time, Blackwater’s CEO was Erik Prince, brother of Education Secretary Betsy DeVos.

Overhauled and scaled down the Department of Justice and the State Department.

The environment

In August, Politico reported that some representatives of oil and gas companies are worried that Trump’s moving too quickly to reverse regulations on their industry. “[Y]ou don’t need to roll things back so far that it opens an opportunity for outsiders to criticize, or something bad happens,” one analyst said.

Withdrew from the Paris climate agreement.

Blocked the Clean Power Plan. The plan implemented under Obama focused on reducing greenhouse gas emissions from power plants. In October, The Post reported that the administration would seek to repeal it entirely.

Suspended a rule limiting methane leaks from drilling on federal land. Methane is a much more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide.

Ended a study on the health effects of mountaintop-removal mining. The process involves blasting away the tops of hills and mountains to get at coal seams under the surface.

Rescinded a rule mandating that rising sea levels be considered when building public infrastructure in flood-prone areas.

Reversed an Obama ban on drilling for oil in the Arctic.

Announced a reduction in the scale of several national monuments. In April, Trump signed an executive order ordering a review of monuments added in the past 20 years, opening up the possibility that some areas previously set aside would have that status revoked. Last month, Trump announced plans to reduce the size of two, one after lobbying from a uranium company.

Ignored a deadline to implement a rule regulating smog.

Withdrew a rule regulating fracking on public land.

Announced plans to reconsider controversial protections for the sage grouse in western states. The bird’s habitat has been reduced as sagebrush has been removed in places that are being developed, often for oil and grass drilling. While not officially endangered, conservation groups worry about the sage grouse’s fate.

Postponed an EPA rule that would have had chemical plants better evaluate and inform the public about possible safety issues. This decision, made in June, drew new attention after Hurricane Harvey flooding led to an explosion at a facility near Houston.

Rejected a proposed ban on the pesticide chlorpyrifos. The month after this decision, a group of farmworkers were sickened by exposure to the chemical.

Reversed a ban on plastic bottles at national parks.

Repealed a ban on lead bullets. The bullets were banned under Obama because the lead can poison wildlife.

Rescinded a limit on the number of sea animals that can be trapped or killed in fishing nets.

Delayed and potentially rolled back automotive fuel efficiency standards.

Began repeal of a rule that would weaken emissions standards for some truck components.

Repealed the Waters of the United States rule. This rule expanded the definition of water bodies that were protected by the Environmental Protection Agency.

Ended a rule banning dumping waste from mining into streams.

Reversed a rule banning hunting bears and wolves. The ban applied to federal refuges in Alaska and prohibited hunting predators using certain methods.

Repealed a rule that would have overhauled the federal land management process.

Removed more than a dozen academics from the EPA’s Scientific Advisory Board.

Removed a bike-sharing station at the White House.

Foreign policy and immigration

Intends to decertify the landmark agreement with Iran aimed at limiting that nation’s ability to develop nuclear weapons. Such a declaration would force Congress to decide whether sanctions should again be imposed on Iran.

Plans to phase out a policy under which people who immigrated to the U.S. illegally as children could work legally and avoid deportation. The program, begun under Obama, is called Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals or DACA.

Cut the number of migrants and refugees allowed from seven predominantly Muslim countries.

Ended “temporary protected status” designations for tens of thousands of Central Americans and Haitians seeking refuge in the U.S.

Proposed revoking a rule that allowed the spouses of those with H-1B visas to work in the U.S.

Ended a process that made it easier for people to extend H-1B visas for most of the year.

Ended a State Department office that oversaw international sanctions. The administration has not met an Oct. 1 deadline to implement new sanctions on Russia.

Repealed a rule allowing transgender individuals to serve in the military. The measure is currently being considered in the courts.

Stopped funding some UN relief efforts. Instead, the administration will back efforts by private organizations and faith-based groups.

Pulled out of the UN’s Global Compact on Migration. The concern, according to Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, was that it “could undermine the sovereign right of the United States to enforce our immigration laws and secure our borders.”

Rolled back of Obama’s outreach to the Cuban government.

Ended the Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents program. DAPA extended protections for some immigrant parents whose children were citizens of or residents in the United States.

Education

Reversed a policy instituted by the Obama administration to expand punishments for campus sexual assaults.

Repealed 72 documents defining the rights of students with disabilities. The administration argues that this won’t affect how those students are educated.

Rolled back school lunch standards championed by Michelle Obama.

Withdrew federal protections for transgender students in schools. Under the rule approved by Obama, transgender students could use school bathrooms that corresponded to their gender identities.

Canceled a partnership with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau aimed at policing student loan fraud.

Reversed a rule that mandated how achievement is measured in schools.

Repealed a rule mandating certain requirements for teacher-preparation programs.

Guns

Reversed a rule that would ban gun sales to those deemed “mentally defective” by the government.

Reconsidered a ban on carrying firearms on Army Corps of Engineers land.

Narrowed the definition of “fugitive” to reduce the number of people allowed to own guns.

Other areas

Halted or canceled hundreds of other minor regulatory actions.

Ended payments to insurers meant to expand health-care coverage for low-income Americans.

Erased net neutrality rules established by the FCC under Obama. The rules prevented internet service providers from charging more for certain types of internet traffic.

Repealed a rule mandating that Internet service providers seek permission before selling personal information.

Revoked a ban on denying funding for Planned Parenthood at the state level.

Revoked an Obama rule barring those who’d served as registered lobbyists the prior year from taking jobs with the administration.

Determined that claims of violations of religious freedom would trump protections for gay and transgender people. This is the cake-for-a-gay-wedding issue; the Trump Justice Department takes the position that the religious beliefs of a business owner can take precedence over the civil rights of employees or customers.

Began the process of undoing the Johnson Amendment. The law bars religious institutions from taking positions on political candidates. An effort to include this repeal in a tax reform package ended without success.

Scrapped an Obama-era rule requiring that airlines disclose baggage fees.

Reversed a policy aimed at reducing mortgage insurance premiums for new FHA loans.



Cut outreach aimed at bolstering enrollment in Obamacare.

Limited the Obamacare mandate that birth control be covered in health-care plans. The administration will give employers and insurers the right to exempt such coverage on religious or moral grounds.

Slow or nonexistent staffing at the Senate-confirmed and management level across administration agencies.

Repealed a rule mandating consolidation of transit planning authorities.

Ended the declaration of June as Pride Month and the practice of recognizing the end of Ramadan with an iftar dinner.

Canceled public reporting on visitors to the White House and other online data.