Napolitano Blasts Feds’ ‘Massive, Stalinistic-Like Use of Force’ in Nevada Ranch Standoff
Judge Napolitano was on “Hannity” tonight to discuss the Nevada ranch standoff, eminent domain, and the percentage of land owned by the federal government.

Napolitano said that the government should file a judgment against Cliven Bundy, and when he passes away or sells his property, the government will get the judgment plus interest.

So why won’t they do that?

“The government, instead of using the least force necessary, which is what the rule of law is, is using the most force possible because they want to intimidate the Bundys – I’m convinced he cannot be intimidated – they want to intimidate others, and they’re probably a little unsure of themselves, Sean, and so they’re compensating for that lack of surety, of certainty, with this massive, Stalinistic-like use of force.”

Hannity and Napolitano also discussed recent cases in which the government is seizing private property under eminent domain.

“Unfortunately, the law has changed and it has changed in a totalitarian direction,” Napolitano said.

The Bureau of Land Management is now reportedly eyeing property along the Red River, which Napolitano said is a big mistake. He said Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott is a “tenacious defender of personal liberty and property rights.” Napolitano believes that we will see a vastly different reaction in Texas than in Nevada. He said the state government will probably take legal action and maybe even use force.

Hannity and Napolitano touched on the latest figures on percentages of land owned by the federal government, many of which are very high. In 2010, the U.S. government owned 81 percent of land in Nevada, for example.

“The Constitution simply does not authorize the federal government to own any of this land. All of it is being held unconstitutionally and all of it should be returned to the private property owners from which it was taken or to the states whose borders it exists, period,” Napolitano said.

'Cheap Apologists of the Obama Admin': Hannity Fires Back At 'The Daily Show'

EXCLUSIVE: Bundy Hits Back After Reid Calls Family's Supporters 'Domestic Terrorists'