Risk Corridors making it to the mainstream media
More people are starting to pay attention to the stealth “Risk Corridors” provision contained in section 1342 of the Affordable Care Act (18 U.S.C. § 18062) . They are looking at whether that provision of the law, which calls for transfers by the Secretary of HHS from profitable exchange insurers to unprofitable ones, might persuade insurers to retain greater enthusiasm about participation in the Exchanges and whether the financial bill for section 1342 might not be the zero projected by the Congressional Budget Office. One of those paying attention is the influential CNN.

In a story this evening titled “Obamacare fix could add millions of collars in government costs” by Adam Aigner-Treworgy, CNN pretty much tracks the analysis offered on this blog in previous days. It quotes the Kaiser Family Foundation, usually a pretty reliable source on the finances of the ACA as saying that the difference between the amount previously thought owed under Risk Corridors and the amount that might be owed as a result of recent developments “could be tens of millions or even hundreds of millions of dollars.” The story likewise quotes Melinda Buntin, a former deputy director for health at the Congressional Budget Office and current chair of the Department of Health Policy at Vanderbilt University:

To the extent that the risk pool changes in ways that were not foreseen by the insurers because of the announcement yesterday and they are not included in the bids that they proposed to the government and that their selection is riskier and more adverse that they anticipated then that could be an additional cost to the government.

Risk corridors was also the topic of remarks today by White House press secretary Jay Carney. As reported on the blog, The Hill, Carney said the following today. “If the costs are higher, then [the Department of Health and Human Services] can mitigate those costs with insurers,” Carney said at a briefing. “If costs come in significantly lower, then the insurers will replenish the fund by passing back some of those profits.”

The question again is where does the money come from? Just saying “the treasury,” as law professor and ACA zealot Timothy Jost is quoted as saying in the CNN report, is not precise enough. Someone needs to find a specific appropriation that can be used for this purpose. On the other hand, if the Kaiser Foundation is right and we are talking about sums less than a billion dollars, that may be a very small amount for President Obama to dig up from somewhere in order to salvage his signature domestic achievement. I guess I’m a little less confident that the bill is going to be that small — unless, of course, enrollment in the Exchanges continues to be minuscule.