Pregnant Mother of Three Had 'Absolute Nightmare' Experience With ACA
BY:



Elizabeth Jacinto, a pregnant mother of three, shared her story Wednesday about how she was arbitrarily kicked off her health care plan because of Obamacare, describing how it affected her small children and pregnancy and why she is now supporting the Republican plan to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act.

The ad was aired by the conservative-leaning American Action Network. The group also posted online a 30-second version of the video.

"With three children and a fourth on the way, health care is extremely important to our family," Jacinto said. "When Obamacare was first coming out I was hopeful that it was going to work out for our family, and what ended up happening was an absolute nightmare."

Jacinto explained that she was kicked off of her plan without any reason, leaving her children, husband, and herself without access to health care coverage.

Her young child had to go without vaccinations for "several months" and she could not visit the gynecologist despite being pregnant.

"We were arbitrarily kicked off our plan, we didn't have access to health care, and with a young child you always worry in the back of your mind, ‘What if something happens, what if something goes wrong,'" Jacinto said. "He couldn't receive his immunizations for several months; I didn’t have access to my OB-GYN."

Her husband also had to delay a surgery that he needed.

"It was one disaster after another for my family," Jacinto said.

She said that for these reasons she supports the Republicans' plan to repeal and replace Obamacare.

"We need to have an option that allows all Americans a better plan and better health insurance, to have deductibles and out-of-pocket maximums be reasonable and for people to get the coverage they want and need," she said. "That's why we need to move forward with a new plan that Republicans are putting forward. I support the Republicans' effort to fix health care for the American people."