Ann Coulter’s Donald Trump hagiography was very poorly timed
On Tuesday, conservative provocateur Ann Coulter released her latest book — an ode to Donald Trump titled "In Trump We Trust: E Pluribus Awesome!" (Yes, that's the real title.)

That same day, Trump did the one thing Coulter wrote in her book cannot be forgiven.

"Until the bleeding has stopped, there's nothing Trump can do that won't be forgiven," she wrote. "Except change his immigration policies."

Trump has now essentially changed his immigration policies, telling Sean Hannity in a town hall taped the very day Coulter's book hit the shelves that he's open to "softening" his position on illegal immigrants who have contributed to society. In further town hall remarks airing Wednesday night, Trump said that he didn't favor citizenship for immigrants living illegally in the country but that he would "work with them" on a plan that would include "back taxes."

Coulter isn't happy.

On Twitter late Wednesday, she noted how similar Trump's rhetoric sounded to those who favor a path to legal status for undocumented immigrants.

Only part he left out was the "hoops" they'll have to jump through! Trump:"No citizenship. Let me go a step further—they'll pay back-taxes" — Ann Coulter (@AnnCoulter) August 25, 2016

Trump: "they have to pay taxes, there's no amnesty" [Pro Tip: "Back taxes" means we pay illegals $30k apiece in EITC.} — Ann Coulter (@AnnCoulter) August 25, 2016

She tweeted incredulously about Trump saying his proposal wasn't "amnesty."

It's not "amnesty." It's "comprehensive immigration reform"!!!! Trump: "they have to pay taxes, there's no amnesty." — Ann Coulter (@AnnCoulter) August 25, 2016

And she wasn't happy about Trump's comment that deporting illegal immigrants who have been here for many years would be "very hard."

"I've had very strong people come up to me — really great, great people come up to me — and they've said, 'Mr. Trump, I love you, but to take a person who's been here for 15 or 20 years and throw them and their family out, it's so tough, Mr. Trump,'" he told Hannity. "I have it all the time. It's a very, very hard thing."

Well, if it's "hard," then nevermind. Trump: "... to take a person who's been here for 15 or 20 years ....It's a very, very hard thing." — Ann Coulter (@AnnCoulter) August 25, 2016

It's "hard" to deport someone who's been here FOUR YEARS! https://t.co/Ajbon3TcDP — Ann Coulter (@AnnCoulter) August 25, 2016

So here is Coulter, having just published a book making the case that we need Trump at this point in our history — that there's only one thing he could do that would be a deal-breaker. And immediately he does that thing.

We have yet to see how big a backlash there will be on the right against Trump's new immigration policy — in large part because he hasn't laid it out in detail, and we're still left to parse exactly what his position is. But it's clear he's moving in a direction that folks like Coulter won't like. Coulter tried to play his comments off before Wednesday night, but now he has apparently gone too far.

Let this be a reminder to anyone who feels strongly about very conservative policy ideals: For Trump, self-described master negotiator, it appears just about everything is negotiable.