Ted Cruz and Jeff Sessions Attack Gang of Eight, Immigration Reform
BY:



Sens. Jeff Sessions (R., Ala.) and Ted Cruz (R., Texas) attacked the recently passed immigration bill in the Senate to chants of "kill the bill" from a swelling crowd at the D.C. March for Jobs rally Monday.

The sweeping immigration reform bill passed 68-32 in the Senate late June with 14 Republicans joining all 52 Democrats and two independents.

"We come here today with a message for Congress: We need an immigration policy that serves the American worker and the American taxpayer," Sessions said.

Sessions went on to say that if the immigration reform bill passes, as is, unemployment will rise, wages will drop, and the GDP will be on the decline for the next twenty years.

"If this bill is passed it will increase unemployment," said Cruz.

"The immigration bill passed in the senate benefits a select few … at the cost of the American worker."

"It is a hammer blow to American families" Sessions added.

"We need to improve and streamline our legal immigration system … this ‘Gang of Eight’ bill that just passed in the Senate does neither one of those. It is designed to fail," Cruz said.

The rally had over 500 people in attendance, most adorned with signs and clothing lamenting the amnesty clause in the new immigration bill and mocking Sen. Marco Rubio’s (R., Fla.) participation in the bipartisan "Gang of Eight."

"Marco Rubio is a traitor to Florida and the United States," one woman from Florida told the Washington Free Beacon. She refused to give her name, citing fears of being audited by the IRS.

Cruz ended the rally by highlighting Obamacare’s preferential treatment towards illegal immigrants that will be granted amnesty under the new immigration bill.

"There is a $5,000 dollar penalty for hiring legal U.S. citizens and a $0 dollar penalty for illegal immigrants [under Obamacare]," Cruz said.

The bipartisan immigration bill passed in the Senate faces staunch resistance as it enters the GOP-dominated House of Representatives, with many there opposed to its passage.