Philippine President Duterte said he’d be sitting next to Obama at dinner. He isn’t.
Leaders of the East Asia Summit gathered at a gala dinner in Vientiane on Sept. 7. The Philippines' headline-grabbing president attended, but was seated next to Russia's prime minister instead of the leaders of the U.S. or the U.N. as his press service had previously suggested. (Reuters)

Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte looked set for a potentially awkward dinner Wednesday, with widespread reports suggesting he would be seated between two men he had recently insulted.

Worse still, these men happen to be two of the most important politicians in the world.

Representatives of the Philippine leader, notorious for both his campaign against drug traffickers and his frequent use of obscenities, had told reporters early Wednesday that he was due to be seated between President Obama and United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon at an Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) gala dinner hosted by Laotian Prime Minister Thongloun Sisoulith in Vientiane on Thursday evening.

Despite these claims, images from the dinner quickly revealed that Duterte was not, in fact, seated next to Obama or Ban.

After all the hype, Obama does not sit next to Duterte at #ASEAN2016 dinner. He's chatting to Vietnam PM's wife pic.twitter.com/yWKab6hlA4 — Karl Malakunas (@karlmalakunas) September 7, 2016

Duterte not seated beside Obama, Ban Ki-Moon during ASEAN Summit gala dinner pic.twitter.com/cqpd72gUl2 — Trisha Macas (@trishamacas) September 7, 2016

Ban, Obama, and Duterte are seated apart in ASEAN gala dinner pic.twitter.com/7MdOOF66Gn — Willard Cheng (@willardcheng) September 7, 2016

The apparent move may have saved Duterte some awkward small talk and Philippine officials later told the Associated Press said that Obama and Duterte did speak informally at the event.

However, it remains unclear why the Philippine president thought he would be sitting next to Obama and Ban.

Just a few days ago, Duterte had used the Tagalog term "putang ina" in threatening to curse Obama if he raised the issue of extrajudicial killings in the Philippines' fight against drug dealers. That phrase means "son of a bitch" or "son of a whore." Shortly after the comments were reported, the White House canceled a scheduled meeting with Duterte. The Philippine president later said that he regretted that his comments "came across as a personal attack."

President Obama traveled to China and Laos to attend the G20 and ASEAN conferences. Along the way there were more than a few times when the geopolitical discourse surrounding the events became awkward. (Jason Aldag,William Wan/The Washington Post)

Duterte has also criticized Ban for his comments about the extrajudicial killings, and last month he threatened to pull the Philippines out of the United Nations, saying that the organization had made a "very stupid" proposition. Again, the Philippine president later said he was only joking, but this week, Duterte said he would not meet with the U.N. secretary general at the ASEAN summit as he had "no time."

Early Wednesday, however, Duterte's press service announced that the Philippine president would meet both of these men for the first time at a dinner that evening — because he would be seated next to them.

"Presidents Duterte and Obama will be seated next to each other, which expectedly, will focus all cameras on them to deliver to the world the encounter of the two. Incidentally, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is also seated on the other side of President Duterte," the president's office said in a statement, according to Rappler.

Asked how the meeting with Duterte and Obama might go down, Communications Secretary Martin Andanar told reporters: "It's difficult to speculate, but certainly they will have their drinks and food together."

More on WorldViews

The ‘son of a whore’ story is about so much more than Duterte’s dirty mouth