ICD 9: International Medical and "Legal" Execution Coding Brought Under Obamacare
A faithful reader sent me a code and asked me to investigate how it ties into the larger scale of things. The specific code sent to me will make any American’s hair stand up on the back of their neck. The code is ICD 9 E 978. After reading this code I decided that it was my duty to investigate further and get to the bottom of why we have a medical code in the United States for “Legal Execution.” Below are my results.

ICD 9 E 978 "Legal Execution

All executions performed at the behest of the judiciary or ruling authority [whether permanent or temporary] as: asphyxiation by gas

beheading, decapitation (by guillotine)

capital punishment

electrocution

hanging

poisoning

shooting

other specified means

INJURY UNDETERMINED WHETHER ACCIDENTALLY OR PURPOSELY

INFLICTED

According to reports, more than 68,105 new medical codes are being added due to the Obamacare monstrosity. Doctors all across the nation have been complaining due to the overwhelming burden it places upon them. Just the time consumption alone, making sure these codes are accurate, will inevitably take time away from the doctor/patient relationship creating a barrier of paperwork while destroying the personal experience with your doctor. While these doctors are correct to state it will be even more of a burden, they are not correct to state this has come out of Obamacare itself. Let me explain.

These codes were not created by Obamacare, however Obamacare is trying to implement every American citizen under international codes to link us to the “international” system. These codes were actually created by the WHO (World Health Organization) . The WHO is a specialized agency of the United Nations.

First, it is important to know what the meanings of the codes are to grasp a better understanding of the importance and depth of this “internal takeover” that has been going on for many years right under our noses. The first ICD (International Classification of Diseases) was created in 1893.

WHO took control of clinical modifications in 1948.

1955 the WHO modified the ICD to track mortality rates.

1977 the 9th revision was published aka “ICD 9 Medical Codes” that are being used today within our medical system.

1988 Congress passed “Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act” requiring the use of ICD 9 codes on all claims.

1996 Mandated codes to be of highest possible specificity.

As of October 1, 2014 the ICD 9 coding will no longer be used. ICD 10 “mandated” medical coding will add 68,105 codes. The ICD-10-PCS (Procedure Code System) has an additional 86,000 codes totaling approximately 155,000 new medical codes for medical professionals. I can see why this would be overwhelming, and I am sure this will be a burden on doctors. One does have to wonder why doctors have not spoken out against this international coding system in the first place. This “international” United Nations based code is used to track people in all countries that have signed on with the WHO plan. Their "coding" and “data” collections have been implemented all around the globe with a few exceptions. So why are American doctors being required to use international medical coding? Why haven’t doctors pointed out these are international codes? Why did congress sell out the American people in 1988 by passing the "Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act" going along with and forcing “Sovereign United States Citizens” under “International rules, regulations, and coding”?

According to Wikipedia The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations (UN) that is concerned with international public health. It was established on 7 April 1948, with its headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland. WHO is a member of the United Nations Development Group. Its predecessor, the Health Organization, was an agency of the League of Nations. The use of the word "world", rather than "international", emphasized the truly global nature of what the organization was seeking to achieve. The constitution of the World Health Organization had been signed by all 61 countries of the United Nations by 22 July 1946. It thus became the first specialized agency of the United Nations to which every member subscribed. Its constitution formally came into force on the first World Health Day on 7 April 1948, when it was ratified by the 26th member state. The first meeting of the World Health Assembly finished on 24 July 1948, having secured a budget of US$5 million (then GBP£1,250,000) for the 1949 year. Andrija Stampar was the Assembly's first president, and G. Brock Chisholm was appointed Director-General of WHO, having served as Executive Secretary during the planning stages. Its first priorities were to control the spread of malaria, tuberculosis and sexually transmitted infections, and to improve maternal and child health, nutrition and environmental hygiene. Its first legislative act was concerning the compilation of accurate statistics on the spread and morbidity of disease. The logo of the World Health Organization features the Rod of Aesculapius as a symbol for healing. The WHO and the World Bank constitute the core team responsible for administering the International Health Partnership (IHP+). The IHP+ is a group of partner governments, development agencies, civil society and others committed to improving the health of citizens in developing countries. Partners work together to put international principles for aid effectiveness and development cooperation into practice in the health sector. In addition, the WHO has also promoted road safety. Each year, the organization marks World Health Day focusing on a specific health promotion topic, timed to match the anniversary of WHO's founding. Recent themes have been drug resistance (2011) and aging (2012). As part of the United Nations, the World Health Organization supports work towards the Millennium Development Goals. Of the eight Millennium Development Goals, three – reducing child mortality by two-thirds, to reduce maternal deaths by three-quarters, and to halt and begin to reduce the spread of HIV/AIDS – relate directly to WHO's scope; the other five inter-relate and have an impact on world health. The organization develops and promotes the use of evidence-based tools, norms and standards to support member states to inform health policy options. It oversees the implementation of the International Health Regulations, and publishes a series of medical classifications; of these, three are overreaching "reference classifications": the International Statistical Classification of Diseases (ICD), the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) and the International Classification of Health Interventions (ICHI). Other international policy frameworks produced by WHO include the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes (adopted in 1981), Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (adopted in 2003) and the Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel (adopted in 2010). The WHO regularly publishes a World Health Report, its leading publication, including an expert assessment of a specific global health topic. Other publications of WHO include the Bulletin of the World Health Organization, the Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal (overseen by EMRO), the Human Resources for Health (published in collaboration with BioMed Central), and the Pan American Journal of Public Health (overseen by PAHO/AMRO). As of 2013, the WHO has 194 member states: all Member States of the United Nations except Liechtenstein, as well as the Cook Islands and Niue. (A state becomes a full member of WHO by ratifying the treaty known as the Constitution of the World Health Organization.) As of 2013, it also had two associate members, Puerto Rico and Tokelau. Several other entities have been granted observer status. Palestine is an observer as a "national liberation movement" recognized by the League of Arab States under United Nations Resolution 3118. The Holy See also attends as an observer, as does the Order of Malta. In 2010, Taiwan was invited under the name of "Chinese Taipei". WHO Member States appoint delegations to the World Health Assembly, WHO's supreme decision-making body. All UN Member States are eligible for WHO membership, and, according to the WHO web site, "other countries may be admitted as members when their application has been approved by a simple majority vote of the World Health Assembly". In addition, the UN observer organizations International Committee of the Red Cross and International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies have entered into "official relations" with WHO and are invited as observers. In the World Health Assembly they are seated along the Financing and partnerships. The WHO is financed by contributions from member states and outside donors. As of 2012, the largest annual assessed contributions from member states came from the United States ($110 million), Japan ($58 million), Germany ($37 million), United Kingdom ($31 million) and France ($31 million). The combined 2012–2013 budget has proposed a total expenditure of $3,959 million, of which $944 million (24%) will come from assessed contributions. This represented a significant fall in outlay compared to the previous 2009–2010 budget, adjusting to take account of previous under spends. Assessed contributions were kept the same. Voluntary contributions will account for $3,015 million (76%), of which $800 million is regarded as highly or moderately flexible funding, with the remainder tied to particular programs or objectives. In recent years, the WHO's work has involved increasing collaboration with external bodies. As of 2002, a total of 473 NGOs had some form of partnership with WHO. There were 189 partnerships with international non-governmental organization (NGO) in formal "official relations" – the rest being considered informal in character. Partners include the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation.

As you can see the WHO supports UN Agenda 21 through the “Millennium Development Goals” "Sustainable Development" agendas. President Obama, as senator, had a hand in attempting to increase U.S. political attention towards Millennium Development Goals, including The Borgen Project which worked with Senator Obama on "The Global Poverty Act"; a bill requiring the White House to develop a strategy for achieving the goals. The bill did not pass.

Even more disturbing, is finding out American citizens have been subject to the ICP Medial code for many years. Thus, giving the United Nations our private information through “coding.” This is not only is an invasion of our privacy, but has been done in silence without our knowledge.

The Department of Homeland Security of Wisconsin "List of underlying causes of injury death Framework of E-code groupings (ICD-9) 1989 – 1998" conveniently leaves out the definition of code ICD 9 E 978, but does reference it at the bottom of the list as: “1. Includes legal intervention (E970-E978) and operations of war (E990-E999).”

This certainly makes me wonder why DHS would omit (“hide”) the code from the chart? Most people won’t dig to find out what the “medical code” means unless they have a specific reason to do so. One thing is for sure, whether omitted by DHS or someone else, there is a good reason this code was left out of their document. They definitely didn't want most people to see what it means. DHS knows this code would create a stir with the American people if they found out there was a code for “Legal Execution,” especially with a guillotine and beheading.

ICD9Data.com also gives a list for “legal intervention.” Center for Disease Control “International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10)”

To read more about the "global" coding ICD 9 and 10 see below:

2013 ARHPC_ICD 9 CM

The questions that need to be asked and answered are:

Why has the United States been subjected to “International Medical Coding” without our knowledge? Why are we allowing “coding” that goes against our principles and constitution? Why do we have a code for "Legal Execution" which is illegal in America? With the exception of those given the death penalty after trial by jury. When did the Department of Homeland Security find out about this coding? Why haven’t they addressed this (since they are supposed to protect the people)? Why is DHS sending any kind of “Medical Coding” to the states? Why haven’t the doctors spoken out to make Americans and Medicare recipients aware that their information has been given to an “International body”? Why haven’t they made people aware that the WHO is a specialized agency of the United Nations and directly linked to the “League of Nations under the guise of collecting data? Why would we allow forced medical coding through congressional bills to come from an organization that supports UN Agenda 21, Millennium Development Goals, and supports the eradication of “sprawl” (which is average people like you and I)? Is law enforcement aware of this specific code? If so why haven’t they brought this to the attention of the American people?

I, of course, do not know the answers to these questions, but I am deeply disturbed that we, the American People, have been kept in the dark on such an important issue. I was never asked permission for an international organization being able to access any of my information through “coding.” I’ll bet you were not asked either. It is bad enough the out of control IRS will have complete access to our health information. Now, to make matters even worse, we find out the WHO will have access to every American citizens health information through “medical coding,” via Obamacare. When will enough be enough? When will the United States wake up and refuse to continue funding the United Nations and any organization that is affiliated with it?

One thing is for sure. This coding is directly related and tied to creating their “International One World Government.” While the WHO pretends to be for helping people, they create codes for "Legal Execution" by beheading. The more you research, the more you realize that the WHO isn't all roses and sunshine. There is a much darker agenda at play. There is a direct connection between the "elitist" global banks and the WHO. The deeper you research, the more disturbing it gets. While American citizens have trusted our government to spend our money wisely, they have paid the WHO approximately $110 million dollars this year alone. Our government is inching us closer and closer to being controlled by a “One World Government” system and forcing us to pay for it. The repeal of Obamacare is important to our nation for many reasons, but pulling out of the United Nations and completely defunding them is imperative to our survival as a sovereign country and a free people.

Contact your representatives and demand that we defund and pull out of the United Nations now. Let them know about the “International Coding” system that is in place. I am sure many are not aware of this as they normally don’t even read the bills before they pass them ref: Obamacare aka ACA. If they won’t read their own bills why would we expect them to understand or know that the new medical coding is an expansion of a International Medical Code designed to track the world? This must be stopped. I am not and never have been a “global citizen”! I am an AMERICAN citizen! I am Red, White, and Blue through and through, and will continue to fight for our country, exposing corruption and spreading truth as long as I live.

Ronald Reagan Speaks out against Socialized Medicine



Don't forget to Like Freedom Outpost on Facebook, Google Plus, & Twitter. You can also get Freedom Outpost delivered to your Amazon Kindle device here.