John Kerry to Get Jail Time – They Found Everything
“Very good. Very very good. Excellent relationship. Thank you, thank you very much,” responded Trump.

“Mr. Kim will you give up your nuclear weapons, sir?” shouted Acosta, adding, “Did you talk about Otto Warmbier sir?”

Trump tried to do damage control by moving on and ignoring Acosta, at which point the CNN reporter said on a hot mic, “Hey, if they’re not going to let me in the f*cking meeting, then that’s what happens.”

Acosta was playing with millions and millions of lives here, as these comments could have enraged Kim to the point where he called off the peace agreement. Many took to social media to slam Acosta and call for his immediate firing:

Jim @Acosta should immediately have his press credentials suspended. He is an absolute disgrace! @realDonaldTrump https://t.co/EY18ZeIq2h — Brad Parscale (@parscale) June 12, 2018

screaming inappropriate and obscene questions at world leaders as they’re meeting to begin sensitive negotiations with global ramifications isn’t journalism, it’s just Jim Acosta being a grandstander. CNN needs to begin rehabilitating their image, you guys look awful. — Jamison Pridgen (@JamisonPridgen) June 13, 2018

First off, who says a leftwing activist like you, Jim @Acosta, are a legitimate member of the press? You and your organization, #CNN, are not in the business of informing people, you trying to influence people. No free pass for you. — Jim G (@AxialEquatorial) June 13, 2018

Despite the backlash from all sides, Acosta has actually stood by his outburst.

“I mean, to me, you know, I couldn’t think of anything else to ask North Korean dictator Kim Jong Un but whether he’s going to give up his nuclear weapons. Wasn’t that the entire point of this summit?” Acosta said. “There is a dictator right in front of you who has nuclear weapons. Why on Earth would you not ask that question?”

“I really thought it was a golden opportunity for a reporter to ask a dictator really the most important question of the moment,” he ranted, “and that is, are you going to give up these weapons that threaten much of the world. He’s threatened to vaporize parts of the United States. My goodness, I could not have thought of anything else better to ask at that moment than that question.”

SHARE this story if you think it’s time for CNN to FIRE Jim Acosta!