Wall Street upgrades Florida debt rating
Skip to comments.

Wall Street upgrades Florida debt rating

Posted on by NautiNurse

TALLAHASSEE, Fla. A leading bond rating service upgraded Florida's debt rating to its top grade Friday, citing a strong economic outlook in the state and conservative budget management by Gov. Jeb Bush's administration and lawmakers.

Standard & Poor's raised its rating on Florida's general obligation debt outstanding from "AA-plus" to "AAA."

The company said the state's strong reserves and long-term planning to avoid budget crises made the state a solid bond backer.

"Although Florida will face continued budgetary challenges as it funds approved constitutional amendments relating to education spending and growth-related service demands, the state is well-positioned to manage these challenges," said Standard & Poor's credit analyst Robin Prunty.

Bond ratings generally reflect a government's overall financial health, and can lower the state's borrowing costs. AAA is Standard&Poor's top rating.

Prunty also cited the Florida economy's growth, which has generally outpaced that of the country as a whole, and its moderate debt burden.

"While spending demands for the state remain significant for fiscal 2006 and budget gaps are projected in fiscals 2007-2008, the state has effectively managed its budget and retained financial flexibility not seen in other states," Standard & Poor's said.

The rating action affects roughly $11.4 billion of state full faith and credit debt outstanding.

"This bond rating shows that our state leaders are conservative in their financial and budget management practices and strong stewards of public dollars," said Florida Chief Financial Office Tom Gallagher, who added that the higher bond rating would save the state millions of dollars in borrowing costs.

Last month, Florida's credit rating was upgraded by another Wall Street investor service, Moody's, the first time the rating had been upgraded by that company in 30 years.

---

On the Net: Standard & Poor's www.standardandpoors.com



TOPICS:

Business/Economy

US: Florida

KEYWORDS:

debt

economy

florida

More good news for Florida



To: NautiNurse

The media in south Florida will be very anxious to put this in their newspages and broadcasts. Oh, wait, reverse that.



To: SoFloFreeper

They'll demand to know why Jeb isn't spending more on social services with all that good credit.



by 3 posted onby Moonman62 (Republican - The political party for the living.)

To: SoFloFreeper

It made a front page blurb in our paper on the Gulf Coast. :o)



by 4 posted onby NautiNurse (Osama bin Laden has more tapes than Steely Dan)

To: Joe Brower; JulieRNR21

Florida good news ping, particularly after the 2004 hurricane season.



by 5 posted onby NautiNurse (Osama bin Laden has more tapes than Steely Dan)

To: NautiNurse

Arnold? Are you taking notes?



To: Moonman62

But the Bush & Bush economy is working wonders, isn't it



by 7 posted onby dufekin (Saddam Hussein: both a TERRORIST and a COMMUNIST, deposed thank God and the American soldier!)

To: NautiNurse

What happens after the 2005 hurricane season?



by 8 posted onby verity (The Liberal Media is America's Enemy)

To: verity

My tin foil hat blew away last year.



by 9 posted onby NautiNurse (Osama bin Laden has more tapes than Steely Dan)

To: dufekin

I prefer Jeb's fiscal management over his brother's.



by 10 posted onby Moonman62 (Republican - The political party for the living.)

To: NautiNurse

lol



by 11 posted onby verity (The Liberal Media is America's Enemy)

To: Moonman62

Haha.....me too.



To: NautiNurse

I would guess that the chief economic uncertainty in Florida now (the article mentions "education") is the legacy of super-liberal judges, who will mandate public spending at the drop of a hat.



The Republicans really, really need to do something about the liberal judges on SCOFLAw. Until they do, they will be continually subjected to the interfering oversight of judicial tyrants.



Disclaimer: Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual posters and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its management. All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the exemption for fair use of copyrighted works.

FreeRepublic , LLC, PO BOX 9771, FRESNO, CA 93794

FreeRepublic.com is powered by software copyright 2000-2008 John Robinson