Washingtonpost.com Special Report: Jones vs. Clinton
A. I don't know about several times. There was a period when the, when the Republican Congress shut the government down that the whole White House was being run by interns, and she was assigned to work back in the chief of staff's office, and we were all working there, and so I saw her on two or three occasions then, and then when she worked at the White House, I think there was one or two other times when she brought some documents to me. Q. Well, you also saw here at a number of social functions at the White House, didn't you? A. Could you be specific? I'm not sure. I mean when we had, when we had like big staff things for, if I had a, like in the summertime, if I had a birthday party and the whole White House staff came, then she must have been there. If we had a Christmas party and the whole White House staff was invited, she must have been there. I don't remember any specific social occasions at the White House, but people who work there when they're invited to these things normally come. It's a – they work long hours, it's hard work, and it's one of the nice things about being able to work there, so I assume she was there, but I don't have any specific recollection of any social events. JUDGE WRIGHT: I want to interrupt because I want a break. I also wanted to ask about the luncheon break. We're not, we're not too far from 12. I personally don't care when we take it, but has Skadden lawyers arranged for lunch to be brought up to us? MR. BENNETT: I've arranged for lunch, Your Honor. We can have it – I don't know if it's there right now. We were thinking 12:30, but whatever – JUDGE WRIGHT: That's great. That's perfect. MR. BENNETT: And we have a room set aside for you and your law clerk where you can eat privately, and we have a separate room for their side of the table, and our side. JUDGE WRIGHT: All right, let's take a 10-minute break. (Short recess) Q. Mr. President, before the break, we were talking about Monica Lewinsky. At any time were you and Monica Lewinsky alone together in the Oval Office? A. I don't recall, but as I said, when she worked at the legislative affairs office, they always had somebody there on the weekends. I typically worked some on the weekends. Sometimes they'd bring me things on the weekends. She – it seems to me she brought things to me once or twice on the weekends. In that case, whatever time she would be in there, drop it off, exchange a few words and go, she was there. I don't have any specific recollections of what the issues were, what was going on, but when the Congress is there, we're working all the time, and typically I would do some work on one of the days of the weekends in the afternoon. Q. So I understand, your testimony is that it was possible, then, that you were alone with her, but you have no specific recollection of that ever happening? A. Yes, that's correct. It's possible that she, in, while she was working there, brought something to me and that at the time she brought it to me, she was the only person there. That's possible. Q. Did it ever happen that you and she went down the hallway from the Oval Office to the private kitchen? MR. BENNETT: Your Honor, excuse me, Mr. President, I need some guidance from the Court at this point. I'm going to object to the innuendo. I'm afraid, as I say, that this will leak. I don't question the predicates here. I question the good faith of counsel, the innuendo in the question. Counsel is fully aware that Ms. Jane Doe 6 has filed, has an affidavit which they are in possession of saying that there is absolutely no sex of any kind in any manner, shape or form, with President Clinton, and yet listening to the innuendo in the questions – JUDGE WRIGHT: No, just a minute, let me make my ruling. I do not know whether counsel is basing this question an any affidavit, but I will direct Mr. Bennett not to comment on other evidence that might be pertinent and could be arguably coaching the witness at this juncture. Now, I, Mr. Fisher is an officer of this court, and I have to assume that he has a good faith basis for asking the question. If in fact he has no good faith basis for asking this question, he could later be sanctioned. If you would like, I will be happy to review in camera any good faith basis he might have. MR. BENNETT: Well, Your Honor, with all due respect, I would like to know the proffer. I'm not coaching the witness. In preparation of the witness for this deposition, the witness is fully aware of Ms. Jane Doe 6's affidavit, so I have not told him a single thing he doesn't know, but I think when he asks questions like this where he's sitting on an affidavit from the witness, he should at least have a good faith proffer. JUDGE WRIGHT: Now, I agree with you that he needs to have a good faith basis for asking the question. MR. BENNETT: May we ask what it is, Your Honor? JUDGE WRIGHT: And I'm assuming that he does, and I will be willing to review this in camera if he does not want to reveal it to counsel. MR. BENNETT: Fine. MR. FISHER: I would welcome an opportunity to explain to the Court what our good faith basis is in an in camera hearing. JUDGE WRIGHT: All right. MR. FISHER: I would prefer that we not take the time to do that now, but I can tell the Court I am very confident there is substantial basis. JUDGE WRIGHT: All right, I'm going to permit the question. He's an officer of the Court, and as you know, Mr. Bennett, this Court has ruled on prior occasions that a good faith basis can exist notwithstanding the testimony of the witness, of the deponent, and the other party. MR. BENNETT: Yes, Your Honor, but you understand, and I'm not arguing with you what my concern is, Your Honor, I wouldn't have any trouble with that if I knew that this deposition would be kept under seal. But when he mentions names, when he knows, or at least, you know, hearsay, hearsay, hearsay about something, they check it out, they get an affidavit from the woman, they ask these questions, and the Washington Times will have her name on the front page tomorrow or the day after. JUDGE WRIGHT: As you know, I'm extremely sympathetic with your position, however this is a discovery deposition. MR. BENNETT: I understand. That's all right, Your Honor. I'm sorry. JUDGE WRIGHT: Go ahead. MR. FISHER: Thank you, Your Honor. THE WITNESS: What was your question again, sir? MR. FISHER: I've forgotten, Mr. President, I'm sorry. JUDGE WRIGHT: Something about Ms. Jane Doe 6 in the hallway. Q. Do you recall ever walking with Jane Doe 6 Lewinsky down the hallway from the Oval Office to your private kitchen there in the White House? A. Well, let me try to describe the facts first, because you keep talking about this private kitchen. The private kitchen is staffed by two naval aides. They have total, unrestricted access to my dining room, to that hallway, to coming into the Oval Office. The people who are in the outer office of the Oval Office can also enter at any time. I was, after I went through a presidential campaign in which the far right tried to convince the American people I had committed murder, run drugs, slept in my mother's bed with four prostitutes, and done numerous other things, I had a high level of paranoia. There are no curtains on the Oval Office, there are no curtains on my private office, there are no curtains or blinds that can close the windows in my private dining room. The naval aides come and go at will. There is a peephole on the office that George Stephanopoulos first and then Rahm Emanuel occupied that looks back down that corridor. I have done everything I could to avoid the kind of questions you are asking me here today, so to talk about this kitchen as if it is a private kitchen, it's a little cubbyhole, and these guys keep the door open. They come and go at will. Now that's the factual background here. Now, to go back to your question, my recollection is that, that at some point during the government shutdown, when Ms. Lewinsky was still an intern but was working the chief staff's office because all the employees had to go home, that she was back there with a pizza that she brought to me and to others. I do not believe she was there alone, however. I don't think she was. And my recollection is that on a couple of occasions after that she was there but my secretary Betty Currie was there with her. She and Betty are friends. That's my, that's my recollection. And I have no other recollection of that. MR. FISHER: While I appreciate all of that information, for the record I'm going to object. It's nonresponsive as to the entire answer up to the point where the deponent said, "Now back to your question." Q. At any time were you and Monica Lewinsky alone in the hallway between the Oval Office and this kitchen area? A. I don't believe so, unless we were walking back to the back dining room with the pizzas. I just, I don't remember. I don't believe we were alone in the hallway, no. Q. Are there doors at both ends of the hallway? A. They are, and they're always open. Q. At any time have you and Monica Lewinsky ever been alone together in any room in the White House? A. I think I testified to that earlier. I think that there is a, it is – I have no specific recollection, but it seems to me that she was on duty on a couple of occasions working for the legislative affairs office and brought me some things to sign, something on the weekend. That's – I have a general memory of that. Q. Do you remember anything that was said in any of those meetings? A. No. You know, we just have conversation, I don't remember. Q. How long has Betty Currie been your secretary? A. Since I've been president. Q. Did she also work with you in Arkansas? A. Not when I was governor. She worked in the transition. She worked for Warren Christopher in the transition, and then she came to work for me. Q. How is her work schedule arranged? Does she have a certain shift that she works. or do you ask her to work certain hours the following day? Please explain how her schedule is determined. A. She works, she comes to work early in the morning and normally stays there until I leave at night. She works very long hours, and then when I come in on the weekend, or on Saturday, if I work on Saturday, she's there, and normally if I'm, if I'm working on Sunday and I'm having a schedule of meetings, either she or Nancy Hernreich will be there. One of them is always there on the weekend. Sometimes if I come over just with paperwork and work for a couple of hours, she's not there, but otherwise she's always there when I'm there. Q. Are there any other individuals who are specifically assigned to be your secretary? A. No, just Betty. Betty and Nancy Hernreich basically runs the outer office for me. They are my two major assistants, and of course, and there are a couple of other people who work with them, Janice Kearney who keeps my, in effect, diary now of what's going on, who's been – she's been doing that maybe a. . . Pages 61 to 64 missing A. I don't know. Q. Have you ever met with Monica Lewinsky in the White House between the hours of midnight and six a.m.? A. I certainly don't think so. Q. Have you ever met – A. Now, let me just say, when she was working there, during, there may have been a time when we were all – we were up working late. There are lots of, on any given night, when the Congress is in session, there are always several people around until late in the night, but I don't have any memory of that. I just can't say that there could have been a time when that occurred, I just – but I don't remember it. Q. Certainly if it happened, nothing remarkable would have occurred? A. No, nothing remarkable. I don't remember it. Q. It would be extraordinary, wouldn't it, for Betty Currie to be in the White House between midnight and six a.m., wouldn't it? A. I don't know what the facts were. I mean I don't know. She's an extraordinary woman. Q. Does that happen all the time, sir, or rarely? A. Well, I don't know, because normally I'm not there between midnight and six, so I wouldn't know how many times she's there. Those are questions you'd have to ask her. I just can't say. Q. Has it ever happened that a White House record was created that showed the Monica Lewinsky was meeting with Betty Currie when in fact Monica Lewinsky was meeting with you? MR. BENNETT: No, Your Honor, I'm going to certainly let the president answer that, but I object to the form of the question because it assumes facts not in evidence, and I again question their good faith in this line of questioning. JUDGE WRIGHT: I overrule the objection. I will permit it. The nature of many of the responses has been he doesn't recall or he doesn't know, and so he has not outright denied it. This is discovery and I'll permit the question. Go ahead. A. Would you repeat the question? Q. Yes sir. Has it ever happened that a White House record was created that reflected that Betty Currie was meeting with Monica Lewinsky when in fact you were meeting with Monica Lewinsky? A. Not to my knowledge. Q. Are there records created of your meetings with people in the White House?