Within budget, Obama seeks $10.25 per barrel oil tax
President Obama made official Tuesday his plan to seek a tax on the oil industry to fund an overhaul of the country’s transportation network towards reducing carbon emissions.

In a proposed $4.1 trillion federal budget, the administration is requesting a $10.25 per barrel tax on oil companies, revenue from which will be shuttled into expanding high-speed rail, building up mass transit systems and expanding research into cleaner-burning planes and automobiles, along with self-driving cars.

“By placing a fee on oil, the President’s plan creates a clear incentive for private-sector innovation to reduce America’s reliance on oil,” the administration wrote in the budget.

The administration estimates the oil-tax funded program would cost $320 billion over the next decade.

Last week a White House official said the tax would be applied to oil that is consumed in the United States, including imports, but not to crude shipped overseas. Some revenue would be shuttled in the Highway Trust Fund towards maintaining the nation’s roads.

The president described the plan as an opportunity to take advantage of the current lows in gasoline prices to complete some much needed work updating America’s transportation infrastructure.

But in his final year in office, he faces a Republican-led Congress that has already promised it will not consider an oil tax.

Likewise, the oil and gas industry has attacked the proposal as an effort to undermine the country’s energy industry, at a time it is already struggling to survive under historic lows in the price of oil and natural gas.

“His proposal places a dangerous bet on unproven energy and gives the upper-hand to nations that compete against us. And, it increases taxes not only on the industry, but also on virtually every American,” Barry Russell, president of the Independent Petroleum Association of America, said in a statement Tuesday.

The American Petroleum Institute estimates the oil tax would add 25 cents to the cost of a gallon of gasoline.

The federal tax on gasoline is currently 18.4 cents per gallon. The last time Congress raised it was in 1993.

To address fears over a hit to consumers, the White House in its proposal Tuesday said 15 percent of revenues from the oil tax would go to helping households with “burdensome” energy costs, with a focus on those in the northeast transitioning away from using oil to heat their homes.

The oil tax has been cheered by environmentalists, who have pushed the administration to move the country away from its dependence on fossil fuels.

“President Obama has laid out an ambitious roadmap for the future that will help protect our air, water, lands and wildlife, meet our climate commitments, and invest in low-carbon transportation solutions and innovative clean energy technologies,” Gene Karpinski, president of the League of Conservation Voters, said in a statement Tuesday.