Teddy Roosevelt's Complicated Legacy 100 Years After His Death
The 26th U.S. president died 100 years ago this year. Theodore Roosevelt was an environmentalist and progressive social reformer who laid the groundwork for the modern Democratic party. But he was also an advocate for white nationalism and eugenics. So how should his presidency be remembered? Roosevelt's views were racist, says Gary Gerstle (@glgerstle), a professor of American history at the University of Cambridge. But he was very much "a man of his time." “I think his legacy was in constructing a modern liberalism that would come to full fruition in the presidency of his cousin [Franklin D. Roosevelt],” Gerstle tells Here & Now’s Jeremy Hobson. “The idea that one could not allow private wealth to accumulate without regulation; that the government had a role to play in regulating the economy; that it had a role to play in evening the playing field between the rich and the poor.” Perhaps the most visible piece of Roosevelt’s legacy is the National Park System, which grew during his presidency, Gerstle says. “He was a great believer that America's greatness lay in its wilderness, and he became determined to protect that wilderness for all generations coming after him,” Gerstle says. Interview Highlights On the political divide over Roosevelt’s legacy “He called himself a 'new nationalist,' and he felt very strongly that America had to be reconstructed on a more egalitarian foundation. He slipped out of the news in our memory because neither party really knows what to do with him right now because he, in essence, he anticipates the modern Democratic Party, but he's a Republican. So the Democrats really don't want him. And because he anticipates so much of what the Democratic Party will become, the Republicans don't want to recognize him as one of their own. So there is a conspiracy of silence about the man. “He's known as someone who carries a big stick and a loud mouth and antagonizes opponents. He was a man of his time in the sense that he had many racist views about how America ought to be constructed and those views have to be understood, and both in the context of that time and from the perspective of our own. But I would not want his reform program to be lost sight of because it sets the terms for much of the politics of the 20th century.”

"There is a conspiracy of silence about the man." Gary Gerstle

On Roosevelt’s passion for the wilderness “He was a very sickly, asthmatic boy who spent countless years of his childhood pretty much confined to his room because he was so sickly. And in those circumstances, he began to dream of a very different kind of life, and he was determined by the force of his personality to make himself into another man and that meant strong, muscular, conquering his infirmity. And so in a sense, his own experience of infirmity became a motivation for him to test himself and make himself into a very different kind of man. “He also was a member of a New York elite, gentry elite, but it was old wealth rather than new wealth. And while they were comfortably elite in New York City of the 1860s and 1870s, by 1900, 1910, they were being supplanted by the fortunes of [Andrew Carnegie], [John D. Rockefeller], the other so-called robber barons. And he became critical of them for being entirely consumed with the struggle for wealth. And he began to articulate an ethic of life, which could not be achieved simply by the accumulation of fortune, but by man as an individual testing himself constantly against the elements. And he imagined the wilderness as a place to be preserved, not just so Americans could experience the sublime, but so that they could test themselves against the elements and against their antagonists. “[The Badlands were] where he went to find himself [after his wife and mother’s deaths], and he repeatedly put himself in those situations in moments of extreme hardship. It was a place that he felt utterly comfortable, and I think we have trouble understanding that. But this is where he felt at home, personally at home.” On his economic legacy being similar to Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren “If we brought him back, that's exactly where he would fit on the political spectrum. And it's extraordinary to have a mainstream figure of a major political party speaking in these terms. On another occasion, he said this, 'The man who wrongly holds that every human right is secondary to the prophet must now give way to the advocate of human welfare who rightly maintains that every man holds his property subject to the general right of the community to regulate its use to whatever degree the public welfare may require.' That puts him squarely in Bernie Sanders' camp. Now, he was not a socialist, but everyone who was running for president in 1912 understood that the biggest issue facing America was the inequality between rich and poor. And a candidate who did not stand up for the poor in 1912 was not going to get himself elected to the presidency of the United States.”

"I see Teddy Roosevelt as a figure who fully expresses the two most important nationalist traditions in American life." Gary Gerstle