Police officer exposed to fentanyl during response to overdose call

A Wareham police officer had to be treated for fentanyl exposure while responding to an overdose call, according to the Wareham Police Department.Police and emergency medical services were dispatched to a reported overdose on Saturday night.The officer was the first to arrive at the scene and found a man attempting lifesaving measures on another man, who was unresponsive.Police said the officer took over patient care and administered Narcan to the unresponsive man. However, he began to feel dizzy and disoriented.A second ambulance was called to the scene, and the officer was transported to Tobey Hospital.According to police, it appears the officer was most likely exposed to fentanyl particles in the air during the course of the emergency.The officer was released from the hospital following treatment from the emergency room staff.Police said two other individuals from the scene were transported to Tobey Hospital for treatment.The incident was the third overdose call on Saturday, according to the Wareham Police Department.

A Wareham police officer had to be treated for fentanyl exposure while responding to an overdose call, according to the Wareham Police Department.

Police and emergency medical services were dispatched to a reported overdose on Saturday night.

Advertisement

The officer was the first to arrive at the scene and found a man attempting lifesaving measures on another man, who was unresponsive.

Police said the officer took over patient care and administered Narcan to the unresponsive man. However, he began to feel dizzy and disoriented.

A second ambulance was called to the scene, and the officer was transported to Tobey Hospital.

According to police, it appears the officer was most likely exposed to fentanyl particles in the air during the course of the emergency.

The officer was released from the hospital following treatment from the emergency room staff.

Police said two other individuals from the scene were transported to Tobey Hospital for treatment.

The incident was the third overdose call on Saturday, according to the Wareham Police Department.

AlertMe