Extreme Rainfall and Flash Flooding - August 3rd - 10th, 2013
Extreme Heavy Rainfall and Flooding - August 3rd-10th, 2013 National Weather Service, Springfield, MO

Event Summary Extreme heavy rainfall occurred on an every night basis in differing locations across the Missouri Ozarks and southeast Kansas from August 3rd through August 10th, 2013. Rainfall rates of around two inches per hour occurred with these storms each night and trained across the same locations for several hours. High 24 hour precipitation totals were the result with some locations receiving between 8 to 10 inches of rain in a short window of time. This extreme amount of rainfall led to dangerous flash flooding, many water rescues, hundreds of flooded roadways and 3 deaths.



There was widespread 5 to 6 inches of rainfall across the Missouri Ozarks and southeast Kansas for the week with a large area of greater than 10 inches in parts of central and south central Missouri. There was also a decent area of greater than 15 inches from the southern half of Pulaski county in to Wright county.







Event Synopsis Several rounds of showers and thunderstorms impacted southeastern Kansas and the Missouri Ozarks the first couple of weeks of August as a persistent upper pattern remained in place. An unusually strong upper trough of low pressure was located over the Hudson Bay area of Canada while an upper ridge of high pressure remained anchored across the southwest U.S. This resulted in a steady west to northwest flow aloft that brought a series of upper level disturbances across the region.









Meanwhile a front became nearly stationary and oscillated only slight to the north and south underneath the persistent west to northwest flow aloft. A flow of deep moisture from the Gulf of Mexico interacted with this boundary to aid the development of thunderstorms that trained along the boundary. The exceptionally moist atmosphere resulted in torrential rainfall rates.







Event Pictures



Event Radar Here is a radar loop from the week long extreme heavy rain and flash flooding event.









Event Maps

Precipitation from 7 AM Aug 2nd to 7 AM Aug 3rd





Precipitation from 7 AM Aug 3rd to 7 AM Aug 4th





Precipitation from 7 AM Aug 4th to 7 AM Aug 5th





Precipitation from 7 AM Aug 5th to 7 AM Aug 6th





Precipitation from 7 AM Aug 6th to 7 AM Aug 7th





Precipitation from 7 AM Aug 7th to 7 AM Aug 8th





Precipitation from 7 AM Aug 8th to 7 AM Aug 9th





Precipitation from 7 AM Aug 9th to 7 AM Aug 10th



River Hydrographs The following river hydrographs depict the stages of several area rivers during the flood event.























Roubidoux River near Waynesville