Fact Check: Has Another Doctor With Supposed Clinton Connections Mysteriously Died?
Two “reports” recently surfaced on Facebook claiming that a doctor “who exposed Clinton Foundation corruption” had died under mysterious circumstances. The blog post, published Friday on Republic Information and Miami Post, is a republishing of the 2017 conspiracy theory debunked by multiple outlets. It maintains that Dr. Dean Lorich had revealed corruption by the Clintons in Haiti and ultimately “paid with his life to expose this evil.”



Dr. Dean Lorich was one of America’s leading orthopedic surgeons and a true humanitarian.



He was also one of a growing number of whistleblowers exposing Clinton corruption. And, like so many of the others, he met a premature and brutal end.

He was also one of a growing number of whistleblowers exposing Clinton corruption. And, like so many of the others, he met a premature and brutal end.



…



He very publicly known as the Clinton Foundation for shady dealings after the devastating 2010 earthquake in Haiti. Lorich himself was part of the US relief campaign sent to Haiti, and later said he was disgusted by the “black” performance being run there by the Clintons. The doctor took his concerns directly to Hillary Clinton, but was unsatisfied with her reply, so went public on CNN.



What’s the truth?

Lorich was involved in U.S. aid to Haiti after the devastating earthquake in 2010 and co-wrote a scathing criticism of the U.S.’s inadequate and fumbled (as he saw it) effort of support. He was not, however, involved with the Clinton Foundation’s Haiti activity and does not mention the foundation in the CNN opinion piece. The doctor did voice his complaints in an email thread that was eventually sent to Hillary Clinton via her chief of staff Cheryl Mills, as Snopes has documented from emails published by WikiLeaks.

Unfortunately, Lorich was found dead in his New York apartment in December 2017. At the time, the doorman (who was alerted by Lorich’s daughter) called 911. The police told New York Daily News at the time that the call was “regarding an assault,” not that they had ruled it as such. Investigators determined that Lorich committed suicide by stabbing himself in the chest with a knife, eventually bleeding out.

Despite these blatant inaccuracies -- or perhaps because of them -- the conspiracy continues popping up online, and TWS Fact Check doubts they will disband anytime soon.

If you have questions about this fact check, or would like to submit a request for another fact check, email Holmes Lybrand at hlybrand@weeklystandard.com or the Weekly Standard at factcheck@weeklystandard.com. For details on TWS Fact Check, see our explainer here.