Truth Test: Gubernatorial political ads
Just as the Panhandle is trying to recover from Hurricane Michael, the Democratic candidate for governor is being attacked in political commercials, over his actions following an earlier storm.

But are those claims true?

Advertisement

WESH 2 News political reporter Greg Fox has the exclusive Truth Test."

They begged Mayor Andrew Gillum for help. But Gillum turned away workers who could have restored our power."

That is from one of two ads the Republican Party of Florida has been using to attack Democratic candidate for governor, Andrew Gillum.

The ads refer to Hurricane Hermine, which, in September 2016, knocked out power to 80 percent of Tallahassee homes and businesses.

Gillum, was, and still is, the city's mayor.Several times during the days following the storm, Gillum and Republican Gov. Rick Scott sparred over the work that was being done to remove debris and get power trucks in to restore electricity.

"We don't really have time for a back and forth between the city and the state. Just get the job done," Gillum said.

"I'm going to offer services. I'm going to offer support. Whoever is responsible gets to make that decision," Gov. Scott said.

So, who was responsible for making decisions in the storm's wake?

Was it Gillum as the two ads are suggesting?

The WESH 2 News Truth Meter rings false.

Gillum is not a "strong" mayor. He and Tallahassee City Council hire a city manager responsible for "administering day to day operations."

As Florida Power & Light was offering crews to supplement help from eight municipal utilities, including two from Central Florida, Gillum explained the concern about having too many crews that could not be safely coordinated, based on advice.

"This power, electricity, has the ability to take lives, a very powerful instrument that requires coordination to ensure safety," Gillum said.

That statement was backed up by a spokesman for Kissimmee Utility Authority.

He said, "We all scale our employee base according to what is requested. But when we reach a saturation point, it becomes too dangerous and difficult to manage."

While it's true, Gillum was not "responsible" for making the decisions following Hermine, as mayor, he's the public "face" of the city, and could have done a better job to facilitate the storm clean-up, which he admitted.

"Without a doubt, we have not been perfect in this process," Gillum said.

But did he just sit "while people suffered?"

The Truth Meter rings false.

It's also interesting to note that the Florida Municipal Electric Association awarded utilities for outstanding work in the wake of Hurricane's Hermine and Matthew, including the city of Tallahassee.

AlertMe