Six Staffers Escorted Out Of White House After Failing Background Checks
Six White House staffers were dismissed Thursday after failing to pass FBI background checks.

The staffers were escorted from the White house Wednesday for problems with their SF86 application, the “Questionnaire for National Security Positions.”

The 127-page document includes questions on the applicant’s credit score, medical records, employment history, family history, substance use and other personal subjects.

Caroline Wiles, director of scheduling and the daughter of President Trump’s Florida campaign manager, is one of the staffers who was dismissed.

Wiles, who resigned Friday before the background check was completed, was appointed deputy assistant secretary before the inauguration in January. She will instead get a job at the Treasury Department, sources told Politico.

TRENDING: LiAngelo Ball Tells Truth About The Day He Said ‘Thank You’ To President

Trump’s detractors used the news about the staffers’ demotions to slam the president.

Lmao the White House staff can't even pass an FBI background check, but thinks it should be responsible for vetting immigrants. — Aldo Raine (@ThatHawkwardGuy) February 16, 2017

@thehill Staffers don’t have to pass the background check BEFORE they start working in White House? This is nuts — Ubbo Ubbo (@TheRealUbboUbbo) February 16, 2017

How could someone even get a job as a White House staffer without passing a background check? Genuine question #NoShade https://t.co/SLchaNC2Od — Thomas Thayer (@ThayerThomas) February 16, 2017

The White House has yet to comment on the dismissals.

The website ClearanceJobs.com says the SF86 background investigation is for anyone applying for “security clearances and high-risk public trust positions.” The Office of Personnel Management is in charge of investigating the information provided by the applicant.

RELATED: Fox’s Lisa Boothe Notices a Common Attack Used Against Trump During His First Year

Reince Priebus, White House Chief of Staff, argued before Trump was sworn in that there was “no reason” to complete background checks on the then-president elect’s cabinet appointments.

Priebus was asked on Fox News by Chris Wallace if the Trump administration would consider delaying the confirmation hearings until the background checks were complete.

“No,” Priebus replied. “They have to get moving. I mean, they have to move faster. And they have all the information. These are people that have been highly successful in their lives. They need to move quicker.”