Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity
On May 11, 2017, President Donald J. Trump signed an Executive Order establishing the Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity. Vice President Mike Pence chairs the Commission, and Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach serves as the vice chair.

Please check back regularly for further updates regarding the Commission and its future meetings and agendas.

Statements & Releases

MAY 2017

JUNE 2017

JULY 2017

AUGUST 2017

Commission Members

Vice President Mike Pence, Chair

Kris Kobach, Secretary of State of Kansas, Vice-Chair

Connie Lawson, Secretary of State of Indiana

Bill Gardner, Secretary of State of New Hampshire

Matthew Dunlap, Secretary of State of Maine

Ken Blackwell, Former Secretary of State of Ohio

Christy McCormick, Commissioner, Election Assistance Commission

David Dunn, Former Arkansas State Representative

Mark Rhodes, Clerk of Wood County, West Virginia

Hans von Spakovsky, Senior Legal Fellow and Manager of Election Law Reform Initiative, Edwin Meese Center for Legal & Judicial Studies, The Heritage Foundation

J. Christian Adams, President and General Counsel, Public Interest Legal Foundation

Alan King, Probate Judge, Jefferson County, Alabama

Meetings

This meeting will be livestreamed for remote viewing at the following link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l93GoVJTR5Q. Please be advised that this link WILL NOT be live BEFORE 10 a.m. EST on Tuesday, September 12.

Press Credentials for September 12, 2017 Meeting in New Hampshire

To request Press credentials for the September 12, 2017 meeting of the President’s Advisory Commission on Election Integrity at the New Hampshire Institute of Politics (NHIOP) at Saint Anselm College, Please submit the form at this link: http://www.anselm.edu/Academics/Institutes-Centers-and-the-Arts/NH-Institute-of-Politics/Election-Integrity-Request-for-Press-Credentials.htm. Due to limited physical space, the NHIOP will do its best to accommodate all requests, however a request for credentials does not guarantee approval of credentials.

The Advisory Commission’s meeting will be livestreamed for remote viewing as well as at the NHIOP. Journalists’ assignments within the NHIOP, including potential access to the Advisory Commission meeting room, will be determined upon a final configuration of table, seating and equipment requirements for Commission members, panelists, witnesses and elected officials.

You will be notified of approval prior to the event along with additional instruction for directions, parking, etc.

Commission Documents

Any member of the public wishing to submit written comments for the Commission’s consideration may do so at any time at www.Regulations.gov via the Federal eRulemaking portal at the following link: https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=GSA-GSA-2017-0002-0180. Click “Comment Now” and then follow the instructions provided. Please include your name, organization (if any), and the notice number on your attached document. Please note that any information, including personal or contact information, that you provide on the www.Regulations.gov comment form or in an attachment will be publicly disclosed as it is entered, searchable on the Internet, and included in any paper docket. Commenters may also choose to remain anonymous.

Public comments may also be submitted via mail. Please address public comments to: Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity, 1650 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Eisenhower Executive Office Building (EEOB), Rm. 268, Washington, D.C. 20504. Please note that any written comments received via mail will be uploaded to the docket on www.Regulations.gov, where they will be viewable in full by the public, including any personal or contact information. The Commission values public comments and input.

Please check back soon for further updates regarding the Commission and its future meetings and agendas.

Mission

Pursuant to Executive Order 13799, the Commission shall, consistent with applicable law, study the registration and voting processes used in Federal elections. The Commission shall be solely advisory and shall submit a report to the President that identifies the following:

(a) those laws, rules, policies, activities, strategies, and practices that enhance the American people’s confidence in the integrity of the voting processes used in Federal elections;

(b) those laws, rules, policies, activities, strategies, and practices that undermine the American people’s confidence in the integrity of the voting processes used in Federal elections; and

(c) those vulnerabilities in voting systems and practices used for Federal elections that could lead to improper voter registrations and improper voting, including fraudulent voter registrations and fraudulent voting.