BE BEST
Quote It remains our generation’s moral imperative to take responsibility and help our children manage the many issues they are facing today, including encouraging positive social, emotional, and physical habits...

The mission of BE BEST is to focus on some of the major issues facing children today, with the goal of encouraging children to BE BEST in their individual paths, while also teaching them the importance of social, emotional, and physical health. BE BEST will concentrate on three main pillars: well-being, online safety, and opioid abuse.

BE BEST will champion the many successful well-being programs that provide children with the tools and skills required for emotional, social, and physical health. The campaign will also promote established organizations, programs, and people who are helping children overcome some of the issues they face growing up in the modern world.

download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump visits with children and their parents participating in the White House Take Our Daughters and Sons to Work Day Thursday, April 25, 2019, in the East Room. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump sits in on classes Thursday, October 4, 2018, at the Chipala Primary School in Lilongwe, Malawi. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump visits with kids at an activities table during her visit Tuesday, July 24. 2018, to the Monroe Carell Jr. Children’s Hospital at Vanderbilt in Nashville, Tennessee. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump and Stephen Balkam, CEO of the Family Online Safety Institute, hold a discussion with students about online safety at the Annual FOSI Conference, Thursday, November 15, 2018, at the United States Institute of Peace in Washington, D.C. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump visits with children and their parents participating in the White House Take Our Daughters and Sons to Work Day Thursday, April 25, 2019, in the East Room. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump along with Philip May, husband of British Prime Minister Theresa May meet and play with children Friday, July 13, 2018, at Royal Hospital Chelsea in London. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump participates in classroom activities Monday, March 4, 2019, at the Dove School of Discovery Elementary School in Tulsa, Oklahoma. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump dances with children Friday, October 5, 2018 at The Nest: Children Home Nairobi, Kenya. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump takes a photo of children participating in the White House Take Our Daughters and Sons to Work Day Thursday, April 25, 2019, on the South Lawn. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks A student holds one of the Be Best soccer balls that First Lady Melania Trump donated to the schoolchildren at the Chipala Primary School Thursday, October 4, 2018, in Lilongwe, Malawi. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump participates in a roundtable on Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome Tuesday, July 24, 2018, at Monroe Carell Jr. Children’s Hospital at Vanderbilt in Nashville, Tennessee. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump listens to an Xbox adaptive controller presentation by Dave McCarthy, Microsoft Corporate Vice President of Xbox Operations Monday, March 4, 2019, at the Microsoft Executive Briefing Center in Redmond, Washington. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump visits with students in a 3rd grade classroom Thursday, March 28, 2019, at West Gate Elementary School in West Palm Beach, Florida. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump reads to children Friday, October 5, 2018 at The Nest: Children Home Nairobi, Kenya. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump stops by a Be Best decorated United States Postal Service drop box in the Cross Hall of the White House Thursday, April 25, 2019, during Take Our Daughters and Sons to Work Day. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump meets with children affected by neonatal abstinence syndrome and staff of the Maternal Addiction, Treatment, Education and Research (MATER) program Wednesday, October 17, 2018, at the Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump convenes an Interagency Working Group on Youth Programs, Monday, March 18, 2019, in the State Dining Room of the White House. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump participates in hopscotch on the South Lawn Monday, April 22, 2019, during the 141st White House Easter Egg Roll. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump meets with patients and their families Thursday, December 13, 2018, during a Christmas visit to Children’s National Hospital in Washington, D.C. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump and Second Lady Karen Pence applaud the performance by the Albritton Middle School Chorus Monday, April 15, 2019, at Albritton Middle School in Fort Bragg, North Carolina. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump participates in classroom activities Monday, March 4, 2019, at the Dove School of Discovery Elementary School in Tulsa, Oklahoma. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump delivers remarks during the Family Online Safety Institute Annual Conference, Thursday, November 15, 2018, at the United States Institute of Peace in Washington, D.C. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump along with Philip May, husband of British Prime Minister Theresa May pose for photos with children Friday, July 13, 2018, at the Royal Hospital Chelsea in London. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump meets with students attending the national conference of Students Against Destructive Decisions on Sunday, June 24, 2018, in Tyson’s Corner, Virginia. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump meets with Bronte Johnson of Blacklick, Ohio, one of the fifteen student members of Microsoft’s Council on Digital Good Thursday, July 19, 2018, at the Microsoft Innovation and Policy Center in Washington, D.C. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump greets students who attended her BE BEST policy initiative launch in the Kennedy Garden at the White House, Monday, May 7, 2018. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump participates in a discussion on online safety and the First Lady’s BE BEST program Monday, March 4, 2019, at the Microsoft Executive Briefing Center in Redmond, Washington. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump participates in a discussion with panel moderator, Eric Bolling during an Opioid Town Hall Tuesday, March 5, 2019, at the Westgate Las Vegas Resort & Casino in Las Vegas. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump announces her upcoming travel to Africa to promote her Be Best initiative in New York. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump poses for a photo with students in a 2nd grade classroom Thursday, March 28, 2019, at West Gate Elementary School in West Palm Beach, Florida. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump convenes an Interagency Working Group on Youth Programs, Monday, March 18, 2019, in the State Dining Room of the White House. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump arrives at the Chipala Primary School in Lilongwe, Malawi Thursday, October 4, 2018. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump visits with children Friday, August 24, 2018, at the Nationwide Children’s Hospital in Columbus, Ohio. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump participates in a panel discussion with moderator Eric Bolling at an Opioid Town Hall Wednesday, November 28, 2018, at Liberty University in Lynchburg Virginia. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump meets with mothers and children affected by neonatal abstinence syndrome Wednesday, October 17, 2018, at the Thomas Jefferson University Hospital Pavilion Building in Philadelphia. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump, joined by Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex Azar and Counselor to the President Kellyanne Conway, participates in a roundtable discussion Friday, August 24, 2018, at the Nationwide Children’s Hospital in Columbus, Ohio. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks President Donald J. Trump and First Lady Melania Trump receive an opioid briefing by senior administration officials in the Oval Office Tuesday, March 19, 2019. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks Hand-drawn signs welcoming First Lady Melania Trump and her Be Best initiative are seen on the walls at the Chipala Primary School Thursday, October 4, 2018, in Lilongwe, Malawi. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump visits with students in a 5th grade classroom Thursday, March 28, 2019, at West Gate Elementary School in West Palm Beach, Florida. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks President Donald J. Trump, joined by First Lady Melania Trump, poses with students in the Oval Office after signing a Proclamation establishing Be Best Day, Monday, May 7, 2018. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump delivers remarks at an Opioid Town Hall Wednesday, November 28, 2018, at Liberty University in Lynchburg Virginia. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump poses for photos with students after an assembly at Albritton Middle School Monday, April 15, 2019, in Fort Bragg, North Carolina. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump along with Philip May, husband of British Prime Minister Theresa May meet with children Friday, July 13, 2018, at Royal Hospital Chelsea in London. download-full-size-image Photo Credit: Official White House Photo by Andrea Hanks First Lady Melania Trump meets with mothers and children Tuesday, October 2, 2018, in the Child Welfare Clinic, the original wing of the Greater Accra Regional Hospital in Accra, Ghana. 1/?

THREE PILLARS

OF BE BEST

WELL-BEING

By promoting values such as healthy living, encouragement, kindness, and respect, parents, teachers, and other adults can help prepare children for their futures. With those values as a solid foundation, children will be able to better deal with the evils of the opioid crisis and avoid negative social media interaction.

ONLINE SAFETY

When children learn positive online behaviors early-on, social media can be used in productive ways and can effect positive change. Mrs. Trump believes that children should be both seen and heard, and it is our responsibility as adults to educate and reinforce to them that when they are using their voices—whether verbally or online—they must choose their words wisely and speak with respect and compassion.

OPIOID ABUSE

Opioid dependence, addiction, and abuse are an epidemic in this country. BE BEST will support the families and children affected by this crisis, bring attention to neonatal abstinence syndrome, and help educate parents on the importance of healthy pregnancies.

BE BEST INTERNATIONAL

First Lady Melania Trump joined President Trump on his trip to the United Kingdom in July of 2018. While in London, the First Lady visited the Royal Hospital Chelsea (RHC), which cares for over 300 Chelsea Pensioners (former soldiers of the British Army), along with local school children from St. George’s Church of England Primary School. At St. George’s, students are educated under the school’s motto “the best that we can be.” Mrs. Trump spent time learning more about what the motto means to each of the children, making poppies (a symbol of remembrance for fallen soldiers), and playing a lawn game known as bowls!

In October of 2018, First Lady Melania Trump embarked on her first major solo international trip! She began her trip to Africa in Ghana where she toured Ridge Hospital, paid respects at the Cape Coast Castle, and more. Continuing on to Lilongwe, Malawi—known as the “warm heart of Africa”—Mrs. Trump visited Chipala Primary School and spoke with First Lady Mutharika on empowering children through education.

In Nairobi, Kenya, the First Lady fed baby elephants at the Sheldrick Elephant Orphanage, toured Nairobi National Park, and visited with infants and children at Nest Children’s Home.

On Mrs. Trump’s last stop in Cairo, she visited a few of Egypt’s many cultural sites including the Sphinx, and the Great Pyramid – one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. She also received a briefing about USAID’s Water Table Reduction Project at the base of the Sphinx.

Mrs. Trump’s second solo international tour is set for the fall of 2019 and will further her commitment to visiting schools, hospitals, organizations, and companies that support children around the globe. More details will be announced soon!

To learn more about BE BEST, follow along with First Lady Melania Trump on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. Please send questions and comments to BeBest@who.eop.gov.

Parents, click here to read “Talking with Kids about Being Online,” a Federal Trade Commission booklet, promoted by First Lady Melania Trump.