UPDATE: Confirming Judge Neil Gorsuch to the Supreme Court
On Monday, Judge Neil Gorsuch was confirmed by the Senate Judiciary Committee which sends his nomination to the full Senate body for a final vote. Watch Judge Gorsuch’s opening statement below.

Judge Gorsuch is incredibly qualified and the ultimate example of a mainstream judge with a history of defending the Constitution. In the more than 2,700 cases he has participated in on the 10th Circuit, 97 percent of them have been unanimously decided and he was in the majority 99 percent of the time. Judge Gorsuch has met with nearly 80 Senators, answered 299 questions from Democrats, provided over 70 pages of written answers about his personal record, answered nearly 1,200 questions and has sat through nearly 20 hours of questioning by the Senate Judiciary Committee.

President Trump made a promise to the American people to nominate a Supreme Court Justice who will uphold and defend the Constitution. By nominating Judge Neil Gorsuch, he kept that promise. This week, the full Senate will vote to confirm Judge Gorsuch to the Supreme Court, marking a great victory for the American people.

Judge Gorsuch has earned support across the country for his exemplary service and impeccable record. Here are a few of their statements:

SCOTUSBlog’s Amy Howe: “Gorsuch has been very eloquent - his manner in his opening statement was very reminiscent of John Roberts 11 years ago.”

Washington Post's Sean Sullivan: “Key Democratic senator introducing Gorsuch has ‘open mind’”

New York Times’s Confirmation Hearing Briefing: “Senator Michael Bennet, Democrat of Colorado, introduced Mr. Gorsuch, his fellow Coloradan, with high praise but stayed studiously ambiguous about how he would vote.”

Former Obama Solicitor General Neal Katyal: “There is a reason why our Supreme Court Bar has lined up behind Gorsuch. There is a reason why the American Bar Association has given him the highest rating. I’ve seen him in action, and I have seen him in cases, and studied his written opinions. This is a first rate intellect and fair and decent man.”

"We agree on the most important things that all people are equal before the law and that a judge's duty is to uphold the law and uphold these principles and the Constitution above all. The Judge has done that during his time on the bench and I know he continues to do so as a Justice on the Supreme Court. It is my honor to recommend that his nomination be recorded favorably.”

Senator Michael Bennet (D-CO): “Judge Neil Gorsuch, the son of Colorado, born and raised in Denver with a distinguished record of public service, private practice and outstanding integrity and intellect.”

"I believe Judge Gorsuch is unquestionably committed to the rule of law."

Senator Cory Gardner (R-CO): “It's this appropriate temperament, this fidelity to the constitution, this remarkable humility that has made Judge Gorsuch a consensus legal and legislative pick among colorado's diverse communities.”

“Judge Gorsuch appreciates the rule of law and respect at the considered judgment of those who came before him.”

Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT): “Judge Gorsuch has spent more than a decade on the federal bench. He graduated from Harvard Law School, he clerked for the Supreme Court, he served in the Department of Justice. He received a unanimous, well-qualified rating from the American Bar Association, all things very positive for a Supreme Court nominee.”

Senator Mike Lee (R-UT): “I had the good fortune of appearing in front of you on the Tenth Circuit and so I know from my own personal experience that you are one of the best judges in the country.”

“You come to oral arguments prepared and you asked fair and probing questions that are designed to get at one thing and one thing only which is what the law says and what the law requires in each individual case, depending on the facts and circumstances of that case.”

“What is most impressive, and for our purposes what's most important about your career and about the approach you take to the law is your fierce independence from partisan influence and from any personal bias that you might otherwise be inclined to harbor.”

Denver Broncos’ General Manager and Hall-of-Famer John Elway: “A native of Colorado, Neil has demonstrated tremendous intelligence, character and fairness while serving for more than a decade on the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit. His credentials, integrity and sound moral compass are major reasons why he's already received so much bipartisan support for his nomination.”

“Neil is a big Denver Broncos fan, and I can tell you that I'm a big fan of his. I look forward to having Neil Gorsuch, one of our own from the great state of Colorado, as the next Supreme Court Justice.”

MSNBC's Chris Jansing: "Impressively Disciplined Performance"

CNN's John King: "Democrats Have Not Even Bruised, Blemished Anything To This Judge"

MSNBC's Andrea Mitchell: "This Has Been A Slam Dunk"

CNN's Nia-Malika Henderson: "Very Warm, Affable, Down-Home Kind Of Person"

MSNBC's Ari Melbar: "I Didn't See A Single Glove Laid On Him. He Performed Himself Admirably."