President Trump Welcomes Foxconn to the White House for a Major Jobs Announcement
Today, President Donald J. Trump and the Office of American Innovation welcomed Foxconn to the White House for a technology manufacturing initiative announcement in the East Room. Today’s announcement is one that will bring thousands of jobs and billions of dollars in investments to America.

Foxconn, a world leader in manufacturing for computers, communications, and consumer electronics, will build a state-of-the-art manufacturing facility for the production of LCD panel products in southern Wisconsin. This $10 billion investment will create thousands of new American jobs. The construction of this facility represents a major advancement in regaining America’s place in advanced electronics manufacturing.

"Foxconn joins a growing list of industry leaders who understand that America’s capabilities are limitless and that America’s workers are unmatched, and that America’s most prosperous days are just ahead," said the President.

Under President Trump’s direction, Senior Advisor Jared Kushner and Assistant to the President Reed Cordish, from the White House Office of American Innovation, have led the discussions with Foxconn over the past several months. While pundits have said for years that electronics manufacturing in the U.S. was a lost cause, the policies and focus of President Trump’s administration are producing results that show America can eventually re-emerge as a dominate country in advanced manufacturing.

The new Foxconn plant has the potential to be one of the largest non-energy manufacturing job creators in modern U.S. history, and powerfully illustrates that nothing is beyond America's capabilities.

President Trump was joined by Chief of Staff Reince Priebus, Senior Advisor Jared Kushner, Assistant to the President Reed Cordish, Secretary of Commerce Wilbur Ross, Speaker Paul Ryan, Governor Scott Walker, and Foxconn Chairman Terry Gou. Today’s announcement is another step in putting America first, and part of the White House’s Made in America month.