Congress Must Do More to Address The Border Crisis
Quote I campaigned on Border Security, which you cannot have without a strong and powerful Wall. Our Southern Border has long been an “Open Wound,” where drugs, criminals (including human traffickers) and illegals would pour into our Country.

CRISIS AT THE BORDER: President Trump continues to stress the need to pass legislation that will address the security and humanitarian crises on our Southern Border.

The United States Southern Border is overwhelmed with illegal immigration, gang violence, crime, drugs, and human trafficking.

President Trump has requested a modest amount of funding to address these issues while Democrats continue to resist in the name of politics.

We cannot keep our country safe without adequate funding for Border security, including a physical barrier and increased funding for law enforcement.

BORDER SECURITY AND HUMANITARIAN PRIORITIES: Any government funding bill must address the security and humanitarian crises on our Southern Border. The Administration has requested additional funds—relative to the FY2019 Homeland Security funding bill that passed the Senate Appropriations Committee (Committee)—to address these priorities.

$5.7 billion for construction of a steel barrier on the Southern Border to fund 234 miles of new physical barrier—an increase of $4.1 billion over the Committee bill.

$675 million to deter and detect narcotics, weapons, and other materials that pose a threat to the United States—an increase of $631 million over the Committee bill. Will provide Non-Intrusive Inspection technology for all incoming vehicle lanes of traffic at U.S. Southwest Border Land Ports of Entry, as well as necessary canine and other support.

$211 million to hire 750 additional Border Patrol agents in order to keep our borders safe and secure—an increase of $100 million over the Committee bill.

$800 million to fund enhanced medical support, transportation, consumable supplies, and additional temporary facilities necessary to ensure the well-being of those taken into custody.

IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT: Congress must fund additional immigration detention beds and law enforcement personnel.