President Donald J. Trump Calls on Congress to Secure our Borders and Protect the American People
Quote Now is the time—this is the moment—to finally secure the border and create the lawful and safe immigration system Americans, and those wanting to become Americans, deserve.

THE CRISIS FACING OUR COUNTRY: We are facing a growing national security and humanitarian crisis at our Southern Border.

This crisis is only worsening as 2,000 inadmissible migrants arrive at our border every day and overwhelm our immigration system. We do not have the resources needed to hold them, and legal loopholes and activist court rulings prevent authorities from promptly returning them. Immigration courts are overwhelmed, with a backlog of over 800,000 cases.

We must secure our border to protect our communities and make sure no more Americans fall victim to crimes committed by illegal aliens. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) has arrested 266,000 aliens with criminal records in the last two years. This includes aliens charged or convicted of 100,000 assaults, nearly 30,000 sex crimes, and 4,000 violent killings.

Deadly drugs are flowing across our borders, taking far too many American lives. 300 Americans die every week from heroin, 90 percent of which comes across our Southern Border.

We are facing a humanitarian crisis as human smugglers exploit our immigration system for profit and drive migrants to make the treacherous journey north to the border. 1 in 3 migrant women are sexually assaulted on the dangerous trek to the border. 20,000 migrant children were illegally smuggled into the country last month alone.



RESOURCES NEEDED: The Trump Administration has requested additional funds relative to the Homeland Security funding bill that passed the Senate Appropriations Committee.

The Administration has requested $5.7 billion for construction of approximately 234 miles of new steel barrier on the Southern Border, a $4.1 billion increase over the Senate bill.

To protect our communities, the Administration requested $675 million to deter and detect narcotics, weapons, and other materials crossing our borders.

Among the Administration’s requests for more resources are: $211 million to hire 750 additional Border Patrol agents $571 million for 2,000 additional ICE personnel $4.2 billion for 52,000 detention beds, personnel, transportation, and detention alternatives $563 million for 75 additional immigration judges and support staff



TIME TO ACT: President Trump is calling on Congress to fulfill their duty to the American people and finally take action to secure the border.