DOJ gives clearance for voter verification procedures
[private]

The U.S. Department of Justice has approved Georgia’s procedures for verifying the citizenship of voters before they cast ballots in elections.

Secretary of State Brian Kemp announced Monday his department had received the DOJ’s administrative pre-clearance that is required under the federal Voting Rights Act.

The department’s pre-clearance applies to voter verification procedures that former secretary of state Karen Handel attempted to implement prior to the 2008 general election. That attempt was halted by the federal courts because she had not submitted the procedures for pre-clearance by the DOJ.

The DOJ approval does not extend to SB 86, legislation passed by the General Assembly in 2009 that would require persons to provide documented evidence of U.S. citizenship before they can register to vote.

Matt Carrothers, a spokesman for Kemp, said the secretary of state’s office has not yet applied for federal pre-clearance of SB 86.

The DOJ initially turned down Georgia’s requests to have the voter-flagging program approved, sparking a public dispute between the department and the secretary of state’s office. The ACLU also opposed the pre-clearance of the program.

Kemp filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court in Washington last June attempting to bypass the Justice Department and secure judicial approval of the program. He later withdrew the lawsuit after the Justice Department indicated it would grant administrative pre-clearance.

“When we filed the lawsuit, I was criticized by some because they believed it would be too time-consuming and expensive,” Kemp said. “However, after waiting for nearly a year and a half for a final administrative decision from the DOJ, I was certain that litigation was the only way to put Georgia in a position to obtain final approval from the federal government of our voter verification procedures.”

“After the litigation was filed, it took less than two months for the DOJ to consent to preclearance of the verification process,” Kemp added.

© 2010 by The Georgia Report

[/private]