H.R. 601 - Continuing Appropriations Act, 2018 and Supplemental Appropriations for Disaster Relief Requirements Act, 2017
In the House of Representatives, U. S.,

September 6, 2017.

Resolved, That the House agree to the amendments numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8 of the Senate to the bill (H.R. 601) entitled “An Act to enhance the transparency and accelerate the impact of assistance provided under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 to promote quality basic education in developing countries, to better enable such countries to achieve universal access to quality basic education and improved learning outcomes, to eliminate duplication and waste, and for other purposes.” and be it further

Resolved, That the House agree to the amendment numbered 6 of the Senate to the aforementioned bill, with the following

HOUSE AMENDMENT TO SENATE AMENDMENT:

In lieu of the matter proposed to be inserted by the amendment numbered 6 of the Senate, insert the following:

“(C) there is the greatest opportunity to reduce childhood and adolescence exposure to or engagement in violent extremism or extremist ideologies.”.

DIVISION B—DISASTER RELIEF APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2017

The following sums are appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for disaster relief for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2017, and for other purposes, namely:

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY

DISASTER RELIEF FUND

For an additional amount for “Disaster Relief Fund” for major disasters declared pursuant to the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121 et seq.), $7,400,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That such amount is designated by the Congress as being for an emergency requirement pursuant to section 251(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985: Provided further, That the amount designated under this heading as an emergency requirement pursuant to section 251(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 shall be available only if the President subsequently so designates such amount and transmits such designation to the Congress.

SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION

DISASTER LOANS PROGRAM ACCOUNT

(INCLUDING TRANSFER OF FUNDS)

For an additional amount for the “Disaster Loans Program Account” for the cost of direct loans authorized by section 7(b) of the Small Business Act, $450,000,000, to remain available until expended: Provided, That up to $225,000,000 may be transferred to and merged with “Salaries and Expenses” for administrative expenses to carry out the disaster loan program authorized by section 7(b) of the Small Business Act: Provided further, That none of the funds provided under this heading may be used for indirect administrative expenses: Provided further, That the amount provided under this heading is designated as an emergency requirement pursuant to section 251(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985: Provided further, That the amount designated under this heading as an emergency requirement pursuant to section 251(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 shall be available only if the President subsequently so designates such amount and transmits such designation to the Congress.

This division may be cited as the “Disaster Relief Appropriations Act, 2017”.

Attest: