President's Commission
On March 29, 2017, President Donald J. Trump signed an Executive Order establishing the President’s Commission on Combating Drug Addiction and the Opioid Crisis. The Commission was chaired by Governor Chris Christie and studied ways to combat and treat the scourge of drug abuse, addiction, and the opioid crisis, which was responsible for more than 50,000 deaths in 2015 and has caused families and communities across America to endure significant pain and suffering. The Commission worked closely with the White House Office of American Innovation led by Jared Kushner.

President Trump said, “I made a promise to the American people to take action to keep drugs from pouring into our country and to help those who have been so badly affected by them. Governor Christie will be instrumental in researching how best to combat this serious epidemic and how to treat those it has affected. He will work with people on both sides of the aisle to find the best ways for the Federal Government to treat and protect the American people from this serious problem. This is an epidemic that knows no boundaries and shows no mercy, and we will show great compassion and resolve as we work together on this important issue.”

The Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) provides administrative and financial support for the Commission and its activities.

Commission Members:

Governor Chris Christie, Chair

Governor Charlie Baker

Governor Roy Cooper

Congressman Patrick J. Kennedy

Professor Bertha Madras, Ph.D.

Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi

Please note that the Commission disbanded in late 2017 after completing its Final Report to the President. Any member of the public wishing to submit written comments for the Commission’s consideration may do so via email at commission@ondcp.eop.gov. Any member of the public who wants to submit written comments to ONDCP in considering or implementing the Commission’s recommendations can email ONDCP at oipl@ondcp.eop.gov.

reports

related resources