Pledge to America’s Workers
The economy is booming like never before. It’s time that all our workers have an opportunity to experience the American Dream.

President Trump’s agenda is driving an economic resurgence that is creating more and more opportunities for American workers.

More than 5.3 million jobs were created between President Trump’s election and his second State of the Union Address alone.

February 2019 marked the 12th consecutive month that America’s unemployment rate remained at 4 percent or below.

In early 2019, wage growth for U.S. workers hit its fastest pace in a decade.

This high-energy growth environment presents both a challenge and an opportunity. The challenge is that companies must find more workers with specific skill sets to fill an increasing number of open jobs. The opportunity is that with more affordable, relevant training, many American workers will now have the chance to move into better jobs that deliver bigger paychecks.

On July 19, 2018, President Trump signed an Executive Order establishing the National Council for the American Worker.

Comprised of senior Administration officials, the National Council for the American Worker is charged with developing a National strategy for training and retraining the workers needed across high-demand industries. The group will convene voices from the public, private, education, labor, and not-for-profit sectors to enhance employment opportunities for Americans of all ages.

The National Council for the American Worker is Co-Chaired by:

Executive Order on the National Council for the American Worker

The American Workforce Policy Advisory Board

Working directly with the National Council for the American Worker, President Trump’s Executive Order also established the American Workforce Policy Advisory Board.

This Board brings together members from diverse backgrounds including the private sector, educational institutions, and State and local governments.

Their mission? Ensure all Americans can benefit from the nation’s historic economic boom and record low employment rates.

The American Workforce Policy Advisory Board seeks to bring more Americans off the sidelines and into the workforce by improving jobs data transparency and skills-based hiring and training, advancing opportunities for lifelong learning, and promoting multiple pathways to family-sustaining careers.

Most important, they will focus on getting results.

Co-chaired by Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross and Advisor to the President Ivanka Trump, members of the Advisory Board include:

Jay Box, President, Kentucky Community and Technical College System

Walter Bumphus, President & CEO, American Association of Community Colleges

Jim Clark, President & CEO, Boys & Girls Clubs of America

Tim Cook, CEO, Apple

Tom Donohue, CEO, U.S. Chamber of Commerce

Juanita Duggan, President & CEO, National Federation for Independent Business

Elizabeth Goettl, President & CEO, Cristo Rey Network

Marillyn Hewson, Chairman, President, & CEO, Lockheed Martin

Eric Holcomb, Governor, Indiana

Barbara Humpton, CEO, Siemens USA

Al Kelly, CEO, Visa

Vi Lyles, Mayor, Charlotte, North Carolina

Bill McDermott, CEO, SAP America

Sean McGarvey, President, North America’s Building and Trades Unions

Doug McMillon, President & CEO, Walmart

Craig Menear, Chairman, President, & CEO, Home Depot

Michael Piwowar, Executive Director, Milken Institute

Scott Pulsipher, President, Western Governors University

Kim Reynolds, Governor, Iowa

Ginni Rometty, Chairman, President, & CEO, IBM

Scott Sanders, Executive Director, National Association of State Workforce Agencies

Johnny Taylor, President & CEO, Society for Human Resource Management

Jay Timmons, President & CEO, National Association of Manufacturers

Sheree Utash, President, WSU Tech

Marianne Wanamaker, Professor, University of Tennessee

Learn more about the American Workforce Policy Advisory Board

The Pledge to America’s Workers

As part of the National Council for the American Worker, the Trump Administration is asking companies and trade groups throughout the country to sign our Pledge to America’s Workers—committing to expand programs that educate, train, and reskill American workers from high-school age to near-retirement.

Since President Trump signed the Executive Order, more than 200 companies and organizations have signed the Pledge, contributing to over 8.9 MILLION new education and training opportunities for American students and workers over the next five years.

We call upon employers large and small to join this crucial initiative to create more jobs, strengthen our economy, and restore hopeful futures to countless families.

As the economy booms, it’s time to make a Pledge to America’s Workers.

To LEARN ABOUT SIGNING the pledge, email WORKFORCEpledge@who.eop.gov