President Obama's Plan to Fight Climate Change
The President's Clean Power Plan

Reducing Carbon Pollution from Power Plants

Power plants are the largest major source of emissions in the U.S., together accounting for roughly one-third of all domestic greenhouse gas pollution.

PROGRESS: In September 2013, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced proposed carbon pollution standards for new power plants.

PROGRESS: In August 2015, we established the Clean Power Plan — the first-ever carbon pollution standards for existing power plants, protecting the health of our children and working toward a 32 percent reduction in carbon pollution by 2030.

Expanding the Clean Energy Economy

Since the President took office, the administration has made the largest investment in clean energy in American history, including increasing solar generation by twenty-fold and tripling electricity production from wind power. The Clean Power Plan will lead to 30% more renewable energy generation in 2030.

PROGRESS: Since 2009, the Department of the Interior permitted more than 50 clean energy utility-scale projects on public or tribal lands. The projects could support over 20,000 jobs and generate enough electricity to power 4.8 million homes.

PROGRESS: The Administration launched Solar Ready Vets, an initiative to train transitioning veterans to enter the solar workforce and meet our goal to train 75,000 people to enter the solar workforce by 2020.

PROGRESS: President Obama has created a new initiative to increase access to solar energy for low- and moderate-income households, and to build a more inclusive workforce.

PROGRESS: Building on our progress in wind and solar, the Administration secured more than $4 billion in private sector commitments and actions to scale up clean energy innovation and technologies that reduce carbon pollution.

Continuing the momentum for the future: To ensure America's continued leadership position in clean energy, President Obama has set new goals. 2015 President Obama's Fiscal Year 2015 Budget continues to further American leadership by investing approximately $6.9 billion in funding for clean energy technology programs. This includes investment in a range of energy technologies, from advanced biofuels and emerging nuclear technologies to clean coal. DOE made available $1 billion in additional loan guarantee authority and announced new guidelines for distributed energy projects utilizing innovative technology.

2020 To ensure America's continued leadership position in clean energy. President Obama has set a goal to double wind and solar electricity generation once again by 2020. 2020 Federal agencies are setting a new goal of reaching 100MW of installed renewable capacity across federally-subsidized housing stock by 2020.

2025 The Department of Defense — the single largest consumer of energy in the United States — is committed to deploying three gigawatts of renewable energy on military installations by 2025.

Building Clean Energy Infrastructure

Heavy-duty vehicles (commercial trucks, vans, and buses) are currently the second largest source of greenhouse gas pollution within the transportation sector.

PROGRESS: In April 2015, the Department of Energy released the federal government’s first Quadrennial Energy Review (QER) Report, with an focus on our nation's energy infrastructure.

PROGRESS: In June 2015, EPA and DOT released a proposal for the next phase of medium- and heavy-duty vehicle fuel efficiency and greenhouse gas standards, which will cut carbon emissions by 1 billion metric tons.

PROGRESS: In 2011, we finalized fuel economy standards for Model Year 2014-2018 for heavy-duty trucks, buses, and vans, which reducing greenhouse gas emissions by about 270 million metric tons and saving 530 million barrels of oil.

PROGRESS: The Administration has already established the toughest fuel economy standards for passenger vehicles in U.S. history. These standards require an average performance equivalent of 54.5 miles per gallon by 2025.

Continuing the momentum for the future: During the President's second term, the Administration is partnering with industry leaders and other key stakeholders. Post-2018 In partnership with industry leaders and other key stakeholders, the Administration will develop post-2018 fuel economy standards for heavy-duty vehicles to further reduce consumption through the application of advanced cost-effective technologies.

Cutting energy waste in homes, businesses, and factories

Energy efficiency is one of the clearest and most cost-effective opportunities to save families money, make our businesses more competitive, and reduce greenhouse gas pollution.

PROGRESS: The President’s Better Buildings Challenge enlisted more than 250 partners in cities, states, utilities, manufacturers, school districts, and businesses to improve energy efficiency. Since 2011, they've saved 94 trillion units of energy and $840 million.

PROGRESS: In President Obama's first term, DOE and HUD completed efficiency upgrades in nearly two million homes, saving many families more than $400 on their heating and cooling bills in the first year alone.

PROGRESS: In December 2013, the Department of Agriculture announced it will provide up to $250 million to help businesses and residential customers in rural areas cut their energy bills through energy efficiency and renewable energy use.

PROGRESS: In 2014, DOE issued 9 proposed and 10 final energy conservation standards for appliances and equipment. If finalized and combined with current rules, the energy savings will cut consumers' electricity bills by hundreds of billions of dollars.

Continuing the momentum for the future: The Administration will continue to take a range of new steps geared toward cutting energy waste and achieving President Obama's goal of doubling energy productivity by 2030, relative to 2010 levels. 2020 To continue the success of the President’s Better Buildings Challenge, the Administration will continue to expand Better Buildings Accelerators to support and encourage adoption of state and local policies to cut energy waste and save consumers and families money. 2030 The Administration will build on its progress and continue to establish impactful energy conservation standards for appliances that — when combined with the progress already underway from the first term — will reduce carbon pollution by at least 3 billion metric tons by 2030, equivalent to more than a year's carbon pollution from our entire electricity system.

Reducing other greenhouse gas emissions

Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) are among the fastest-growing greenhouse gases. Methane, another potent greenhouse gas, accounted for nearly 10% of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions in 2012.

PROGRESS: In 2015, the EPA issued two proposals to further reduce emissions of methane-rich gas from municipal solid waste landfills. The proposal is expected to reduce methane emissions by 487,000 tons a year beginning in 2025.

PROGRESS: In October 2015, we announced new private-sector commitments and executive actions to reduce the use and emissions of HFCs, reducing the equivalent of more than 1 billion metric tons of carbon emissions globally through 2025.

PROGRESS: The Administration has partnered with farmers to cut emissions and increase carbon sequestration in the agricultural and forestry sectors through voluntary and incentive-based measures.

PROGRESS: The Administration released proposed standards for methane and volatile organic compound emissions — expected to prevent emissions equal to 7.7 to 9 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent by 2025 — improving air quality.

Continuing the momentum for the future: The United States must lead through international diplomacy and domestic actions to reduce emissions and transition to safer and more substantial options. 2020 The EPA will also use its authority under the Clean Air Act to encourage private sector investment in low-emissions technology by identifying and approving climate-friendly chemicals while prohibiting certain uses of more harmful HFCs.



The EPA will also use its authority under the Clean Air Act to encourage private sector investment in low-emissions technology by identifying and approving climate-friendly chemicals while prohibiting certain uses of more harmful HFCs. Moving Forward When it comes to the oil and gas sector, investments to build and upgrade gas pipelines will not only put more Americans to work, but also reduce emissions and enhance economic productivity.



The Obama Administration will continue to work collaboratively with state governments, as well as the private sector, to reduce emissions across multiple sectors, improve air quality, and achieve public health and economic benefits.

Federal leadership

Since 2008, federal agencies have reduced greenhouse gas pollution by more than 17 percent — the equivalent of permanently taking 1.8 million cars off the road — and set an aggressive new goal of reducing federal emissions by 40 percent by 2025.

PROGRESS: Expanded energy performance contracts from $2 billion to $4 billion to provide energy efficiency upgrades for Federal buildings, at no net cost to the taxpayer.

PROGRESS: In December 2013, President Obama signed a Presidential Memorandum directing the federal government to buy at least 20% of its electricity from renewable sources by 2020.

Continuing the momentum for the future: President Obama believes that the federal government must be a leader in clean energy and energy efficiency. 2020 The federal government will consume 20 percent of its electricity from renewable sources by 2020 — more than double the current goal of 7.5 percent. The President committed to reduce the federal government’s direct greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent below 2008 levels by 2025.

Even as we take new steps to reduce U.S. greenhouse gas emissions, we must also prepare for the impacts of a changing climate that are already being felt across the country.