"Senator Ron Johnson" <no-reply@ronjohnson.senate.gov>
Below my comments is Senator Ron Johnson's email in response to a petition I signed. As always, this is a "no-reply" email so I can't respond to his response. I'm don't know who all his employers are but I'm sure he's not working for "we, the people.

He fails to acknowledge that if we place our number 1 priority on creating jobs by fully supporting the fossil fuel industry (which he does), not only will we not create jobs helpful to our society, but if any jobs are created, they'll be jobs which will continue the destruction of the planet we all live on. I should remind everyone that in 2012, Exxon-Mobil made record profits and paid record wages to its executives with 5,000 fewer employees than they had in 1995.

Each employee is nothing more than a tool - no different than a piece of equipment. These tools allow the company to produce product. The fewer tools required, and the more efficiently each tool operates with the least possible outlay, the higher the percentage of profit the company makes, enabling the company to pay higher executive wages and larger dividends to shareholders. Ultimately, there's no profit in buying tools. Tools are a necessary evil that enables the company to produce product - nothing more, nothing less.

China, India, Brazil, most of Europe, and others are plowing vast financial resources into alternative energy. Clean energy IS the future, yet here is Ron Johnson, an American senator, fighting to save an industry that has seen its better days and is approaching the end of its usefullness as we've known it. Nope...he's not working for Americans. One of his "employers" is the oil industry and he's simply, a good "company man." Who cares if oil companies spew toxins into our atmosphere, our land and our water? They are "job creators"...not. Why should we care if oil companies piss sludge all over our backyards or leak toxic chemicals into our water supplies? Apparently, all fossil fuels belong to these oil companies no matter where they must go to extract their products or methods they must use. Let "we, the people" eat cake. There's money to be made NOW.

It's a lie when he says he's concerned about the environment. He has never cast a single vote which favored the environment over the interests of his corporate sponsors. He cites a recent study without saying what the study is or where I could verify his so-called information. He claims he will carefully monitor regulatory practices of federal agencies to make sure their rules are not doing more harm than good. In other words, he will make sure federal regulations don't get in the way of the corporations he works for. His "no-reply" emails indicate he doesn't wish to hear from "we, the people." However, I'd bet he has an ongoing dialog with oil company executives and representatives.

.

Here is his response:



Dear Greg,

Thank you for taking the time to contact me regarding cap-and-trade

policies and climate change.

I share your desire to protect our natural environment. But I am

equally concerned that misguided efforts to improve the environment can

destroy much-needed jobs and new job creation. Too often, these

policies become so prohibitively expensive that they undermine economic

growth and the average American's ability to support himself or

herself.

A recent study of a proposed cap-and-trade policy showed it would cost

Wisconsin nearly 75,000 jobs by 2030 and result in a loss of disposable

income of up to $6,900 per household. It could also raise gasoline

prices by 141 percent and electricity rates by 171 percent. As so many

of our neighbors struggle to find jobs that will support their

families, I believe it is unfair to ask them to shoulder such huge

additional burdens.

What we do need are common-sense environmental policies that will

produce measurable improvements to the environment where necessary,

protect jobs and the economy, and reduce America's dependence on

foreign oil by using our domestic energy resources in an

environmentally safe manner.

I will carefully monitor the regulatory practices of federal agencies

to make sure their rules are not doing more harm than good. I will

continue to support environmental policies that protect the world we

live in but allow our economy to grow. I will oppose irresponsible

policies that place an unfair financial burden on the average American

family, that kill their jobs, or that endanger the kind of economic

growth our nation needs to survive and prosper.

Thank you again for taking the time to share your thoughts. It is

important for me to hear the views and concerns of the people I serve.

Please feel free to contact me in the future if I can further assist

you or your family. It is an honor representing you and the good

people of Wisconsin in the U.S. Senate.

Sincerely,



Ron Johnson

United States Senator