The Richardson Plan to End the War in Iraq

"Overwhelming majorities of Iraqis, both Shia and Sunni, oppose the presence of US troops in Iraq and believe that US troops are more a cause of violence than a solution to it. Our presence in Iraq fuels the insurgency, strengthens Al Qaeda, and distracts us from the urgent task of defeating the real terrorists who attacked this country on 9-11. It's time for a phased and coordinated, but rapid, withdrawal of all US troops from Iraq, and Governor Richardson has a realistic plan to do it."

- Lt. General Robert G. Gard, Jr. (U.S. Army, Ret.)1

DE-AUTHORIZE, GET ALL TROOPS OUT

The only way to achieve peace and stability in Iraq is to get all U.S. troops out. All of them, with no residual forces left behind. Governor Richardson has repeatedly called for de-authorization of the war. If elected, he will begin an immediate redeployment on his first day in office.

The Iraqis want us out. Iraqis do not feel safer. Iraqis don't want U.S. forces in their country. A recent survey of more than 2,000 people across Iraq concluded that 47 percent want American forces and their coalition allies to leave the country immediately. 57 percent of those surveyed, including 93% of Sunnis and half of Shia Arabs, say attacks on coalition forces are acceptable. 70% in the survey said they believe security has worsened in regions where surge forces have been added.2 No military solution. Even General Petraeus, commander of U.S. forces in Iraq, conceded, "there is no military solution to a problem like that in Iraq, to the insurgency of Iraq."3 4 Our troops have done everything asked of them with courage and professionalism. But they cannot win someone else's civil war. The solution in Iraq is a diplomatic one, not a military one. Leaving our troops in Iraq would serve as a roadblock to political progress.5 6 The hard work of diplomacy and reconciliation cannot begin until the US begins to withdraw troops and we make it clear we are leaving for good. Samuel Berger and Bruce Reidel agree that the United States must re-deploy from Iraq to spark the kind of political reconciliation needed in Iraq: A clear US commitment to a complete, irreversible withdrawal from Iraq may now be the only way to develop a regional concert of powers that could work with Iraqis to try to stabilise the country and cauterise the conflict.7

A complete redeployment will eliminate the insurgents' ability to use our presence as a rallying cry for recruiting and attacks. Philip E. Coyle, Senior Advisor at the Center for Defense Information8, agrees that there is not a military solution to this problem:

There's an old saying, "If you find yourself in a hole, the first thing to do is to stop digging." Americans understand this, and can see that our US military is in a hole in Iraq. Gov. Richardson understands this also, and wants to get our military out of that hole. Americans can see that the war in Iraq is helping al Qaeda to recruit terrorists, undermining the struggle against terrorism, increasing the chances of terror attacks on the US, encouraging anti-American hatred, and strengthening Iran. In a recent poll conducted by the Pew Research Center for People and the Press, nearly 6 in 10 Americans continue to say they want their representatives in Congress to vote for legislation that would bring the troops home by August, 2008. Gov. Richardson is working to bring our young men and women home from Iraq as soon as possible.

The surge has failed. This past summer was the deadliest of the war for our service members,9 and the troop surge has failed to accomplish its declared goals. The Government Accountability Office found that of 18 legislative, security and economic benchmarks, the Iraqi government has met only 3, partially met 4, and did not meet 11. 10

Leaving troops behind will result in significant casualties. Having a much smaller force in Iraq and implementing a partial withdrawal has not prevented significant British casualties.11 12 The British have already lost more troops this year than in each of the past three years of the war.13

A growing number of experts agree that a total withdrawal of forces can be done quickly and safely.14

A total withdrawal: