Education, Other Needs Outstrip Proposed 2016 Budget
Posted January 22, 2015 by Alan Essig

The budget crisis created by the Great Recession may be over, but our review of the proposed 2016 state budget finds it is still insufficient to fully fund education, cover the hundreds of thousands of Georgians without health insurance and adequately maintain our transportation infrastructure. Revenues are growing, but they remain well below past levels in non-recession years.

The governor’s 2016 budget proposal includes another down payment on the billion dollar K-12 education funding formula austerity cut contained in the 2014 budget. An additional $280 million proposed for the 2016 fiscal year reduces the austerity cut below $500 million. The additional money is intended for school districts to use to reduce or eliminate furlough days, increase instructional days or provide salary increases to teachers.

Last January the new state budget was unveiled with optimistic predictions that with additional money teacher furloughs could end and school calendars could return to normal. Many districts are returning to a full school calendar and furloughing teachers fewer days through this partial reduction in austerity cuts this school year, according to a GBPI survey report last fall. However, 66 districts still balance budgets through furlough days and students in 49 districts are in school less than the standard 180 days. Districts should be able to address these with the added funds, and some may be able to increase pay. School districts continue to confront other challenges. These include higher class sizes, loss of school counselors, social workers and media specialists, insufficient textbooks, technology and other instructional materials and elimination of art and music programs, elective courses and programs for students who struggle academically.

Once again Georgia’s budget does not include an across-the-board salary increase for state employees. Each state agency and the Board of Regents will receive enough money to afford the equivalent of a 1 percent salary increase. These funds are set aside for performance incentives or salary adjustments for employee recruitment and retention. Some employees may receive a 1, 2, or even 3 percent increase, while other employees will not receive any increase. While state employee salaries mostly stagnated over the last seven years, most state employees’ take-home pay has suffered a net loss due to increased health insurance costs.

The budget still offers no plan to close Georgia’s coverage gap, which threatens to leave 300,000 Georgians without health insurance and exacerbate existing financial hardships endangering rural hospitals across the state. Nine states with Republican governors already expanded Medicaid coverage to take advantage of new federal funds in 2014. Several other Republican-led states are actively exploring ways to close their state’s coverage gap this year. But so far Georgia’s leaders are not giving proper consideration to the unprecedented opportunity to infuse the state’s health care system with billions of federal dollars. That is available money Georgia can use to increase access to health care services for the uninsured while providing a much-needed financial boost to rural and other safety-net hospitals.

And then there’s the biggest elephant in the room. How will Georgia pay for the over billion dollars a year lawmakers say is needed for the state to maintain its transportation system? Lawmakers are sending signals that a serious discussion of increasing taxes this session could take place. One thing that shouldn’t be part of the transportation funding debate is any plan that robs the general fund, which is the source of money for education and health care. Additional revenues through increased taxes and fees are needed to avoid damaging state services still recovering from the economic downturn. The state cannot afford to solve one problem by making other problems worse.

For a closer look at the education, health care and human services budget proposals keep an eye out as GBPI continues to release our detailed budget analysis starting next week.