SEIU, the Affordable Care Act and Waivers

SMEAR : SEIU Is using loopholes in the new healthcare law to get waivers

So is it true?



No.



The overwhelming majority of SEIU members are covered by plans that will be complying with the $750,000 cap requirement. Before we reformed our national healthcare system, SEIU was on the frontlines figuring out how to make sure low-wage workers had access to healthcare. For example, while most janitors in Texas don’t have any health insurance, Houston janitors who are SEIU members were able to get the healthcare they needed through union initiatives, including free primary care through the Houston Service Workers Clinic.



Now that the Affordable Care Act has passed, SEIU funds have applied for waivers to ensure that our members have the best coverage possible until all the benefits of the law kick in.



SMEAR : The administration granted a disproportionate number of waivers to healthcare reform allies such as labor unions. Is this true?



No.



A recent audit by the Government Accountability Office, the investigative watchdog of Congress, found no merit to the rightwing accusations of favoritism and unduly granted waivers for unions. The GAO analysis found that the Obama administration granted or rejected waivers based on objective criteria, not partisanship. Furthermore, according to the GAO's data, the majority of denials were for plans that covered union employees. [See recent articles in Mother Jones and The Hill for more details].



MORE FACTS:



1,415 applicants have been granted waivers as of April 25, 2011.

A number of SEIU funds have applied for or have been granted waivers.

The full list of granted waivers can be found here.

The waiver process is a key part of healthcare reform because it helps ensure that workers won’t lose their employer-provided health coverage.



It’s important to remember that the coverage we're talking about is low cost plans that cover low-wage workers, some of whom have never had healthcare coverage in their lives.

Example : Houston janitors. Most janitors in Texas don’t have any health insurance, but thanks to the SEIU Fund and this waiver, the janitors in downtown Houston can get the health care they need, including free primary care through the Houston Service Workers Clinic.

: Houston janitors. Most janitors in Texas don’t have any health insurance, but thanks to the SEIU Fund and this waiver, the janitors in downtown Houston can get the health care they need, including free primary care through the Houston Service Workers Clinic. SEIU funds designed these benefits with low wage workers in mind. They are designed to provide affordable access to health care services.

* Send Email To: (required)

Enter up to 10 email addresses above, separated by commas. * Your Email: (required) * Your First Name: (required) * Your Last Name: (required) Subject: SEIU and Affordable Care Act Waivers * Message: (required) With repeal of health care reform the number one priority of the Tea Party, the Republican noise machine is busy pushing lies about SEIU and the Affordable Care Act. You can hardly visit a right-leaning blog (or televisions station) without seeing news of SEIU asking for waivers from the Affordable Care Act. Now that the Affordable Care Act has passed, SEIU funds have applied for waivers to ensure that our members have the best coverage possible until all the benefits of the law kick in. This is simply an attempt by Republicans to discredit the Affordable Care Act - a bill that will provide health care for millions of Americans and make sure no one is ever tossed off their coverage because of a pre-existing condition. We know our members are health care professionals, janitors, public employees and many others trying to make change for our families to help them achieve the American Dream. That's exactly why the right-wing is trying so hard to discredit us. SEIU created a fact check about the story. You can check it out here. http://action.seiu.org/page/share/affordablecarewaivers They will stop at nothing to discredit the work our union does for working families. That's why sending this message was so important. Thank you for getting involved. * denotes required field

The passage of the Affordable Care Act included the promise that Americans can keep their current health insurance. As part of this promise, the law provided flexibility to the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) in writing regulations limiting annual benefit caps on essential benefits to “ensure that access to needed services is made available with a minimal impact on premiums.” In order to preserve existing coverage, the HHS regulations allow plans with an existing annual cap under the new limits to apply for a waiver.