Congressman Davis Announces $1,044,140 Grant for Carroll County School District : Congressman Geoff Davis
Contact: 202-225-3465 Congressman Davis Announces $1,044,140 Grant for Carroll County School District





Washington, Dec 16, 2009 - Congressman Geoff Davis is pleased to announce that the Carroll County School District has been awarded $1,044,140 in funding through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) Early Head Start Expansion Program.



The Carroll County School District plans to use the funds to improve their Early Head Start program to better provide comprehensive, high-quality educational, health, mental health, nutritional, social, and family support services to more than eighty infants, toddlers, pregnant women and their families in Carroll County. The Carroll County School District’s Early Head Start program aims to: (1) enhance the physical, social, emotional, and intellectual developments of very young children; (2) enhance parent-child relationships; and (3) strengthen families.



Congressman Davis stated, “In these difficult economic times, it is critical to ensure that vulnerable populations in Kentucky have access to important support services like those provided by the Early Head Start program. This important grant will allow Carroll County School District to expand their ability to provide needed assistance to local low-income families and children. I am very proud of the work that the Carroll County School District is doing to strengthen their community, and I am pleased that our office was able to assist them in obtaining these funds.”



“This grant will have a significant impact on young children and their families in Carroll County, both now and in the future,” said Lisa James, Superintendent of Carroll County Schools. “We are grateful for Congressman Geoff Davis’ support and assistance with the grant application process.”



The Early Head Start program is administered by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Administration for Children and Families. The program is designed to enhance the cognitive, social and emotional development of low-income children by providing comprehensive health, educational, nutritional, and social services. Additionally, the Early Head Start program strives to involve parents in their children’s learning while helping parents make progress toward their educational, literacy and employment goals.



Congressman Davis and his staff are committed to providing the best services possible to assist residents of the Fourth District and maximize grant funding for worthy projects in Kentucky’s Fourth Congressional District. To learn more about the grant related services offered in Congressman Davis’ office, to request a letter of support, or to sign-up for Congressman Davis’ email distribution list, please contact his Ft. Mitchell office at (859) 426-0080 or visit - Congressman Geoff Davis is pleased to announce that the Carroll County School District has been awarded $1,044,140 in funding through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) Early Head Start Expansion Program.The Carroll County School District plans to use the funds to improve their Early Head Start program to better provide comprehensive, high-quality educational, health, mental health, nutritional, social, and family support services to more than eighty infants, toddlers, pregnant women and their families in Carroll County. The Carroll County School District’s Early Head Start program aims to: (1) enhance the physical, social, emotional, and intellectual developments of very young children; (2) enhance parent-child relationships; and (3) strengthen families.Congressman Davis stated, “In these difficult economic times, it is critical to ensure that vulnerable populations in Kentucky have access to important support services like those provided by the Early Head Start program. This important grant will allow Carroll County School District to expand their ability to provide needed assistance to local low-income families and children. I am very proud of the work that the Carroll County School District is doing to strengthen their community, and I am pleased that our office was able to assist them in obtaining these funds.”“This grant will have a significant impact on young children and their families in Carroll County, both now and in the future,” said Lisa James, Superintendent of Carroll County Schools. “We are grateful for Congressman Geoff Davis’ support and assistance with the grant application process.”The Early Head Start program is administered by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Administration for Children and Families. The program is designed to enhance the cognitive, social and emotional development of low-income children by providing comprehensive health, educational, nutritional, and social services. Additionally, the Early Head Start program strives to involve parents in their children’s learning while helping parents make progress toward their educational, literacy and employment goals.Congressman Davis and his staff are committed to providing the best services possible to assist residents of the Fourth District and maximize grant funding for worthy projects in Kentucky’s Fourth Congressional District. To learn more about the grant related services offered in Congressman Davis’ office, to request a letter of support, or to sign-up for Congressman Davis’ email distribution list, please contact his Ft. Mitchell office at (859) 426-0080 or visit http://GeoffDavis.house.gov/ConstituentServices/Grants.htm Print version of this document