House Democrats Raise Debt Limit, Force Passage of Second Stimulus Package : Congressman Geoff Davis
Contact: 202-225-3465 House Democrats Raise Debt Limit, Force Passage of Second Stimulus Package





Washington, Dec 16, 2009 - On what was likely to be the final day of votes in the House of Representatives for 2009, Speaker Nancy Pelosi forced passage of a $150 billion extension of her failed trillion dollar “Stimulus” bill that was enacted in February.



Congressman Davis stated, “Speaker Pelosi’s unsustainable policies rely on excessive spending, endless debt and the promise of increased taxes. While it is unlikely that anyone has finished reading and digesting the bill, it is clear that this bill adds more money to several programs from the original stimulus bill that still have substantial reserves, not to mention reporting errors and accountability problems.



“Democrats would have us believe that adding $150 billion more to their $1 trillion dollar stimulus plan is the spark needed to finally create jobs and lower the unemployment rate. However, we are still waiting for the three to four million new jobs that Democrats claimed would be created by the previous stimulus bill. Instead, more than 2.6 million Americans have lost their jobs since the bill was passed in February and the unemployment rate has risen to a 26-year high of 10 percent.”



The Speaker narrowly passed H.R. 2847 by a vote of 217-212; Congressman Davis joined all of his Republican colleagues and thirty-eight Democrats in voting against this failed formula for job creation.



Prior to passing the $150 billion spending bill, House Democrats voted to increase the debt limit by $290 billion in order to continue their reckless spending of borrowed money. The move comes just ten months after Democrats increased the national debt limit from $11.315 trillion to $12.104 trillion. The debt limit increase bill passed the House by another close vote of 218 to 214. Congressman Davis joined every Republican and thirty-nine Democrats in opposing this legislation.



In an effort to curb Congress’ insatiable appetite for borrowing and spending, last week, Congressman Davis and his Republican colleagues introduced H.R. 4262, the CAP the DEBT Act. The legislation would mandate a two-thirds roll call vote in the House and Senate in order to raise the debt ceiling and prohibit Congress from hiding debt limit increases in the annual joint budget resolution. Print version of this document