Virginia lawmakers react to UVA's historic win
The excitement continues to build after the University of Virginia men's basketball team clinched their first national championship Monday night.

Cheers from Charlottesville made their way to Capitol Hill as Virginia lawmakers relish the victory.

"They brought glory to Virginia and they did it in a way that people will remember for a long, long time," said Sen. Mark Warner (D-VA).

The "Cardiac Cavs" prevailed Monday night in the finals against Texas Tech, winning their first national title in school history. Warner says this big win is unifying the commonwealth.

"I even heard over the last few days, Virginia Tech Hokie fans rooting for UVA," Warner said. "I never thought that would happen!"

"Like every Wahoo game in the history of basketball, you're biting your nails off," Rep. Denver Riggleman, R-VA, said about the national championship game.

Riggleman — a university graduate who represents Charlottesville — is ecstatic about the win and impressed by the grit and determination of both teams.

"You had two class acts, never been there before, play this historic game," Riggleman said. "I don't think you could ask for anything better in college basketball."

Congresswoman Abigail Spanberger (D-VA) — a fellow UVA alum — says it's inspiring to see her school come back from defeat in the first round of the Big Dance last year to win it all in 2019.

"You can go from a devastating loss and a real challenge and make the most of it and work hard and win," Spanberger said, "it's a phenomenal story."

Senator Tim Kaine (D-VA) is thrilled for all five Virginia schools that competed in this year's March Madness. In the end, he's especially proud UVA finally had their year.

"They just had fate smiling on them this year, thank goodness," Kaine said. "It was such a wonderful thing to see this great season come to an end with Virginia on top."

Now Virginia lawmakers are putting forth a resolution so all of Congress officially recognizes that UVA won the game.

President Donald Trump also congratulated the team over Twitter Tuesday, calling it a great game. Gray's DC bureau reached out to the White House communications department to see whether the Commander-in-Chief would be inviting the 'Hoos to DC. We will update this page if there's more information.