Christopher Wilson
Reflections on Mexico's Southern Border Apr 01, 2015 In early March, 2015, a small group of researchers from the Washington-based Wilson Center and from Mexico’s Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México and Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económicas traveled to the southwestern section of the Mexico-Guatemala border to observe developments in migration, various types of illicit trafficking, trade, and border management. In this report, each of the five researchers participating in the visit presents a short reflection based on several of these encounters. Apr 01, 2015

The U.S.-Mexico Border Economy in Transition Feb 02, 2015 "La Economía de la Frontera México-Estados Unidos en Transición" es un amplio informe con recomendaciones destinadas a fortalecer la competitividad económica de la región fronteriza México-Estados Unidos. Feb 02, 2015

Fostering Innovation in Mexico Nov 19, 2014 How has the global economy changed, and what does it mean for innovation? How should we be thinking about innovation? What conditions are necessary for innovation to thrive? How can we attract greater investment for innovation activities? What types of government policies and regulations can strengthen innovation? How can we better integrate science and technology into practical applications? What are the barriers to innovation, and how can we overcome them? This publication summarizes the main themes of the High-Level Innovation Forum for Policymakers 2013 and highlights some lessons learned. The purpose of this paper is to aid in ongoing dialogue, the next stage of which will take place in Washington, DC in November, 2014 (The publication is available both in English and Spanish). Nov 19, 2014

Three Keys to Understand the 2015 Budget Debate in Mexico Oct 23, 2014 The 2015 budget debate is the first since Mexico's 2013 fiscal reform was implemented, offering an important opportunity to analyze the impact of the tax policy changes on public income, and consequently, on expenditures. Three issues—tax collection, public expenditure, and the national debt—are explored in this article, all in the context of Mexico’s structural reforms and brightening yet somewhat volatile economic prospects. Oct 23, 2014

Plan Tamaulipas: A New Security Strategy for a Troubled State Oct 09, 2014 Recognizing that the situation in Tamaulipas had reached crisis levels, in May, 2014, Mexico's top security officials met with their state level counterparts in Tamaulipas to unveil a new security strategy. This short report analyzes the new strategy, describes the challenging local context, and offers a few recommendations that could serve to strengthen the effort. Oct 09, 2014

Mexico’s Southern Border Strategy: Programa Frontera Sur Jul 11, 2014 The most common adjective used to describe Mexico’s southern border with Guatemala and Belize is probably ‘porous.’ The large volume of Central American migrants, including many families and unaccompanied minors, crossing the border on their way north to the United States suggests as much. In response to these challenges, and also in an effort to facilitate the legal flow of commerce, tourism and guest workers, Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto launched the Programa Frontera Sur (Southern Border Program) on July 7, 2014. Jul 11, 2014

U.S.- Mexico Regional Economic Competitiveness Forums 2014 Apr 14, 2014 The Mexico Institute is pleased to partner with USAID Mexico, the Council of State Governments West, the U.S. Congressional Border Caucus, and the North American Research Partnership on the “U.S.- Mexico Regional Economic Competitiveness Forums 2014.” This initiative brings together key business, government and other stakeholders to discuss the future of the U.S.-Mexico border economy with particular emphasis on four crossborder regions. Apr 14, 2014

Testimony at the House Committee on Homeland Security, "Taking Down the Cartels: Examining United States – Mexico Cooperation" Apr 14, 2014 On April 2, 2014, Christopher Wilson, Mexico Institute's Associate testified in front of the House Committee on Homeland Security, addressing the issue of U.S.-Mexico security in particular regarding to cartel violence and activity. Apr 14, 2014

Is Geography Destiny? A Primer on North American Relations Feb 18, 2014 At a time when nearly all of the key issues facing North America are being understood and addressed either independently by the United States, Canada and Mexico, or within the dual-bilateral framework of U.S.-Mexico and U.S.-Canada relations, this report attempts to view these challenges and opportunities through a trilateral lens. Feb 18, 2014