Faculty & Staff
× Faculty & Staff

Employees by employment category

Faculty and staff are reported in five employment categories listed below. Employees funded on UW Systemwide funds are included within UW System Administration. Employees with multiple appointments are counted in only one category as defined and reported to the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). As a result, the count of faculty is slightly lower than appears in the faculty turnover measure. Source: UW System Office of Human Resources.

Faculty and Instructional Academic Staff – Individuals with instructional, research, and service responsibilities who hold the rank of professor, associate professor, assistant professor, or instructor and academic staff performing at a level typical of faculty.

Non-instructional Academic Staff – Professional and administrative personnel with duties and appointments primarily associated with higher education institutions or their administration.

University Staff – The university workforce who contribute in a broad array of positions in support of the University’s mission and are not exempt from the overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).

Administrators and Academic Leaders –The executive layer of system and institutional academic leadership. Examples include President, Vice Presidents, Chancellors, Provosts, Deans, and Administrative Directors.

Graduate Assistants – Appointments intended primarily to further the education and training of the student, to assist with research, other projects, and/or have been assigned teaching responsibilities under the supervision of a faculty member.

Employees by race/ethnicity

Race/ethnicity is self-reported by the individual in one or more of the following categories: African American, American Indian, Hispanic/Latino(a), Asian American, White, and International. Beginning in fall 2008, new race/ethnicity categories were implemented that allow for self-identifying as Hawaiian/Pacific Islander or as more than one race/ethnicity; these new categories are reported where data are available. The category of Hispanic/Latino(a) includes individuals identifying as Hispanic/Latino(a) alone or in combination with other race/ethnicities. Individuals who are non-resident aliens (temporary U.S. visa holders) are categorized as International. Individuals who are not International and do not report a race or ethnicity are categorized as Unknown.

Faculty compensation gap

The compensation gap with peer institutions uses a standard methodology established in 1984. It is based on salaries adjusted for the cost of living using the Economic Research Institute Index. Benefits are not included. Comparable salary information is provided by the American Association of University Professors (AAUP), and includes 11 peer institutions for UW-Madison, 14 peer institutions for UW-Milwaukee, and 31 peer institutions for the UW Comprehensive institutions. Totals for UW System and UW System excluding UW-Madison include UW Colleges and UW-Extension.

UW Salary Peers xlsx

Faculty turnover rate

Faculty turnover refers to faculty separating from employment at UW institutions. Faculty is defined as Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, and Instructor. Tenure Track (Probationary) means an appointment held by a faculty member that may lead to a decision on a tenure appointment. The number of faculty is based on the October payroll and includes faculty with additional appointments in other employment categories. Retirements, resignations, and non-renewals are tracked in the UW System Human Resources Information System.

Instructional workload

Each statistic on instructional workload is calculated per full-time equivalent instructional staff member. Weekly Group Contact Hours measure the number of hours spent in classroom instruction. Average Student Credit Hours measure the student credit hours generated through all types of instruction. Average Group Instruction (Primary Sections) measures the number of primary group instruction sections, which do not include supporting course sections such as laboratory or discussion sections. Average Individual Instruction (Enrollments) measures the enrollments in individualized instruction such as independent study or thesis research. Instructional workload measures include State-funded activity only.