Cost & Efficiency
× Cost & Efficiency

Published and net cost of attendance

Students who receive grants and scholarships pay substantially less than the published cost of attendance. Published cost of attendance is calculated for Wisconsin resident new freshmen at UW four-year institutions as the sum of full-time tuition and fees, room and board for on-campus residence, books, transportation, and miscellaneous costs. UW Colleges published cost of attendance assumes room and board costs for students living off campus with family. When more than one UW institution is selected, published cost of attendance is weighted by full-time fall resident undergraduate enrollments. Net cost of attendance is the average amount paid by full-time resident new freshmen receiving grants and scholarships, weighted by on- or off-campus living arrangement using the IPEDS methodology. When more than one UW institution is selected, net cost of attendance is weighted by full-time resident new freshmen receiving grants and scholarships. Cost of attendance is not inflation-adjusted. Peer and national costs of attendance are for public four-year institutions and are from the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). Published cost of attendance nationally is weighted by fall total undergraduate enrollments. Net cost of attendance nationally is weighted by full-time resident new freshmen receiving grants and scholarships.

UW Tuition Peers xlsx

Tuition and fees as percent of family income

Published tuition and fees are for Wisconsin resident undergraduates enrolled full-time for both fall and spring semesters at UW four-year institutions. When more than one UW institution is selected, published tuition and fees are weighted by full-time fall resident undergraduate enrollments. Peer and national tuition and fees are for public four-year institutions and are from the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). Peer institution tuition and fees may reflect average tuition rates at institutions with cohort-based tuition and/or different tuition rates for different programs of study. National tuition and fees are weighted by fall total undergraduate enrollments. State and national median family income is from the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey for the calendar year that includes the fall semester. Wisconsin is the state used for UW institutions; peer institutions use the state where the institution is located. Neither tuition and fees nor state median family income is inflation-adjusted.

UW Tuition Peers xlsx

Institutional grant aid

Institutional grant aid to undergraduates with financial need is made up primarily of grants and scholarships funded through sources such as donations to UW institutions and tuition differentials. Years shown reflect the requirement beginning in 1992 to use the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA), the uniform federal guideline for determining student financial need. Inflation adjustments are made using the Consumer Price Index.

Student loan debt

Student loan debt is the cumulative debt incurred by Wisconsin resident bachelor’s degree recipients while enrolled at a UW System institution. The cumulative debt includes loans directed through or reported to UW financial aid offices. PLUS loans to parents are included. Loans received at non-UW institutions, credit card loans, or home equity loans are not included. Cumulative debt may differ from loan debt reported in the Common Data Set (CDS) because the CDS is based on first-time students and does not include PLUS loans. Years shown reflect the requirement beginning in 1992 to use the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA), the uniform federal guideline for determining student financial need. Inflation adjustments are made using the Consumer Price Index. To protect student privacy, values for the less than five bachelor’s degree recipients at UW Colleges in 2014-15 are not shown.

Student loan default rates

The U.S. Department of Education office of Federal Student Aid bases the cohort loan default rate on the percentage of federal loans that go into default within three years of baccalaureate graduation. Prior to fiscal year 2009, the default rate was measured over a two-year period. The national default rate includes all higher education institutions that administer federal student loan programs. Default rates reported by the U.S. Department of Education are truncated to the tenths place and may slightly differ from the rates shown here, which are rounded.

Unmet need

Average unmet need is the financial need of full-time resident undergraduates remaining after grants, loans, scholarships, and the expected family contribution to college costs. Years shown reflect the requirement beginning in 1992 to use the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA), the uniform federal guideline for determining student financial need. Inflation adjustments are made using the Consumer Price Index.

Enrolled semesters of bachelor’s degree recipients (time to degree)

Semesters enrolled at “Any UW” includes fall and spring semesters enrolled at any UW institution by students starting as new freshmen at any UW institution, including UW Colleges. “Same UW” is based on new freshmen who started at and graduated from the same UW institution. Years shown begin in 1993-94, when a systemwide goal to reduce time and credits to degree was established. To protect student privacy, values for the less than five bachelor’s degree recipients at UW Colleges in 2014-15 are not shown.

Credits attempted by bachelor’s degree recipients (credits to degree)

Credits to degree at “Any UW” includes UW credits attempted at any UW institution by students starting as new freshmen at any UW institution, including UW Colleges. “Same UW” is based on new freshmen who started at and graduated from the same UW institution. Years shown begin in 1993-94, when a systemwide goal to reduce time and credits to degree was established. To protect student privacy, values for the less than five bachelor’s degree recipients at UW Colleges in 2014-15 are not shown. “Same UW” credits to degree at UW Colleges are substantially lower than at other UW institutions because the UW Colleges’ Bachelor of Applied Arts & Sciences is designed to include upper level courses at several UW four-year institution partners.

UW credits funded by all sources are included in the analysis. Placement credits, credits awarded for prior learning, and credits transferred from non-UW institutions are not included in any credits to degree calculations.

Administrative spending

Spending on administration is identified using the “institutional support” classification developed by the National Association of College and University Business Officers (NACUBO) and is a standard mandated by the Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB). Administrative spending is divided by student full-time-equivalent (FTE) enrollment, calculated as full-time headcount plus one-third part time headcount. Data for the UW System, neighboring states, and national average include public four-year institutions only. Midwest includes Iowa, Illinois, Michigan and Minnesota. Values are not adjusted for inflation. Source: National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS).

Due to revisions of prior-year IPEDS Finance surveys, FY16 data for some UW institutions were adjusted when FY17 data were added.