Nicholson campaign: Baldwin’s attack ad proves she knows Kevin Nicholson can beat her in November
Contact:

262-361-4266

press@NicholsonForSenate.com

(Delafield, WI) – Ronica Cleary, Communications Director for Marine veteran and political outsider Kevin Nicholson, issued the following statement regarding Tammy Baldwin’s recently released attack ad:

“In career politician Tammy Baldwin’s latest attack ad, she spends time on each major candidate: 44% pro-Baldwin; 43% anti-Nicholson; 13% anti-Vukmir. She clearly spends so much time focusing on political outsider and combat veteran Kevin Nicholson because she understandably fears he can defeat her in November.

By running an ad now about the Republican candidates for U.S. Senate, Baldwin is attempting to trick the voters into selecting a weaker opponent for herself in the general election. By focusing almost all of her fire on Nicholson, she lightly dings Leah Vukmir in the ad so as to give herself cover. But political observers have seen this trick before — most recently by Claire McCaskill in 2012, where she bragged repeatedly about her tricks to ensure Todd Akin was the Republican nominee against her.

Baldwin tosses out completely debunked, fake news lies that were printed by a liberal hack reporter against Kevin in her new ad because she knows that as the Republican nominee, he will send her where she belongs: into political retirement.

Kevin will do so by highlighting all the ways Baldwin has sold out Wisconsinites and the American people as she pushes her socialist agenda in Washington. Baldwin doesn’t support the President’s wall, ending illegal immigration, or tax cuts for hard working families. She announced she would vote against the nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court, even before she met with him. She has signed onto ‘Bernie-care,’ a plan for government-run socialized medicine. But perhaps most important, as a combat veteran of Iraq and Afghanistan, Kevin is well-positioned to call out her disgraceful failures at the Tomah VA. It will take a true political outsider, decorated Marine veteran, and businessman to win this race and go to Washington to help President Trump get the job done.

Republican Primary voters should not be fooled: only Kevin Nicholson can beat Tammy Baldwin, and the Democrats are truly scared by his candidacy.”

Nicholson is a decorated Marine Corps veteran who served combat tours in both Iraq and Afghanistan. He currently works as a business consultant, helping companies solve their toughest problems. He is a first-time candidate running in the Republican primary to defeat Democrat Tammy Baldwin. He and his wife live in Delafield with their three young children.