Give Trump the Medal of Freedom
The problem with guys like Ari Fleischer, the former press secretary of George W. Bush, is that he’s drunk the inside-the-beltway political Kookaid for so long that he actually believes his own spin. Poor guy went down for the third time in the denial goo long ago.

Donald Trump’s biggest critics all believe that the engine of all things good and serious emanates from the professional Fedzillacrats who apparently enjoy wallowing in the said goo of Washington, D.C.

In a recent Politico article, Fleischer is quoted as saying, in part, that “Donald Trump is like watching a roadside accident. Everybody pulls over to see the mess.”

Donald Trump is a mess? Maybe Mr. Fleischer should open up the political garbage can he and the majority of Fedzillacrats live in and take a look at the real, certifiable, rotting, stinking mess that has been caused by the professional scammers of both political stripes for the past 50 years.

What do YOU think? Love him or hate him, what’s your take on Donald Trump? Sound off in the WND Poll

Mr. Fleischer and other critics of Mr. Trump aren’t listening to the blaring trumpets of dissatisfaction that are blown by millions of Americans who realize that it’s the professional political punks in D.C. who have engineered the economic train wreck that is strangling the economy, shrinking the middle class and creating even further embarrassing, America-destroying dependence on Fedzilla by tens and tens of millions of Americans.

Mr. Trump didn’t create this economic swan dive to the street. Our politicians did, the very guys Mr. Fleischer apparently believes are the solution to the problem. If he actually believes this jabberwocky, Fleischer should seek political mental health disability.

Donald Trump is running strong in the early polls because Americans are fed up with the political status quo, especially from left-leaning GOP Fedzillacrats who want to feed us cow dung while telling us it’s a cheeseburger.

Our forefathers wouldn’t recognize the political labyrinth our professional politicians have created. The very things our forefathers warned us not to do as it pertains to embracing a centralized, powerful federal government is the very cliff our professional politicians have steered the Goodship America straight off of.

And Donald Trump is a mess?

American doesn’t need any more professional political punks in D.C., unless you believe sticking a red hot crowbar in your eye is an excellent treatment for cataracts.

It’s professional political punks who have created the puss-filled infected wound of fundamental transformation, not Donald Trump.

They are the ones calling for a bigger bureaucratic shovel for the hole they have already dug, not Donald Trump.

They are the ones who have lied to Americans or intentionally hidden the truth from us, not Donald Trump.

It’s professional politicians who are the enemy of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, not Donald Trump.

Experience more of Ted Nugent’s no-holds-barred passion and patriotism in his books and WND’s “Ted Nugent for President!” bumper sticker

Donald Trump’s message sings to Americans because he doesn’t play politically correct brain-dead games. He calls them like he sees them. That’s refreshing to millions of Americans who believe political correctness is a public cancer that has eroded free speech and everything else good about America.

Those who condemn Donald Trump for refusing to use cowardly, politically correct words would be wise to remember the words of Harry Truman who said, “Once a government is committed to the principle of silencing the voice of opposition, it has only one way to go, and that is down the path of increasingly repressive measures, until it becomes a source of terror to all its citizens and creates a country where everyone lives in fear.”

Instead of being condemned and lampooned by the likes of Ari Fleischer and his ilk, Donald Trump should be given the Medal of Freedom for speaking his mind in such a bold, honest and straight-forward manner.

If you want to watch a real political train wreck, witness a real mess in progress, you need look no further than the professional politicians who have borrowed and spent this country into oblivion. Trump that if you dare.

Carry on, Mr. Trump. Unless you are taking flak, you’re not over the target.

And for the record, I dare anybody to show me one word from Trump that isn’t accurate. What sort of denial gagged liar denies that our country is being invaded by drugrunners, murderers and rapists? What sort of denial gagged liar could possibly believe Trump meant legal immigrants?

GOP, your very existence is on the line here. Show some honesty or you’re done.

Media wishing to interview Ted Nugent, please contact [email protected].