New class-action lawsuit: Opportunity School District ballot question misleading, deceptive

Nathan Deal did not get his Opportunity School District, but he may get a diluted version via the Legislature. (AJC photo)

A class-action lawsuit filed today goes after Gov. Nathan Deal, Lt. Gov. Casey Cagle and Secretary of State Brian Kemp over the language in the Amendment 1 “Opportunity School District” ballot question.

The three lead plaintiffs — Atlanta parent Kimberly Brooks, Rev. Timothy McDonald and public school teacher Melissa Ladd — charge the language is “so misleading and deceptive that it violates the due process and voting rights of all Georgia voters.”

Proponents of state takeover called the lawsuit a stunt. “This is a last-minute media stunt engineered by outside special interest groups in order to generate publicity,” said Tom Willis, director of the Opportunity for All Georgia Students coalition. “This frivolous lawsuit demonstrates the depths to which some outside groups will go to defend the status quo. They are playing political games with the futures of 68,000 students trapped in failing schools. It’s unconscionable to hold these students hostage simply to generate news headlines.”

Among the contentions in the suit:

First, the language states that the constitutional amendment “increase[es] community involvement” when it does the opposite. Second, the language claims that impacted schools will be “fixed,” when there is no research, data or evidence that state takeovers of local public schools yields any better outcomes. Third, the language describes the targeted schools as “failing” while many of them have made as much or more progress on state school assessments as traditionally high performing schools. Accordingly, the ballot language by which the Proposed Amendment will be presented to the Georgia electorate deprives voters of their due process right to an effective vote in violation of the Georgia Constitution. All Georgia voters are entitled to have only those proposed amendments that comply with the Constitution presented on the ballot and also to have such amendments presented in a manner that complies with the Constitution. Accordingly, this lawsuit addresses matters that both directly affect them as voters and that also affect purely public rights, common to all voters in this state, and seeks to enforce the performance of a purely public duty, i.e., to have the Secretary of State place on the ballot only language regarding those proposed amendments that complies with the requirements of the Georgia Constitution. Plaintiffs thus seek to have this Court enter judgment declaring that the Proposed Amendment violates the Georgia Constitution and the ballot language regarding the amendment is so misleading and deceptive that it violates the due process and voting rights of all Georgia voters and enjoining enforcement if passed.

Here is the press release on the suit: