Elizabeth Warren Tries to Win Back Voters in Trump Country
Elizabeth Warren speaks during a demonstration against the Republican repeal of the Affordable Care Act outside the U.S. Capitol last week. Photo: aaron p. bernstein/Reuters

LOWELL, Mass.—Sen. Elizabeth Warren is traveling to Trump-friendly areas of her state hoping to connect with his backers and provide a road map for her party to win back working-class voters.

Ms. Warren’s message echoes the gloomy assessment of the U.S. economy that President Donald Trump sketched out during the 2016 campaign, though her prescription for addressing it is diametrically opposite.

At a weekend town hall meeting here, the Massachusetts Democrat began with a treatise about how the economy worked far better for the middle class in the 1950s, 60s and 70s. Now, Ms. Warren said, the middle class is no longer an equal partner in the nation’s economic growth and there is little hope for anyone who is not rich, powerful and connected.

“It is not the America of our dreams,” she told about 500 people who packed into a steamy hall at a local job-training agency. “It is the America of our nightmares.”

During last year’s presidential campaign, Lowell became the exemplar of the down-on-its-luck places where Mr. Trump filled drew large crowds. A mile from where Ms. Warren held her town hall, Mr. Trump spoke before a packed 6,500-seat hockey arena in January 2016.

Mr. Trump won 60% of Lowell’s GOP primary vote in what was then still a five-candidate field. Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton won the city in the general election, but Mr. Trump carried four of the five towns that border it.

In May, Ms. Warren held a town hall in Ware, a central Massachusetts town won by Mr. Trump. Her team is planning more events in a band across the state’s midsection that, according to an April WBUR poll, remains supportive of the president and skeptical of Ms. Warren.

Ms. Warren’s message: Things are unfair; Washington is to blame; and without major changes the country will be irreparably harmed.

“We talk about how the middle class has just taken one punch after another for nearly 40 years now,” she told the Lowell crowd. “Understand that Donald Trump and these Republican majorities are poised to deliver the knockout blow.”

That blow, Ms. Warren said, comes from GOP efforts to roll back Obama-era financial regulations and the Affordable Care Act, along with increasingly burdensome student loan debt load on new college graduates.

Though she is holding events in Trump-friendly areas, Ms. Warren has drawn supportive crowds.

Among those who asked questions of Ms. Warren was Jennifer Daniel, an unemployed 30-year-old from nearby Methuen. Ms. Daniel said her husband, an Army veteran, used his GI Bill education benefits to attend a for-profit college that closed in 2016 four months before he was to graduate.

“This is not right,” Ms. Warren told her from the stage. “Everyone in this room recognizes the responsibility that we have to you and to each other to stop this kind of cheating on veterans. This is just wrong.”

Now homeless, unemployed and five months pregnant, Ms. Daniel said in an interview after the event that she voted for Green Party candidate Jill Stein last November because she couldn’t bring herself to back Mrs. Clinton.

“I was disillusioned,” Ms. Daniel said. Mr. Trump winning, she said, “felt like it was meant to happen.”

While Democrats across the country wrestle with the question of how to win back voters who rallied to Mr. Trump, Ms. Warren’s aides say her outreach to parts of the state that favored the president is strictly to hear from Massachusetts voters. She isn’t likely to face a serious challenge next year, when she is up for a second term in the Senate.

The 68-year-old Ms. Warren refuses to publicly entertain the question of whether she will run for president in 2020. Told by a questioner here that “most of us want you to run for president in 2020,” she batted away the idea with a reminder that she is on the ballot in Massachusetts first.

“Can I just say, ‘Warren 2018?’” she replied.

Ms. Warren’s evasiveness hasn’t stopped Republican groups and Mr. Trump from making her the focus of their attacks. Mr. Trump, in a Sunday interview on the Fox News Channel, called her “a hopeless case.”

“I actually think that she is just somebody that’s got a lot of hatred, a lot of anger,” Mr. Trump said. “I think she’s a highly overrated voice.”

America Rising, an Arlington, Va.-based GOP opposition research group, in April made Ms. Warren the centerpiece of an effort to attack would-be 2020 Democratic presidential candidates with a project dubbed “The Elizabeth Warren Initiative.” The super PAC’s executive director, Colin Reed, said going after Ms. Warren is “a major priority.”

Ms. Warren says her immediate focus is on fighting the Republican health-care legislation and mounting her 2018 re-election campaign. But she hasn’t been shy about seeking to pull fellow Democrats and those running in next year’s midterm elections to the left.

Blocking the GOP rollback of provisions in the Affordable Care Act, Ms. Warren said, is not enough. She said Democrats on the ballot in the next two federal elections should back a national single-payer health-care plan.

“President Obama tried to move us forward with health-care coverage by using a conservative model that came from one of the conservative think tanks that had been advanced by a Republican governor in Massachusetts,” she said during an interview in her Senate office last week. “Now it’s time for the next step. And the next step is single payer.”

In Lowell, Ms. Warren said there is broad support for raising the minimum wage, expanding Social Security, forgiving student loan debt and installing tougher federal regulations on the financial services industry.

Democrats, she said, would do better if they campaigned on that progressive platform rather than blurring the lines between themselves and Republicans.

“The progressive agenda is America’s agenda,” she said. “It’s not like we’re trying to sell stuff that people don’t want…It’s not that at all. It’s that we haven’t gotten up there and been as clear about our values as we should be, or as clear and concrete about how we’re going to get there.”