Congressman Phil Gingrey, M.D.
Congressman Phil Gingrey was born and raised in Augusta. After graduating from St. Thomas Aquinas High School, he moved to Atlanta to attend the Georgia Institute of Technology. Phil co-oped his way through college, and completed his undergraduate studies in Chemistry. With a Bachelor's of Science degree from Georgia Tech, Phil returned home to Augusta to attend the Medical College of Georgia.

Dr. Gingrey completed his internship at Grady Memorial Hospital in Atlanta, and his residency at the Medical College of Georgia. He also completed a rotation during this time at Doctor's Hospital in Columbus.



Upon completion of his medical training, Dr. Gingrey moved his young family to Marietta where he set up a pro-life OB-GYN practice. For 26 years, Phil built a successful practice and delivered more than 5,200 babies.

Phil is deeply involved in his community. He volunteers regularly at Good Samaritan Health Clinic, which provides free medical care for patients without health insurance or who are unable to afford care, and actively supports the March of Dimes. His community service has been recognized with the Leadership Cobb and the Earnest Barrett Outstanding Leadership Award. He served on the Marietta City School Board, including three terms as chairman, and in the State Senate. In 2002, he was elected U.S. Congressman for Georgia's 11th District.

In the U.S. House of Representatives, Congressman Gingrey is working to improve healthcare for all Americans, protect our nation, create jobs, fight for the life of the unborn and improve education. He is committed to lowering taxes for hardworking Georgians and protecting the traditional values so important to Northwest Georgia.

Congressman Gingrey currently serves on the House Energy and Commerce Committee, where he utilizes his background as a physician to help shape our nation’s health care policy. He also serves on the House Administration Committee, where he is the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight. Congressman Gingrey was also recently selected to serve on the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe (Helsinki Commission). During his previous terms in Congress, Phil has served on the Armed Services Committee, the Rules Committee, the Committee on Education and the Workforce, and the Science and Technology Committee. In the 110th Congress, Phil served as Ranking Member of the Science Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation.

As Chairman of the GOP Doctors Caucus, Phil works with 21 medical providers in Congress to develop patient centered, patient driven healthcare reforms focused on quality, access, affordability, portability, and choice. The GOP Doctors Caucus Members continue to utilize their unique experiences and medical expertise to help reform and strengthen the healthcare system in the United States. Congressman Gingrey has been a driving force in the fight to repeal Obamacare, and continues working hard to reduce waste and fraud in the Medicare system.

Phil and his wife, Billie, have been married for 43 years. They have been blessed with 4 children, Billy, Gannon, Phyllis and Laura Neill, and 13 grandchildren. The Gingreys attend St. Joseph Catholic Church in Marietta.

Click HERE for a complete list of congressional caucuses of which Phil is a member.



Click HERE for a high-resolution copy of Congressman Gingrey's congressional photograph.



Fast Facts About Phil