‘Private Jet Deduction’ in Tax Bill Isn’t Quite What It Seems
Did you hear the one about the “private jet deduction” in Senate Republicans’ tax bill?

There’s less to it than that—and it’s backed by one of the most liberal Democrats in the Senate.

The provision attempts to ensure an excise tax for commercial airline flights isn’t imposed on private flights operated through management companies. Under the law, private jet owners pay a higher fuel tax than commercial airlines do but no ticket tax, said Troy Rolf, an aviation tax attorney at GKG Law.

After years of court cases and Internal Revenue Service audits, some of the definitions had gotten vague or confusing. Here's the question: When an airplane owner pays a management company to operate its plane and lease it out to others, do those payments count as taxable transportation?

The proposal says those aircraft management services, such as storage and maintenance costs, are exempt from the ticket tax.

“It’s really just, I think, clarifying what the law was always intended to do in the first place,” Mr. Rolf said. “As the IRS kept expanding what they would consider to be commercial, no one really knew.”

The main Senate bill on this issue was sponsored by Sen. Sherrod Brown (D., Ohio), who spent four days in the Finance Committee this week railing against corporate handouts in a bill he opposes. According to the Joint Committee on Taxation's estimate of the whole bill, this provision reduces federal revenue by less than $50 million over a decade.

But it's likely far less than that. According to a 2016 JCT letter, the proposal would lower federal revenue by less than $500,000. That's partly because uncertainty over what the rules are now means that not much tax is collected.

“This provision in no way cuts taxes for private jet owners,” said Jennifer Donohue, a spokeswoman for Mr. Brown. “It simply clarifies what the law already says—that service companies made up of mechanics and service workers don’t pay ticket taxes, because they don’t sell tickets.”

Mr. Brown’s home-state colleague, Republican Rob Portman, wrote the amendment that got the provision into the Senate bill.

“This bipartisan proposal clarifies the intent of the law and stops a specific IRS abuse when the agency chose to ignore the law,” said Kevin Smith, a spokesman for Mr. Portman.

Why Ohio?

That’s the home of NetJets and Executive Jet Management, companies owned by Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway Inc.

Kristyn Wilson, a NetJets spokeswoman, said the company backs the proposal because it "simply confirms the longstanding precept that whole aircraft management services do not constitute commercial transportation and therefore are not subject to the ticket tax."