Virginia 6th District :: COMMITTEE APPROVES PACKAGE OF BILLS TO ADDRESS FEDERAL OVER-CRIMINALIZATION
For Immediate Release November 18, 2015 November 18, 2015

COMMITTEE APPROVES PACKAGE OF BILLS TO ADDRESS FEDERAL OVER-CRIMINALIZATION

WASHINGTON, D.C. – The House Judiciary Committee today approved four bills to rein in the explosion of federal criminal law, commonly referred to as over-criminalization.

First, the Committee approved the Criminal Code Improvement Act of 2015 (H.R. 4002) by voice vote, authored by Crime, Terrorism, Homeland Security, and Investigations Subcommittee Chairman Jim Sensenbrenner (R-Wis.). This legislation creates a default mens rea standard that applies when federal law does not provide a state of mind requirement. It also creates uniform definitions for several terms that are used frequently throughout title 18 of the Criminal Code.

Second, the Committee approved the Fix the Footnotes Act of 2015 (H.R. 4001) by voice vote, sponsored by Congressman Ken Buck (R-Colo.). This legislation fixes the footnotes in the current version of the Criminal Code to address errors made by Congress in drafting the laws.

Third, the Committee approved the Regulatory Reporting Act of 2015 (H.R. 4003) by voice vote, sponsored by Congresswoman Mimi Walters (R-Calif.). This bill requires every federal agency to submit a report to Congress listing each rule of that agency that, if violated, may be punishable by criminal penalties, along with information about the rule.

And fourth, the Committee approved the Clean Up the Code Act of 2015 (H.R. 4023) by voice vote, authored by Congressman Steve Chabot (R-Ohio). This bill eliminates several statutes in the U.S. Code that subject violators to criminal penalties, such as the unauthorized use of the 4-H emblem or the interstate transportation of dentures.

House Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte (R-Va.) and Ranking Member John Conyers (D-Mich.) said the following on the approval of the four bills to address over-criminalization:

“Over the past few decades, the federal criminal code has expanded dramatically. The bills approved by the House Judiciary Committee today make commonsense changes to the federal criminal code to ensure our laws fit within the overall federal criminal law scheme, are appropriate in force relative to other criminal laws, require that a person must intend to commit a crime in order to be criminally liable for that crime, and are necessary. We look forward to introducing additional bills to improve our criminal justice system over the coming weeks.”

Background: The United States Code currently contains nearly 5,000 federal crimes. Recent studies estimate that approximately 60 new federal crimes are enacted each year, and over the past three decades, Congress has averaged 500 new crimes per decade. In addition to the statutory criminal offenses, there are thousands of federal regulations that, if violated, can also result in criminal liability. Many of these laws and regulations impose criminal penalties on people who have no idea they are violating a law.

To learn more about the House Judiciary Committee’s bipartisan criminal justice reform initiative, click here.