Majority Leader
All,

This afternoon, Press Secretary Jay Carney said reducing the nation’s dependence on foreign oil is a “high priority” for the Administration. If that is the case, then why does the Administration continue to promote and implement policies that hinder domestic energy production? In contrast, the House will be considering three Republican bills in the coming weeks that create jobs, expand domestic energy production and provide relief at the pump.



The Administration’s Energy Policies Are Leading To Higher Energy Prices, Job Loss and Lower Domestic Energy Production. Despite the president's repeated claims that he's been "encouraging" domestic oil production, administration policies have been driving drilling rigs out of the Gulf (six deepwater rigs in addition to the Noble have left the Gulf, with two more possibly on the way out). The overall result has been lower domestic oil production, slower economic growth, job losses and higher energy prices. (The Wall Street Journal, 4/25/11)

The Obama Administration Cannot Claim Their Policies Created An Increase In Domestic Energy Production. ... an uptick in production—such as the one the White House is currently touting in its press materials—cannot be attributed to permits granted yesterday, last week, or even five years ago. Companies spend years developing a well—the process from initial permit to production can take up to eight years. The increased production we're seeing now is mostly due to permits granted before Mr. Obama took office. (The Wall Street Journal, 4/25/11)

In Reality, The Obama Administration Has Been Locking Up Our Domestic Production Capacity. “It’s because of their [The Obama Administration] policies, frankly of locking up all those resources, that we’re in situation,” [Chairman] Hastings said. “I don’t say this lightly, but when the president speaks he sounds good, but when he acts he’s 180 degrees from what he says, and actions speak louder than words, and actions are what has an impact on our policy. So, I think this administration has been very, very deficient in trying to make us become less energy dependent on foreign sources.” (ABC News, 4/19/11)