Republican Leader John Boehner
FACT CHECK: A ‘Yes’ Vote is A Vote For Taxpayer-Funded Abortions Posted by GOP Leader Press Office Rep. Bart Stupak (D-MI): "The intent behind both this legislation and the executive order the President will sign is to ensure that as provided for in the Hyde Amendment that health care reform will maintain a ban on the use of federal funds for abortion services..." GOP Leader Response: Under the Democrats' government takeover of health care, there is no prohibition on abortion coverage in federally subsidized plans participating in the Exchange, contradicting the Hyde Amendment - the longstanding federal policy by providing federal subsidies to private health plans that cover elective abortion. Moreover, no Executive Order or regulation can override a statutory mandate unless Congress passes a law that prohibits federal funding from being used in this manner. Legal experts have confirmed this view that if the Senate bill is signed into law, it is a statutory mandate for the new health plans to include federal funding of elective abortion. The need for an Executive Order is evidence that this is true, and Congressional Democrats know it. Furthermore, the Executive Order uses standard language clearly stating that it can do nothing to contradict the language in statute. Make no mistake, a ‘yes' vote on the Democrats' health care bill is a vote for taxpayer-funded abortions. VIDEO - Rep. James Sensenbrenner (R-WI) exposes President Obama's worthless Executive Order : Key Quotes : "If the bill is signed into law, these statutory requirements and defects are not subject to correction or nullification by the chief executive or his appointees, whether by Executive Order, regulation, or otherwise." (National Right to Life Committee statement)

"An Executive Order cannot prevent insurance companies that pay for abortions from participating in the exchanges. Further, Executive Orders can be undone or modified as quickly as they are created. This is a blatant attempt to subvert democracy and should be quickly quashed." (Dr. Charmaine Yoest, President & CEO of Americans United for Life Action)

"If the Obama Administration continued to falsely believe the Senate bill had no problem on the issue of funding abortion and funding health plans that include abortion, he certainly would not put forth the idea of an EO. Because of an EO would give no protections to the unborn when it comes to funding for abortion in the Senate and Reconciliation bills, FRCAction will still score votes on both in our scorecard for the Second Session of the 111th Congress." (FRC letter to members of Congress) Better Solutions : • The Republican under the Republican plan, any health plan that includes abortion coverage may not receive federal funds . "The intent behind both this legislation and the executive order the President will sign is to ensure that as provided for in the Hyde Amendment that health care reform will maintain a ban on the use of federal funds for abortion services..."Under the Democrats' government takeover of health care, there is no prohibition on abortion coverage in federally subsidized plans participating in the Exchange, contradicting the Hyde Amendment - the longstanding federal policy by providing federal subsidies to private health plans that cover elective abortion. Moreover, no Executive Order or regulation can override a statutory mandate unless Congress passes a law that prohibits federal funding from being used in this manner. Legal experts have confirmed this view that if the Senate bill is signed into law, it is a statutory mandate for the new health plans to include federal funding of elective abortion. The need for an Executive Order is evidence that this is true, and Congressional Democrats know it. Furthermore, the Executive Order uses standard language clearly stating that it can do nothing to contradict the language in statute. Make no mistake, a ‘yes' vote on the Democrats' health care bill is a vote for taxpayer-funded abortions.• The Republican health care bill would codify the Hyde Amendment and prohibit all authorized and appropriated federal funds from being used to pay for abortion. And