Boehner, Westmoreland Unveil “Bloodhounds” Video Asking: Where Are the Jobs?
House Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) today released a new web video targeting Washington Democrats’ trillion-dollar “ stimulus ” bill and asking “where are the jobs?” The tongue-in-cheek web video, inspired by a classic 1984 TV commercial by now-Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell (R-KY), features a job-sniffing GOP bloodhound named Ellie Mae and a down-home voiceover by Rep. Lynn Westmoreland (R-GA).

“This is a lighthearted web video, but the underlying point is no laughing matter,” Boehner said. “At a time when Americans are looking to Washington for leadership, the trillion-dollar ‘stimulus’ isn’t working. Americans were promised the ‘stimulus’ would keep the unemployment rate from going above eight percent. It’s now at 9.5 percent, and rising. Where are the jobs?”

In the video, job-sniffing bloodhounds follow the “stimulus” money trail across the nation in search of the millions of jobs the Obama Administration promised to “save or create” if the trillion-dollar spending bill were enacted. The trail takes them to AIG Headquarters in New York City, where “stimulus” funds were used to pay big bonuses to top executives; to Wisconsin, where “stimulus” funds are paying for repairs to a bridge that reportedly carries about 260 cars per day, many to a place called Rusty’s Backwater Saloon, according to a June 16 report in the Wall Street Journal; and to North Carolina, where “stimulus” funds were reportedly used by one town to hire a new worker whose job is to apply for more “stimulus” funds from Washington.

“A real ‘stimulus’ would help small businesses across America get back on their feet and create jobs,” Boehner said. “Washington hasn’t tried that yet. Instead we’ve made government bigger, wasted taxpayers’ money, and piled new debt on our children and grandchildren. Republicans have put forth a better solution – a plan that recognizes small business, not government, is the engine of the American economy. We hope Washington Democrats will work with us in the months ahead to make it a reality.”

#####