Alaska Governor Sean Parnell
In December 2009, I pledged that my administration would take every step necessary to stop the epidemic of domestic violence and sexual assault in Alaska. This comprehensive legislation won’t solve the problem on its own, but these are important steps we must pursue, even as we urge all Alaskans to take a stand and choose respect.

SB 22 (PASSED 2013) - Adding Protections for Children and Victims of DVSA and Trafficking



By building on the shared successes of the past legislative sessions to ensure safe homes and strong families in our state, SB 22 enhances the Governor’s commitment to ending the epidemic of domestic violence and sexual assault in Alaska. This bill: Provides stronger protections for victims and survivors of sex trafficking;

Strengthens the penalties on the demand side of sex trafficking by requiring persons who prey on these victims to register as sex offenders;

Strengthens the investigative tools available to law enforcement;

Offers additional protections for victims and survivors of domestic violence, sexual assault, and stalking;

Strengthens the law requiring judges to consider the impact of the crime on the victim at sentencing;

Prohibits a probation or parole officer from engaging in sexual activities with a person on probation or parole;

Requires school athletic coaches to report to authorities if there is reasonable cause to believe that a child has been abused or neglected. Find More Information on SB 22

HB 359 (PASSED 2012) - Addresses crimes involving sex or human trafficking



The legislation makes it a serious felony for anyone to conspire to commit sex trafficking or human trafficking in the first degree. This legislation also raises the penalty for those who prey on and victimize Alaska’s children. HB 359 changes terminology used to describe an offender’s conduct as sex trafficking rather than promoting prostitution. The bill allows the State to confiscate property used in connection with committing the crime of prostitution when the defendant commits the act with a child victim. It also allows the use of simultaneous two-way video conferencing in cases where a witness is unable to testify in a courtroom. Find More Information on HB 359 Check out the full Crime Package press release

SB 86 (PASSED 2012) - Strengths laws protecting vulnerable adults



HB 127 (PASSED 2011) - Strengthen laws related to sexual exploitation of children, domestic violence, and stalking

The bill would strengthen Alaska laws related to sexual exploitation of children and domestic violence. The bill prohibits the creation of indecent images of children, online enticement of a child, and using a computer to solicit or entice a minor to engage in sexual behavior. The bill would expand the crime of stalking to include those acts of following or monitoring the victim with a global positioning device, and using or installing a device to record or photograph events in the victim's home, workplace, vehicle, or on the victim's telephone or computer. These changes are in response to technological advances that enable stalkers to terrorize victims. Also, the bill prohibits graphic texting, commonly known as "sexting." Perpetrators would be punished for distributing a sexually explicit image of a child under 16 years old. The bill clarifies that conduct by predators outside the state that harm victims in Alaska may be prosecuted in this state. The bill also clarifies that a child under 16 years old may not be left with an individual who must register as a child kidnapper. Finally, the bill clarifies that a court may order active supervision for probationers who are on felony probation. Active supervision in particular cases enhances public safety by requiring close supervision of certain offenders. Active supervision could also be provided to certain misdemeanants in the discretion of the commissioner of corrections.

Read the Bill and Transmittal Letters (PDF)

Find More Information on HB 127

SB 222 (PASSED 2010) - Changes in crimes and sentences involving sexual assault and domestic violence



Governor signs

SB 222, HB 324, and SB 110 The bill prohibits suspended imposition of sentences for people convicted of human trafficking, possession or distribution of child pornography, and distribution of indecent materials to minors. It is against the law not just to possess child pornography but also to access it on a computer with the intention of viewing it. Courts can prohibit sex offenders, in cases involving children, from using a computer or communicating with children under 16 years old. Sentences for sex offenses can be increased through new “aggravating factors,” including the defendant’s knowledge that the victim had consumed drugs or alcohol, or a previous dating relationship with the victim. Anyone required to register as a sex offender in another state is required to register in Alaska. Find More Information on SB 222

HB 324 (PASSED 2010) - A revision of bail laws

This bill makes a presumption – that can be overcome with a preponderance of evidence – that defendants accused of serious crimes such as felony sexual assault are a danger to the community and to the victims, and that bail should be set appropriately. This also applies to a defendant charged with domestic violence who has been convicted of domestic violence within the five preceding years. Once convicted of sex-related felonies, perpetrators can not be released pending sentencing or an appeal. The bill also allows more time before a defendant’s first appearance in court for the police to investigate and for the prosecutor to make a better-informed charging decision, present stronger bail arguments, and contact the victim so that the victim may be present at the bail hearing Find More Information on HB 324

SB110 (PASSED 2010) - Specific procedures for DNA retention (originally introduced by Gov. Parnell)

This bill establishes a requirement that biological evidence in murder and sexual assault cases be properly retained while cases are unsolved and during the period after conviction that an offender is imprisoned. Find More Information on SB 110

(APPROPRIATION) - The Alaska Scientific Crime Detection Laboratory in Anchorage