[Press Release] Gov. Perry Names Sullivan Chief of Staff
Gov. Perry Names Sullivan Chief of Staff

Kimbrough to stay on as senior advisor

AUSTIN – Gov. Rick Perry today named Ray Sullivan as chief of staff effective July 1, 2009. Sullivan replaces Jay Kimbrough, who will stay on as a senior advisor to the governor.



“I am pleased to have a man of Ray’s insight, experience and integrity rejoining my staff. He is uniquely prepared to manage this office and continue our forward momentum as we work to keep Texas the strongest economy in the nation,” said Gov. Perry.



“This session’s achievements are a real tribute to the leadership of Jay Kimbrough. With sweeping changes to our state schools, establishing a road map for our universities to achieve Tier One status, prudent fiscal decisions and a tax cut for 40,000 small businesses, Jay was at the helm of my office during one of the most successful legislative sessions in memory. He leaves behind big shoes to fill, but I’m confident Ray is up to the task. I’m thankful Jay will continue to provide wise counsel in his new role as senior advisor.”



Sullivan, 46, has 22 years of government and public relations experience. Since leaving state government in late 2002, he has operated Sullivan Public Affairs, an Austin-based public and government relations firm.



“I’m honored to be rejoining the staff of America’s most successful conservative governor in the most fiscally and culturally sound state in the Union,” Sullivan said.



Between 1998 and 2002, Sullivan worked in various roles the Perry operation, including as the governor’s deputy chief of staff, lieutenant governor’s communications director, and communications director for the 1998 and 2002 campaigns. During the 2000 presidential campaign, Sullivan served as a national spokesman for George W. Bush for President in Austin, which included stints in Tallahassee and Broward County during the Florida recount. He also worked in the communications office of Bush-Quayle’92.



From 1995 to 1998, Sullivan served as deputy communications director for then Gov. George W. Bush as a member of Bush’s senior staff. He also worked as a political consultant at Karl Rove + Company, and served on the Washington, D.C. staffs of U.S. Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison (R-TX), Congressman Duncan Hunter (R-CA) and Congressman Sam Johnson (R-Plano).



Sullivan graduated from San Diego State University with a degree in business marketing. He is married to Leslie Rawl Sullivan, and father of a two year-old girl and four year-old boy.