[Press Release] Gov. Perry: Education Helps Set the Course for a Brighter Future
Gov. Perry: Education Helps Set the Course for a Brighter Future

Gov. Rick Perry today emphasized the importance of ensuring all Texans have access to a quality higher education for the future success of our state's workforce and economy. The governor was joined by Supreme Court Justice Eva Guzman, Texas Secretary of State Hope Andrade and Texas Education Commissioner Robert Scott at Moody High School for the Generation Adelante/Generación Forward college fair.

"Education is the factor that can help set you on a course for continued success, greater prosperity, and a brighter future," Gov. Perry said. "Young Texans are no longer just competing against their peers in school and across the state, rather with people around the world for jobs. If these young Texans are going to compete in the workplace of the future, they need to have the skills to succeed and compete in the global marketplace."

Generation Adelante/Generación Forward provides students with information about college applications, financial aid and college visits, and gives them the opportunity to speak with representatives from more than 30 colleges, universities and technical colleges from across the state.

Ensuring that Texas remains a leader in job creation depends on the development of our workforce, and is imperative to Texas' future prosperity. Gov. Perry is committed to ensuring that all Texans who pursue a higher education have access to an affordable and accountable system.

Because a college education is so important, the governor worked with lawmakers last session to secure $22.6 billion for higher education for the current biennium, including $1.1 billion in state financial aid. To help further keep the cost of attending college low, Gov. Perry signed an executive order in September 2009 calling for a comprehensive review of higher education cost efficiencies.

To improve the quality of higher education in the state, Gov. Perry signed House Bill 51 and voters passed Proposition 4, which will create more tier one universities in the state, giving Texas students the opportunity to study in the most premier research facilities available. HB 51 also provides a performance incentive funding mechanism for all of the state's general academic institutions based on the average number of degrees awarded annually and an increase in the average number of degrees awarded annually, with weighted consideration for at-risk students and critical fields.