[Press Release] Gov. Perry Announces Fortune 500 Company to Create Nearly 300 Jobs in San Antonio
Gov. Perry Announces Fortune 500 Company to Create Nearly 300 Jobs in San Antonio

Gov. Rick Perry today announced the state is investing $1.56 million through the Texas Enterprise Fund (TEF) in BD (Becton, Dickinson and Company), a leading global medical technology company, for the creation of its global professional services headquarters in San Antonio. This investment will create 296 jobs and generate an estimated $6.35 million in capital investment.

"Texas continues to attract Fortune 500 companies and jobs thanks to our low taxes, reasonable and predictable regulatory environment, skilled workforce, and investments from the Texas Enterprise Fund," Gov. Perry said. "BD's new facility will not only result in more growth for Texas' thriving biomedical industry, but it will attract hundreds of jobs and millions of dollars in capital investment to San Antonio."

BD develops, manufactures and sells medical devices, instrument systems and reagents. The company is focused on improving drug delivery, enhancing the quality and speed of diagnosing infectious diseases and cancers, and advancing research, discovery and production of new drugs and vaccines. The company is establishing four global professional services headquarters throughout the world, with the San Antonio facility overseeing operations in the U.S., Canada and Puerto Rico.

"We are very pleased to be expanding our operations to include a new facility in San Antonio, Texas. San Antonio met all of the criteria that we were seeking in order to meet our business requirements," BD Chairman and CEO Edward J. Ludwig said. "The excellent pool of potential employees and skilled labor, along with proximity to academic institutions, were significant draws, as well as the support we received from local officials and the Texas Enterprise Fund. BD looks forward to becoming a good neighbor and a valued corporate citizen in this community, as we are in the other communities in which we operate around the world."

"I welcome BD's decision to invest in Texas. With their outstanding reputation as a leader in the medical technology industry, they will bring much needed jobs to our state," Speaker Straus said.

"BD's selection of San Antonio adds great momentum to our bioscience sector and the building of a formidable brainpower economy in San Antonio," said San Antonio Mayor Julián Castro. "Combined with other recent additions to our bioscience sector, BD will be an important element to attract future investment to the city."

At Gov. Perry's request, the legislature created the TEF in 2003 and re-appropriated funding in 2005, 2007 and 2009 to help ensure the growth of Texas businesses and create more jobs throughout the state. TEF projects must be approved by the governor, lieutenant governor and speaker of the House. The fund has since become one of the state's most competitive tools to recruit and bolster business. To date, the TEF has invested more than $397 million and closed the deal on projects generating more than 53,600 new jobs and more than $14.4 billion in capital investment in the state.

For more information about the TEF, please visit http://www.texaswideopenforbusiness.com/financial-resources/texas-enterprise-fund.html.