[Press Release] Gov. Perry Names Mike Toomey Chief of Staff
Gov. Perry Names Mike Toomey Chief of Staff

AUSTIN – Gov. Rick Perry today named Mike Toomey, former chief of staff for Gov. Bill Clements and former three-term state representative, as his new chief of staff.

Toomey, a lawyer and government consultant, will replace Dr. Mike McKinney, a family physician, former Health and Human Services Commissioner and former state representative who resigned earlier this week. Both Toomey and McKinney are long-time friends of the governor.

“Mike Toomey will bring extraordinary experience and expertise to my staff as we head into the 2003 legislative session,” Perry said. “With his expertise in state budget and legislative matters, Mike will be an important addition to my team as we work with the Legislature in making fiscally responsible decisions.”

During his first term as a state representative from Houston, Toomey served on the Judiciary and Urban Affairs committees. He later served on the House Appropriations Committee and chaired the Budget and Oversight Committee and the subcommittee on Dedicated State Funds.

During the mid-1980s, Toomey helped fellow legislators make tough budget decisions prompted by shrinking state revenues.



During the 1987 session, Toomey also was House sponsor of tort reform legislation and chaired the Judiciary Committee.

Toomey was consistently honored throughout his six-year career in the House of Representatives. During his first term, he was named Best House Freshman by the Fort Worth Star-Telegram. In subsequent terms, he was named one of the Ten Best Legislators by Texas Monthly magazine and one of the Seven Best Legislators by The Dallas Morning News.

Most recently, Toomey has been a lobbyist representing various clients across the state. In accepting the position as the Governor’s chief of staff, Toomey will immediately sever all business ties with his former clients. He also will be bound by the Governor’s Office Code of Ethics, the most stringent ethics and revolving door policy in state government. The Code of Ethics prohibits governor’s staff members from lobbying the office for one year plus one legislative session after leaving the office.

Toomey will officially start his job on Dec. 1.

Toomey, 52, has a bachelor’s degree in philosophy from Baylor University, where he was a member of the ODK Circle scholarship honorary, and a law degree from South Texas College of Law. At SouthTexas, he was a member of the Order of Lytae scholarship honorary and member of the Law Journal editorial board.

He is a former chairman of the West Houston Chamber of Commerce board of directors, former president of the Optimist Club and recipient of the American Tort Reform Association’s Tort Reformer award in 1987.

Toomey is married to the former Stacy L. Penny. He has four children – Shelley, Christine, Michael and Grace.