Trump: My Own Administration’s Latest Decision ‘Doesn’t Seem To Make Much Sense!’
While Donald Trump wants you to believe that he’s tough on crime, his own administration allowed a Texas-based company to publish instructions for 3D-printed guns on its website, thus making the weapons untraceable because they will not be required to register the firearms. Nine states have just sued to stop the distribution of plans for the 3D-printed weapons. The downloadable plans include handguns and rifles similar to an AR-15 and all that’s needed is a 3-D printer and minimal outside materials to create an untraceable firearm. The former reality show star suddenly thinks it’s not a very good idea and he’s already spoken to his handlers at the National Rifle Association.

“I am looking into 3-D Plastic Guns being sold to the public,” Trump tweeted. “Already spoke to NRA, doesn’t seem to make much sense!”

I am looking into 3-D Plastic Guns being sold to the public. Already spoke to NRA, doesn’t seem to make much sense! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) July 31, 2018

21 Attorneys General — including California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, the District of Columbia, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia and Washington State, sent a letter to the U.S. State Department and the Department of Justice, to ask them to immediately block the 3D-printed gun plans from appearing online, according to CNET.

The NRA is probably against this idea because gun sales will fall and that’s not good for the gun lobbyists. However, designs for the 3D guns have already been posted online, so by Sunday, more than 1,000 people had already downloaded plans to print an AR-15-style semiautomatic assault rifle.

In a statement, Washington State attorney general Bob Ferguson said: “These downloadable guns are unregistered and very difficult to detect, even with metal detectors, and will be available to anyone regardless of age, mental health or criminal history.”

A lawyer for the Texas-based company called printing the 3D guns a “free speech case” but we’re wondering about the public’s right to not get murdered by some arsehole that’s already downloaded the plans.

But Trump wants to talk about crime in Mexico instead of addressing gun violence here in the U.S. and the easy access to weapons in our gun-saturated country.

Image: Michael Vadon via Flickr, under Creative Commons license 2.0.