Deal, Driver Services to launch a more secure licensing process
Home > Newsroom > 2012 Press Releases > May

Deal, Driver Services to launch a more secure licensing process

Tuesday, May 8, 2012



Secure ID will improve safeguards for cardholders and reduce risks for fraud

Gov. Nathan Deal and the Georgia Department of Driver Services today announced the launch of Secure ID, a program aimed to further ensure the integrity of driver’s licenses and identification cards while offering additional protection from identity theft. Secure ID also places Georgia in compliance with the Federal Real ID Act of 2005 prohibiting the federal government from accepting DL/IDs issued by noncompliant states for boarding a commercial flight or entering a federal building.

“This program will give Georgians the most secure IDs we’ve ever issued in this state,” said Deal. “It is our duty to protect our residents’ identities to the best of our ability.”

DDS began issuing its most recent generation of high security DL/ID cards in 2010 under the Secure Automated Fast Friendly Easier Driver’s License Program. Georgia’s new Secure ID program builds on the advances of SAFFE DL by further enhancing the integrity and security of Georgia DL/IDs.

“Georgians deserve to have the highest degree of safety measures in place to protect their identity,” said DDS Commissioner Gregory C. Dozier. “And DDS is committed to that goal.”

Beginning July 1, customers who need to renew, reinstate or apply for their first Georgia DL/ID will have to visit a DDS Customer Service Center and present their original identification documents. They will have to prove their (1) identity, (2) full Social Security number and (3) residential address. Citizens have been required to personally provide these same types of documents and go through this same process for over a decade when applying for their first Georgia DL/ID.

The new Secure ID process will be phased-in with existing Georgia DL/IDs remaining valid until their expiration date. After presenting documentation at a DDS Customer Service Center, Georgians will be issued a new card with a gold star symbol in the upper right corner. Customers with a current Georgia DL/ID may continue to use it as an acceptable form of identification and/or for boarding a commercial flight and entering federal buildings as long as it is valid.

For aid in this process or for more information, please visit www.dds.ga.gov/SecureID.