Deal: MI Metals to create 100 jobs in Jenkins County
Gov. Nathan Deal today announced that MI Metals, a leading aluminum extrusion company, will expand its existing operations in Millen, creating 100 jobs and investing $2 million over the next three years.

“Georgia has become a national hub for advanced and highly skilled manufacturing,” said Deal. “When high-tech companies such as MI Metals choose our state to expand, it indicates that Georgia’s pro-business climate is not only attracting new businesses, but also helping existing companies in Georgia achieve the success necessary to grow and prosper.”

In order to better reach customers in the Southeast, the company will expand its fabrication and metal extrusion production facility by 120,000 square feet. MI Metals will also take advantage of Quick Start, the nation’s No. 1 workforce training program, to provide customized training for the newly created positions.

“We at MI Metals are very excited about the opportunities that the Millen, Georgia, facility represent for our company in the coming years,” said MI Metals President Brook Massey. “After the approval of our air permit, we will be able to paint extrusions in the Georgia location, adding even more jobs to the local community. The plant in Millen is located within a four-hour drive to several of our existing customers and will be MI Metals fifth plant location with 100 million-plus pounds of aluminum extrusion and finishing capacity.”

MI Metal products can be found in the transportation, communication, recreational vehicles, solar, building and construction, medical science and power generation markets.

MI Metals represents one of more than 20 companies that have expanded in the east region of the state since FY 15. Adela Kelley, senior project manager of existing industry and regional recruitment at the Georgia Department of Economic Development (GDEcD), supported the company on behalf of the state of Georgia, along with the Jenkins County Development Authority.

“We are thrilled to see this expansion come to fruition,” said Jenkins County Development Authority Vice Chair King Rocker. “Today’s news represents hard work and dedication from our entire community. We welcome MI Metals to Jenkins County and look forward to their growth.”

“MI Metals’ decision to expand in Jenkins County speaks volumes about our skilled workforce,” said GDEcD Commissioner Chris Carr. “A strong logistics framework, solid network of companies and direct access to leading R&D resources will better support MI Metals in reaching its customer base.”

About MI Metals

MI Metals, founded in 1947 in Oldsmar, Fla., has provided more than 60 years of professional experience. Today, it is a leader in the aluminum extrusion industry, with five strategic locations across the United States. To learn more about MI Metals, click here.