The Governor - Governor Bobby Jindal
The Governor

Bobby Jindal was sworn in as Governor of Louisiana on January 14, 2008.

He was elected Governor of Louisiana on October 20, 2007, with 54 percent of the vote in the primary, winning 60 of 64 parishes.

Shortly after taking office, Governor Jindal called a Special Session to address comprehensive ethics reform, the cornerstone of his election platform. Since the conclusion of the session, the Better Government Association and the Center for Public Integrity announced that Louisiana’s new ethics laws are among the best in the nation.

Additionally, the Governor's second Special Session eliminated burdensome taxes that deterred investment in Louisiana and limited the growth of existing businesses. Since 2008, the Jindal Administration has secured projects that are resulting in more than 83,000 new direct and indirect jobs and $54 billion in capital investment across Louisiana. As a result of Governor Jindal’s reforms Louisiana set an all-time record for total employment and private sector employment, and the state now ranks higher in every national business-climate ranking than it ever did prior to 2008.

Governor Jindal led the historic response to Hurricane Gustav by successfully moving 1.9 million people out of harms’ way, the largest evacuation of citizens in the history of the United States, including the largest medical evacuation in history moving more than 10,400 people from hospitals, nursing homes, and other medical facilities out of the path of the storm.

Governor Jindal made education reform his top priority and pushed a bold plan to provide more choices for families, reward quality teachers, increase school accountability, and give school leaders more flexibility with funding and personnel. As a result of his reforms, Louisiana now has a statewide school choice scholarship program that gives parents the option to remove their children from a failing school and enroll them in a new school of their choice. Governor Jindal removed the cap on the number of charter schools allowed to operate in Louisiana, causing the state to be recognized as a national leader in student achievement at charter schools. Also, the Governor adopted a new teacher evaluation system to reward quality teachers and hold low-performing ones accountable. Outcomes are improving because of Governor Jindal’s reforms, with high school graduation rates recently hitting an all-time high in Louisiana.

Governor Jindal also has tackled health care reform and is transforming Louisiana’s health care system by embracing a new approach to both physical and behavioral health care that focuses on outcomes, streamlines delivery, saves taxpayer dollars, contains costs, dramatically improves access to care, and puts patients in charge of their health decisions. When Governor Jindal took office, the state’s Medicaid program was failing Louisiana citizens. Now approximately 900,000 recipients have access to tremendous new resources through health plans that promote better coordination of care and management of chronic disease. Additionally, Governor Jindal has converted the states antiquated charity hospital system to public-private partnerships. These partnerships are transforming access to services for Louisianians, lowering costs, and providing better educational experiences for future health care professionals that the entire state will benefit from for years to come.

Jindal was born in Baton Rouge on June 10, 1971. He graduated from Baton Rouge High School in 1988 and went on to attend Brown University where he graduated with honors in biology and public policy. Following his graduation from Brown he attended Oxford University in England as a Rhodes Scholar, having turned down admissions to medical and law schools at both Harvard and Yale.

In 1994, Jindal went to work for McKinsey and Company as a consultant for Fortune 500 companies before entering public service. In 1996, he was appointed Secretary of the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals (DHH). There were many issues that needed resolving during his tenure, not the least of which was the growing deficit in Louisiana's Medicaid program. During Jindal's tenure as DHH Secretary, he rescued Louisiana's Medicaid program from bankruptcy, childhood immunizations increased, Louisiana ranked third best nationally in health care screenings for children, and new and expanded services for elderly and disabled persons were offered.

In 1998, Jindal was appointed Executive Director of the National Bipartisan Commission on the Future of Medicare. As Executive Director, he was responsible for the day-to-day operations of the Commission, whose work continue to be the driving force behind much of the ongoing debate on how to strengthen and improve Medicare.

At the conclusion of the Commission's work, Jindal was appointed President of the University of Louisiana System, the 16th largest higher education system in the country. While serving as President, Jindal worked to establish areas of excellence at each individual institution.

President George W. Bush appointed Jindal to serve as Assistant Secretary for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in 2001. In that position, he served as the principal policy advisor to the Secretary of Health and Human Services. He later resigned from the position in 2003 to return to Louisiana and run for elected office for the first time. In that race, Jindal went from being a relatively unknown candidate for Governor, to receiving the most votes in the primary election and eventually 48 percent of the vote in runoff.

In 2004 he was elected to the 109th United States Congress representing the First District of Louisiana. In Congress he was elected Freshman Class President and served on the House Committee on Education and the Workforce, the House Committee on Homeland Security, and the House Committee on Resources. Bobby also served as Assistant Majority Whip. In his first term he passed a number of notable pieces of legislation and played an instrumental role in Louisiana's recovery from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. His noteworthy accomplishments include the passage of legislation to bring significant offshore energy revenues to Louisiana for the first time and legislation that keeps Federal Emergency Management Agency from taxing certain recovery grants as income.

Jindal and his wife Supriya have three young children.