Grapevine
Welcome to Grapevine, Fiscal Year 2013-14*

Since 1960, Grapevine has published annual compilations of data on state tax support for higher education, including general fund appropriations for universities, colleges, community colleges, and state higher education agencies. Each year’s Grapevine survey has asked states for tax appropriations data for the new fiscal year and for revisions (if any) to data reported in previous years.

As of fiscal year 2010, Grapevine tables--including both tax and non-tax support--have been produced by Illinois State University’s Center for the Study of Education Policy in cooperation with the State Higher Education Executive Officers (SHEEO). The Grapevine survey has been consolidated with the annual survey used by SHEEO in its State Higher Education Finance (SHEF) project (http://www.sheeo.org/finance/shef-home.htm) . This consolidated questionnaire asks for data that are compiled in a new State Support for Higher Education database. This database, in turn, is used to produce both the annual Grapevine tables, which provide a first look at state appropriations for the new fiscal year, and the annual SHEF report, which offers a more complete examination of trends in total state support for higher education, factoring in inflation and enrollment. The SHEF report for FY2013 will be released shortly by SHEEO.

The results of the Grapevine survey for fiscal year 2013-14 (FY14), including tax and nontax monies, are compiled in the national tables available on this website. The FY14 data summarized in these tables represent initial allocations and estimates reported by the states from September 2013 through January 14, 2014 and are subject to change. Andy Carlson of the SHEEO staff led the data collection effort. Further revisions may be made as states make corrections or adjust their budgets in the face of ongoing revenue shortfalls. In addition, it is important to note that unlike Grapevine reports issued prior to fiscal year 2009-10, the data from the survey for FY14 include only state totals. The new, consolidated questionnaire does not ask states to provide appropriations figures for individual colleges and universities. (Further information on the Grapevine data on the "Method" page of this web site.)

Thank you for your interest in Grapevine. Please feel free to contact me with any questions.

Jim Palmer

Grapevine Editor

January 20, 2014

*revised January 20, 2014