Investigators: Anthony Bourdain Was Killed By Clinton Operatives
Anthony Bourdain had been harassed and threatened by Hillary Clinton operatives just weeks before he was found dead in an apparent “suicide.”

According to investigators, Mr. Bourdain was planning to expose pedophile rings connected to Hollywood and D.C. shortly before his death.

His body found Friday after reportedly hanging himself. He was just 61 years old.

Bourdain was fierce critic of Harvey Weinstein and denounced the serial sexual abuser, calling for swift justice to be served.

During his condemnation of Weinstein, he publicly stated that Hillary Clinton had full knowledge of the sexual abuse, and had done so “for years”:

“know what Hillary Clinton is NOT? She’s not stupid. Or unsophisticated about the world. The Weinstein stories had been out there for years.”

..and I am in no way an HRC fan. I’ve been on the receiving end of her operatives’ wrath. And it ain’t fun, — Anthony Bourdain (@Bourdain) May 2, 2018

It’s no secret that people who cross the Clinton’s wind up dead … mostly from suicide. Just this week, famous designer and Clinton Foundation member, Kate Spade reportedly killed herself. Spade hung herself as well, NYPD officials said. Are Spade’s and Bourdain’s deaths both coincidences?

Newmediacentral.net reports: Back in October of 2017, CNN’s Bourdain made statements regarding Harvey Weinstein, suggesting Hillary Clinton had to know of his history of being a sexual predator. Bourdain’s girlfriend, actress Asia Argento, accused Weinstein of raping her.

know what Hillary Clinton is NOT? She's not stupid. Or unsophisticated about the world. The Weinstein stories had been out there for years — Anthony Bourdain (@Bourdain) October 11, 2017

The tweet angered Hillary spokesman, Brian Fallon. He took to Twitter to tell Bourdain to “eat a scorpion.” Many other Clinton winged monkeys followed suit.

Go eat a scorpion or something.https://t.co/jlKBC2TDmI — Brian Fallon (@brianefallon) October 12, 2017

One month ago today, Anthony Bourdain tweeted he was not a fan of HRC, and he was on the receiving end of he'd operatives' wrath. One month ago… pic.twitter.com/kHFeKn7FKJ — Mike (@Fuctupmind) June 8, 2018

It’s no secret that people who cross the Clinton’s wind up dead…mostly from suicide. Just this week, famous designer and Clinton Foundation member, Kate Spade reportedly killed herself. Are Spade’s and Bourdain’s deaths both coincidences, or are they added bodies to the list of folks who made the mistake of angering Hillary and Bill?