Me Conoce
Uploaded on Oct 4, 2016

--

SUBSCRIBE for the latest news and updates from the Marco Rubio campaign ► http://bit.ly/2cL27oV



Watch more videos from Marco Rubio! ► http://bit.ly/2cL27oV



Stay connected with the campaign.

Subscribe on YouTube ► http://bit.ly/2cL27oV

Like us on Facebook ► http://bit.ly/2drHfRQ

Follow us on Twitter ► http://bit.ly/2d4onKj

Follow us on Instagram ► http://bit.ly/2drFpkf



ABOUT MARCO RUBIO

For Marco Rubio, America is not just the country where he was born -- it is the place that changed his family’s history. His parents came to America from Cuba in 1956 to pursue a better life. His father became a bartender, and his mother became a cashier, a maid and a Kmart stock clerk. Growing up in Las Vegas and Miami, Marco watched how his parents worked hard and sacrificed to give their children a life better than their own. They never made it big, but they were successful. They achieved the American Dream. And that is why he is running for president. For too many people, the American Dream feels impossible. Opportunity and success seems far away. But Marco has worked tirelessly to restore the hope and promise that the American Dream is real and that every American can achieve their own unique version of that dream. As U.S. Senator, Marco has led a bold offensive to institute innovative, conservative ideas to address the fundamental issues our country is facing and to restore hope in the American Dream. His ideas are firmly rooted in this simple truth – the American economy has changed significantly in recent decades and our policies must change with it. He has proposed conservative reforms to our nation’s anti-poverty laws, tax code, regulatory policies, higher education system, vital senior safety net programs and national defense. For Marco, this country has provided him so much -- the chance to graduate from the University of Florida and then the University of Miami’s law school. The chance to marry his wife Jeanette in 1998, with whom he is raising four children: Amanda, Daniella, Anthony and Dominick. And the chance for both of them to give back through public service as a West Miami city commissioner; a Florida state legislator that rose to become majority whip, majority leader and speaker of the house; and since 2011, as a U.S. Senator. For all the opportunities this country has provided Marco and his family, including all that Jeanette has accomplished through her charitable work, he is indebted to this great country. He believes that he owes America for the opportunities that this country has given him and his family. He believes the American Dream is still possible for all Americans. But make no mistake: it will require new leadership and a bold conservative reform agenda built for the 21st century. Join Marco today in fighting for a safe and strong America.