Hypocrisy in the Medicaid debate
State lawmakers and Gov. Bob McDonnell established a legislative commission this year to determine whether to expand Medicaid, the government insurance program for low-income adults, children and people with disabilities.

The concept is a deferral of responsibility on a critical policy, but for Republican supporters, it provides a way to claim that they haven't expanded Medicaid when, in fact, they already have.

Two types of care are available under the Medicaid umbrella: managed care and long-term, critical care. McDonnell has led opposition to expanding Medicaid's managed care program to an estimated 400,000 lower-income Virginians eligible for coverage under the 2010 federal Affordable Care Act. It is this form of care that commission members are charged with determining whether to expand.

The governor has insisted that the overall Medicaid budget's 1,600 percent growth over the past 30 years makes immediate expansion irresponsible, and that cost-saving reform must be implemented before any more people can be covered.

But he and other Republicans offered unequivocal support this year to expanding the component of Medicaid where costs are out of control: long-term, critical care. They designated millions more toward adult day care, private nursing duty services and community- and home-based care for intellectually or developmentally disabled Virginians.

About one-third of all Medicaid patients in Virginia are enrolled in this side of the insurance program, but it comprises two-thirds of the entire Medicaid budget.

The distinction underscores the hypocrisy that has obfuscated discussion of complex public policy in Richmond.

Opponents of President Barack Obama's signature domestic achievement certainly have plenty to complain about in the Affordable Care Act. The law is rife with unintended, complicated consequences of reshaping industries as massive as health insurance and health care. But arguing that expansion of Medicaid's managed care program is financially irresponsible runs counter to research that has shown it can improve patients' health and blunt the long-term growth of health care costs. Two-thirds of Virginia's Medicaid patients are in managed care, and they account for just one-third of Medicaid's cost.

The state typically bears half the cost of Medicaid expenses, and the federal government covers the other half. Under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government will cover 100 percent of the costs associated with Medicaid expansion through 2016. It would gradually phase that coverage to 90 percent by 2021.

Opponents cannot credibly claim that cost-saving reform is necessary before expansion when they will have three years to achieve such reform. Virginians will pay the federal taxes associated with the new law regardless of whether the state expands the program. And failing to expand managed care would mean forgoing the estimated 30,000 new jobs that most lawmakers acknowledge it would bring.

The opposition's credibility fails entirely, however, when adherents eagerly pump millions more dollars into long-term care, which is accelerating Medicaid's overall budget growth, without advocating that services be coordinated or other cost-saving measures be implemented first.

Expanding Medicaid's critical care program is necessary and morally right, and Virginia is contractually bound under a settlement negotiated between Gov. Bob McDonnell's administration and the U.S. Department of Justice to transition disabled Virginians from institutions to home- and community-based care.

But McDonnell's administration did not draw a line demanding that additional money for long-term, critical care be contingent on the implementation of measures to curb the program's exploding costs. Instead, they've used its continually escalating costs to justify opposition to a program that is more efficient, affects far more Virginians and is backed by a Democratic president.

What's worse, the myth of Virginia's Medicaid program has been perpetuated by many of the Republican lawmakers who represent areas with Virginia's highest rates of uninsured residents: Southside, the Northern Neck and certain southwestern Virginia counties. It is sleight-of-hand politics at its finest.

Shawn Day is an editorial writer for The Virginian-Pilot. Email: shawn.day@pilotonline.com.