A diagnosis of misplaced blame
The 25,000 residents of Lee County, a rugged, sprawling locality the size of Suffolk in southwestern Virginia, won't have access to their local hospital after Monday.

Wellmont Health System, the private operator of Lee Regional Medical Center in Pennington Gap, is closing the facility's doors for good. In a statement announcing the closure, the health system blamed myriad factors, including burdensome provisions in the Affordable Care Act and Virginia's refusal to expand Medicaid.

"These political decisions clearly can have dire ramifications for small communities and the hospitals that serve them," Denny DeNarvaez, president and chief executive officer of Wellmont, said. "For months, Wellmont and other health systems in the region and across the country have outlined the consequences of these cuts on community health."

This explanation fits neatly into political narratives and directs the spotlight onto partisans who crave it. But the hospital isn't closing because of federal Democrats' health insurance reform plan any more than it's closing because Virginia Republicans refuse to expand Medicaid.

The hospital is closing because it's losing money and patients, and it has for some time.

Data available through the Virginia Health Information network, a clearinghouse for health data across the commonwealth, show the hospital posted an operating loss of nearly $1.5 million in 2011, the most recent year for which figures are available.

In the past year, the situation has worsened; the medical center averages four patients in beds on a given day, down from about 15 per day a year ago, a hospital spokesman said.

The hospital draws more than 60 percent of its funding through state and federal tax dollars, a necessary arrangement because of the proportion of uninsured, elderly, low-income and disabled patients seeking treatment there.

It just doesn't get enough patients; 2,199 cases, or barely 1 percent of all cases at the 39 hospitals in Virginia's southwestern region, were recorded at Lee in 2011. The lack of use has devastated the hospital's financial condition.

"If we had Medicaid reform, that would not have been enough on its own to prevent the closure of the hospital," Jim Wozniak, the hospital spokesman, told me last week. Nor would avoiding the reductions mandated through the Affordable Care Act for Medicare reimbursement rates.

Of course, those reductions and the state's refusal to expand Medicaid didn't help the hospital's prospects or its parent company's.

Wellmont's Lonesome Pine Hospital, about 20 miles northeast in Big Stone Gap, also posted an operating loss of about $1.5 million in 2011. Its only other Virginia hospital, Mountain View Regional Medical Center in Norton, lost nearly $2 million.

The three hospitals combined serve less than 4 percent of hospital patients in the state's southwestern region.

Those figures, and the decision to shutter Lee Regional Medical Center, speak more to the plight of small, rural hospitals in an industry under sustained, intense market pressure.

Factors squeezing those facilities include soaring medical costs, availability of high-quality care through less expensive clinics and offices, treating the uninsured and the inadequate reimbursement rate for Medicare and Medicaid patients.

Expanding Medicaid as part of President Barack Obama's health insurance reform plan may help blunt those effects; refusing to expand Medicaid, while the rest of the reform is implemented, will not.

But increasingly, actions resulting largely from the industry's own pre-existing conditions are blamed on Obamacare.

This month, the University of Virginia announced it would no longer offer health insurance to an employee's spouse if the spouse has access to an employer-sponsored plan. UPS made the same decision. Both assigned blame, in part, to the health insurance overhaul.

That charge rings hollow for those of us who worked for companies that imposed hefty surcharges for spousal coverage a decade ago.

The Affordable Care Act includes some good provisions, but on the whole it's a complicated mess codified in federal law. The U.S. Supreme Court muddied the water even further by upholding it while making an essential provision - Medicaid expansion - optional for each state.

The effects, direct and indirect, of the overhaul remain largely unknown.

That leaves plenty to complain about without also crowing it's the cause of cost-cutting moves that companies and organizations have made or likely would've made anyway.

Shawn Day is an editorial writer for The Virginian-Pilot. Email: shawn.day@pilotonline.com.