McAuliffe: Cuccinelli tax cut would de-fund schools
NORFOLK



Terry McAuliffe, the Democratic candidate for governor, said Tuesday that policies proposed by his Republican opponent would lead to devastating cuts in funding for Virginia's public schools.



Meeting with education students at Old Dominion University, McAuliffe said Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli's proposed $1.4 billion income tax cut would necessitate an annual reduction of at least $525 million in state education funding, leading to layoffs of more than 8,000 teachers.



For Norfolk schools, McAuliffe said, that translates into a budget cut of more than $16 million and more than 250 teacher layoffs.



Cuccinelli has proposed cutting the top individual income tax rate from 5.75 percent to 5 percent and the corporate income tax rate from 6 percent to 4 percent. He has said he would offset the lost revenue by eliminating unspecified tax loopholes.



McAuliffe also attacked Cuccinelli's proposal to amend the state constitution to allow tax dollars to flow to private religious schools, saying it would further starve public schools of resources.



"Ken Cuccinelli has proposed a massive tax gimmick that would blow a $1.4 billion hole in Virginia's budget with no explanation of how he would pay for it," McAuliffe spokesman Josh Schwerin said in a statement. "Virginians deserve to know the dangerous implications of Cuccinelli's plan, including his proposal to divert funding from public schools to private schools."



Anna Nix, a Cuccinelli spokeswoman, accused McAuliffe of misrepresenting the Republican's proposals. Cuccinelli is not proposing reductions to education funding, she said by email.



"Ken Cuccinelli's jobs plan will create 50,000 jobs without any impact on school financing and his education plan will empower parents so that every Virginia child has the opportunity to receive a great education," Nix said.



Cuccinelli launched a statewide campaign tour Tuesday night in Richmond touting his education policies.



In addition to his proposed constitutional amendment, the candidate has proposed a "Parent Empowerment and Choice Act" to rescue students in failing schools. It would transfer power from school boards to parents. By majority vote, parents would have the power to close such a school, convert it to a charter school, replace its leadership, or receive state funding to enroll their children in the school of their choice, public or private.



Bill Sizemore, 757-446-2276, bill.sizemore@pilotonline.com