Gilbert Welcomes Kinky to the Race : Hank Gilbert for Agriculture Commissioner
admin | Dec 14, 2009 | Comments 0

Friedman’s Entry Into Ag Commissioner Race Another Example Of Self-Promotion By Entertainer

El Paso-Democratic Agriculture Commissioner Candidate Hank Gilbert (D-Whitehouse) on Monday welcomed Kinky Friedman as a late entry into the race for Texas Agriculture Commissioner.

“Here we have a candidate who is running for office-any office-solely because he wants to promote his books and personal appearances,” Gilbert said. “Kinky is no Democrat. If he was, he never would have stayed in the 2006 race running as an independent and denied our party’s nominee a real chance at the governor’s office,” Gilbert continued.

“Since exploring a race for governor, Kinky has had a cigar promotion tour, a book promotion tour and a documentary released about his last run all in an attempt to promote his publishing and business interests. He doesn’t care about running for office for the sake of helping people. He’s looking for the best and most cost-efficient way of building name recognition to sell his products and himself. He’s figured out that an entertainer running for office can generate earned media to help boost his book sales and sell tickets to his shows,” he continued.

“Texas needs bold, common-sense leadership at the Texas Department of Agriculture in order to address the many issues facing consumers, family farms, food producers, and the other industries regulated by the agency. All of these issues directly effect the citizens of this state on a daily basis. People don’t need someone more concerned about self-promotion than selfless public service,” Gilbert said.

“A careless, lackadaisical attitude has already resulted in the deaths of eight and more than 600 cases of illness nationally thanks to poor TDA oversight at the former Peanut Corporation of America factory in Plainview. I shudder to think what would happen if Texas’ next Agriculture Commissioner were out selling books and not running the office,” Gilbert said. “I’m sure former Commissioner Hightower has done what he could to help Kinky understand the complexities of the office, but having been out of it for almost 20 years one wonders if his knowledge of the office may be a little out-of-date.”

“I led the statewide executive ticket as the Texas Democratic Party Nominee for Commissioner of Agriculture in 2006. My travels took me into counties no Democratic statewide candidate had been in for years – driving more than 150,000 miles in an effort to energize the party’s base. I committed to Texans then that whatever the result, I would continue to fight against unfair eminent domain practices, the privatization and sale of our roads to foreign companies and for the family farms of this state. I kept that promise and have spent thousands of hours over the last three years working with citizens all over this state and a bipartisan majority in the legislature to stop schemes that would impoverish Texans. Not once did I ever see Kinky Friedman. Not once did he ever bother to lift a finger for the people of this state. And now, he’d like to ask for their support?”

“I welcome Kinky to this race. We need to have a spirited debate on the issues affecting Texas agriculture, consumers, and family farms. I am sure Democratic Clubs and the media across Texas would welcome the opportunity to see our positions and how each of us would run the Agricultural Commissioner’s office,” Gilbert concluded.