New Ad: Cuccinelli’s Extreme Attacks on Women’s Access to Health Care
Press Release

Home Press Release New Ad: Cuccinelli’s Extreme Attacks on Women’s Access to Health Care

New Ad: Cuccinelli’s Extreme Attacks on Women’s Access to Health Care

September 17, 2013

Gubernatorial candidate Terry McAuliffe’s campaign released a new television ad today, “Offended,” regarding Ken Cuccinelli’s attacks on women’s access to health care. Cuccinelli has repeatedly stated he opposes abortion even in cases of rape, incest, and the health of the mother. As a State Senator, Cuccinelli introduced “personhood” legislation that would effectively outlaw abortions in Virginia and medical experts say could ban many common forms of birth control like the pill. Cuccinelli also used his role as attorney general to bully the Virginia Board of Health into passing medically unnecessary regulations. The ad can be viewed here: http://youtu.be/ SZckqiIJdKE.

“Throughout Ken Cuccinelli’s career, it has been clear that his ultimate mission is to make abortion illegal and restrict women’s rights to make their own health care decisions,” said McAuliffe spokeswoman Rachel Thomas. “As governor, Terry McAuliffe will be focused on making sure all Virginians have equal rights and greater economic opportunities. Protecting women’s access to quality healthcare and preventive services is a critical component of Terry’s plan to build a stronger future for the Commonwealth.” Transcript, “Offended” Dr. Holly Puritz, Norfolk: For thirty years I’ve worked as an OB-GYN, my job is to protect the health of women. So I’m particularly offended by Ken Cuccinelli.

Cuccinelli wants to make all abortion illegal, even in cases of rape and incest, even to protect a woman’s health.

I want a Governor who’s focused on schools and creating jobs, not someone who wants to do my job. Who’s Ken Cuccinelli to interfere in the lives of women across Virginia? Background

Cuccinelli Cosponsored Personhood Bill In 2007

In February 2007, Sen. Cuccinelli cosponsored legislation introduced by Del. Bob Marshall that would prove that “the right to enjoyment of life” guaranteed by Article 1, § 1 of the Constitution of Virginia applies to “preborn human beings from the moment of fertilization.” The bill failed in the House. [HB 2797, 2/5/07]





HEADLINE: BILL THAT COULD HAVE BANNED ABORTIONS FAILS [AP, 2/6/07]





Personhood Bill Could Have “Effectively Banned All Abortions in Virginia”

In February 2007, the AP reported, “The measure would have given constitutional rights at fertilization. A bill that could have effectively banned all abortions in Virginia died on the House floor Monday. Del. Robert G. Marshall’s bill would have granted constitutional protections at the moment of fertilization. The measure failed to advance on a 43-53 vote. Such bills rarely die in the conservative House, and are killed by the more moderate Senate.” [AP, 2/6/07]





AP: Abortion of “All Types Would Become Illegal”

In February 2007, the AP reported, “By giving embryos the constitutional protection of personhood from the instant of fertilization, abortions of all types would become illegal.” [AP, 2/6/07]





Virginians For Life: Cuccinelli’s Bill Would “Dismantle The Tragic Roe V. Wade Decision”

In February 2007, the Petersburg Progress-Index published a letter to the editor from Bob Kline, a member of Virginians for Life. The letter praised the Virginia Life at Conception Act, sponsored by Ken Cuccinelli, saying that it “would dismantle the Tragic Roe v. Wade decision that legalized the murder of innocent children on demand.” [Petersburg Progress-Index, letter to the editor, 2/6/07]



Cuccinelli Headlined Rally Urging Passage of Personhood Bill HB 1 with Bill Sponsor Bob Marshall In February 2012, NBC 29 reported, “Then, a half hour after the Republican press conference, Delegate Bob Marshall and Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli headlined a personhood rally. The legislation has been the subject of much controversy. It would define life as beginning at conception. Critics say it could pave the road to outlawing contraception and abortion.” [NBC 29, 2/15/12]

Cuccinelli Pushed for Passage of HB 1 Personhood Legislation, Said “The Fight For Life Is Going To Last For All Of Our Lives”





In 2012, National Journal Hotline quoted Cuccinelli at rally for HB 1 personhood legislation, saying “It’s hard to believe we actually have to come and advocate for something as basic as life, but we’ve had to do it for decades and we’re going to have to do it for the rest of our lives. The fight for life is going to last for all of our lives.’“ [National Journal Hotline, 2/16/12; CBS 6 WTVR, 2/15/12, Video]

AP: Personhood Bill HB1 “Would Effectively Outlaw All Virginia Abortions” In February 2012, the AP reported: “A House Republican supermajority has muscled two of the most restrictive anti-abortion bills in years to passage over passionate objections from Democrats. Del. Bob Marshall’s House Bill 1 would effectively outlaw all Virginia abortions by declaring that the rights of persons apply from the moment sperm and egg unite.” [AP via WJLA, 2/14/12] Cuccinelli Opposed Abortion “Even In Cases Of Rape Or Incest” In August 2002, the Washington Post reported, “He also imbued the campaign with his antiabortion message. Cuccinelli opposes the procedure even in cases of rape or incest.” [Washington Post, 8/7/02] Cuccinelli Said He Would Support Abortion ONLY When The Woman’s Life Was At Risk In February 2009, the Roanoke Times reported: “During a question about the circumstances under which abortion should be legal, Cuccinelli and Brownlee both said they would support it only in cases where the mother’s life was threatened.” [Roanoke Times, 2/18/09]

Cuccinelli Touted Himself as “Most Aggressive Pro-Life Leader” in the Senate

In March 2010, the New York Times reported, “As a lawmaker from one of the state’s most liberal regions, Mr. Cuccinelli proudly described himself as ‘the most aggressive pro-life leader in the Virginia Senate.’ He favored legislation granting legal rights to fetuses at conception and voted against a bill stating that contraception is not abortion. He also sponsored bills requiring regulations so strict they would have put most abortion clinics out of business.” [New York Times, 3/25/10]