McAuliffe Urges House of Delegates to Pass School Resource Officer Proposal
Press Release

Home Press Release McAuliffe Urges House of Delegates to Pass School Resource Officer Proposal

McAuliffe Urges House of Delegates to Pass School Resource Officer Proposal

January 19, 2013

Virginia gubernatorial candidate Terry McAuliffe released the following statement today urging the House of Delegates to pass the School Resource Officer proposal:

“I was pleased to hear that the House of Delegates will begin considering the expansion of School Resource Officers to elementary schools on Monday. The reason I made this proposal is to ensure that we give Virginia elementary schools the option of professionally trained officers whose primary responsibility is protecting our children. The passage of this proposal would be an important step to protect our children and would also show Virginians that we can work together to find mainstream solutions.”

Background

Coverage of McAuliffe’s Plan:

CNN, December 19, 2012

Washington Post, December 19, 2012

Virginian-Pilot, December 19, 2012

Roanoke Times , December 19, 2012

Fairfax News, December 19, 2012

Republican Leadership of House of Delegates Supported McAuliffe Proposal to Expand SROs to Elementary Schools. According to the Virginian-Pilot: ““Through the resource officer program, Sherwood said, “80 percent of Virginia’s high schools and middle schools have full-time school resource officers.”"Unfortunately, only about 25 percent of elementary schools have assigned school resource officers, many of which serve multiple schools,” added Sherwood of Winchester. A statement Thursday from [Speaker] Howell and his colleagues said the grant program will be expanded through an amendment to Virginia’s two-year state budget, though they didn’t specify how much new money they hope to invest. Their proposal comes a day after Terry McAuliffe, a Democrat running for governor, suggested putting more resource officers in elementary schools.”” [Virginian-Pilot, 12/20/12]

Lt. Gov Bolling Agreed That Increased School Security Should Be Based on Trained Law Enforcement Officers. [Washington Post, 12/19/12]

Republican Delegates Sherwood and Cox Joined Speaker Howell in Endorsing Plan to Expand SROs to Elementary Schools. [Virginian-Pilot, 12/ 20/12]