Texas Alliance
Petroleum Economist

806-373-4814

Karr Ingham is a professional economist who lives and works in Amarillo, Texas. He is the owner of Ingham Economic Reporting, an economic analysis and research firm that specializes in the indexing and tracking of regional and metro area economies.

Mr. Ingham is a native of Stratford, Texas in the northern Texas Panhandle, and a 1979 graduate of Stratford High School. He attended Hardin-Simmons University in Abilene, Texas, and is a Magna Cum Laude BBA Economics graduate of West Texas A&M University in Canyon. He has graduate work in economics, primarily in the area of national macro-economic policy, and monetary theory and policy. He also taught undergraduate micro-economics at West Texas A&M for a short time (they were in a pinch!).

Ingham has a career history in agriculture broadcasting, public affairs and politics. He served as District Director and Legislative Aide to then U.S. Congressman Beau Boulter, and was the Congressman’s principal liaison to the Panhandle and West Texas agriculture community. He also performed agriculture budget policy analysis for the Congressman, then a member of the House Budget Committee.

The regional metro analysis concept has been expanded to include regional energy production economies with the establishment of the Texas Permian Basin Petroleum Index, the Texas PetroIndex, a statewide index-based analysis of the state’s energy production economy produced monthly for the Texas Alliance of Energy Producers, and the Oklahoma Energy Index produced monthly for the Oklahoma Independent Petroleum Association and the Oklahoma Energy Education Foundation. In addition, he also consults with both organizations on economic and analytical policy matters and conducts various industry-related economic impact studies in Texas and Oklahoma.

Ingham is member of the US Association for Energy Economics (USAEE), and holds his affiliation with the Houston chapter of that organization. He also serves on the natural gas supply and demand panel for the Independent Petroleum Association of American (IPAA), and is a frequent commentator in various local and statewide media outlets with regard to oil & gas prices and markets.

Mr. Ingham resides in Amarillo with his wife, Elizabeth, and two daughters – Allison, 16, and Gracie, 6.