This agency hereby certifies that the adoption has been reviewed by legal counsel and found to be a valid exercise of the agency's legal authority.

STATUTORY AUTHORITY. The amendment is adopted under the Texas Water Code, §§5.103, 5.105, and 27.019, which authorizes the commission to promulgate rules necessary to carry out the powers and duties under the provisions of the Texas Water Code and other laws of the state, and under Texas Health and Safety Code, §361.017 and §361.024 (Vernon 1992), which further authorizes the commission to promulgate rules necessary to manage industrial solid waste and municipal solid and hazardous wastes.

This rule amendment is administrative in nature and does not impose any additional or substantial burden on private real property. UIC facilities are already subject to this federal requirement, this amendment merely incorporates the federal requirement into the state UIC program. Also, because this rulemaking is reasonably taken to fulfill an obligation mandated by Federal Law, this rule amendment is excepted from the Private Real Property Preservation Act pursuant to §2007.3(b)(4) of Texas Government Code (the "Act").

TAKINGS IMPACT ASSESSMENT. The commission has prepared a Takings Impact Assessment for these rules pursuant to Texas Government Code Annotated, §2007.043. The following is a summary of that assessment. The specific purpose of the rules is to incorporate federal language into current state regulations so that the UIC program can maintain compliance with the federal program. The rules will substantially advance this specific purpose by allowing the commission to maintain primacy, and thus state control, for the UIC program. Promulgation and enforcement of these rule amendments will not create a burden on private real property.

HEARINGS AND COMMENTERS. There were no hearings, and no comments were submitted on the proposed rule.

EXPLANATION OF ADOPTED RULE. Adopted §281.22 is an amendment, per 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §144.31(d), to prohibit the issuance of an injection well permit until the agency has received a complete application.

The purpose of the adopted amendments is to maintain consistency with federal regulations applicable to the state Underground Injection Control (UIC) Program and to maintain state primacy for the UIC Program.

The Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (commission) adopts an amendment to §281.22, concerning Referral to Commission, without changes to the proposed text as published in the October 11, 1996, issue of the Texas Register (21 TexReg 9756).

The Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC or commission) adopts the repeal of §§285.11-285.18, 258.51-285.63 and 285.101-285.109, relating to on-site wastewater treatment, and adopts new Subchapters A-I, §§285.1-285.7, 285.10-285.11, 285.20-285.21, 285.30-285.36, 285.39, 285.40, 285.50-285.63, 285.70, 285.80, 285.90, and 285.91, relating to on-site sewage facilities. New §§285.2-285.7, 285.10, 285.11, 285.20, 285.21, 285.30-285.36, 285.39, 285.40, 285.50-285.57, 285.59-285.61, 285.80, 285.90, and 285.91 are adopted with changes to the text as published in the July 16, 1996, issue of the Texas Register (21 TexReg 6578). The repeal of §§285.11-285.18, 285.51-285.63 and 285.101-285.109 and new §§285.1, 285.58, 285.62, 285.63 and 285.70 are adopted without changes and will not be republished.

EXPLANATION OF ADOPTED RULES

The purpose of this repeal and new rules is to eliminate duplicate provisions with other chapters in this title and to revise and update technical standards in response to the evolution of on-site wastewater technology since 1990. In addition, these new rules provide minimum levels of acceptable criteria to assure that the proper on-site sewage facility (OSSFs) will be installed in the state in order to eliminate and prevent health hazards for the public and the waters in the state. These new rules establish overall requirements for the use of such technology as cluster systems, drip systems, intermittent sand filters and leaching chambers which were not covered in the current rules under this chapter.

In addition, the new rules concerning general program administration will clarify program operating procedures, better define the commission's relationship with authorized agents, establish an additional class of installer and continuing education requirements for installers, and require the training and certification for individuals performing site evaluations and inspections for OSSF systems in the state. These new rules will implement Senate Bill 1042 mandated by the 73rd Legislature (1993) which authorized the commission to establish a certification procedure for designated representatives of authorized agents and to pursue civil and administrative penalties for violations of Chapter 366, Texas Health and Safety Code, or its rules.

TAKINGS IMPACT ASSESSMENT

The commission has prepared a Takings Impact Assessment for these rules pursuant to Texas Government Code Annotated §2007.043. The following is a summary of that Assessment. The purpose of the on-site sewage facility (OSSF) rules is to revise the state's minimum OSSF standards such that they reflect past legislative changes, address newer technologies and methodologies, and reduce inconsistency between state and locally administered programs. Data from this commission and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) consistently indicate that one of the largest components of non-point source water pollution is the lack of adequate OSSF systems in the state of Texas. Promulgation and enforcement of these rules could affect private real property which is the subject of these rules.

The "Texas Government Action Affecting Private Property Act", as found in Chapter 2007 of the Texas Government Code, applies to governmental actions which affect private property. This statute provides that the regulation of on-site sewage disposal systems is specifically exempted from the application of that chapter. The specific exemption is found at Chapter 2007.003(b)(11)(B). Furthermore, the following exceptions to the application of Chapter 2007 of the Texas Government Code, §2007.003(b), apply to these rules:

(1) The Action is taken to prevent a public or private nuisance. The purpose of the promulgation of these rules are authorized by Chapter 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. That Chapter provides that it is the public policy of this state to eliminate and prevent health by properly regulating on-site systems. These rules set forth minimum statewide standards to further the stated policy. Chapter 341 of the Texas Health and Safety Code provides that overflowing septic tanks are statutorily defined as a nuisance condition. The promulgation of this Chapter is for the purpose of preventing both public and private nuisance conditions by setting minimum standards.

(2) The action is taken in response to a real and substantial threat to public health and safety. Improperly located, constructed, or maintained on-site systems can present a real and substantial threat to public health and safety as sewage is a communicative medium for diseases. The proliferation of on-site system use in Texas and the close proximity of a systems' location to occupied dwellings presents a potential threat to public health and safety.

(3) The action significantly advances the health and safety purpose. The rule significantly advances the health and safety purpose by establishing new site evaluation criteria which will reduce the use of improperly located, designed and constructed systems.

(4) The action imposes no greater burden than is necessary to achieve the health and safety. These rules are similar to the predecessor rules for OSSF and do not establish a greater burden for most type of systems. In areas where there is a greater burden, the rules have attempted to provide more detailed criteria in order to insure that the proper system is installed for the site. This is necessary in order to insure that systems don't fail and create health and safety hazards.

PUBLIC HEARING AND COMMENTERS

A public hearing was held on August 8, 1996, in Austin. Twenty-one individuals presented oral testimony at the public hearing. The public comment period to receive written comments was extended to September 3, 1996. A total of 83 written comments to the proposed rules were submitted. Expressing general opposition to the rules were two registered professional engineers and the County Judges and Commissioners Association of Texas. Supporting the proposal with recommended changes were Texas Representative Homer Dear (District 89), Lower Colorado River Authority, Bell County Public Health District, Harris County Engineering Department, Austin Health and Human Services Department/Travis County Health Department (Austin-Travis County), Advanced Wastewater Systems, A-1 Wastewater Service, Inc., North Texas Marketing, McGrew Construction Company and Ecological Tanks, Inc. Those offering recommended changes were Texas State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers, Upper Guadalupe River Authority, Brazos County Health Department, San Angelo-Tom Green County Health Department, Fort Worth-Tarrant County Public Health Departments, Galveston County Health District, Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District, Fort Worth Water Department, City of Denton, Smith County Designated Representative, Hays County Environmental Health, Dallas County Health Department, City of Arlington, Angelina County and Cities Health District, San Antonio Water System, Williamson County and Cities Health District, Gregg County Health Department, Texas On-Site Wastewater Association, Texas Capitol Area Builders Association, Texas Manufactured Housing Association, Texas Society of Professional Engineers, Texas Environmental Health Association, NSF International, Community Environmental Services, Inc., Wastewater Technologies, Inc., Dooly Plumbing Company, Hydro-Action, Sherrill Engineering, Scott Kitchner Septic Systems, Drip-Tech Wastewater Systems, Hill Country Concrete Products, Inc., Robert Morriss, Inc., Clearstream Wastewater Systems, Inc., Tejas Engineering and Septic Systems, Brandon Ellison, Inc., Coldwell Banker/Richard Smith Realtors, Hill Plumbing, Inc., Highland Lakes Engineering, Wallis Concrete, Inc., Rural Wastewater Systems, Cox Concrete Pipe Company, Zachary Brothers, Norwalk Wastewater Equipment Company, Hopco Clearwater Systems, Cole Septic Service, Guadalupe Companies, Frank Aquirre and Associates, Robins Engineering, Harrison Environmental Systems, Kirk's Tractor Service, Inc., The Hill Company, Holmes Concrete Pipe, Amstar Engineering, Inc., Gulf Shores Enterprises, Cecil's Backhoe Service, Inc., S and D Environmental Services, one registered professional engineer, seven registered sanitarians, six installers, four individuals.

GENERAL COMMENTS

Fort Worth Water Department suggested that a table of contents be added to the rules for ease of use.

The commission agrees with the comment and a table of contents will be developed after the final rules are adopted.

Representative Homer Dear and an individual stated that the proposed rules are an improvement over the existing rules and they will promote better local implementation of the OSSF program. Lower Colorado River Authority generally supports the proposed rules. Many people are waiting for these new rules to be adopted and recommend the rules be adopted with some fine tuning. Bell County Public Health District believes that these rules are vastly improved regulations over the ones the commission and authorized agents are currently using to protect the health of citizens that the commission and authorized agents are charged with serving. Harris County Engineering Department supports the adoption of these rules with minor changes. The adoption of these rules will reduce the cost of systems installed in areas that are now fully complying with the current construction standards by allowing reduced setbacks. Harris County Engineering Department supports the rules to better protect the environmental quality in the state and reduce the cost of systems to the citizens. Austin-Travis County is in support of the proposed regulations and also suggest the TNRCC revisit the rules in a year or two to see if there is any room for adjustment. Advanced Wastewater Systems stated that as a whole the new rules will greatly improve the performance of OSSFs. A-1 Wastewater Service, Inc. stated that everyone has done an excellent job on these rules. North Texas Marketing totally supports the TNRCC and these provisions, the concerns expressed are that a consumer have a voice in the process and while standards are upgraded, systems are kept affordable and in-line with mainstream products offered in the marketplace. McGrew Construction Company, Inc., Clearstream Wastewater System, Inc., and Ecological Tanks, Inc. expressed support for the adoption of the rules.

The commission appreciates the general support for these rules. In the future, the commission will convene an ad hoc committee to review these rules and see what, if any, modifications need to be made. This ad hoc committee will be made up of various representatives of the OSSF field (local permitting authorities, engineers, sanitarians, installers, homebuilders, manufactured homes and legal counsel) and will be from different parts or regions of the state.

An individual suggested that the Chapter 290 rules referenced in these rules should be added to the appendices.

The commission feels it is necessary in its rulemaking to clearly reference other rules of the commission that may apply to a specific set of circumstances so that the regulated community will not be caught unaware. However, the commission believes it would be redundant and is not appropriate to attach already existing rules to other rule packages, but rather to just reference them in the body of the rule.

A registered professional engineer asked that more time be given to respond and shape the rule. An individual requested that the comment period be extended an additional 90 days.

The commission feels that it has provided the necessary public review and input into the revisions of this chapter. The staff of the commission have been working on revising this chapter for over three years. In addition to the current rulemaking process, the staff have provided draft proposals to the public, conducted 11 public meetings across the state to solicit comments and suggestions on the proposals and met with a 14 member ad hoc advisory committee made up of local government officials, installers, registered sanitarians, registered professional engineers, trade associations, manufacturers and attorneys. Also, the commission granted an additional two weeks of comment period to allow for further input.

An individual requested that the ad hoc committee should be present when the comments are reviewed by the TNRCC staff.

The commission feels it has allowed for a very open and participative process in the development and proposal of these rules. The commission believes these rules need to be evaluated as quickly as possible so that they can become effective at the earliest possible date. Although the commission appreciates the efforts of the ad hoc committee and feels indebted to its members for spending a lot of their personal time in advising the staff on their experience, thoughts and ideas, the commission believes that it is the staff's responsibility to fully evaluate all the comments and submit recommendations to the commission in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Administrative Code.

Texas Capital Area Builders Association and an individual would like for the commission to consider whether these rules would be a takings of private property.

The commission feels that these rules would not prohibit the use of an individual's tract of land. Many provisions of these rules allow landowners of smaller lots and lots which can not meet the minimum criteria to pursue other remedies to allow them normal use and enjoyment of the land without creating a public health concern or a threat to the surface and ground water in the state. In addition, the "Texas Government Action Affecting Private Property Act", as found in Chapter 2007 of the Texas Government Code, applies to governmental actions which affect private property. This statute provides that the regulation of on-site sewage disposal systems is specifically exempted from the application of that chapter. The specific exemption is found at §2007.003(b)(11)(B).

Coldwell Banker/Richard Smith Realtors expressed concern that many of the proposed changes require engineering on every system in Williamson County.

The commission disagrees with this comment. The commission believes that one of the most important revisions to the OSSF rules is the new site evaluation criteria. Any OSSF, whether a standard system or a non-standard system, has a high likelihood of failing when the system design is not suited for the site on which it is installed. In many cases, improper system specification begins with an improper site evaluation. Improper site evaluations are most often the result of a faulty percolation test. All too often the percolation test is performed improperly or provides misleading results. Site evaluation criteria based upon USDA soil classification methodology lower the possibility of improper site evaluation. Soil evaluation from any site can be compared with USDA soil classification survey data that is readily available. The end result will be site evaluations that supply the data to OSSF designers and regulators to determine whether a standard, proprietary, or non-standard system is appropriate for any given site.

Texas Capital Area Builders Association expressed the following concerns: what is the justification for the increased regulations; there is no broad based reason to conclude that the septic tanks systems being installed in Central Texas are having an impact on public health; if current standards are working, why add a large expense to the cost of building a home.

The commission disagrees with the comments. The intent of this rulemaking process is to revise the state's minimum OSSF standards such that they reflect past legislative changes, address newer technologies and methodologies, and reduce inconsistency between state and locally administered programs. Data from this commission and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) consistently indicate that one of the largest components of non-point source water pollution is the lack of adequate OSSF systems in the State of Texas. The revised site evaluation procedures contained within this rule will create a greater match between OSSF system design and individual site limitations.

Brazos County Health Department suggested that the rules convert the present square footage requirements with a new formula, instead of recalculating all the tables.

The commission disagrees with this comment. The revised rules for standard absorptive disposal systems address drainfield excavations in terms of varying excavation lengths and widths (widths may not be less than 1.5 feet) where wastewater application rates are derived from soil textural analysis. The previous rules derived square footage requirements based upon percolation test results. Since the revised rules do not address percolation testing, the standard absorptive drainfield system dimensions cannot be cross-referenced to the square footage tables in the previous rules.

A registered professional engineer requested the following: 1) the rules be withdrawn from further consideration; 2) in the alternative, suspend any further consideration until such time as complete compliance with Chapter 366 of the Health and Safety Code, Administrative Procedures Act (APA), Engineering Practices Act and Sanitarian Registration Act is accomplished; and 3) 15 categories of documents related to this rulemaking under the Open Records Act. Also, the registered engineer expressed the following: 1) have not heard any authorized agent express any wish for new rules; 2) does not see the need for the new rules; 3) no facts presented to show existing rules are causing health hazards or impacts on waters in the state; 4) have seen no publication of criticism on the difficulty of existing rules; 5) benefit of these rules should be quantified, rules do not mention costs to prospective homeowners; 6) takes issues with statement that there will be more qualified professionals operating in the OSSF program; 7) rules should be rewritten in a performance language establishing the minimum acceptable level of environmental protection; and 8) finds the rules harder, not easier, to work with.

The commission disagrees with the comment that the rules should be withdrawn or that action on this rules package should be suspended. The commission follows all the required statutory and regulatory requirements in the proposal and adoption of rules. This rules package has been developed involving public participation and has been in accordance with all the requirements of the aforementioned statutes. The commission believes this rules package to have benefited from a lot of public input and to adequately address the various issues involving OSSFs. In response to the request for information regarding this process, the commenter was provided all responsive documentation for review.

SUBCHAPTER A-GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 285.2. Definitions.

Fort Worth-Tarrant County Public Health Department recommended that the term "abandoned tanks" be modified from plural to singular.

The commission agrees and has modified the definition accordingly.

In addition, the commission has found a small number of misspelled, misplaced or missing words or similar type of typographical errors in the published proposed rules for which no comments were received. These inadvertent mistakes have been corrected in the body of the rules.

Williamson County and Cities Health District recommended that definitions for terms "alteration" and "repair" be added to this section.

The commission believes these terms are commonly used terms and do not need to be further defined in this chapter.

A registered sanitarian suggested that the definition of "cluster system" be modified to recognize that these are systems which would be used to serve separate legal tracts of land.

The commission has added the recommended language to clarify the definition.

Fort Worth-Tarrant County Public Health Department requested that a definition for the term "direct supervision" be added since the use of the term in Subchapter F of the proposed rules was not clear.

The commission has defined the term and included it in this section.

Fort Worth-Tarrant County Public Health Department recommended that a definition for the term "executive director" be added.

The commission has developed a definition for the term "executive director" in Chapter 3 of this title (relating to Definitions). This definition applies to all the commission's rules unless specified otherwise. The definition in Chapter 3 applies to these rules.

Austin-Travis County and Texas On-Site Wastewater Association recommends that the definition of "ground water" be modified by adding a phrase recognizing that the ground water formation will be fully saturated either year round or on a seasonal or intermittent basis; and Tejas Engineering and Septic Systems recommended that the definition of "ground water" is technically inaccurate and should recognize the duration of saturation.

The commission agrees with the comments and has modified the language of the definition to clarify it.

Austin-Travis County recommended the term "individual" be deleted and in its place use that definition to define the term "person". Texas On-Site Wastewater Association recommends that the definition of individual should be changed to person. Texas Manufactured Housing Association recommended that a definition for the term "person" be added to this section.

The commission has developed a definition for the term "person" in Chapter 3 of this title (relating to Definitions). This definition applies to all the commission's rules unless specified otherwise. The definition in Chapter 3 for "person" applies to these rules. In addition, the commission feels it is necessary to distinguish between an individual and a person within the context of these rules. No changes will be made.

Austin-Travis County recommended that the definition of "maintenance company" be expanded to include "partnerships and corporations which provide services to maintain the functional operations of OSSFs". Smith County designated representative suggests that the definition of "maintenance company" is unclear.

The commission's definition under Chapter 3 of this title (relating to Definitions) for the term "person" is expansive enough to address the concerns of the first commenter. As to the second comment, the commission feels the definition of a maintenance company under this section is clear. Although, as of the effective date of these new rules an Installer II certification will not be available for issuance, it is the intent of these rules to allow Installers, who presently operate a maintenance company, to continue to do so until such time as they obtain an Installer II certificate or the deadline (540 days after the effective date of these rules) to obtain such a certificate has passed. In addition, §285.21(f) of the rules as proposed has been deleted to eliminate any duplicity or inconsistency with the definition in this section.

Fort Worth-Tarrant County Public Health Department recommends that the definition of "maintenance company" be limited to the maintenance of "aerobic treatment units" specifically and not "OSSFs" in general.

The commission believes the definition as modified from previous comments is sufficient. The commission believes it is not in the best interest of the public to limit the use of maintenance companies to aerobic treatment systems only.

A registered sanitarian recommended that experienced people, other than Installer II's should be allowed to operate maintenance companies.

The commission believes the provisions of these rules allow individuals who hold a Class D or higher wastewater operators certificate, in addition to Installer II's, to be associated with maintenance companies. In addition, §285.21(f) of the rules as proposed has been deleted to eliminate any duplicity or inconsistency with the definition in this section.

Tejas Engineering and Septic Systems and a registered sanitarian recommended that the definition for "mound system" should be modified.

The commission agrees and has modified the definition to clarify its intent.

Austin-Travis County recommended that the term "multi-use residential" be defined. A registered sanitarian recommended that the term "multi-use residential" be changed to "multi-unit residential".

The commission has defined the term "multi-unit residential" and included it in this section.

Austin-Travis County recommended that the definition of "on-site sewage disposal system" be modified in subparagraph (B) to reflect that a disposal system may be located not only on but near the site where the sewage is produced (e.g. cluster systems).

The commission agrees and has modified the definition to recognize the use of cluster systems in conjunction with the use of this term.

A registered sanitarian recommended that a definition for the term "primary treatment" be added to this section.

The commission feels a definition is not necessary since these rules do not establish any specific criteria for primary treatment.

Austin-Travis County recommends that the first sentence of the definition of "proprietary disposal" be deleted. Clearstream Wastewater Systems, Inc. recommended that the definitions for "proprietary disposal, proprietary system and proprietary treatment" be modified to reflect that not all proprietary systems have registered trademark or patent.

The commission agrees in part and has modified the language of "proprietary systems" to recognize that not all proprietary products will be sold under a registered trademark or patent. In addition, the commission believes the use of the terms "proprietary disposal and proprietary treatment" are redundant terms in relation to the definition of "proprietary systems" and has deleted those two definitions from the section.

City of Denton recommends that a definition for the term "professional design" be added to this section.

The commission feels a definition of this term is not necessary. This term is a commonly used term and any reference or use of this term in the text of these rules is properly referenced.

Lower Colorado River Authority, Austin-Travis County, Texas On-Site Wastewater Association and a registered sanitarian recommended that a definition for the term "secondary treatment" be added to this section. An individual commented that secondary treatment should be defined.

The commission has defined the term "secondary treatment" and included it in this section.

Community Environmental Services, Inc. recommended that the term "septage" be defined in this section and that the management of septage be specifically mentioned in these rules.

The commission believes there is no reason to define this term in this chapter, since the use of the term is not within the scope of these rules and is defined and regulated as "domestic septage" in Chapter 312 of this title (relating to Sludge Use, Disposal and Transportation). It would not be appropriate to mix regulations or requirements in the two chapters. No changes to the rules will be made.

Texas Society of Professional Engineers recommended that the term "sewerage generating units" be added to this section.

The commission feels this term does not need to be defined. Due to modifications of rules based on comments received, this term is no longer used in the text of the rule.

Texas Society of Professional Engineers recommended that the term "sewage disposal plan" be modified to recognize "treatment units" in the definition.

The commission agrees with the comments and has modified the language of the definition.

Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District and Dooly Plumbing Company recommended that the definition of the term "sewage disposal plan" be modified by deleting the reference to the "10 acre exemption". The company feels that everyone should have to permit their system.

The commission feels this comment would modify the statutory limitations in Chapter 366 of the Health and Safety Code and cannot be changed by the commission.

Austin-Travis County recommended that the definition of "sewage disposal plan" be modified by deleting its second sentence.

The commission agrees and has deleted the second sentence.

Austin-Travis County recommended that the definitions for the terms "standard disposal" and "standard treatment" should be deleted.

The commission agrees and has deleted the referenced definitions.

Lower Colorado River Authority, Austin-Travis County and Texas On-Site Wastewater Association recommended that a definition for "subdivision" be added to this section.

The commission has defined the term "subdivision" and included it in this section.

Austin-Travis County and Williamson County and Cities Health District recommended that the term "substantial modification" be defined and added to this section and other specific sections of the rules.

The commission believes that any modification of an OSSF in accordance with §366.051 of the Texas Health and Safety Code would require the permittee to obtain the necessary authorization from the permitting authority. The suggested definition would not afford the necessary oversight to assure that the surface and ground waters in the state would be protected. No change or addition will be made.

Texas Society of Professional Engineers, a registered engineer and Community Environmental Services, Inc. recommended that the definitions in this section should, wherever possible, be consistent with those accepted as standard for the industry. Suggested that the definitions in the Glossary of Water and Wastewater Treatment publication be used.

The commission feels that the terms in these rules are generally consistent with the definitions in the referenced document. The commission has chosen to use different definitions because of certain statutory definitions and to specifically describe the limits of jurisdiction and regulation under these rules. No changes were made.

Section 285.3. General Requirements.

Lower Colorado River Authority recommended that this section clarify the circumstances under which a system could be permitted under this chapter versus being permitted by the commission under other provisions of the Texas Administrative Code. In addition, Austin-Travis County recommended that this section should reflect that it was only applicable to systems serving 5,000 gallons per day or less.

The commission agrees with the comments and has added a subsection (d) to specify those exclusions to the provisions of this chapter. Those OSSFs meeting the criteria of this subsection must obtain a permit under Chapter 26 of the Texas Water Code and Chapter 305 of this title (relating to Consolidated Permits).

Lower Colorado River Authority recommended that the term "extension" be defined or clarified in §285.3(a)(1) and (2).

The commission believes this term is a commonly used term and does not need to be further defined in this chapter.

Fort Worth-Tarrant County Public Health Department recommended that a new subsection (d) be added to specify that authorized agents may adopt standards and other OSSF rules that are more stringent than the sections proposed under these rules.

The commission believes existing statutes clearly give an authorized agent the authority to adopt more stringent standards in accordance with §366.032 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and there is no need to recite the statutory language in this rule.

Texas On-Site Wastewater Association recommended that only a registered professional engineer or registered sanitarian shall be required to submit planning materials if a variance is requested.

The commission agrees and has added language to clarify who can submit planning materials with a request for a variance.

Section 285.4. Facility Planning.

Fort Worth-Tarrant County Public Health Departments suggested changing reference in subsection(a)(1)(B) from "served by a public water supply" to "off-site water supply".

The commission believes the existing language is sufficient to assure that only a tract of land that is served by a public water system, whether it is located on or off-site, will be allowed the smaller lot size. Chapter 290 of this title (relating to Water Hygiene) provides sufficient setbacks to assure proper protection of the drinking water supply.

Lower Colorado River Authority, Austin-Travis County, Williamson County and Cities Health District, Galveston County Health District, Texas On-Site Wastewater Association and three registered sanitarians recommended that the requirement proposed under §285.4(a)(1)(C) requiring "In no instance shall the area available for such systems be less than two times the design area." be added to §285.4(a)(1)(B) and §285.4(a)(2).

The commission agrees and has modified the appropriate parts of this section to provide consistent regulatory standards for submission of planning materials.

Texas Manufactured Housing Association recommended that the term "mobile home park" be replaced with "manufactured housing community" in this section and throughout the rules.

The commission agrees and has made the appropriate changes throughout the rules.

Texas Manufactured Housing Association asked that the following be clarified: the distinction between space rental/lease and space purchase; do the requirements for smaller lots served by a public water systems apply to manufactured housing communities, and if so why; does the TNRCC plan to exempt manufactured housing communities from the 20 unit limitation and planning requirement; it is not clear what a "central water system" means; and the planning required for more than and less than 20 units served by a public water system.

The commission has reviewed and modified the language in §285.4(a)(2) such that it does not address central water systems for manufactured housing communities. The commission has further revised the paragraph to delete the maximum number of units connecting to a sewage collection system and instead limit the overall domestic wastewater production to 5,000 gallons per day. Therefore, when a manufactured housing community is composed of individual dwellings each situated on legally separate properties, then each property is limited to 5,000 gallons per day of domestic wastewater in order to utilize an on-site sewage facility. When the manufactured housing community is composed of individual dwellings all located on a single property, the property is limited to 5,000 gallons of domestic wastewater per day in order to utilize an on-site sewage facility.

A registered sanitarian suggested mobile home parks do not have to meet replacement area requirements.

The commission agrees in part and has modified subpart (2) to require the sewage disposal plan to address replacement area.

Austin-Travis County and Texas Society of Professional Engineers recommended that reference to OSSFs "with a subsurface disposal system" be deleted from §285.4(a)(1)(C).

The commission agrees with the suggested changes and has modified the language accordingly.

A registered sanitarian asked for clarification on §285.4(a)(1)(A) indicating that this paragraph appears to address surface water and not ground water.

The commission agrees and has modified the language to take out any specific references to surface water situations.

A registered professional engineer recommended that the terms "site specific planning materials" in §285.4(a)(1)(B) should be replaced with "a sewage disposal plan" and a minimum lot area of 13,500 square feet be required in the best of circumstances if an OSSF is to be used.

The commission agrees in part and has replaced the language of the referenced subsection with the suggested "a sewage disposal plan". As to the second suggestion, the commission believes that this type of minimum requirement would not allow a registered professional engineer or registered sanitarian the appropriate flexibility to develop an OSSF system to solve unusual situations regarding small lots.

Williamson County and Cities Health District asked for clarification on the following in §285.4: whether counties have the independent power to require submittals for platting requirements; if platting is not required by another entity, do these proposed rules give local representatives independent authority to require planning materials to be submitted; can a permit application be denied for non-compliance of planning material submittal; and do easements need to be excluded from the required square footage.

The commission feels a determination as to whether counties have independent authority to require submittal for platting requirements is beyond the scope of Chapter 366 of the Health and Safety Code and this chapter. These rules provide for the evaluation and approval of overall site suitability for on-site installation for subdivisions. Planning materials for individual on-site systems are a necessary part of the application and as such failure to submit their proposals for an on-site system can be grounds for denial. In addition, land developments and land subdivided for building constructions which will utilize OSSF's for sewage disposal shall be evaluated and approved by the permitting authority. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that on-site systems are located so as to insure properly functioning systems. The requirements of this chapter set technical standards to provide minimum statewide standards. A permit request which can comply with the technical requirements of this chapter should not be denied solely on the basis that site plans were not approved prior to submittal. However, violation of this requirement would be actionable as a violation of this chapter and covered by the penalty provisions of Chapter 366. Legal easements in real property convey different legal meaning and responsibility depending on the intent of grantor. Each easement which would be included in any required calculation should be reviewed individually to determine the purpose of the easement and whether it could be included in calculation for required footage.

Smith County designated representative asked for clarification about lots in unplatted subdivisions and whether these proposed rules have different sizes for unplatted subdivisions.

The commission believes these rules do not propose any different lot sizing for unplatted subdivisions.

A registered sanitarian asked for clarification of §285.4(a)(1)(C) indicating that it was not clear if the exemption to one acre lot size (two times the area required for the OSSF) allows the area to include the structure site or if this area is dedicated for inclusion with the OSSF and to be used if there is a failure. Also, the registered sanitarian indicated that the way the exemption was written it can be obtained for every lot or tract failing to meet the one acre requirement.

The commission feels a variance can be requested from the requirement to have two times the area required for an OSSF, but a variance to the minimum lot size requirements can only be granted upon a proper demonstration that equivalent protection of public health and the environment is provided. The calculation of two times the area required for OSSF must be free of any structures or impervious covering.

Austin-Travis County recommends that there be a minimum lot size for spray irrigation established at two acres.

The commission disagrees. No technical information was offered to justify the establishment of a two acre minimum lot size. Such a restriction for this type of system would severely limit the flexibility of developing an OSSF system to meet the overall requirements of this chapter.

Texas Society of Professional Engineers recommended that the term "sewerage" should be changed to "water" in the first sentence of §285.4(a)(2).

The commission feels that water supply is not the issue of concern in the referenced subsection. The subsection has been rewritten to clarify that the intent was to set standards for the identified developments which are served by a "sewage collection system for on-site disposal".

Lower Colorado River Authority recommended that §285.4(a)(2) be clarified to require that systems under this paragraph be under common ownership or else a cluster system and a definition for a responsible person is needed to determine what entities can be permittees and licensees of multi-unit residential tracts (i.e. does a homeowners association qualify).

The commission feels manufactured housing communities which rent or lease lot space must obtain a permit for the system. The person who owns the land on which the OSSF is located is the responsible party.

Smith County designated representative asked for clarification on: 1) whether these proposed rules allow an OSSF to be installed on property that is subdivided, but not platted; 2) whether the TNRCC intends to require two times the design area for smaller pre-1988 lots; and 3) whether this section is intended to prohibit the installation of all OSSFs when the site is classified as unsuitable.

The commission intended: 1) for this section to cover all lots or tracts, whether platted or not; 2) that the "two times design area" would not apply to the smaller pre-1988 lots, the installation of OSSFs on this category of lots will have to be determined on a case-by-case basis; and 3) that this section would not prohibit the use of all OSSFs for sites that were determined unsuitable, but instead limit the use of a standard disposal system for such situations.

Lower Colorado River Authority recommended that under §285.4(b) the permitting authority be allowed to issue a variance if the proposed site does not meet setback or suitability requirements for standard systems provided a professional design is found acceptable.

The commission believes that the variance provisions of §285.3 of this title (relating to General Requirements) gives the duly designated authorized agent the authority to grant a variance such as requested by the comment.

Austin-Travis County recommends that §285.4(b) be amended to require that all existing illegally subdivided lots must meet the proposed lot sizes.

The commission believes that the rules as written clearly require that all lots or tracts, whether platted or not must meet the requirements established in this chapter. However, the issue of "illegally" subdivided lots is an issue best left to the authority of the local governments and is not within the authority of this agency.

Austin-Travis County and Texas On-Site Wastewater Association recommended that references to "engineering" be deleted from §285.4(c) and replaced with "professional planning".

The commission agrees in part and has modified the language in the section to delete the use of the term "engineering".

Williamson County and Cities Health District asked for clarification on: 1) if platting is not proposed will the planning material be required; 2) what contour interval is required for topographic maps submitted for site plans and subdivision planning materials; and 3) should a notation that a lot over the Edwards be required.

The commission intended that: 1) planning materials would be required whether or not platting of a subdivision is proposed; 2) detail such as contour intervals of topographic mapping necessary for site plans or subdivision submittal is best left to each individual permitting authority to determine based on the situations that exist in their local jurisdictions; and 3) that this section in conjunction with Subchapter E of this title (relating to Special Requirements for OSSFs Located in the Edwards Recharge Zone) and Chapter 213 of this title (relating to Edwards Aquifer) provide sufficient notification of the location of subdivisions over the Edwards. No changes will be made.

Section 285.5. Submittal Requirements for Planning Materials.

Texas Society of Professional Engineers and Amstar Engineering, Inc. recommended that the submission of planning materials under the rules as proposed be limited to registered professional engineers only. In addition, Texas Society of Professional Engineers recommended that a registered engineer's seal is required for: septic tank and evapotranspiration (ET) drainfield; pumped drainfield; septic tank and leaching chamber; septic tank and graveless pipe; holding tank; and septic tank and intermittent sand filter. Several registered professional engineers stated a belief that the design of on-site systems is regulated by the Texas Engineering Practices Act. On this same issue, Texas On-Site Wastewater Association, S and D Environmental Services, Angelina County and Cities Health District, Tejas Engineering and Septic Systems, Rural Wastewater Systems, Texas Environmental Health Association, Hays County Environmental Health, San Angelo-Tom Green County Health Department and three registered sanitarians recommended that registered sanitarians be allowed to submit planning materials for any OSSF in the state.

The commission believes that Chapter 366 of the Health and Safety Code provides the public policy and purpose to prevent and eliminate health hazards by regulating and properly planning the location, design, construction, installation, operation and maintenance of on-site systems (see §366.01 (1)). The commission is given authority over the location, design, construction, installation, operation and maintenance of on-site systems (see §366.011(1)). The commission is authorized to promulgate rules regarding the review and approval of all such systems, including design (see §366.012(a)(1)). The commission interprets Chapter 366 to exempt the design of on-site systems as being regulated under the Texas Engineering Practices Act. In seeking to construe both acts in harmony, several factors are considered. The Engineering Act does not expressly speak to the regulation of on-site system designs. Furthermore, that Act offers exemptions, in §3271(a) and §20(f), which would arguably exempt such activities from being regulated by that Act. Chapter 366 is a more recent legislative action which specifically vests the regulation of on-site system design with the commission and allows the commission to promulgate standards for on-site design which allow both registered professional engineers and registered sanitarians to utilize skills associated with their professional status. The existing rules of the commission and previous rules of the Texas Department of Health have accepted the materials submitted by both registered professional engineers and registered sanitarians. The commission has not been provided any information which indicates the necessity to limit the submission of planning materials for OSSFs to registered professional engineers.

The commission has modified the language of this section to clarify its intent that planning materials prepared by either a registered sanitarian or registered professional engineer include their seal, the date the materials were prepared and their signature. In addition, language in this section has been modified to provide consistency in terminology with other sections and to clarify references to the Texas Engineering Practices Act.

Section 285.6. Cluster Systems.

Texas On-Site Wastewater Association, A-1 Wastewater Services, Inc., Harrison Environmental Systems and a registered sanitarian recommended that the proposed rules be modified to allow a registered sanitarian to submit a professional design for cluster systems.

The commission disagrees that a registered sanitarian should be allowed to submit professional designs for cluster systems. The commission feels that the cluster system design is sufficiently complex and has the potential to meet or exceed the statutory limit of 5,000 gallons per day of wastewater produced by the system. A system which exceeds 5,000 gallons per day must be permitted under Chapter 26 of the Water Code and design of a system for over 5,000 gallons shall be in accordance with Chapter 317 of this title (relating to Design Criteria for Sewerage Systems). The commission currently requires under Chapter 317 that all systems which utilize a collection system, similar to the designs which would be applied to cluster systems, to be designed by a registered professional engineer. The commission feels it is being consistent with current rules and requirements by limiting the design of cluster systems to registered professional engineers. No changes are being made.

Williamson County and Cities Health District and Lower Colorado River Authority recommended that the language of this section be modified to make it clear that this section only applies to systems that serve residences on separately owned lots.

The commission agrees in part and has modified the definition of "cluster system" to clarify that this type of system relates to a system designed to serve two or more sewage generating units on separate legal tracts.

Lower Colorado River Authority recommended that the language of this section be modified to not only require that the site of the cluster system be jointly owned by all parties, but also allow the use of a permanent easement.

The commission agrees and has modified the language of this section to allow the use of perpetual easements in addition to fee simple ownership.

Lower Colorado River Authority, Texas Society of Professional Engineers and a registered professional engineer recommended that the language of this section be modified to allow the use of cluster systems for circumstances other than when the site is determined to be unsuitable for a standard system.

The commission feels that it is required by statute to establish minimum standards for the state in relation to when these and other types of systems may generally be used. However, at any time that an applicant for a permit wishes to use a technology other than what these rules or requirements of a permitting authority may require, the applicant can request a variance to such requirements. The commission feels the existing language is sufficient to allow the flexibility to pursue other OSSF alternatives.

Wastewater Technologies, Inc. and an individual recommended that the specific standards established by Chapter 317 of this title be incorporated into these rules.

The commission believes it has provided the necessary references to Chapter 317 of this title. Chapter 317 provides that the TNRCC duties include the review and approval of plans and specifications for sewage disposal systems. These rules relating to cluster systems provide that these systems be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter or Chapter 317. The requirements are intended to allow flexibility in designs provided they are in accordance with the standards found in this chapter or Chapter 317. The importance for complying with the requirements of Chapter 317 is for those systems whose capabilities would allow for expansion of capacity which exceeds 5,000 gallons per day. A system which exceeds 5,000 gallons per day must be permitted under Chapter 26 of the Water Code and design of a system for over 5,000 gallons shall be in accordance with Chapter 317. This importance will be seen in subdivision developments which utilize cluster systems. Land developments and land subdivided for building construction which will utilize OSSFs for sewage disposal will be calculated by total flow for the development to determine whether permitting is under Chapter 26 or Chapter 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. No changes will be made.

A registered professional engineer asked for clarification on who is authorized to inspect cluster systems constructed under Chapter 317 criteria. In addition, the registered professional engineer and an individual also suggested that the rules be modified to require that the TNRCC be the permitting authority for all cluster systems in the state with flows less than 5,000 gallons per day.

The commission feels that the staff of any appropriately delegated permitting authority are authorized to inspect cluster systems constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter relating to OSSF cluster systems. In regard to the request to modify the rules to require only the TNRCC to be the permitting authority for OSSF cluster systems, the commission believes it has delegated the authority to selected authorized agents to administer the program at a local level. It is the responsibility of that authorized agent to have sufficient expertise to manage and administer the program. The commission under these rules will audit the performance of the authorized agents and require that permitting and enforcement standards be met. In addition, an authorized agent may seek assistance from the staff of the TNRCC on complex permitting and enforcement cases. No changes will be made.

An individual suggested that the proposed rules: 1) do not have adequate technical requirements for the design of collection systems; 2) be modified to require the permitting authority to retain a professional engineer to review and approve plans; 3) be modified to allow the permitting authority the right to refuse to review and permit cluster systems; 4) be modified to require more detailed planning, including deeper soil evaluation and meet the requirements of Chapter 309 of this title; cluster systems which serve contiguous land can not be broken into smaller sections which flow under 5,000 gallons per day to avoid a Chapter 309 permit; and 5) be modified to require continuous flow measurement and reporting to the permitting authority.

The commission disagrees with the first comment. 1) The rules address minimum OSSF design, installation, and operation requirements and provide specific requirements for standard systems and where maximum protection of public health and environmental protection is necessary. By statute, collection systems are addressed by other rules promulgated by this commission. 2) The commission disagrees with this comment. Based on commentary received from local governmental entities, the commission does not believe that small and rural communities would be able to successfully recruit and maintain registered professional engineers employed solely for the purposes of review OSSF plans. Furthermore, the commission does not believe that local governmental entities must employ registered professional engineers to conduct plan reviews for system designs largely exempted from the Engineering Practices Act. 3) The commission believes that the statute and these rules adequately address the prerogative of local governmental entities to adopt more stringent provisions in their commission approved orders. However, local governmental entities operating a commission approved OSSF program must be as stringent as the statute and these rules. 4) The commission disagrees with this comment in part. The commission believes that it cannot provide more specific language addressing planning materials and soils evaluation without exceeding the scope of this rulemaking effort. However, the commission has included the appropriate references to Chapter 309 of this title (relating to Effluent Limitations) where necessary, such as for secondary treatment of effluent. The commission believes that it has modified and added appropriate language in these rules to satisfactorily address the OSSF limitation of 5,000 gallons per day per property. 5) The commission disagrees with this comment. Continuous flow measurements are primarily utilized as a control during the testing of proprietary systems. To require that all OSSF systems maintain continuous flow measurements and report such data to the permitting authority does not address public health and environmental protection equitably nor cost effectively. Historically, the commission does not believe that owners of OSSF systems that exceed their designed and permitted wastewater flows will comply with reporting requirements when their OSSF systems are operating in a state of failure.

A-1 Wastewater Services, Inc. and Kirk's Tractor Service, Inc. recommended that the rules be modified to allow the fee for the cluster system to be the same as the fee for a single OSSF at the time of installation.

The commission disagrees with this comment. The commission or the local governmental entity must recover the administrative cost for design review, inspection, and permit issuance for cluster systems that may not consolidate treatment systems even where the disposal systems have been consolidated. However, local governmental entities may amend their commission approved orders to assess and collect a single permit fee for cluster systems since local governmental entities have the authority to establish their own permitting fees.

A registered sanitarian suggested that the proposed rules do not address the requirements for enforcing the provisions once the permit is issued and the permitting authority should require a perpetual maintenance contract be in force.

The commission believes the performance requirements for a cluster system are the same as any other OSSF described under this chapter and therefore subject to the same enforcement provisions as any other OSSF. The commission feels the provisions of this section are correct in requiring on-going maintenance of the facilities and not to require a perpetual contract. Circumstances are such that a perpetual contract would be unrealistic.

Section 285.7. Cost Recovery Fee.

Lower Colorado River Authority, Austin-Travis County, City of Arlington, Dallas County Health Department and County Judges and Commissioners Association of Texas either requested clarification of who would be required to pay the cost recovery fee or recommended that this section be deleted.

The commission feels the implementation of the provisions of §366.059(b) of the Texas Health and Safety Code needs further review and discussion prior to being implemented. The language under §285.7, Cost Recovery Fee, (as proposed) is deleted from the proposal to allow such consideration and discussion.

SUBCHAPTER B-LOCAL ADMINISTRATION OF OSSF PROGRAM

Section 285.10. Delegation to Authorized Agents.

Williamson County and Cities Health District recommended that a time limit be placed on responding to the potential authorized agent.

The commission believes that timely response to the potential authorized agent is necessary. The commission feels the existing provisions under §285.10(a)(2)(C) direct the executive director to respond to the potential authorized agent within 30 days of the receipt of the proposed order/ordinance. No changes are necessary.

Texas On-Site Wastewater Association recommended the addition of language to §285.10(a)(2)(C) requiring the authorized agent to submit every item more stringent than the standards of the commission's rules to the commission in the form of an order for approval.

The commission feels that this request to modify language of the proposed rules is already clearly embodied in §366.032(b) of the Health and Safety Code and does not need to be repeated in this set of rules.

A registered sanitarian suggested grammatical changes to §285.10(f).

The commission agrees with the suggestion and has modified the language of this subsection.

Amstar Engineering, Inc. suggested that septic tank designers be allowed to utilize the new rules immediately upon adoption and new rules supersede local rules until such time as local rules can be evaluated by the TNRCC; designers should independently choose between choosing the new rules or using the old rules during a six month phase-out period; the rules should provide a phase-out period for the use of the percolation test; and a local authorized agent has developed a manual for non-engineered LPD trench disposal systems, the manual should be revised in accordance with the commission's new rules and cleared through the TNRCC.

The commission believes that upon the effective date of the rules (20 days after the commission files its adopted rules with the Texas Register ) these rules will supersede local rules unless local rules are more stringent than the adopted rules in accordance with §366.032 of the Health and Safety Code. The commission feels these new rules should be implemented immediately in order to provide increased protection for the public health and the environment and not be phased-in over a six month period as suggested by the commenter. The proposed rules have also been modified to delete the percolation test criteria from the rules. The commission feels it is more protective to move as quickly as possible from the current percolation test to the site evaluation process specified under these rules. On the last point, the commission encourages all authorized agents to provide technical assistance to the designers and installers in their area of jurisdiction and such publications need to be consistent with the minimum standards established by the commission. However, the commission feels it is not necessary for the TNRCC to review and approve such publications under these rules. No changes will be made.

SUBCHAPTER C-COMMISSION ADMINISTRATION OF THE OSSF PROGRAM IN AREAS WHERE NO LOCAL ADMINISTRATION EXISTS

Section 285.20. Application Requirements.

Austin-Travis County recommended that additional language be added to §285.20(1) to clarify that "permit approval and submission of planning material is not required for a single residence on tracts of land larger than ten acres".

The commission agrees in part with the suggested language and has modified paragraph (1) to include language showing the statutory exemption to permitting.

Smith County designated representative and a registered sanitarian asked for clarification on whether the provision of §285.20(3) applies to authorized agents and suggested changes to the timeframes specified in the subpart.

The provisions of §285.20(3) apply only to permit applications received by the commission in those areas of the state where an authorized agent does not exist. A local authorized agent can establish different administrative requirements and timeframes, if it chooses to and such requirements do not conflict with statutory requirements. The commission feels the requirements specified in this section are sufficient given the workload and resources available to the agency. No changes will be made.

A registered sanitarian recommended that the rule specify how many inspections are required and at what stage they are to be performed. In addition, the registered sanitarian suggested that the rule require a registered professional engineer or registered sanitarian to submit a final certification of the system to the permitting authority and owner upon completion of construction.

The commission believes it will be difficult to specify the number and/or stages of inspections because of the variety of the different types and sizes of OSSFs the agency will encounter. In addition, the commission does not feel it is necessary at this time to require a final certification by a registered professional engineer or registered sanitarian, since the agency is directly involved in the approval of the installed system. Authorized agents may require such documentation if it so chooses.

A registered sanitarian suggested: 1) it will be difficult to monitor transfers of property, placing requirements on deeds will not be successful and result in unnecessary costs for property owners; and 2) future audits of authorized agents will not be thorough without specific guidelines for inspections.

The commission feels it is necessary to document certain types of systems and situations in the deed or transfer related documents. It is normally through this process that a buyer will be made aware of the type of OSSF system they may be purchasing and what extra maintenance requirements, if any, may need to be performed. As to the last suggestion, the commission believes that it has developed a program under this subchapter for the way this agency will handle the permitting, administration and enforcement of OSSFs. The legislature, with the passage of Chapter 366 of the Health and Safety Code, mandated this agency and its predecessors to encourage this program to be managed at the local level. How a local authorized agent accomplishes the same charge should be left to the local jurisdiction to decide, so long as they perform in such a manner as to protect the public health and the surface and ground waters in the state.

Section 285.21. Additional Application Requirements for Surface Irrigation Systems.

Hays County Environmental Health, Lower Colorado River Authority, Austin-Travis County, and Texas On-Site Wastewater Association suggested that this section be moved out of Subchapter C to either Subchapter A or D.

The commission agrees and has moved this section in its entirety to Subchapter A and will be renumbered in §285.7 in place of the section on Cost Recovery Fees which was deleted based on previous comments. The commission will respond to comments under the original section number so as not to confuse anyone who submitted comments under the rules as proposed.

Kirk's Tractor Service, Inc. suggested that §285.21(a) be modified to not require a flow diagram for proprietary aerobic treatment units, but instead only provide the site specific flow rates.

The commission feels that a flow diagram is necessary to assure that all necessary components are identified as a part of a proposed system in order for the agency to properly evaluate its overall effectiveness. No changes will be made.

A registered sanitarian suggested that site drawings should have minimum requirements specified for submission.

The commission agrees in part and has modified the language to reflect that the listing of items in §285.21(b) is at a minimum and will require any additional information the permitting authority determines to be necessary.

A registered sanitarian suggested that these rules appear to only require a maintenance contract for two years and that the contract should be for the life of the contract. In addition, the registered sanitarian suggested that appropriate fees should be charged to recoup costs of monitoring by the permitting authority.

The commission believes the requirements of this section clearly lay out that the initial contract must be for a minimum of two years (see subsection (d)) and that the surface irrigation system shall remain under a maintenance contract at all times over the life of the system (see §285.21(g)(1)). As to the last suggestion related to fees, the commission feels that one of the primary reasons for requiring that a surface irrigation system be under the supervision of a maintenance company is to assure that the system functions properly and that monitoring and testing would be the responsibility of the maintenance company. To then charge a fee for the permitting authority to monitor would appear to be duplicative and defeat the purpose of having a maintenance company continually monitoring the system.

A registered sanitarian suggests that provisions of §285.21 allow a maintenance provider to avoid state licensing, that registered professional engineers and registered sanitarians should be allowed to provide the maintenance services under these rules, and manufacturers can exclude a qualified individual from taking their training and therefore create a monopoly through the use of these rules. In addition, Austin-Travis County suggested that these rules have not identified a process by which a maintenance company is approved, and how a homeowner can determine if one is approved.

The commission feels that these rules establish the necessary minimum criteria for maintenance companies. It is not the intent of this commission to establish licensing programs for every facet of its regulatory programs, but instead to let private enterprise work in conjunction with regulatory programs. If upon reevaluation of these rules in the next several years, the commission determines that there is a need to change the requirements for a maintenance company based on some of the concerns of the commenters, it will do so as swiftly as possible to appropriately address the situation.

Smith County designated representative suggested that an affidavit can not be added to a real property deed and that subsection (h) of this section needs to be clarified on how the permit is transferred automatically and what the permitting authority and owner must do to accomplish the transfer.

The commission feels that the use of an affidavit provides the necessary communication with future owners of the property to assure that they are informed of the fact that they are responsible for an on-site sewage disposal system on their property. Texas Property Code 12.001 provides that an instrument concerning real property, may be recorded if it has been acknowledged, sworn to with a proper jurisdiction, or proved according to law. The recording of the affidavit puts all potential buyers on notice as to the requirements and responsibilities regarding the on-site system located on that site. An on-site permit is issued in the name of the person who owns the on-site system. Ownership of real property includes ownership of the on-site system. The purpose of this part of the rules is to clearly indicate that the responsibility for the on-site system automatically transfers with title of the property, whether or not there is any requirement to formally transfer ownership.

Texas Society of Professional Engineers pointed out a misspelled word in §285.21(j) and Texas On-Site Wastewater Association suggested specifying the effluent grab samples as representative samples.

The commission agrees with the suggestions and has made the appropriate changes.

An individual suggested that the disinfection design criteria is vague and recommended the following changes: 1) specific performance standards for chlorination or fecal coliform; 2) require continuous chlorination; 3) the use of chlorine solution feeders be specifically mentioned in the rule; and 4) include referrals to standard references and EPA literature on disinfection.

The commission feels the requirements under this section provide sufficient information and criteria to allow the professional designing the surface irrigation system to properly integrate the necessary components to assure that the effluent being applied is disinfected to the appropriate levels. In regard to the specific recommendations, the commission believes: 1) that this section and Table IV of §285.91(4) of this title (relating to Tables) provides the necessary performance standards for chlorination and fecal coliform; 2) these rules establish the minimum requirement which specifies that the effluent would need to be appropriately disinfected prior to application, continuous chlorination may not be appropriate in all circumstances; 3) it is not necessary to mention specific types of chlorination devices in the rule; and 4) the commission feels it is not necessary to limit design criteria associated with disinfection related to OSSFs since this technology is continually changing.

Section 285.22. Fees.

Due to the movement of the previous section (§285.21. Additional Application Requirements for Surface Irrigation Systems) to Subchapter A of this title (relating to General Provisions) this section on Fees will be renumbered to §285.21. However, all response to comments will be under the original section number so as not to confuse anyone who submitted comments under the rules as proposed.

Kirk's Tractor Service, Inc. suggested increasing fees over a five year period; a registered professional engineer suggested the fees schedule should be scrapped based on analysis of Mr. Minick; and a registered sanitarian suggested that the fees for this program not be listed in these rules, but in a separate document so that the rules do not have to be changed every time you need to change the fees.

The commission believes it has the clear authority under §366.058 of the Health and Safety Code to establish a reasonable fee to cover the costs of operating an OSSF program in the state. The permit fees established under this section are in line with fees being charged across the state by authorized agents operating an OSSF program at a local level to recover their costs. The commission further feels that the establishment of these fees through the rulemaking process is the appropriate method to allow persons affected by this program to offer comments and suggestions on any proposal the commission may have regarding OSSF fees. No changes will be made.

SUBCHAPTER D-PLANNING, CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION STANDARDS FOR OSSFs

Section 285.30. Site Evaluation.

Austin-Travis County, Texas Society of Professional Engineers and several registered professional engineers stated that the commission must present the public with all technical data justifying any changes to these rules.

The commission feels that it has provided the necessary public review and input into the revisions of this chapter. The staff of the commission have been working on revising this chapter for over three years. In addition to the current rulemaking process, the staff have provided draft proposals to the public, conducted 11 public meetings across the state to solicit comments and suggestions on the proposals and met with a 14 member ad hoc advisory committee made up of local government officials, installers, registered sanitarians, registered professional engineers, trade associations manufacturers, homebuilder and attorneys. Changes in the technical standards in these rules have been open to the public for review and comment and fully discussed with the ad hoc committee.

Hays County Environmental Health and a registered sanitarian suggested that many parts of the state have caliche soils and these rules do not address the suitability of this soil type.

The commission believes that caliche soils are not a specific class of soils unto itself. Accordingly, the commission has deleted the use of the term in these rules and replaced it with the term "soils". Depending upon its structural makeup, it can be highly variable in its qualities to properly treat the effluent from a septic tank or other type treatment unit. The commission feels that upon a proper site evaluation a determination can be made as to the type or soil class any soil, including a caliche type soil, may be, and therefore determine whether it is suitable for a standard type disposal system.

Wastewater Technologies, Inc. suggests that a clear standard be established which requires a minimum separation of two feet between restrictive horizon and the lowest elevation of effluent application within each disposal area. The two foot requirement should replace the requirement found currently proposed in §285.33(b)(3)(E). In order to assume equal treatment of all subsurface irrigation practices, the same restriction should be imposed on low pressure dosed drainfields, thus the language in §285.33(c)(1)(iv) should also reflect a requirement of two feet of separation to the restrictive horizon.

The commission disagrees with the comment. Pressure dosed systems distribute effluent evenly and therefore do not require the vertical separation required for standard drainfields.

Wastewater Technologies, Inc. recommended borings should be required to penetrate "restrictive horizon" encountered within the two foot separation zone unless the auger is rejected. Clayey subsoils can be suitable for disposal if application rates and resting periods are properly monitored and controlled.

The commission feels that proprietary and non-standard systems can be used in clayey soils, it is standard systems that cannot (except situations using ET beds, etc.).

Wastewater Technologies, Inc. suggested more specific criteria be established for the number of borings to be taken. A disposal system that carries 4,000 to 5,000 gallons per day (gpd) is likely to be very large and could include several areas.

The commission agrees in part and has modified §285.30(a) to insert a new sentence after the first sentence that reads "In areas of the high soil variability, the permitting authority may require additional soil borings or backhoe pits be taken".

Texas On-Site Wastewater Association suggested that the §285.30(a) be modified to allow a limited soil evaluation where surface irrigation will be used.

The commission feels that a thorough site evaluation needs to be performed on all potential OSSF sites to determine the total range of options that exist for the proper treatment and disposal of domestic effluent.

Austin-Travis County suggested that the soil analysis should be done with back-hoe pits only and they should be done to a depth of four feet not two feet. An individual suggested that two feet was a reduction in environmental protection and that the rules needed to increase the number of required test pits or boreholes. Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District suggested that soil borings to two feet below the excavation is not necessary in many areas of the state. A registered professional engineer suggested that the language of subsection (a) be reworded to look for the most restrictive soil class within two feet of the bottom of the excavation.

The commission believes that evaluation of soils two feet below the proposed bottom of the drainfield is protective of the public health and the environment. The commission has chosen to require the site evaluation as the method to properly evaluate all the factors at a site and determine whether a standard disposal system can be used. This method provides for the flexibility of soil conditions that we have in this state. Two feet of appropriate soil is sufficient to provide the necessary final treatment for a standard system. An OSSF system should be planned based on a thorough evaluation of the site, with one of the most critical features being the appropriate evaluation of the soils in the vicinity of the disposal area. The commission feels that the boreholes and back-hoe pits are both acceptable methods for performing a soil analysis. However, we do agree that the permitting authority needs to be given flexibility in determining whether additional borings or pits are necessary to properly evaluate the soils in areas where highly variable soils exist, and we also agree that the language in subsection (a) is unclear about the area of evaluation for the restrictive horizon. Changes are being made to provide more flexibility to permitting authorities and to clarify the intent of the extent of the evaluation below the excavation.

Fort Worth-Tarrant County Public Health Department suggested that subsection did not address soil with exactly 30% gravel.

The commission agrees and has made the appropriate changes.

Austin-Travis County suggested that §285.30(c) be modified to not require a soil analysis for Class IV soils.

The commission agrees and has modified the language to reflect that a soil analysis need not be performed for Class IV soils.

Brazos County Health suggested that the language of §285.30(e) be modified to replace "shall" with "may" in the last sentence to allow the possibility of standard systems going where a restrictive horizon is within two feet of the bottom of the excavation.

The commission disagrees with the suggested change. This section is meant to be determinative of the type of soil in the area of treatment for a standard disposal system. If a restrictive horizon exists within two feet of the bottom of the excavation, there will be a strong possibility that sufficient treatment of the effluent will not occur and the OSSF will fail.

An individual suggested that §285.30(f) be modified to specify all the requirements that a site evaluator must evaluate as a part of the site evaluation process related to ground water.

The commission feels that such specific requirements should be left to the training that is required under Subchapter F of this chapter (relating to Registration, Certification and/or Training Requirements for Installers, Apprentices, Site Evaluators or Designated Representatives) rather than specified in this section.

Hays County Environmental Health suggested that §285.30(g) be modified to restrict conventional systems to slopes less than 15-20%.

The commission believes that the suggestion would be overly restrictive as a minimum standard. If properly planned, a conventional system can properly function at slopes up to 30%. Authorized agents may restrict OSSFs to a higher standard in accordance with §366.032 of the Health and Safety Code.

A registered sanitarian suggested that the special planning requirements mentioned in §285.30(h) should be spelled out or defined. An individual suggested that the language in subsection (h) of this section be modified to be specific on how tanks float and specifically mention that fiberglass and plastic tanks are more prone to float. Another individual suggested further changes to subsection (h) as follows: 1) referrals to the appropriate Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) documents; 2) sites located in the 100-year floodplain should have the OSSF designed to be waterproof, resist floatation and equipped with one-way valves to restrict movement of wastewater back to dwelling; 3) sites within 10-year floodplain will not be allowed a soil absorption system; and 4) all portions of the OSSF are excluded from the floodway.

The commission believes the special planning requirements should be identified by the installer, registered sanitarian or registered professional engineer based on a site evaluation. There are a lot of different alternatives that could be utilized in this situation. It is not necessary to identify all alternatives in these rules.

In regard to the comment on tank flotation, the commission feels that the existing language is sufficient to identify this as an issue that needs to be addressed during the site evaluation and the subsequent application process for a permit to operate an OSSF. All tanks under selected circumstances have the potential to float, it is not necessary to single out any type or types of tanks in these rules.

As to specific requirements regarding the location of OSSFs in floodplains, the commission agrees in part with the first two comments and has modified the subsection to clarify its intent and offer further definition of what additional information is needed and what impacts need to be properly addressed. In regard to the last two comments, the commission feels these suggested modifications are overly restrictive and do not allow the permitting authority the flexibility to assess the site-specific situations and make a case-by-case determination of whether an OSSF can be installed in the described situations.

Smith County designated representative, Hays County Environmental Health, Williamson County and Cities Health District and Amstar Engineering, Inc. recommended that §285.30(i) is no longer needed since the percolation test is no longer the sole criteria for determining site suitability. San Angelo-Tom Green County Health Department and Hays County Environmental Health asked for clarification on how to apply the results of the test and whether the test was mandatory. City of Denton, Texas Society of Professional Engineers, Community Environmental Services, Inc. and an individual expressed that this subsection should be modified to require the percolation test rather than it being optional, especially if a representative soil type can not be identified. Lower Colorado River Authority, Austin-Travis County, Texas On-Site Wastewater Association and a registered professional engineer suggested that language of the subsection be modified to clarify that the percolation test was an optional test. Austin-Travis County recommended that the 24-hour requirement in paragraph (5) be deleted. Fort Worth-Tarrant County Public Health Department suggested that the presoaking and timing procedures need to be further defined. A registered sanitarian recommended that paragraph (5) be modified to allow filling the hole all the way to the surface to avoid excessive wicking.

The commission believes that the site evaluation should replace the existing percolation test as the mechanism by which to determine whether a standard disposal system may be used in the state. The commission agrees with commenters that this subsection should be eliminated and has deleted §285.30(i) under the proposed rules and renumbered the remaining subsections.

In addition, the commission feels it is necessary to clarify that during the period of time between the effective date of these rules and the date when site evaluations can no longer be performed except by an individual holding a valid site evaluator certificate (540 days after the effective date), only installers holding valid certificates, registered professional engineers, registered sanitarians and designated representatives will be recognized as individuals who can submit site evaluation recommendations to a permitting authority for consideration.

Williamson County and Cities Health District asked for clarification on whether a standard disposal system could be used in unsuitable soil if non-standard treatment was used. Texas Society of Professional Engineers recommended language changes to §285.30(j) eliminating standard treatment in unsuitable soil and allowing a standard disposal system with a non-standard treatment.

The commission feels the main purpose of performing a site assessment is to determine whether the soils and other factors at the proposed site will allow the use of a standard disposal system. If these factors are determined to be unsuitable, a standard disposal system should not be used. However, this determination does not, of itself, limit the use of a standard treatment system in a non-standard design. No changes will be made.

Austin-Travis County and a registered sanitarian suggested changes to §285.30(j)(3) recognizing the use of evapotranspiration as a standard disposal method.

The commission agrees and has modified the language to distinguish subsurface and surface standard disposal systems for overall site suitability.

Section 285.31. Setback and Separation Requirements.

Austin-Travis County recommended that the term "fences" be deleted from the section and expressed overall concern about future impacts from the reductions in setbacks allowed by the proposed rules. An individual indicated that there was a conflict between this chapter as proposed and proposed new Chapter 238 of this title (relating to Water Well Drillers) regarding the placement of a well near a property line.

The commission agrees with the first comment and has modified the language of the section to delete the term "fences". On the issue of concern about reductions in setbacks, the commission believes that the use of the site evaluation method to determine the usage of a standard disposal system will help in eliminating the concerns for the use of the higher setback requirements under the existing rules. In regard to the potential conflict between these rules and the proposed Water Well Drillers rules, the commission has found that the two sets of rules are consistent in regard to location of well in the proximity of an OSSF and property lines.

Section 285.32. Criteria for Sewage Treatment Systems.

Austin-Travis County, Holmes Concrete Pipe, Smith County designated representative, Texas On-Site Wastewater Association, and Kirk's Tractor Service, Inc. raised objections to the proposed size (at least 15-inches) of septic tank cleanout ports indicating that a 15-inch opening in small septic tanks would create structural problems and that changes to fabrication forms would increase product cost.

The commission agrees with the concern that 15-inch cleanout ports on all septic tank sizes may reduce structural integrity. The commission will revise the proposal to indicate a 12-inch cleanout port requirement as recommended by Austin-Travis County and Texas On-Site Wastewater Association. The commission does not believe that septic tank prices will substantially increase based on the revised cleanout port requirement.

An installer commented that inspection and cleanout ports should not be centered over the "T" in tanks and that risers should be extended to ground level.

The commission feels the proposed rule sufficiently addresses inspection and cleanout port positioning as not centered over the "T" in tanks. The commission disagrees that risers must be extended to ground level as this increases system cost unnecessarily. Extending risers to ground level is an option, not a requirement in the proposed rules.

North Texas Marketing commented that prohibiting steel lids will drive up the cost.

The commission disagrees with this comment. Metal tanks are prohibited in the current rules and metal tanks and lids were not considered in the proposed rules because their structural integrity is compromised by long term contact with the ground and sewage.

A registered sanitarian commented that the proposed rules should address depths to tank lids for load bearing traffic and whether tank cleanout ports must be sealed watertight.

The commission believes that the establishment of load bearing depths for lids of any tank should follow the specifications of the tank manufacturer. Likewise, tank manufacturers are responsible for producing a tank that will remain water-tight.

Wallis Concrete, Inc. suggested that the frequency of site visits and performance of required testing should be at least on a monthly basis, with the exception of aerobic units utilizing monitors.

The commission disagrees with this comment. This suggestion would substantially increase the cost of on-site sewage facilities unnecessarily. Monitoring requirements are already addressed for proprietary and non-standard systems.

Smith County designated representative requested clarification whether the 3-inch drop from inlet to outlet is located in the first tank or the second tank or any combination.

The commission feel this condition may be satisfied as a combination as long as there is an overall 3-inch drop. Figures 6 and 7 of these rules (§285.90) indicate the 3-inch drop in the first tank for illustrative purposes only.

San Angelo-Tom Green County Health Department questioned the reason for restricting designs of poured-in-place concrete tanks to registered professional engineers.

The commission disagrees with the comment because registered professional engineers are qualified by education and licensing to address the mechanical design issues for poured-in-place concrete.

An individual commented that the reference to American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) designation C 1227-93 (Standard Specification for Precast Concrete Septic Tanks) should be specific and included as an appendix.

The commission disagrees with this comment that the reference is not specific and should be included as an appendix. The reference in these rules specifically addresses two sections within this ASTM standard. The appendices do not contain nationally accepted and widely available standards referenced in this proposed rule as a matter of brevity and reducing unnecessary printing and distribution costs.

Robert Morriss, Inc., Texas On-Site Wastewater Association, Kirk's Tractor Service, Inc., and Austin-Travis County commented that pretreatment tanks should meet the same structural standards as detailed for septic tanks.

The commission agrees with these comments and has revised the proposed rules accordingly.

Wallis Concrete, Inc. questioned whether or not local-level enforcement of these standards (ASTM C 1227-93) will occur.

Local governmental authorities shall enforce the requirements of this chapter where the commission has delegated the administration of an on-site sewage program to a local governmental entity.

Fort Worth Water Department and Kirk's Tractor Service, Inc. commented that backfill and cushion requirements for all tanks should be addressed.

The commission believes these rules sufficiently address backfill and cushion requirements for all tanks in §285.32(a)(1)(J).

Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District agreed with the commission's proposal to include pretreatment tanks for aerobic treatment plants.

The commission thanks this commenter.

Austin-Travis County commented that tanks must be tested for leakage after installation.

The commission disagrees with this comment since a leakage test increases system installation cost and may not be conclusive. Local governments wishing to impose this requirement may do so as long as it is contained within their approved delegation order from the commission.

Robert Morriss, Inc. commented that filter beds should not be limited to the use of an impervious lined pit.

The commission agrees with this comment and has revised the proposed rule to include the use of tanks.

Hays County Environmental Health, Texas On-Site Wastewater Association, a registered sanitarian and a registered engineer commented on intermittent sand filter loading rate, maintenance contracts, and other details may not be sufficient for promoting their use or listing them as a standard design. Amstar Engineering, Inc. suggested sand media, waste loadings, hydraulic and other engineering matters should be performed by a registered professional engineer and such a design should not be considered as a standard treatment process. A registered engineer suggested the commission consult the states of Oregon and California on this subject.

The commission disagrees with these comments. The loading rate and standard design specifications represent nationally accepted data. The commission believes that requiring maintenance contracts for standard systems will increase system cost unnecessarily. During the construction of this proposal, the commission consulted with the states of Oregon and Washington. The specifications for intermittent sand filters contained within this proposal reflect specifications from the State of Washington.

Clearstream Wastewater Systems, Inc. commented that product approval of proprietary aerobic treatment systems before adoption appears to be a product that is approved forever.

The commission agrees and has revised the proposed rule to clarify that retesting shall occur under the requirements of National Sanitation Foundation, International (NSF) Certification Policies for Wastewater Treatment Devices (1991).

Hydro-Action, NSF, Texas On-Site Wastewater Association, commented that the proposed rules should reflect the current date of NSF Standard 40 and Certification Policies for Wastewater Treatment Devices (Policies).

The commission disagrees with these comments because these proposed rules would have to be republished and commented upon again in order to incorporate the new NSF Standard 40 and Policies revision dates. At the time the proposed rules were published, the commission was unaware the final revision of the NSF Standard 40 and Policies had taken place.

Hydro-Action, NSF, and Texas On-Site Wastewater Association commented that the retesting provisions for aerobic treatment systems is contained within Certification Policies for Wastewater Treatment Devices, not NSF Standard 40.

The commission agrees and has revised the proposed rule accordingly.

Norwalk Wastewater Equipment Company and NSF commented that the proposed rule should not consider aerobic treatment systems for approval when these systems were not tested by an American National Standards Institute (ANSI) accredited institution.

The commission disagrees with these comments because there are already manufacturers producing aerobic treatment systems which have been tested and listed by the executive director in accordance with the existing rules. All units will eventually need to be retested in accordance with NSF Certification Policies for Wastewater Treatment Devices by NSF or an ANSI accredited institution.

McGrew Construction Company, Inc. and Ecological Tanks, Inc. endorsed the adoption of Chapter 285, as proposed, regarding the testing and approval of aerobic treatment systems.

The commission thanks the commenters.

NSF supports the reference to NSF Standard 40 and NSF listed Class I systems.

The commission thanks NSF for its comments.

San Angelo-Tom Green County Health Department requested clarification on how long must a manufacturer guarantee its system.

The commission does not require that any manufacturer state a specific guarantee period for a proprietary product. However, the manufacturer is responsible for their product during the completion of the two year test period and five year conditional acceptance period in order for any manufacturer to receive agency approval of its product.

An individual commented that proprietary system approvals need to include the requirement that a report be provided at the