Washington Watch: Senate attracts outsider dollars
Be prepared. The outsiders are coming.

The 2014 Senate election featuring U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., with U.S. Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, as her best-funded competition, is still a year away, but the out-of-state money is already flowing in heavily with much more to come.

The first cannons going off come from the Virginia-based Americans for Prosperity conservative group that is funding ads that relentlessly attack Landrieu for her support of the health care law, known as “Obamacare.”

The first ad contends Landrieu went against the wishes of Louisiana residents. “Instead, (Landrieu) sided with Barack Obama. Now, we’re paying the price,” the commercial states.

Americans for Prosperity is a political advocacy group co-founded by the billionaire Koch brothers — David and Charles — of Koch Industries Inc., of Witchta, Kan. The group is a nonprofit that falls under the controversial 501(c)(4) classification that can spend unlimited amounts of money without disclosing its donors.

Such nonprofits are supposed to be “social welfare” groups that can participate in “political education” as long as politics do not represent their primary purpose. As such, the classification was the one highlighted in the IRS scandal this year about targeting for extra scrutiny the applications of tea party groups for 501(c)(4) status.

Americans for Prosperity is just the first of likely many such groups that will get involved in the Senate race on both political sides over the next 11 months or so. For instance, last year, the tea party-aligned FreedomWorks for America Super PAC ran a campaign in southwestern Louisiana in support of former U.S. Rep. Jeff Landry’s unsuccessful congressional race.

While such groups cannot legally coordinate with the candidates, Louisiana is a relatively small state and some shoulder brushing probably will occur.

On Wednesday, for instance, both Cassidy and Americans for Prosperity had events at the same Wow Café and Wingery in Covington within 30 minutes of each other.

Americans for Prosperity publicized its event as a “Wasteful spending and Obamacare town hall” luncheon with Jeff Landry at noon on Wednesday.

Cassidy’s event was scheduled for 30 minutes prior at 11:30 a.m. at the same location. The event was billed as a visit with the Northshore Republican Men’s Club and the Northshore Republican Professional Women.

But a Democratic tracker following Cassidy around looking for potential slipups — Republicans are “tracking” Landrieu, too — filmed the events seemingly intermingling and Cassidy chatting with Americans for Prosperity staffers.

“Thank y’all for the ads you’re running,” Cassidy told one of the Americans for Prosperity workers. “Obviously, you care deeply about our country, and Obamacare is a bad thing.”

Joel DiGrado, Cassidy’s campaign manager, said the congressman simply agreed to an invitation from the Northshore groups.

This is not to contend that Cassidy is breaking any laws, but just that Senate campaigns are expansive and expensive affairs, especially since the 2010 Citizens United Supreme Court decision that ruled that some third-party groups can spend unlimited amounts of money on campaigns through free speech protections.

Republicans will continue to try to tie Landrieu to the Affordable Care Act. Blog postings and emails this past week noting the senior senator’s vote and news that nearly 93,000 Louisiana residents would have to change their individual health care policies to comply with the law.

Democrats will continue to blame Gov. Bobby Jindal for not helping the health care law work better in Louisiana by accepting the Medicaid expansion to insure about 265,000 more state residents. Louisiana Democratic Party Chairwoman Karen Peterson called it the “unconscionable … Jindal gap.”

As for Americans for Prosperity attacking Landrieu, the PolitiFact.com fact-checking journalism group deemed at least one part of the advertisement as “mostly false.” The contention is that new “Obamacare” mandates “are already reducing full-time employment.”

The Americans for Prosperity assertion is that businesses are eyeing the 2015 employer mandate and moving employees from full-time to part-time status in order to have fewer than 50 full-time employees and not have to offer them health insurance coverage. In reality, part-time employment has decreased slightly since the height of the recession.

“It’s a plausible scenario, but as of now, it’s largely speculative, with the evidence anecdotal rather than statistical,” PolitiFact ruled.

“Across the economy as a whole, part-time employment is high, but independent observers say that has to do with the recession and the weak recovery rather than Obama’s health care law. We rate the Americans for Prosperity claim Mostly False.”

Jordan Blum is chief of The Advocate’s Washington bureau. His email address is jblum@theadvocate.com.