Human Meat Found In McDonald’s Meat Factory
According to fitbodyfitpirit.com, there is one report which contains a shocking audio confession by a man claiming McDonald’s uses human meat as a filler in their 100% beef hamburgers along with proved facts that McDonald’s has been accused of using worm meat fillers was published recently.

This shocking report impelled food inspectors to investigate the matter further. What is even more shocking, allegedly they have found human and horse meat in the freezers of an Oklahoma City McDonald’s meat factory. In addition, inspectors found human meat in several trucks on their way to deliver the burgers to the fast food restaurants.

There are other reports that suggest that upon inspecting McDonald’s factories and food restaurants throughout the country, food authorities found human meat in even 90% of the locations, while horse meat was found in 65% of the locations.

Lloyd Harrison is FBI agent, and for Huzler he stated: “The worst part is that it’s not only human meat, it’s child meat. The body parts were found across the US factories and were deemed too small to be adult body parts. This is truly horrible.”

When it comes to cannibalism it originated thousands of years ago. Actually there are few tribes today that still practice it as a cultural cult.

Unfortunately we can conclude that cannibalism is present in the modern world. In 2013 a North Korean man was sentenced to death for killing his children for food. In America the people who supported eating human meat, Jeffrey Dahmer and Albert Fish, were proclaimed insane.

After these investigations and breakthroughs, the public and consumers are expecting answers from McDonald’s fast food restaurants. The question is how long has this human meat been used? Where did those children come from?

It is fact that McDonald’s facilities are under thorough investigation and authorities are hopeful to have all of these questions answered as soon as possible. Well, our advice is at the meantime to avoid these places and their food altogether!

All rights belong to the fitbodyfitspirit.com