Why is Democrat Candidate Jill McCabe Hiding?
Dr. Jill McCabe, Democrat candidate for the Virginia Senate in the 13th district, recently got a 100% rating from Planned Parenthood because of her pledge to fight against oversight or additional regulations of abortion clinics.

Oversight and investigations are clearly needed in the wake of the Planned Parenthood scandal which has uncovered the common and illegal practice of selling baby body parts.

The third Planned Parenthood video was released this week showing an aborted baby while Planned Parenthood doctors discussed how much money they could get for his various baby parts. I won’t post that video here because I cannot bear to watch it again but you can view ithere.

Jill McCabe released a statement to the press indicating her strong support of Planned Parenthood, despite the Planned Parenthood scandal rocking the country. In a recent interview McCabe said she supports the practices of Planned Parenthood:

“I’m a doctor, and I take care of patients, including women,” McCabe said when asked whether she still welcomes Planned Parenthood’s support. “Women need health care choices and Planned Parenthood provides that. That’s kind of the end of it for me.”

Really? There are no other clinics or hospitals that can provide these services to women? Why must she support an abortion mill?

Planned Parenthood has endorsed Dr. Jill McCabe because of her promise to fight for abortions including late term abortions because larger baby body parts are more profitable. Disgusting. How can we have a candidate for office who supports these vile practices?

Dr. McCabe has hidden herself from the public throughout this campaign. She won’t tell the public on her Facebook page or Twitter feed where or how they can meet the candidate. There is no way to reach the candidate. During the rare appearances by Jill McCabe, her campaign staff act more like body guards, standing as a buffer between Jill and the public. One staff member will stay with her and the other will wade into the crowd to find friendly faces and lead them back to the candidate so they can hold court with the queen….oh, I mean candidate. However, only those who have been properly vetted by the staff members can speak to Jill McCabe. Even her website shows no way to contact her. All of McCabe’s events are private and by invitation only. The public is not welcome, ever.

It’s obvious why she’s hiding from the public, because of the outrage over Planned Parenthood practices. However, if Jill McCabe can’t be bothered to ask for your vote now – imagine how little she’ll care about voters if she’s elected. Most candidates are eager to speak to the public – it’s not a nuisance. But she wants nothing to do with the public. She wants nothing to do with those pesky voters.

We need to get behind Senator Black, a stalwart in protecting women and their unborn children. Senator Black is always available to voters. He’s out in public every single day meeting with voters. Senator Black really enjoys meeting with the people and learning their concerns, unlike the recluse Dr. McCabe. Senator Black wants to know how to best represent us, he wants to know our views. He’s not hiding from anyone, ever.

Because it’s unlikely any of us will ever see Jill McCabe, I’ve attached a photo of her to this post.