Jeb knocks Hillary's record in Senate and at State
New GOP presidential candidate Jeb Bush is wasting no time targeting the likely Democratic nominee, calling Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonFox News host: Comey sounds like an emotional 'schoolgirl' Clinton was under investigation when campaign denied reports, Comey says With Afghanistan, loyalty is a fickle thing MORE’s record as secretary of State a failure and needling her wary relationship with the press.

“I think she’s smart. I think she loves the country. I don’t ascribe bad motives for people that I don’t agree with. But as a senator, I think she passed -- she has her name on three laws in eight years,” Bush said in an interview on Fox News’s Hannity to air Tuesday night.

“As secretary of State, in all honesty, the things she’s known for, the reset [with Russia], the pulling back of our commitments, Libya, to put aside Benghazi, Libya in general. It turns out there was a complete failure.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Clinton sponsored three laws during her Senate tenure that became law, but co-sponsored an additional 74.

Bush, who announced his presidential bid on Monday, also attempted to draw a contrast with Clinton over his willingness to address the media. Clinton has only held one major press conference since she announced in April, but her campaign has promised that she’ll be more available following her first rally last Saturday.

The GOP frontrunner also criticized the Clinton camp for reports it shut out a Daily Mail reporter from traveling with the pool of campaign trail reporters who share their observations with the rest of the media.

“I’m going to make mistakes. I can guarantee you that. I’m not going to hide from people that don’t agree with me. And if they’re people in the press, I’m not going to say, ‘I’m sorry, you can’t come. I’m sorry I’m not going to answer questions,’” Bush said.

"That’s ridiculous. And that’s what she’s done."

Bush also addressed suggestions his connection to former Presidents George H.W. Bush, his father, and George W. Bush, his brother, could hurt him on the trail. He said that he’s “blessed” by his extraordinary parents and that he loves his brother who left office in 2009 with plummeting approval ratings.

“I'm blessed to be Jeb Bush. But I know if I'm going to be successful, I have to make my own way as a candidate,” he said.

“No one wins this by, you know, heredity.”

Bush also reiterated his stance on immigration, a potential landmine for him in the GOP primary. He previously supported a path to citizenship for those in the country illegally, a stance not in line with his party's base, but he’s walked that back.

“If we had a guest worker program along with securing the border, there’d be people coming seasonally to do the work in the fields and other things that are essential for our economy and then going back home,” he said, adding that border security has to be the “first priority.”

Bush’s long-awaited announcement of his candidacy brought another major player to the ever-crowding GOP field. He’s now off to tour the early primary states of Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina, and Nevada.