Trump questions Clinton’s religion
Donald Trump Donald John TrumpJulián Castro: Presidential candidates should be required to release tax returns Hillary Clinton says Assange must 'answer for what he has done' after arrest Herman Cain expected to withdraw from consideration for Fed: report MORE questioned Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonHillary Clinton says Assange must 'answer for what he has done' after arrest Hillicon Valley: Assange faces US charges after arrest | Trump says WikiLeaks 'not my thing' | Uber officially files to go public | Bezos challenges retail rivals on wages | Kremlin tightens its control over internet Gabbard: Assange arrest is a threat to journalists MORE’s commitment to her Christian faith on Tuesday, saying that little is known about her spiritual life even though she’s been in the public eye for decades.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaking to a group of top social conservative evangelical Christian leaders at a gathering in New York City, Trump said, “we don't know anything about Hillary in terms of religion.”

“Now, she's been in the public eye for years and years, and yet there's no — there's nothing out there,” Trump said. “There's like nothing out there. It's going to be an extension of Obama but it's going to be worse, because with Obama you had your guard up. With Hillary you don't, and it's going to be worse.”

The meeting was closed to the press but E.W. Webb, a faith leader on hand for the event, posted video of the remarks.

Clinton does not speak frequently about being a Methodist, but she has opened up about it on several occasions on the campaign trail this year.

Trump on Tuesday also said that while it’s important to pray for everyone, that those one hand shouldn’t be “politically correct” by praying for the nation’s leaders who are “selling the evangelicals down the tubes.”

“People were saying, some of the people were saying, 'Let's pray for our leaders,'” Trump said.

“I said, 'Well, you can pray for your leaders' — and I agree with that, pray for everyone — but what you really have to do is pray to get everybody out to vote for one specific person.

“And we can't be, again, politically correct and say we pray for all of our leaders, because all of your leaders are selling Christianity down the tubes, selling the evangelicals down the tubes,” Trump said. “And it's a very, very, very, very bad thing that's happening.”