Nevada Republican enjoys 56-point lead on primary rival
Rep. Joe Heck (R-Nev.) holds an astounding 56-point lead over GOP opponent Sharron Angle as the two compete in a Nevada primary.

The winner will take on the Democratic nominee in a general election battle to succeed Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid Harry ReidBill O'Reilly: Politics helped kill Kate Steinle, Zarate just pulled the trigger Tax reform is nightmare Déjà vu for Puerto Rico Ex-Obama and Reid staffers: McConnell would pretend to be busy to avoid meeting with Obama MORE (D-Nev.), who is retiring.

ADVERTISEMENT

new poll conducted by Public Opinion Strategies for Senate Leadership Fund, a super-PAC run by allies of Senate Majority Leader(R-Ky.), found Heck leading Angle, 67 to 11 percent, according to Jon Ralston, a veteran Nevada political journalist.

The poll also found that both GOP candidates have high name recognition, but Heck has a positive favorability rating of 66 to 8 percent, compared to Angle, who has a negative rating of 21 to 47 percent.

The survey’s findings should trigger a big sigh of relief for establishment Republicans who expected Heck to have an uncontested GOP primary so that he could focus on a likely general election match-up with former Nevada Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto (D).

In 2010, Angle emerged from a heated GOP Senate primary as the nominee.

She was endorsed by several conservative outside groups, but lost to Reid by nearly 6 points despite a GOP electoral wave and the rise of the Tea Party. Gaffes on the campaign trail and criticism for avoiding the press appeared to hurt Angle.

The open Nevada Senate seat is one of the few Republican targets this cycle as the party seeks to maintain its majority.

Democrats need to net five Senate seats to regain a majority — unless they retain the White House. Then a net gain of four seats would give them the majority, with the vice president breaking a 50-50 tie.

The poll was conducted from March 28 to 30 and surveyed 500 likely GOP primary voters via phone. The margin of error was 4.4 percentage points.