H.R.1078 - 101st Congress (1989-1990): Global Warming Prevention Act of 1989
There is one summary for H.R.1078. Bill summaries are authored by CRS.

Shown Here:

Introduced in House (02/22/1989)

Global Warming Prevention Act of 1989 - Establishes as national goals: (1) that the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere be reduced from 1988 levels by at least 20 percent by the year 2000 through a mix of Federal and State energy policies; and (2) the establishment of an International Global Agreement on the Atmosphere by 1992. Requires the Secretary of Energy (the Secretary) and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to report to the Congress within two years regarding whether a higher level of carbon dioxide emissions reduction is desirable after 2000, together with any necessary policy actions and their costs and benefits.

Title I: National Least-Cost Energy Plan - Requires the Secretary to prepare for the President, and transmit to the Congress, a new National Least-Cost Energy Plan in lieu of other authorized national energy plans. Directs the Secretary to implement such plan immediately. Outlines a program for public involvement in the formulation of the Plan. Directs the Secretary to establish an intervenor funding mechanism based upon certain State models. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1990 through 1992. Requires designated Secretaries to prepare reports for inclusion in the Plan with respect to: (1) all government subsidies for energy-related expenditures; (2) waste reduction options and recycling; (3) tree plantings to offset carbon dioxide emissions; and (4) transportation modes to reduce carbon-dioxide emissions. Amends the Department of Energy Organization Act to repeal the National Energy Policy Plan.

Title II: Energy Efficiency - Part A: Energy Efficiency Policy - Directs the Secretary to grant the highest priority to energy efficiency improvements in: (1) energy-consuming devices; (2) federally owned and leased buildings and equipment; (3) federally assisted housing; and (4) the Federal vehicle fleet. Mandates that the President's budget request for FY 1991 through 1994 include recommendations for the increased efficiency of energy-consuming devices. Directs the Secretary to establish an Energy Research Advisory Board Panel on end-use energy technologies. Requires the Panel to report annually to the Energy Research Advisory Board on its assessment of promising energy efficiency research and development opportunities and policies. Requires the Secretary to submit to the Congress: (1) a long-term research and development plan that accelerates by five years the current Department of Energy multiyear program goals for energy efficiency; and (2) an estimate of the funding increase needed to achieve such accelerated goals. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1993.

Directs the National Institute of Standards and Technology to provide financial assistance in consultation to ten research centers to achieve multiple improvements in energy-intensive industrial and manufacturing processes. Sets forth an operations timetable for such centers. Authorizes appropriations for such centers for FY 1991 through 1993.

Directs the Secretary to: (1) establish energy efficiency goals resulting in specified primary energy savings for federally owned or leased buildings, as well as federally assisted housing; and (2) include the use of renewable forms of energy within the energy efficiency options for such buildings. Authorizes appropriations for such program for FY 1990 through 1992.

Requires the Secretaries of Energy and the Department of Housing and Urban Development to convene a meeting of housing industry members to select a not-for-profit organization to administer a uniform nationwide home energy rating system. Mandates that such organization contract with the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Center for Building Sciences by a certain deadline. Authorizes appropriations for such organization for FY 1990 through 1993.

Mandates that certain institutions which offer federally assisted home mortgage loans take measures to encourage cost-effective energy efficiency improvements based upon a home energy audit and rating scheme.

Directs the Secretary to promulgate energy efficiency standards for incandescent and fluorescent lamps and windows.

Requires the Secretary to: (1) implement a research, development, and demonstration program on technologies to reduce chlorofluorocarbon use; (2) expand the Department of Energy's existing technology transfer initiative on least-cost electric utility planning; and (3) implement a least-cost gas utility initiative.

Requires the Secretary of Transportation to: (1) establish an evaluation program regarding car-pooling arrangements and high-occupancy vehicle lanes; and (2) report to the Congress on nonmotorized transportation alternatives, as well as a fuel-savings mass transportation assistance program for State and local governments. Requires such Secretary to report to the Congress on the use of Highway Trust Fund moneys for non-motorized transportation alternatives and for carbon-dioxide emissions reductions.

Directs the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to: (1) take certain prescribed actions to ensure the adoption of least-cost utility planning principles; and (2) detail for the Congress any amendments to the Federal Power Act which are necessary for the Commission to adopt such planning principles.

Requires the Secretary of Energy to report to the Congress on the results of a national power survey emphasizing policies and technologies within the electric utility industry which are designed to diminish global warming.

Amends the National Energy Conservation Policy Act to repeal the prohibition against the supply or installation by a public utility of a residential energy conservation measure for residential customers.

Amends the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 to direct the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) to prescribe within one year after the date of enactment of this Act rules encouraging the achievement of qualifying efficiency. Mandates that such rules: (1) require that electric utilities offer to purchase qualifying conservation from qualifying cogeneration or small power production facilities; and (2) provide for the verification of conservation achievement. Prescribes rate guidelines for such electric utilities purchases.

Establishes Federal standards for least cost supply measures, and requires State regulatory authorities and nonregulated gas and electric utilities to implement such standards.

Title III: State Energy Conservation Program - Amends the Energy Policy and Conservation Act to mandate that each State energy conservation plan which receives Federal assistance contain a goal to reduce by ten percent or more the total amount of energy consumed in such State in the year 2000 from the projected energy consumption for such year as of October 1, 1990.

Adds to Federal assistance eligibility prerequisites for proposed State energy conservation plans, including an emergency planning program for energy supply disruption. Cites optional State energy conservation programs.

Repeals the mandate for supplemental State energy conservation plans.

Authorizes appropriations for energy conservation programs (including those for schools and hospitals) for FY 1990 through 1992.

Establishes a State Energy Advisory Board to: (1) review and advise on the programs under this Act; (2) serve as liaison between the States and the Department of Energy on energy efficiency; and (3) report annually to the Secretary and the Congress on its activities.

Authorizes the use of loan programs and performance contracting for the non-Federal share of energy conservation project costs under the grant program.

Amends the Energy Conservation and Production Act to cite conditions under which the Secretary may approve a State application for a waiver of: (1) the requirement that at least 40 percent of Federal weatherization assistance be used for weatherization materials; and (2) the limitations placed upon expenditures per dwelling unit for weatherization measures.

Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1992 for a weatherization research and technical assistance program which shall include the monitoring of indoor air quality in low-income homes.

Title IV: Vehicle Energy Efficiency Improvements - Vehicle Energy Efficiency Performance Standards Act of 1989 - Amends the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act to increase the average fuel economy standards for passenger automobiles and light duty trucks for model year 1992 and thereafter according to prescribed guidelines. Exempts manufacturers of fewer than 10,000 light trucks and emergency vehicles from such prescribed standards. Establishes an incentives schedule for manufacturers of passenger automobiles and light trucks.

Authorizes the Secretary of Transportation to assess a tax against any manufacturer who fails to comply with the prescribed average fuel economy standards. Terminates the current civil penalty after model year 1989.

Prescribes a fleet average fuel economy schedule for all Federal passenger automobiles and light trucks for model years 1992 and thereafter.

Amends the Information and Cost Savings Act to require the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to consult with the Secretary of Energy before establishing testing and calculation procedures for measuring automobile fuel economy. Revises from mandatory to discretionary the Administrator's authority to require fuel economy tests in conjunction with emissions tests conducted under the Clean Air Act.

Directs the Administrator to measure a sampling of production passenger automobiles for each model type and year during the first month of manufacture for sale.

Directs the Administrator to review procedures periodically for testing fuel economy.

Directs the Administrator to update the booklet containing fuel economy data at least twice a year. Directs the Secretary of Energy to distribute at least 100 booklets each year to each dealer and additional numbers if requested.

Cites conditions under which manufacturers of light vehicles with certain increased fuel economies shall be considered to have offered the Government a specified discounted bid.

Directs the Secretary, within two years of enactment of this Act, to submit suggestions to the Congress for additional legislation to carry out its purposes and the purposes of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act.

Directs the National Academy of Sciences to report to the Congress on the results of its review of the research and development status of the fuel efficiency and energy consumption reduction of light vehicles, trucks, and passenger vehicles. Directs the Secretary of Energy to make changes in the Department of Energy's transportation research and development program based upon such report.

Outlines criteria and procedures for prescribing amended vehicle fuel economy standards.

Amends the Internal Revenue Code to prescribe a gas guzzler tax schedule applicable to 1989 and later model year automobiles. Sets forth a tax credit schedule for the purchase of certain fuel efficient passenger vehicles.

Title V: Solar and Renewable Resources - Requires the Secretary of Energy to report to the Congress regarding a long-term research, development and demonstration program with policy options necessary to achieve a quadrupling of renewable energy production and use by 2015. Requires the Secretary of Energy to work closely with specified Federal departments regarding the Federal Government's biofuels program, and to report to the Congress on the progress being made in the development of solar and renewable resources. Mandates that the President's budget requests for FY 1990 - FY 1993 include the Secretary of Energy's recommendations for civilian research and development budgets necessary to implement such long-term program.

Directs the Secretary to establish an Energy Research Advisory Board Panel on Solar and Renewable Resources and Technologies which shall report annually to the Energy Research Advisory Board regarding the status of the solar and renewable resources program. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through FY 1994 for such program. Mandates that the President's budget request for FY 1991 include the Secretary's recommendations for proof-of-concept or near-commercialization demonstration projects in specified categories.

Directs the Secretary to: (1) establish and provide financial assistance to a joint research and development venture to develop advanced district cooling technologies applicable in cities with high cooling loads; and (2) appoint members to an Advisory Committee on Advanced District Cooling Technology to assist in the implementation of such joint venture. Authorizes appropriations for such venture.

Directs the Secretary of Energy to implement a research program regarding: (1) fuel cell use of methane gas generated from biomass forms; (2) technologies using renewable energy sources (such as wind and solar energy) to produce hydrogen for fuel cell use; and (3) fuel cell technology for electric power production as backup spinning reserve components to renewable power systems in rural and isolated areas.

Authorizes the Secretary to make grants to, and enter into contracts with, private research laboratories. Requires the Secretary to report to the Congress regarding the fuel cell research program. Directs the Secretary to appoint members to an Advisory Committee on Energy Conservation and Renewable Energy Technology Exports to assist in the implementation of such program.

Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1993.

Directs the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to prepare Federal guidelines for use by cities and municipalities, specifying environmental and safety standards for the use of fuel cell technology.

Requires the Secretary of Commerce to report to the Congress regarding the export market potential for integrated fuel cells systems with renewable power technologies. Requires such Secretary to report to the Congress on the activities of the Committee on Renewable Energy, Commerce, and Trade to promote exports of renewable energy technology. Requires each participating member of such Committee to report annually to the Congress on the Committee actions regarding renewable energy technology exports. Requires the Committee to establish a joint government-industry plan to promote the U.S. market share in international trade in renewable energy technologies, including the development of administrative guidelines for Federal export loan programs. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1993.

Directs the Committee to coordinate, contract with, and assist financially appropriate parties to build and demonstrate the commercial operation of a biomass gasified steam-injected gas turbine of up to 25 megawatts. Authorizes appropriations and requires a report to the Congress.

Title VI: Solar Hydrogen Fuels - Directs the Secretary of Energy to prepare and submit to specified congressional committees a comprehensive five-year program management plan for a research and development program designed to permit the development of a domestic hydrogen fuel production capability within the shortest practicable time. Requires the Secretary to send the Congress annual plan descriptions including any necessary plan modifications.

Directs the Secretary to establish such program within the Department of Energy. Gives priority to production techniques that use renewable energy sources as their primary energy sources.

Directs the Secretary: (1) to conduct demonstrations to evaluate technical and nontechnical parameters to determine commercial applicability of hydrogen technology; and (2) to prepare a comprehensive large-scale hydrogen technology demonstration plan.

Establishes a Hydrogen Technical Advisory Panel of the Energy Research Advisory Board to advise the Secretary on the conduct of the hydrogen program. Requires an annual report from the Panel to the Energy Research Advisory Board, which shall subsequently report to the Secretary.

Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1995.

Title VII: Natural Gas and Coal - Part A: Natural Gas - Directs the Secretary of Energy to enter into cooperative agreements with and provide financial assistance to appropriate parties to construct and demonstrate the commercial operation of ten intercooled steam-injected gas turbines for generating electricity. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1994. Requires the Secretary to report to the Congress on the implementation of this program.

Directs the Secretary to enter into cooperative agreements with and to provide financial assistance to municipal governments to demonstrate the feasibility of using natural gas as a fuel for urban area mass transit. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1993.

Requires the Secretary to submit a feasibility report to the Congress within nine months after enactment of this Act pertaining to the use of natural gas in diesel-powered vehicles to facilitate compliance with emissions requirements.

Part B: Coal - Requires the Secretary, within nine months, to provide the Congress with a comprehensive review of clean coal technologies to be developed in federally-funded projects under the Department of Energy's clean coal technology program. Directs the Secretary to establish and implement research and development technologies for preventing, reducing, recycling, or offsetting carbon-dioxide emissions from combusted coal. Requires the Secretary to report to the Congress on the implementation of such technologies. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1990 through 1992.

Title VIII: Forest and Agriculture Policies - Part A: Forest Policies - Directs the Secretary of Agriculture, in cooperation with the Secretary of the Interior, to report to the President and the Congress on the feasibility of a national forestation initiative.

Amends the Food Security Act of 1985 to require the Secretary of Agriculture to: (1) enter into contracts with ranch and farmland operators to place specified acreage of highly erodible cropland into the conservation reserve during certain crop years; and (2) report to the Congress regarding the potential for offsetting new carbon dioxide emissions through the use of tree plantations.

Part B: Agricultural Policies - Mandates that specified Federal agencies conduct a joint study on critical linkages between agricultural production and global climate change.

Directs specified Federal agencies to establish an interagency task force to ensure that all satellite and remote sensing information pertinent to agricultural needs and climate modeling are made available to the Department of Agriculture. Directs the Secretary of Agriculture to use the "Low-Input Farming Systems Research and Education Program." Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1995.

Part C: Integrated Farming Policies - Directs the Secretary of Agriculture to consult with the agriculture community and sustainable agriculture advocates for the purpose of developing an integrated farming research, development, and demonstration program. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1993.

Directs the Secretary of Energy to establish a national farm ethanol program. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1993.

Part D: Urban Forestry Conservation Program - Directs the Secretary of Agriculture to implement an urban forestry education and accelerated tree planting program for: (1) energy conservation; (2) carbon-dioxide emissions reduction; (3) improved urban air quality; and (4) general environmental benefits. Outlines demonstration projects financed with Federal matching funds.

Directs the Secretary to support urban forestry projects at Department of Agriculture stations and at Land Grant Universities. Authorizes appropriations.

Part E: Tongass Timber Reform Act - Amends the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act to repeal the ongoing appropriations for timber utilization in the Tongass National Forest, Alaska.

Repeals the requirement for identifying lands unsuitable for timber production in such Forest.

Repeals the reporting requirement on the adequacy of timber supply from Forest lands.

Requires the biennial report on such Forest to include the impact of timber management on subsistence resources, wildlife, and fisheries habitats, biological diversity, the old growth rain forest ecosystem, and other specified items.

Requires the southeast Alaska commercial fishing industry to be included for cooperation and consultation in a study of the Forest timber supply and demand.

Directs the Secretary of Agriculture to terminate specified long-term timber sale contracts, and to revise the Tongass National Forest Land Management Plan of 1979 in a manner that fully protects long-term environmental and recreational concerns. Requires such Secretary to report to certain congressional committees regarding the status of such Forest Plan revision schedule. Imposes a moratorium on timber sales and harvest until the Forest Plan is completely revised and ready for implementation.

Title IX: Development Assistance - Directs the Secretary of State, in conjunction with the Administrator of the Agency for International Development and other specified officials, to report to the Congress on the status of forest resources in tropical countries, including a forest and agroforestry plan with goals for each tropical country. Requires: (1) the Administrator to ensure that all activities supported by U.S. bilateral foreign assistance are consistent with such plan; and (2) the Administrator to take into account each country's measure of success in meeting plan goals when allocating development assistance monies.

Prescribes guidelines under which the Secretaries of State and of the Treasury and the President must promote multilateral tropical forestry programs, and report to the Congress regarding the progress made by each of the multilateral development banks, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Program, the United Nations Development Program, and the International Tropical Timber Organization.

Directs the Secretary of Commerce to promulgate regulations within one year after enactment of this Act requiring wood and products containing imported wood to bear a label disclosing the scientific and common names of such wood and the countries of origin.

Directs such Secretary to impose a tropical woods tax upon products containing specified woods. Requires such Secretary to promulgate regulations prohibiting the importation of wood and wood products containing wood from: (1) tropical forest countries that have not achieved the forest plan goals; (2) countries that import wood or products containing wood harvested in tropical countries that have not achieved forest plan goals; and (3) countries that permit transit of wood or products containing wood harvested in tropical countries that have not achieved forest plan goals. Requires the Secretary to report annually to the Congress on the status of import controls with respect to tropical forest countries that have not achieved the forest plan goals.

Amends the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 to authorize the President to assist developing countries with research and development programs aimed at energy efficiency and energy transmission facilities. Prohibits assistance for large-scale production of energy. Prescribes guidelines under which the President is directed to provide support to aid-receiving countries with emphasis upon least-cost energy planning. Requires the President to report annually to the Congress regarding the bilateral energy program, including the progress made in reducing greenhouse gas emission.

Directs the Secretary of the Treasury to instruct the U.S. Executive Director of each multilateral development bank to: (1) vigorously promote the adoption by each bank of a least-cost energy planning program containing specified components; and (2) oppose, except in certain instances, financial or technical assistance to any borrowing country if a least-cost energy plan is not in place.

Directs the Secretary of State to instruct the Ambassador to the United Nations to: (1) vigorously encourage the United Nations Development Program implementing energy conservation and efficiency programs for recipient countries; and (2) oppose the adoption of country programs for any country for which a least-cost energy planning program giving priority to energy conservation, end use energy efficiency, and renewable energy sources is not in place.

Requires the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of State to report annually to the Congress regarding the progress of the multilateral development banks and the United Nations Development Program in implementing energy conservation measures.

Declares that it is the policy of the United States that its economic assistance programs to developing countries should encourage least-cost, sustainable transportation policies and practices based on a diverse mix of motorized and nonmotorized transport modes which minimize fuel needs and reduce carbon-dioxide emissions. Directs the Administrator of the Agency for International Development to: (1) implement a study of the Agency's transportation-related programs and of the multilateral development bank policies regarding their transportation-related lending practices to recipient countries; and (2) redirect part of the Agency's resources to provide nonmotorized low-cost vehicles that can be sustained in the long term.

Directs the Secretary of the Treasury to instruct the U.S. Executive Director of each multilateral development bank to increase the emphasis on nonmotorized, low-cost and energy efficient alternatives to private motor vehicles.

Directs the Peace Corps to encourage the use of nonmotorized transport technologies in the projects it undertakes. Specifies non-motorized transportation policies to be promoted by the U.S. Government in implementing its development assistance programs.

Authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury to modify the loan terms on up to one-half of the sovereign debt owed the United States by developing countries as a condition of adopting forest and energy conservation programs. Directs the Secretary to promulgate regulations implementing such environmental conservation and debt reduction program within one year after the enactment of this Act. Directs the Administrator of the Agency for International Development to report biennially to the Congress regarding the status of energy conservation and efficiency for each country receiving Federal development assistance monies.

Requires the Administrator of the Agency for International Development to report to the Congress regarding the options and strategies for the use of bilateral and multilateral development assistance programs sponsored by the United States to control emissions of certain greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.

Title X: International Activities - Directs the Secretary of State to convene an international meeting in the United States by the end of 1992 to adopt a global climate protection agreement with measures at least as stringent as those in this Act. Sets forth a percentage reductions schedule for emissions of specified gases.

Directs the Secretary of State to: (1) initiate negotiations for the adoption of a binding multilateral agreement requiring specified reductions of nitrogen oxide emissions by 1998; (2) request and, if necessary, convene the parties to the Montreal protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer for possible control measures reassessment; and (3) convene an international meeting to exchange information regarding energy efficiency and solar/renewable energy resources that are environmentally sustainable.

Directs the Secretary of the Treasury to instruct the U.S. Executive Directors of multilateral development banks to promote lending policies which emphasize specified aspects of energy conservation, renewable energy source, greenhouse gas emissions, and least-cost non-motorized transportation systems.

Directs the Administrator of the Agency for International Development to take specified measures concerning: (1) biological diversity conservation; (2) renewable energy resources and conservation; and (3) assistance to developing countries in the use of agricultural and industrial chemicals.

Declares U.S. policy with respect to domestic and international efforts to deal with the greenhouse effect.

Requests the President to take steps to establish a long-term study of the greenhouse effect, beginning with a one-year cooperative international research program started during or before 1991. Names the year of such program the "International Year of the Greenhouse Effect."

Directs the Environmental Protection Agency to develop and implement programs with respect to: (1) chlorofluorocarbon replacement; (2) methane control; (3) energy efficiency; and (4) alternative energy sources. Authorizes appropriations.

Title XI: World Population Growth -Declares it is the policy of the United States that family planning services should be made available to all persons requesting them. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1995 for international population and family planning assistance. Prohibits the use of such funds for: (1) involuntary sterilization or abortion; or (2) the coercion of any person to accept family planning services.

Requests the President to initiate an international conference on population, and to seek an international agreement on population growth. Establishes a National Commission on Population, Environment, and Natural Resources to prepare reports and convene conferences. Terminates such Commission three years after the enactment of this Act.

Mandates that multilateral development banks adopt guidelines promoting lending strategies which emphasize the maintenance of sustainable world population levels. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1993.

Title XII: Recyclable Materials - Directs the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of Health and Human Services to report to the Congress the results of a study regarding degradable materials and recycling methodologies. Requires the Secretary of Defense to report to the Congress the results of a study regarding the national security implications of requiring the use of degradable materials in items procured by the Department of Defense, and of requiring the Department to comply with specified prohibitions against the use of nondegradable materials.

Requires the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency biennially to submit an updated report to the President and the Congress regarding Federal, State, and local policies and practices in recycling government wastes and procuring recyclable materials.

Directs the Secretary of Agriculture to report to the Congress the results of a pilot project to develop and demonstrate a viable technology for composting municipal waste and sewage sludge.

Directs the Secretary of Commerce to appoint a Director of Recycling Research and Information to: (1) make grants for recycling research and development; (2) establish a national database information clearinghouse for recyclable materials; (3) report annually to the Congress regarding the status of recyclable wastes; and (4) make grants for scientific research on the use of plastic materials as part of a recycling program. Authorizes appropriations for FY 1991 through 1994.

Sets forth civil and criminal penalties for offenses involving the production, manufacturing, distribution or selling of specified nonrecycled consumer goods which have been proscribed by the Secretary of Commerce under regulations jointly issued with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. Requires the Secretary of Commerce periodically to update the list of proscribed nonrecycled consumer goods.