Ann Coulter: Nikki Haley 'an immigrant' who doesn’t understand Confederate flag
Conservative pundit Ann Coulter said on Tuesday night that South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley (R) is unqualified to deal with her state’s use of the Confederate flag because she’s an "immigrant."

“I’d really like to like Nikki Haley since she is a Republican, but on the other hand, she’s an immigrant and does not understand America’s history,” Coulter told host Kennedy on her Fox Business show Tuesday evening.

ADVERTISEMENT

“You think immigrants can’t understand history?” Kennedy asked.

“Well, she doesn’t,” Coulter responded. “The Confederate flag we’re talking about never flew over an official Confederate building.”

“It was a battle flag — it is to honor Robert E. Lee,” she added. “Anyone who knows the first thing about military history knows that there is no greater army that ever took the field than the Confederate Army.”

Haley's parents are Indian Sikhs who came to the United States before she was born in Bamberg, S.C.

The governor urged her state’s lawmakers on Monday to remove the Confederate flag from a memorial on the state Capitol grounds in Columbia, responding to an outcry after the mass shooting last week at a historically black church in Charleston.

“Today, we are here in a moment of unity in our state, without ill will, to say it’s time to move the flag from the Capitol grounds,” she said.

“We are not going to allow this symbol to divide us any longer,” Haley added. “The fact that it causes pain to so many is enough to move it from the Capitol grounds.”

South Carolina law dictates that a majority of state lawmakers must vote on whether the Confederate flag is raised or lowered.

Fresh controversy over the flag ignited in the wake of last week’s mass shooting last Wednesday evening at Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church. Nine people were killed.

Dylann Storm Roof, the alleged shooter, reportedly uttered racial epithets before attacking Emanuel AME Church’s congregants and had been photographed with Confederate flag merchandise.

Coulter accused the Democratic Party of hypocrisy over their opposition to the Confederate flag.

“But if we’re going to remedy the sadness of the Confederate side of the Civil War, I think we need to abolish the Democratic Party,” she said.

“That’s a much more hateful symbol,” Coulter added of Democrats. “Even after the North, i.e. Republicans, won that war and finally got Democrats to give up slavery, Democrats continued to discriminate against black people for another 100 years.”