Dem senator: Carbon tax ‘inevitable’
Whitehouse told E2-Wire Thursday that the amendment is about what to do with the revenue when the “inevitable” carbon fee happens.



ADVERTISEMENT

SA 646. Mr. WHITEHOUSE submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to the concurrent resolution S. Con. Res. 8, setting forth the congressional budget for the United States Government for fiscal year 2014, revising the appropriate budgetary levels for fiscal year 2013, and setting forth the appropriate budgetary levels for fiscal years 2015 through 2023; as follows:

At the end of title III, add the following:

SEC. 3__. DEFICIT-NEUTRAL RESERVE FUND RELATING TO ENSURING THAT ALL REVENUE FROM A FEE ON CARBON POLLUTION IS RETURNED TO THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.

The Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports relating to the establishment of a fee on carbon pollution, provided that--

(1) all revenue from such fee is returned to the American people in the form of Federal deficit reduction, reduced Federal tax rates, cost savings, or other direct benefits; and

(2) such legislation would not increase the deficit over either the period of the total of fiscal years 2013 through 2018 or the period of the total of fiscal years 2013 through 2023.

“I think that ultimately a fee on carbon pollution is inevitable, and the purpose of that amendment was to begin a discussion on that and begin the discussion about when that happens, what the best way to use the proceeds of the fee are, so from that point of view, I didn’t view it as binding anybody on a carbon fee, but I did view it as an assessment of the best way of using carbon fee proceeds,” he said in a short interview.The Senate rejected the Whitehouse amendment in March, and an anti-carbon-tax amendment by Sen.(R-Mo.) also failed during debate that was seen as a proxy battle over taxing carbon.Here’s the text of the failed Whitehouse amendment: