The Hill's Whip List: Obama has 42 Senate votes for Iran deal
President Obama has enough support in the Senate to save his nuclear deal with Iran.

Forty-two Democratic senators, including two independents who caucus with the party, now publicly support the deal, enough to potentially filibuster any measure of disapproval.

ADVERTISEMENT

Under legislation passed earlier this year, Congress has 60 days — until Sept. 17 — to vote on the deal, which places limits on Tehran’s nuclear program in exchange for lifting sanctions. Congress is expected to take up a resolution of disapproval.

Only four Democrats in the upper chamber, Sens. Charles Schumer Charles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerBlue Dogs look to move forward on infrastructure project Democratic strategist says Republicans are turning immigration debate into 'political football' Trump touts Mexico deal on migrants: Will be 'very successful' MORE (N.Y.), Ben Cardin Benjamin (Ben) Louis CardinProposed bipartisan kidney legislation takes on kidney disease epidemic in America Lawmakers raise security concerns about China building NYC subway cars House votes to boost retirement savings MORE, Joe Manchin Joseph (Joe) ManchinManchin knocks Barr: He should be focused on protecting the Constitution Trump Jr. blasts reported Roy Moore Senate bid: 'It's time to ride off into the sunset' Senate Democrats to House: Tamp down the impeachment talk MORE (W.Va.) and Robert Menendez Robert (Bob) MenendezThere is a severe physician shortage and it will only worsen Democrats ask Fed to probe Trump's Deutsche Bank ties Ending the Cyprus arms embargo will increase tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean MORE (N.J.), publicly oppose the Iran deal.

Here’s a list on how senators stand on the Iran deal. The Hill will update this list; please send updates to jcarney@thehill.com and mmali@thehill.com.

This list was last updated on Sept. 8 at 6:06 p.m.

DEMOCRATS – YES (42)

Sen. Tammy Baldwin Tammy Suzanne BaldwinValedictorian says he was not allowed to use graduation speech to come out as gay Valedictorian says he was not allowed to use graduation speech to come out as gay Democrats highlight history-making LGBTQ lawmakers for Pride month MORE (Wis.) — "Simply put, I do not believe that rejecting this agreement is in our national security interest," Baldwin said in a statement.

Sen. Michael Bennet Michael Farrand BennetTulsi Gabbard has a future in politics — but not at the White House Democrats hope some presidential candidates drop out — and run for Senate Democrats hope some presidential candidates drop out — and run for Senate MORE (Colo.) — He called the deal a "flawed, but important step" to preventing a nuclear Iran and keeping Israel safe in a statement first reported by the Denver Post.



Sen. Richard Blumenthal (Conn.)



Sen. Cory Booker (N.J.) — “We have now passed a point of no return that we should have never reached, leaving our nation to choose between two imperfect, dangerous and uncertain options,” said Booker in a statement. “Left with these two choices, I nonetheless believe it is better to support a deeply flawed deal, for the alternative is worse.”

Sen. Barbara Boxer Barbara Levy BoxerOnly four Dem senators have endorsed 2020 candidates Only four Dem senators have endorsed 2020 candidates Hispanic civil rights icon endorses Harris for president MORE (Calif.) — "In my view, this agreement is the only way to ensure that Iran's nuclear program is used exclusively for civilian purposes, which is in the best interest of the United States, Israel and the world," Boxer said in a statement.

Sen. Sherrod Brown Sherrod Campbell BrownDemocrats ask Fed to probe Trump's Deutsche Bank ties Democrats ask Fed to probe Trump's Deutsche Bank ties On The Money: Trump hits Mexico with new tariffs over immigration | White House starts clock on approval for new NAFTA | Third House Republican blocks disaster aid bill MORE (Ohio) — "This deal is not about trusting the Iranian regime, but instead working with our allies on comprehensive, verifiable restrictions to block Iran's pathways to a nuclear bomb without precipitating another war in the Middle East,” said Brown in a statement first reported by USA Today.

Sen. Maria Cantwell Maria Elaine CantwellHillicon Valley: Democratic state AGs sue to block T-Mobile-Sprint merger | House kicks off tech antitrust probe | Maine law shakes up privacy debate | Senators ask McConnell to bring net neutrality to a vote Hillicon Valley: Democratic state AGs sue to block T-Mobile-Sprint merger | House kicks off tech antitrust probe | Maine law shakes up privacy debate | Senators ask McConnell to bring net neutrality to a vote Senators call on McConnell to bring net neutrality rules to a vote MORE (Wash.)

Sen. Tom Carper Thomas (Tom) Richard CarperCommanding Biden lead puts pressure on Democrats to endorse Two years after Trump's Paris climate move, frustrated Democrats eye 2020 Tackling climate change: How lawmakers are facing environmental injustice MORE (Del.) — Carper said the deal "beats the likely alternative - war with Iran - hands down," in an op-ed for the News Journal.

Sen. Bob Casey Robert (Bob) Patrick CaseyOvernight Health Care: Biden infuriates abortion-rights groups with stance on Hyde Amendment | Trump tightens restrictions on fetal tissue research | Democrats plan event to scrutinize Trump's mental health Overnight Health Care: Biden infuriates abortion-rights groups with stance on Hyde Amendment | Trump tightens restrictions on fetal tissue research | Democrats plan event to scrutinize Trump's mental health The Hill's Morning Report - 2020 Dems, progressives preview anti-Biden offensive MORE, Jr. (Pa.)



Sen. Chris Coons Christopher (Chris) Andrew CoonsSenate Democrat: Trump Mexico tariff threat 'hopefully' a breaking point for GOP Senate Democrat: Trump Mexico tariff threat 'hopefully' a breaking point for GOP Commanding Biden lead puts pressure on Democrats to endorse MORE (Del.) — "We are better off trying diplomacy first," Coons told the Washington Post.



Sen. Joe Donnelly Joseph (Joe) Simon DonnellyConservatives spark threat of bloody GOP primaries Anti-corruption group hits Congress for ignoring K Street, Capitol Hill 'revolving door' K Street giants scoop up coveted ex-lawmakers MORE (Ind.) — "I owe it to the men and women of our Armed Forces and to the people of Indiana to have exhausted every other option to stop Iran before we would consider putting any of our servicemembers in harm’s way,” Donnelly said in a statement.

Sen. Dick Durbin Richard (Dick) Joseph DurbinHomeland Security official describes widespread 'fraudulent' families at border Homeland Security official describes widespread 'fraudulent' families at border Senate GOP to vote on Trump's .5 billion border request next week MORE (Ill.) — "Finding a diplomatic solution will make our country, our allies and the world a safer place,” said the Senate's No. 2 Democrat.

Sen. Dianne Feinstein Dianne Emiel FeinsteinBipartisan senators push new bill to improve foreign lobbying disclosures Bipartisan senators push new bill to improve foreign lobbying disclosures Keep tradition of horse racing alive MORE (Calif.) — “I stand behind the U.S. negotiating team and will support this agreement in the Senate,” Feinstein, the ranking member of the Intelligence panel, said Tuesday.

Sen. Al Franken Alan (Al) Stuart FrankenThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Mexican officials scramble to avoid Trump tariffs The Hill's 12:30 Report: Mexican officials scramble to avoid Trump tariffs The Hill's Morning Report - Tariff battle looms as Trump jabs 'foolish' Senate GOP MORE (Minn.) — “[T]o take the extraordinary step of rejecting it — because of clearly unrealistic expectations, because of a hunger to send Americans into another war, or, worst of all, because of petty partisanship — would be a terrible mistake,” said Franken in an op-ed for CNN.

Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand Kirsten Elizabeth GillibrandDemocratic White House hopefuls push to expand health care in US territories Democratic White House hopefuls push to expand health care in US territories Lawmakers congratulate US women's soccer team on winning opening World Cup match MORE (N.Y.) — “Our goal has been, and remains, to prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon. We have far more ability to achieve that outcome if we approve this deal‎,” said Gillibrand in a statement.

Sen. Martin Heinrich Martin Trevor HeinrichOvernight Energy: Democrats ask if EPA chief misled on vehicle emissions | Dem senators want NBC debate focused on climate change | 2020 hopeful John Delaney unveils T climate plan Democratic senators want NBC primary debate to focus on climate change Collins offering bill to boost battery research as GOP pushes energy 'innovation' MORE (N.M.) — "This deal sets the stage for a safer and more stable Middle East and a more secure United States of America," said Heinrich.

Sen. Heidi Heitkamp Mary (Heidi) Kathryn HeitkampLobbying World Pro-trade group targets Democratic leadership in push for new NAFTA On The Money: Stocks sink on Trump tariff threat | GOP caught off guard by new trade turmoil | Federal deficit grew 38 percent this fiscal year | Banks avoid taking position in Trump, Dem subpoena fight MORE (N.D.) — “It isn’t a perfect deal, but it is a good one. Americans deserve to see this deal through,” Heitkamp said in a statement.

Sen. Mazie Hirono Mazie Keiko HironoTrump defense pick expected to face tense confirmation Senate confirms Rosen for No. 2 spot at DOJ Alabama abortion law sparks fears Supreme Court may overturn Roe v. Wade MORE (Hawaii) — Hirono said Iran’s nuclear program “will be disabled for many years” under the deal.

Sen. Tim Kaine Timothy (Tim) Michael KaineTexas raises age to purchase tobacco to 21 Texas raises age to purchase tobacco to 21 Democrats push to make national security a 2020 wedge issue MORE (Va.) — Kaine called the deal a "dramatic improvement over the status quo."

Sen. Amy Klobuchar Amy Jean KlobucharTop voting machine manufacturer urges Congress to make paper records required Top voting machine manufacturer urges Congress to make paper records required Klobuchar accuses Trump of treating farmers like 'poker chips' at his 'bankrupt casinos' MORE (Minn.) — “While the agreement is by no means perfect, I have concluded that it is our best available option to put the brakes on Iran’s development of a nuclear weapon and that is why I will support it,” said Klobuchar in a statement. “In conjunction with that support I will also push for increased security assistance to Israel and enhanced defense cooperation with our Arab allies to combat terrorism throughout the region.”

Sen. Angus King Angus Stanley KingOn The Money: Economy adds 75K jobs in May | GOP senator warns tariffs will wipe out tax cuts | Trump says 'good chance' of deal with Mexico On The Money: Economy adds 75K jobs in May | GOP senator warns tariffs will wipe out tax cuts | Trump says 'good chance' of deal with Mexico Trump administration appeals ruling that blocked offshore Arctic drilling MORE (I-Maine) — "The current alternatives, if this agreement is rejected, are either unrealistic or downright dangerous and so, based upon what we know now, I intend to vote in favor of the agreement,” King said.

Sen. Patrick Leahy Patrick Joseph LeahyOvernight Defense: Senators plan 22 resolutions to block Saudi arms sale | Trump defends transgender military plan | Trump, lawmakers prep to mark D-Day anniversary Senators plot 22 resolutions to block Saudi arms sales Senators plot 22 resolutions to block Saudi arms sales MORE (Vt.) — "I know from my conversations with the president and Secretary Kerry and Moniz how difficult this was. I also know from my conversations with them, they were prepared to walk away than settle for a bad deal. ... This is not a bad deal," said Leahy.

Sen. Ed Markey Edward (Ed) John MarkeyDemocratic White House hopefuls push to expand health care in US territories Democratic White House hopefuls push to expand health care in US territories Hillicon Valley: Democratic state AGs sue to block T-Mobile-Sprint merger | House kicks off tech antitrust probe | Maine law shakes up privacy debate | Senators ask McConnell to bring net neutrality to a vote MORE (Mass.) — I believe our negotiators achieved as much as they reasonably could, and that if strictly implemented, this plan can be effective," he said in a statement.

Sen. Claire McCaskill Claire Conner McCaskillConservatives spark threat of bloody GOP primaries Congress needs to work to combat the poverty, abuse and neglect issues that children face Lobbying world MORE (Mo.) — "This deal isn't perfect and no one trusts Iran, but it has become clear to me that the world is united behind this agreement with the exception of the government of Israel," she said in a statement. "I respect and understand those who oppose it but I have become convinced that it is more dangerous to Israel, America and our allies to walk away in the face of unified world-wide support."

Sen. Jeff Merkley Jeffrey (Jeff) Alan MerkleyDemocratic White House hopefuls push to expand health care in US territories Democratic White House hopefuls push to expand health care in US territories Hillicon Valley: Assange hit with 17 more charges | Facebook removes record 2.2B fake profiles | Senate passes anti-robocall bill | Senators offer bill to help companies remove Huawei equipment MORE (Ore.) — "I believe the agreement, titled the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), is the best available strategy to block Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon," he said in a statement.

Sen. Barbara Mikulski Barbara Ann MikulskiLobbying World Only four Dem senators have endorsed 2020 candidates Only four Dem senators have endorsed 2020 candidates MORE (Md.) — “No deal is perfect, especially one negotiated with the Iranian regime," she said in a statement. "I have concluded that this Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is the best option available to block Iran from having a nuclear bomb. For these reasons, I will vote in favor of this deal." Mikulski is also retiring from the Senate.

Sen. Chris Murphy Christopher (Chris) Scott MurphyOvernight Defense: Inside the 3B House defense policy bill | Senators take new tack to challenge Saudi arms sales | Raytheon, United Technologies to merge Overnight Defense: Inside the 3B House defense policy bill | Senators take new tack to challenge Saudi arms sales | Raytheon, United Technologies to merge Senators take bipartisan step toward blocking Trump's Saudi arms sales MORE (Conn.) — “The test for this agreement, then, is simple: is Iran less likely to obtain a nuclear weapon with this deal than without it? Because I answer this question affirmatively, I will support this agreement when it comes before the United States Senate for a vote in September," Murphy said in a statement.

Sen. Patty Murray Patricia (Patty) Lynn MurraySenate health panel to move forward on package to lower health costs next week Senate health panel to move forward on package to lower health costs next week Establishing the building blocks of high-quality, early childhood education MORE (Wash.) — "I am hopeful that this deal will be implemented and will move us closer to our goal of preventing Iran from developing a nuclear weapon, but I will be monitoring it closely and will be ready to join others in moving quickly on other options if Iran choses to pursue an unacceptable path," she said in a statement.

Sen. Bill Nelson Clarence (Bill) William NelsonHow Jim Bridenstine recruited an old enemy to advise NASA Republicans amp up attacks on Tlaib's Holocaust comments The muscle for digital payment MORE (Fla.) — "If the U.S. walks away from this multinational agreement, I believe we would find ourselves alone in the world with little credibility," said Nelson on the Senate floor.

Sen. Gary Peters (Mich.)

Sen. Jack Reed John (Jack) Francis ReedTop voting machine manufacturer urges Congress to make paper records required Top voting machine manufacturer urges Congress to make paper records required Democrats ask Fed to probe Trump's Deutsche Bank ties MORE (R.I.) — "No one assumes Iran will change its stripes, which is why the agreement is built on a foundation of intrusive inspections and constant verification," said Reed, the top Democrat on the Senate Armed Services Committee.

Sen. Harry Reid Harry Mason ReidImpeachment will reelect Trump Impeachment will reelect Trump Biden faces first crisis as front-runner MORE (Nev.) — "I’m going to do everything in my power to make sure the deal stands,” the Senate minority leader told The Washington Post.

Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersDemocratic White House hopefuls push to expand health care in US territories Democratic White House hopefuls push to expand health care in US territories Tulsi Gabbard has a future in politics — but not at the White House MORE (I-Vt.) — "This agreement is obviously not all that many of us would have liked but it beats the alternative — a war with Iran that could go on for years," said the 2016 contender for the Democratic nomination.

Sen. Brian Schatz (D-Hawaii) — "This is the best possible way to deny Iran from acquiring the bomb. It is what is best for the United States, Israel, and peace in the region."

Sen. Jeanne Shaheen Cynthia (Jeanne) Jeanne ShaheenBipartisan senators push new bill to improve foreign lobbying disclosures Bipartisan senators push new bill to improve foreign lobbying disclosures Supporting the military means supporting military spouses MORE (N.H.) — “Rejecting this agreement would leave us with no credible non-military options for stopping Iran’s nuclear weapons program,” said Shaheen in a statement.

Sen. Debbie Stabenow Deborah (Debbie) Ann StabenowTrump judicial nominee withdraws amid Republican opposition: report Trump judicial nominee withdraws amid Republican opposition: report The Hill's Morning Report — Trump pushes Mexico for 'significantly more' as tariffs loom MORE (Mich.) — “I have determined that the imminent threat of Iran having a nuclear weapon outweighs any flaws I see in the international agreement. For this reason, I must support the agreement," Stabenow said in a statement.

Sen. Jon Tester Jonathan (Jon) TesterDemocrats hope some presidential candidates drop out — and run for Senate Democrats hope some presidential candidates drop out — and run for Senate Bullock says he's 'awfully excited' about endorsement from Tester MORE (Mont.) — Tester called the deal “the only option right now,” according to Dennis Bragg, a reporter for local station KPAX.

Sen. Tom Udall Thomas (Tom) Stewart UdallHillicon Valley: House Judiciary opens antitrust probe of tech giants | Senate to receive election security briefing | Quest Diagnostics breach exposes data on 11.9 million patients | House sets hearing on 'deepfakes' Senate Democrats ask DOJ about any White House involvement in T-Mobile-Sprint merger review Overnight Energy: Democrats push EPA to collect 4K in 'excessive' Pruitt travel expenses | Greens angered over new rules for rocket fuel chemical | Inslee to join youth climate strikers in Las Vegas MORE (N.M.) — "I urge my colleagues to support this agreement," Udall said in a floor speech. "We have a choice between this deal or no deal. I do not believe we will get another chance."

Sen. Mark Warner Mark Robert WarnerLawmakers demand answers on Border Patrol data breach Lawmakers demand answers on Border Patrol data breach Top voting machine manufacturer urges Congress to make paper records required MORE (Va.) — “This agreement is just the beginning, and not the end, of our combined international efforts to keep Iran free of nuclear weapons," said Warner in a statement.

Sen. Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth Ann WarrenDemocratic White House hopefuls push to expand health care in US territories Democratic White House hopefuls push to expand health care in US territories Democrats push for tougher oversight on student loan market MORE (Mass.) — “The question now before Congress — the only question before Congress — is whether the recently announced nuclear agreement represents our best available option for preventing Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon,” Warren told The Boston Globe. “I am convinced that it does.”

Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse Sheldon WhitehouseThe Hill's Morning Report - Democrats wonder: Can Nadler handle the Trump probe? The Hill's Morning Report - Democrats wonder: Can Nadler handle the Trump probe? Democrats hope some presidential candidates drop out — and run for Senate MORE (R.I.) — "Short of war, with all its dramatic uncertainties and terrible costs, I do not see another pathway to impose a nuclear weapons-free Iran," said Whitehouse in a statement.

Sen. Ron Wyden Ronald (Ron) Lee WydenLobbying World Hillicon Valley: Democratic state AGs sue to block T-Mobile-Sprint merger | House kicks off tech antitrust probe | Maine law shakes up privacy debate | Senators ask McConnell to bring net neutrality to a vote Hillicon Valley: Democratic state AGs sue to block T-Mobile-Sprint merger | House kicks off tech antitrust probe | Maine law shakes up privacy debate | Senators ask McConnell to bring net neutrality to a vote MORE (Ore.)

DEMOCRATS - NO (4)

Sen. Ben Cardin (Md.) — "This is a close call, but after a lengthy review, I will vote to disapprove the deal," he said in an op-ed in the Washington Post.

Sen. Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.) — "For me, this deal had to be about more than preventing Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon for the next 10-15 years. For me, this deal had to address Iran’s terrorist actions," said Manchin in a statement.

Sen. Bob Menendez Robert (Bob) MenendezThere is a severe physician shortage and it will only worsen Democrats ask Fed to probe Trump's Deutsche Bank ties Ending the Cyprus arms embargo will increase tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean MORE (N.J.) — “I have looked into my own soul and my devotion to principle may once again lead me to an unpopular course, but if Iran is to acquire a nuclear bomb, it will not have my name on it,” said Menendez, a senior member of the Foreign Relations Committee.

Sen. Charles Schumer (N.Y.) — "If Iran’s true intent is to get a nuclear weapon, under this agreement, it must simply exercise patience. After ten years, it can be very close to achieving that goal, and, unlike its current unsanctioned pursuit of a nuclear weapon, Iran’s nuclear program will be codified in an agreement signed by the United States and other nations," Schumer, likely the next Democratic leader, said in a statement. Schumer's opposition is a blow to the administration's effort to win over Democrats.

REPUBLICANS – NO (54)

Sen. Lamar Alexander Andrew (Lamar) Lamar AlexanderSenate health panel to move forward on package to lower health costs next week Senate health panel to move forward on package to lower health costs next week Without transparency, health-care industry will keep price-gouging MORE (Tenn.) — “I will vote to disapprove the president’s nuclear agreement with Iran because it does not sufficiently restrict Iran’s nuclear program and makes no effort to put a brake on its other conduct as the world’s largest state sponsor of terrorism," he said in a statement.

Sen. Kelly Ayotte Kelly Ann AyotteSinema, Gallagher fastest lawmakers in charity race New Hampshire senator to ask 2020 Dems to back repeal of state residency law Schultz recruiting GOP insiders ahead of possible 2020 bid MORE (N.H.) — "We need to require them to dismantle their program. ... What we will have here is more proliferation in the Middle East,” she tweeted.

Sen. John Barrasso John Anthony BarrassoTrump hails D-Day veterans in Normandy: 'You are the pride of our nation' Lawmakers, Trump agencies set for clash over chemicals in water Trump boxed in on trade MORE (Wyo.) —

Sen. Roy Blunt Roy Dean BluntMcConnell: Senate will hold election security briefing McConnell: Senate will hold election security briefing Proposed bipartisan kidney legislation takes on kidney disease epidemic in America MORE (Mo.) — “This is a bad deal for the United States and one that will embolden our adversaries and jeopardize the security of our allies,” Blunt said in a statement. “The stated goal of the negotiations was to ensure Iran never develops the capability to produce a nuclear weapon, yet the president agreed to a deal that does the opposite.”

Sen. John Boozman John Nichols BoozmanThere is a severe physician shortage and it will only worsen Trump's pursuit of infrastructure deal hits GOP roadblock Democrats, making a difference is better than making a point MORE (Ark.) — "We have a responsibility to ensure that Iran never achieves its goal of becoming a nuclear power. This deal give us little confidence that we will be successful in this regard,” said Boozman.

Sen. Richard Burr Richard Mauze BurrTrump Jr. returning to Capitol Hill for questioning on Wednesday: report Trump Jr. returning to Capitol Hill for questioning on Wednesday: report Five takeaways from Barr's new powers in 'spying' probe MORE (N.C.) — "I will not support this agreement and, as the Chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, I will continue my efforts to ensure that we fully understand Iran’s capabilities and intentions,” said Burr.

Sen. Bill Cassidy (La.) — “This deal won’t just jeopardize our security, but it will also hurt our economy. It would allow Iran to export oil but we can’t,” Cassidy told the Shreveport Times, explaining his opposition.

Sen. Dan Coats Daniel (Dan) Ray CoatsHouse Intelligence panel to examine 'deepfake' videos in June Schiff requests briefings from intel chiefs on Barr 'spying' probe Five takeaways from Barr's new powers in 'spying' probe MORE (Ind.) — "Congress should reject this bad deal," said Coats in a statement.

Sen. Thad Cochran William (Thad) Thad CochranThe Hill's Morning Report — Trump turns the page back to Mueller probe Trump praises Thad Cochran: 'A real senator with incredible values' The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump, Democrats deal with Mueller fallout MORE (Miss.)

Sen. Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsDemocrats hope some presidential candidates drop out — and run for Senate Democrats hope some presidential candidates drop out — and run for Senate On The Money: Economy adds 75K jobs in May | GOP senator warns tariffs will wipe out tax cuts | Trump says 'good chance' of deal with Mexico MORE (Maine) — Collins called the deal "fundamentally flawed."

Sen. Bob Corker Robert (Bob) Phillips CorkerPress: How 'Nervous Nancy' trumped Trump Press: How 'Nervous Nancy' trumped Trump Amash gets standing ovation at first town hall after calling for Trump's impeachment MORE (Tenn.) — “Congress should reject this deal and send it back to the president,” said the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee in a Washington Post op-ed.

Sen. John Cornyn John CornynThe Hill's Morning Report - Warren's moment: Policy plans and rising polls The Hill's Morning Report - Warren's moment: Policy plans and rising polls GOP senators dodge major trade battle with Trump MORE (Texas) — "The alternative to this deal is a better deal," Cornyn told reporters on a conference call earlier this month. "This deal is not a good deal in my view."

Sen. Tom Cotton Thomas (Tom) Bryant CottonSupporting the military means supporting military spouses GOP senator says Iran needs to 'stop acting like an outlaw' Sen. Tom Cotton: 'Memorial Day is our most sacred holiday' MORE (Ark.) — Cotton called the deal a “terrible, dangerous mistake” in an appearance on "Morning Joe" and vowed senators would kill the agreement.

Sen. Mike Crapo Michael (Mike) Dean CrapoOn The Money: Senate passes disaster aid bill after deal with Trump | Trump to offer B aid package for farmers | House votes to boost retirement savings | Study says new tariffs to double costs for consumers Senate passes disaster aid bill after deal with Trump Trump, Senate GOP discuss effort to overhaul legal immigration MORE (Idaho) — “I am completely opposed to this agreement,” Crapo said at a town hall, according to the Idaho State Journal.

Sen. Ted Cruz Rafael (Ted) Edward CruzTrump judicial nominee withdraws amid Republican opposition: report Trump judicial nominee withdraws amid Republican opposition: report Democrats hope some presidential candidates drop out — and run for Senate MORE (Texas) — The 2016 presidential candidate called it a "staggeringly bad deal." "It is a fundamental betrayal of the security of the United States and of our closest allies, first and foremost Israel," he said.

Sen. Steve Daines (Mont.) — “Congress should vote down the deal and uphold our commitment to our national security and send a clear message that we cannot consider a deal that is so lacking in transparency and accountability,” said Daines in an op-ed for the Helena Independent Record.

Sen. Mike Enzi Michael (Mike) Bradley EnziTensions rise during GOP leadership meeting over dues Tensions rise during GOP leadership meeting over dues Trump's latest Interior pick wins unexpected support from environmentalists MORE (Wyo.) — “Do you trust the Iranians? I haven’t found one yet who does,” said at an event in Wyoming, according to the Cody Enterprise."

Sen. Joni Ernst (Iowa) — "This to me is a pathway to nuclear armament for Iran," Ernst told CNN when asked why she opposed the deal. "This deal does not stop them from developing nuclear capabilities."

Sen. Jeff Flake Jeffrey (Jeff) Lane FlakeDemocrats needle GOP on standing up to Trump Democrats needle GOP on standing up to Trump Amash gets standing ovation at first town hall after calling for Trump's impeachment MORE (Ariz.) — Flake has been an ally of the administration on its Cuba policy and was lobbied by the White House to back the Iran deal.

Sen. Deb Fischer Debra (Deb) Strobel FischerSteve King denied seat on Air Force One for Trump trip to Iowa: report Steve King denied seat on Air Force One for Trump trip to Iowa: report Iowa Democrat calls foul on White House over Trump ethanol tour invite MORE (Neb.) — “While the president argued that we ‘give nothing up’ by ‘testing’ whether this agreement will constrain Iran’s nuclear ambitions, I disagree,” Fischer said in a statement. “The international sanctions regime took years to assemble and remains the most effective method of imposing costs on Tehran for their destabilizing behavior."

Sen. Cory Gardner Cory Scott GardnerWhite House hires director of African American outreach after post was vacant for months: report White House hires director of African American outreach after post was vacant for months: report The Hill's Morning Report - Democrats wonder: Can Nadler handle the Trump probe? MORE (Colo.) — "Deal lifts the arms embargo against Iran, the world's largest state sponsor of terror. And the more detail we learn, the worse it seems,” Gardner tweeted.

Sen. Lindsey Graham Lindsey Olin GrahamActing DHS chief testifies about situation at border Acting DHS chief testifies about situation at border Senate GOP to vote on Trump's .5 billion border request next week MORE (S.C.) — "The deal is far worse than I ever dreamed it could be and will be a nightmare for the region, our national security and eventually the world at large,” the 2016 contender told Bloomberg News.

Sen. Chuck Grassley Charles (Chuck) Ernest GrassleySteve King denied seat on Air Force One for Trump trip to Iowa: report Steve King denied seat on Air Force One for Trump trip to Iowa: report Grassley: 'Congress has delegated too much authority to the president' MORE (Iowa) — “I’ve always been skeptical about an agreement with Iran that fails to fully dismantle its nuclear program. This is a country that sponsors terrorism and has a history of hiding its nuclear program from outside inspectors.”

Sen. Orrin Hatch Orrin Grant HatchTrump to award Medal of Freedom to economist Arthur Laffer Trump gambles in push for drug import proposal Biden's role in Anita Hill hearings defended by witness not allowed to testify MORE (Utah)

Sen. Dean Heller Dean Arthur HellerThis week: Barr back in hot seat over Mueller report Trump suggests Heller lost reelection bid because he was 'hostile' during 2016 presidential campaign Trump picks ex-oil lobbyist David Bernhardt for Interior secretary MORE (Nev.)

Sen. John Hoeven John Henry HoevenSenators introduce bill to prevent border agency from selling personal data Overnight Energy: Bipartisan Senate group seeks more funding for carbon capture technology | Dems want documents on Interior pick's lobbying work | Officials push to produce more electric vehicle batteries in US Officials, automakers aim to produce more electric vehicle batteries in US: report MORE (N.D.) — “All along I’ve believed our best chance to prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon is strong sanctions until they absolutely agree to give up their nuclear program with anywhere, anytime inspections,” Hoeven told the Grand Forks Herald.

Sen. James Inhofe James (Jim) Mountain InhofeKey Republican pushes B defense funding bump for 'core military needs' Key Republican pushes B defense funding bump for 'core military needs' Trump defense pick expected to face tense confirmation MORE (Okla.) — “I do not trust Iran who has been the leading state sponsor of terrorism for generations, and I have no faith that President Obama’s deal will change the irrational and dangerous behaviors of Iran's government leaders,” according to a statement.

Sen. Johnny Isakson John (Johnny) Hardy IsaksonSenate passes disaster aid bill after deal with Trump GOP senators work to get Trump on board with new disaster aid package Senators say they've reached deal on Puerto Rico aid MORE (Ga.) — "I have said from day one that I will not be part of any agreement that allows the Iranians to develop a nuclear weapon," Isakson said in a statement.

Sen. Ron Johnson Ronald (Ron) Harold JohnsonLawmakers demand answers on Border Patrol data breach Lawmakers demand answers on Border Patrol data breach Former Trump chief of staff Reince Priebus officially joins Navy MORE (Wis.) — "I will vote to disapprove this awful and dangerous agreement," he said in a statement.

Sen. Mark Kirk Mark Steven KirkEx-GOP Sen. Kirk registers to lobby The global reality behind 'local' problems Dems vow swift action on gun reform next year MORE (Ill.) — “If Congress doesn't stop this bad deal, the American people will be left with a nuclear Iran and a nuclear arms race in the Middle East. Congress can and should insist on a better deal,” said Kirk in a Chicago Tribune op-ed. Kirk is a top Democratic target in 2016.

Sen. James Lankford (Okla.) — "This is a bad deal for America and I have decide [sic] to vote against it and do whatever I can to defeat this agreement,” said Lankford in a statement on his Facebook page.

Sen. Mike Lee Michael (Mike) Shumway LeeHow Congress can take back control over tariffs How Congress can take back control over tariffs Overnight Energy: Trump allows use of ethanol gas in summer | Move to benefit farmers | Britain goes two weeks without using coal | EPA watchdog hands Pruitt probe findings to Congress MORE (Utah) — "The agreement...that he has negotiated is a bad deal. I intend to do everything I can to stop it," Lee said during a town hall in Utah on Sept. 1.

Sen. John McCain John Sidney McCainShanahan calls on Pentagon leaders to 'reinforce the apolitical nature' of US military Shanahan calls on Pentagon leaders to 'reinforce the apolitical nature' of US military Meghan McCain: 'I feel slighted as a conservative' by Biden flip-flop on Hyde Amendment MORE (Ariz.) — McCain, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, said the upper chamber would have the 60 votes to vote down the deal.

Sen. Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellAugust recess under threat as yearly spending bills pile up August recess under threat as yearly spending bills pile up McConnell brushes off question about special treatment from Chao MORE (Ky.) — “The comprehensive nuclear agreement announced today appears to further the flawed elements of April’s interim agreement because the Obama administration approached these talks from a flawed perspective: reaching the best deal acceptable to Iran, rather than actually advancing our national goal of ending Iran's nuclear program," said the majority leader.

Sen. Shelley Moore Capito Shelley Wellons Moore CapitoAugust recess under threat as yearly spending bills pile up August recess under threat as yearly spending bills pile up Congress, White House near deal on spending, debt limit MORE (W.Va.)

Sen. Jerry Moran Gerald (Jerry) MoranGOP senator rescued from Camelback Mountain in Arizona after injuring ankle On The Money: Judge upholds House subpoena for Trump financial records | Trump vows to appeal ruling by 'Obama-appointed judge' | Canada, Mexico lift retaliatory tariffs on US | IRS audit rate falls GOP senator calls for resolution of trade dispute: 'Farmers and ranchers are hurting' MORE (Kan.) — “My best guess is that Congress, by a majority vote, will reject this agreement,” Moran said at a town hall, according to the Topeka Capital-Journal. “I will vote that way. I think this agreement is horrific.”

Sen. Lisa Murkowski Lisa Ann MurkowskiAugust recess under threat as yearly spending bills pile up August recess under threat as yearly spending bills pile up Overnight Energy: Trump appoints Social Security watchdog to also oversee Interior | Critics question EPA guidance on pipelines | Battle over science roils EPA MORE (Alaska) — "Iran got the most out of this negotiation and gave the least. Iran's strategy of nuclear extortion has not been disabled. To the contrary, it has been rewarded," she said in a statement.

Sen. Rand Paul Randal (Rand) Howard PaulSenators take bipartisan step toward blocking Trump's Saudi arms sales Senators take bipartisan step toward blocking Trump's Saudi arms sales Overnight Health Care: Liberals rip Democratic leaders for writing drug pricing bill in secret | Dems demand answers from company that shelters migrant kids | Measles cases top 1,000 MORE (Ky.) — "The proposed agreement with Iran is unacceptable and I will vote against the agreement," the 2016 contender tweeted.

Sen. David Perdue (Ga.) — "This deal won’t prevent Iran from becoming a nuclear weapons state — it just delays it," said Perdue on July 23. "As I’ve said all along, I cannot support any deal that allows Iran to become a nuclear weapons state. Not now, not in 10 years, not ever."

Sen. Rob Portman Robert (Rob) Jones PortmanHouse passes bill to establish DHS cyber 'first responder' teams House passes bill to establish DHS cyber 'first responder' teams Democrats needle GOP on standing up to Trump MORE (Ohio) — "The agreement falls far short of our own stated goals and that of the international community," said Portman in a statement first reported by The Columbus Dispatch. "This is another example of another red-line the Administration has drawn but failed to honor.”

Sen. Jim Risch James (Jim) Elroy RischSenators take bipartisan step toward blocking Trump's Saudi arms sales Senators take bipartisan step toward blocking Trump's Saudi arms sales House Democrats considering probe into Giuliani's overseas political work: report MORE (Idaho) — "This deal falls disastrously short of what the Obama Administration originally promised and gives the Iranian government what it desires,” Risch said in a statement. “The West will have to live with a nuclear Iran and will abandon our closest ally, Israel, under this horribly flawed agreement.”

Sen. Pat Roberts Charles (Pat) Patrick RobertsEPA exempts farms from reporting pollution tied to animal waste EPA exempts farms from reporting pollution tied to animal waste Conservatives spark threat of bloody GOP primaries MORE (Kan.)

Sen. Mike Rounds (S.D.) — "I feel very uncomfortable with it. I think it's a mistake," said Rounds in August, according to the Argus Leader. "I think they got out-negotiated and I think, in doing so, it's not a good deal for the United States.”

Sen. Marco Rubio Marco Antonio RubioRepublicans warn Cuccinelli won't get confirmed by GOP Senate Republicans warn Cuccinelli won't get confirmed by GOP Senate Bipartisan senators push new bill to improve foreign lobbying disclosures MORE (Fla.) — "I expect that a significant majority in Congress will share my skepticism of this agreement and vote it down,” said the 2016 contender.

Sen. Ben Sasse (Neb.) — “Sadly, the Administration just lit the fuse for a nuclear arms race in the Middle East,” Sasse said in a statement. “We all know Iran’s neighbors will not sit idly as the world's largest state-sponsor of terror becomes a nuclear-threshold state.”

Sen. Tim Scott Timothy (Tim) Eugene ScottOn The Money: Trump weighs emergency declaration for Mexico tariffs | GOP senators look to rein in Trump on trade | Powell says Fed may cut rates if trade war hurts economy On The Money: Trump weighs emergency declaration for Mexico tariffs | GOP senators look to rein in Trump on trade | Powell says Fed may cut rates if trade war hurts economy Trump floats new emergency declaration to impose Mexico tariffs MORE (S.C.) — "It's hard to make a good deal with bad actors, and this #IranDeal leads us down a dangerous path," Scott tweeted.

Sen. Jeff Sessions Jefferson (Jeff) Beauregard SessionsBarr compares his return to DOJ to D-Day invasion Barr compares his return to DOJ to D-Day invasion University of Alabama expected to return .5M over donor's abortion remarks MORE (Ala.)

Sen. Richard Shelby (Ala.) — "Well I think it's a disaster,” Shelby told Alabama TV station WVTM. "Ultimately it was a bad deal. ... If Putin's for it, why would we be for it?"

Sen. Dan Sullivan (Alaska) — "Principal objective of Iran negotiations was to keep Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. This #IranDeal does NOT do that," he tweeted.

Sen. John Thune John Randolph ThunePublic policy expert: US has become 'outlier' on immigration practices Public policy expert: US has become 'outlier' on immigration practices The Hill's Morning Report - Warren's moment: Policy plans and rising polls MORE (S.D.) — "A nuclear armed Iran is a threat to the United States, and an agreement that allows Iran to retain all the components necessary to build a nuclear bomb is not a good deal for America and should be rejected," he said in a statement.

Sen. Thom Tillis (N.C.) — The freshman senator tweeted his concerns: "Democrats & Republicans share grave concerns over the bad #IranDeal & Congress has a responsibility to do everything it can to stop it."

Sen. Pat Toomey (Pa.) — "This deal would give Iran the capacity to inflict harm in much more destructive ways. I will do everything I can to defeat this deal, and I encourage everyone to do the same," Toomey wrote in an op-ed.

Sen. David Vitter David Bruce VitterSenate confirms Trump judge who faced scrutiny over abortion views Collins votes against Trump judicial pick Progressive group targets Susan Collins over Trump judicial pick MORE (La.) — Vitter tweeted, "I think this #Iran agreement is a really, really bad deal for America, for Israel, and for freedom."

Sen. Roger Wicker Roger Frederick WickerHillicon Valley: Democratic state AGs sue to block T-Mobile-Sprint merger | House kicks off tech antitrust probe | Maine law shakes up privacy debate | Senators ask McConnell to bring net neutrality to a vote Hillicon Valley: Democratic state AGs sue to block T-Mobile-Sprint merger | House kicks off tech antitrust probe | Maine law shakes up privacy debate | Senators ask McConnell to bring net neutrality to a vote Lawmakers demand answers on Border Patrol data breach MORE (Miss.) — Wicker said he would vote against the deal because he didn’t trust Iran’s leaders to keep up their end according to Mississippi station WAPT. “When you’re dealing with somebody, you consider the past conduct of who you’re negotiating with … the people in charge of Iran have shown no indication that they’re trustworthy,” he said.