Senate rejects effort to strip funding from Planned Parenthood
The Senate on Thursday rejected a short-term spending bill that would defund Planned Parenthood, thwarting the opening move by Republican leaders to avoid a government shutdown on Oct. 1.

Senators voted 47-52 on ending debate on the short-term continuing resolution, well short of the 60 votes needed. The legislation would have funded the government through Dec. 11.

ADVERTISEMENT

The vote divided Republicans, with eight of them breaking ranks. Sens. Kelly Ayotte Kelly Ann AyotteElection Countdown: O'Rourke brings in massive M haul | Deal on judges lets senators return to the trail | Hurricane puts Florida candidates in the spotlight | Adelson spending big to save GOP in midterms GOP mulls having outside counsel question Kavanaugh, Ford Pallbearers, speakers announced for McCain's DC memorial service and Capitol ceremony MORE (N.H.), Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsParties start gaming out 2020 battleground White House ousts Sessions Collins: Mueller 'must be allowed' to continue Russia probe MORE (Maine), Tom Cotton Thomas (Tom) Bryant CottonPompeo says 'no one's going to argue' he and Trump aren't tough on Iran amid new sanctions Flake: Congress should not continue Kavanaugh investigations GOP senator suspects Schumer of being behind release of Ford letter MORE (Ark.), Dean Heller Dean Arthur HellerThe Hill's Morning Report — Washington resets after midterms, Sessions fired Election Countdown: Midterm fallout | What we learned | What to watch next | Trump calls out lawmakers who lost | A look at the undecided races | Vote deepens urban, rural divide | Women help deliver Dems House | McConnell thanks Trump for Senate gains Schumer: 2020 'doesn't bode well' for GOP MORE (Nev.) Mark Kirk Mark Steven KirkThis week: Trump heads to Capitol Hill Trump attending Senate GOP lunch Tuesday High stakes as Trump heads to Hill MORE (Ill.), Lisa Murkowski Lisa Ann MurkowskiTrump and Pelosi set to collide as Democrats celebrate their power Poll: Palin unpopular in Alaska following jab at Murkowski Conservatives bankrolled and dominated Kavanaugh confirmation media campaign MORE (Alaska), Rand Paul Randal (Rand) Howard PaulGOP pollster says Republicans could break with Trump on Saudi Arabia Overnight Defense: Trump says 15,000 troops could deploy to border | Mattis insists deployment is not 'stunt' | Pompeo calls for Yemen peace talks in November GOP senators press Trump to halt nuclear energy talks with Saudi Arabia MORE (Ky.) and Ben Sasse (Neb.) all voted against moving forward.

Sen. Joe Manchin Joseph (Joe) ManchinDemocrats face tough 2020 battle after blowing chance at blue wave Trump's acting AG doesn't plan to recuse himself from Russia probe: report Manchin: We're 'on the verge' of a constitutional crisis due to Sessions's firing MORE (W.Va.) was the only Democrat to vote in favor.

After the vote, Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellOvernight Health Care: House Dems plan early vote on pre-existing conditions | ObamaCare repeal off the table for now | Dem overtures to Trump on drug pricing worry pharma Parties start gaming out 2020 battleground Todd Young launches bid for Senate Republican campaign chief MORE (R-Ky.) filed a new short-term spending bill that would fund the government and Planned Parenthood.

"I regret the Democratic leadership determined a crisis would be necessary to advance a policy aim of growing the government and that our colleagues decided accordingly to block every single funding bill," McConnell said. "We've been forced to pursue a continuing resolution as a result."

The majority leader could file cloture on the new funding bill in the afternoon. That could set the stage for a final vote early next week.

One senator who could drag out the process is Sen. Ted Cruz Rafael (Ted) Edward CruzFox CEO rips activists outside Carlson home as ‘reprehensible’ Bernie Sanders on Gillum, Abrams: Many white voters 'uncomfortable' voting for black candidates Activists converge on home of Fox's Tucker Carlson: 'You are not safe' MORE.

The Texas Republican, who is running for president, has slammed Republican leadership during the funding fight, telling reporters that they “will support 100 percent of the priorities of Democrats.”

Cruz could try to force weekend work by objecting to a request to adjourn on Friday, but he could be rebuffed by a majority vote.

The presidential hopeful has reasons of his own to avoid weekend work, as he is currently scheduled to campaign in Iowa on Saturday.

Sen. Orrin Hatch Orrin Grant HatchHow much power do states have? Supreme Court holds the answer On The Money: Trump says he won't give up tax returns | Likely Dem chair vows to subpoena | Stocks rally on Dem House takeover | Tough midterm for many GOP tax writers Grassley to make chairmanship decision after meeting with colleagues next week MORE (R-Utah), questioned as to whether the Senate would work this weekend, said "no." Asked if he was sure, he replied, "yeah, I'm pretty sure."

The White House, meanwhile, reiterated its pledge to veto any spending bill that reaches President Obama's desk without funding for Planned Parenthood.

“By eliminating Federal funding for a major provider of health care, the Senate amendment to H.J.Res. 61 would limit access to health care for women, men, and families across the Nation, and disproportionately impact low-income individuals,” the Office of Management and Budget said in a statement.

Senate Democrats, and even some Republicans, slammed Thursday’s vote, suggesting it was a waste of time with less than a week left before government funding expires and federal workers are furloughed — something that last happened in 2013.

Minority Leader Harry Reid Harry Mason ReidDemocrats have a Puerto Rican problem Dem Susie Lee defeats Danny Tarkanian to retain Nevada House seat My father wants to end illegal immigration with this answer MORE (D-Nev.) said Thursday’s vote was the latest in a line of Republican “publicity stunts.”

“Instead of voting today on a bipartisan way forward, we’ll have another failed vote,” he said. “Republicans should abandon their commitment to fruitless votes and pass a clean funding bill.”

Cecile Richards, the president of Planned Parenthood, said Thursday's vote "should send the message loud and clear to the House of Representatives that Americans overwhelmingly support the care that Planned Parenthood provides."

The new funding bill is expected to have the votes to pass the Senate, though Cruz and Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), who is also running for president, have pledged to vote against it.

But it remains to be seen whether the spending bill can pass the House.

Speaker John Boehner John Andrew BoehnerMcMorris Rodgers won't run for GOP leadership Newly empowered House Dems eyeing Trump need to learn from Gingrich debacle Media’s blame-Trump narrative ignores midterm realities MORE (R-Ohio) is under intense pressure from conservative lawmakers to stand firm on defunding Planned Parenthood.

More than 30 House conservatives have pledged to vote against any funding bill that includes Planned Parenthood, spurred by a series of controversial undercover videos dealing with the organization’s handling of fetal tissue.

With chatter of a potential coup against the Speaker growing, Boehner John Andrew BoehnerMcMorris Rodgers won't run for GOP leadership Newly empowered House Dems eyeing Trump need to learn from Gingrich debacle Media’s blame-Trump narrative ignores midterm realities MORE is treading carefully.

He has yet to say whether he will schedule a vote on a bill that does not defund Planned Parenthood, though a decision could be announced when House Republicans gather Friday morning for a conference meeting.

Boehner would likely need Democratic votes to pass such a bill, given the expected defections on the Republican side.

Sen. John Cornyn John CornynTrump's shortlist for attorney general takes shape Beto lost but Texas Democrats have a lot to celebrate Former congressman sentenced to 10 years in prison for campaign finance scheme MORE (R-Texas) predicted that the Senate would “quickly” send something to the House, where lawmakers will “have to figure out what they can do.”

"The House has got their own process right now, and I think they're kind of waiting to see what we do," added Sen. John Thune John Randolph ThuneCongress should pass bill to prevent stacked taxation of digital purchases GOP lawmakers condemn attempted attacks on Democrats Democrats slide in battle for Senate MORE (R-S.D.).

This story was updated at 3:46 p.m.