Shaq: Time to give Trump a chance
ADVERTISEMENT

“We have a process that’s been going on forever,” the NBA Hall of Famer told ITK on Wednesday. “And whoever wins, you just hope he does what he says he’s going to do. You know, candidate Trump promised a lot of people a lot of things.

“Now that he’s president-elect, you just hope that he can make the world a better place. He won fair and square. We have to give him a chance,” added O’Neal. “There’s no need talking about recounts and this and that.”

But what O’Neal does want to talk about is the fight against impaired driving. The basketball star, who also serves as a Florida Police Department reserve officer, is making a return trip to Capitol Hill on Wednesday at a briefing hosted by Responsibility.org about battling dangerous driving. He came to the nation’s capital last year with the organization for the same issue.

“We’re trying to help raise funds so officers can help get properly trained when it comes to drunk and distracted drivers. You’re talking about being impaired, you have to focus on the four D’s: drunk, drowsiness, distracted and drugged,” said O’Neal.

Training that helps officers to recognize impaired driving, the Los Angeles Lakers and Miami Heat great said, “is very long, very time-consuming and very costly. A lot of these municipalities don’t have the funding that they need.”

When asked what’s harder, a tough basketball showdown or getting through to lawmakers, O’Neal, 44, replied: “I would have to say getting legislation passed in Congress. You have a lot of people up there and you have to try to convince the majority that this is what you think should happen.”

What’s not so tough for O’Neal is schooling his opponents on the court.

So who would be more likely to win in a one-on-one match against him: President Obama or President-elect Trump?

“Neither,” O’Neal replied without missing a beat.

“They’d both be toast?” ITK exclaimed.

“Barbecue chicken is what I like to call it,” O’Neal said with a laugh.