Miley Cyrus mocks previous pledge to leave US if Trump won: 'That's dumb'
Miley Cyrus, one of several famous names who vowed to leave the United States if Donald Trump Donald John TrumpSouth Carolina detention centers say it will not relocate inmates in mandatory evacuation zones Letitia James routs three Dems to win New York AG primary Trump slams Kerry for 'illegal' meetings with Iran MORE won the election, is now singing a different tune, calling it "ignorant" to hightail it out of the country because of the president.

“I’m not f---ing leaving the country, that’s some ignorant shit, that’s dumb,” Cyrus, 24, says in an interview with NME published Friday.

“Because that’s me abandoning my country when I think I’ve got a good thing to say to my country. And trust me, I hear every day on my Instagram, ‘Just leave already! When are you going to leave?’ Well, that’s not going to be any good.”

Back in March 2016, Cyrus wrote to her nearly 72 million followers on Instagram of Trump, “Honestly f--- this shit I am moving if this is my president! I don’t say things I don’t mean.”

ADVERTISEMENT

“Does it really matter where I am?” the “Malibu” singer said in her NME interview. “Because wherever I am, my f---ing voice is gonna be heard, and I’ll make sure of it.”

Asked if she regretted making the remark about escaping abroad if Trump made it to the White House, she replied, “I didn’t leave the country.”

Cyrus was one of several performers who pledged to exit the U.S. pending a Trump win but have stayed put, including actress Lena Dunham, Netflix talk show host Chelsea Handler, and Samuel L. Jackson, among others.

The politically active singer — who hit the campaign trail for Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonCynthia Nixon camp partially blames high turnout for loss Bannon says right must support ‘RINOs’ Graham to renew call for second special counsel MORE last year — also revealed that one of the songs on her new album is an ode to the former Democratic presidential nominee.

“Well, ‘Inspired’, I wrote that for Hillary Clinton [but] I’m not fighting fire with fire, hate with hate. I’m fighting hate with love,” Cyrus said.

“I’m doing this concert this week in Vegas and for ‘Party In The USA’ the screens will say ‘education’ and ‘healthcare’ and ‘equality’, ‘justice’, ‘freedom’, ‘liberation’, ‘expression’. These things are what make up our country,” the entertainer added. “It’s not a party in the USA if it’s filled with hate, discrimination, walls, violence, all these things.”