This is a war, and Black Lives Matter is the enemy
Americans watching the news of the murders of police officers in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, are observing a civil war unfold within our borders. A war between rule of law and anarchy-seeking hate.

The murders in Baton Rouge, and before them Dallas, were not acts of domestic terrorism but guerrilla urban warfare against the police - who represent law and order - against the Constitution, and against the American way. The police, the men and women whom I as the Sheriff of Milwaukee County ask to put their lives on the line, are on the front lines of this war.

It’s time to come to the aid of our police, our front-line soldiers, by calling this war, and not terrorism. Avoiding the truth through wordsmithing – the false narrative of the lone-wolf – is contemptible as more innocent officers perish while our politicians hem and haw.

We as a people need to declare that we stand with rule of law, and not with the false tales of the revolutionary Marxist forces, who most recently have rebranded themselves from Occupy Wall Street to Black Lives Matter.

ADVERTISEMENT

The targeting of police for hate and for murder is by Black Lives Matter and their accomplices are, in actuality, the targeting is our rule of law. Groups like Black Lives Matter, blessed by the progressive left and most recently our own President Obama, need to be exposed and condemned for their true aims: revolution.

Black Lives Matter organizers hold the same values of America’s age-old enemies, who have always fought the ideals of our Constitution and our nation. That they have now taken on as their costume a false concern for Black America only adds to their depravity.

This president will not name Black Lives Matter the enemy. Instead, the White House proactively defended the revolutionary group in the most unfitting of contexts: the eulogies for fallen police officers in Dallas, Texas. He has invited those who speak hate against our rule of law and police officers, in some cases the only element that stands between the violence-plagued communities and their utter destruction, into his fold. The Democrats and their leaders have made their choice known to the American people: utter capitulation.

Alton Sterling’s own 15-year-old son and his calls for peace have provided more leadership for our country and courage than President Obama. The disgust and contempt I have for this president’s and his party’s actions could not be more complete.

We have several forces internal and external attacking our rule of law: ISIS, Black Lives Matter, Occupy Wall Street – just the most recent iterations of the elements who brand themselves as unique but seek the same revolutionary aim: take down the West, the philosophy of equality before the law, and replace it with their authority, their rules, their hate.

So we are left with an enemy within our borders, without our borders, and a weak enabler of that enemy at the head of our government.

The Americans I know are not willing to abandon our police and our great Democratic experiment to the pathetic cowardice—or worse—of the progressive left.

We fight back, and that comes by first describing the fight as what it is: guerrilla warfare. When we define Baton Rouge, Dallas, or even the Miami nightclub, as terrorist attacks, we are setting ourselves up for slow and steady obliteration.

We “go about our lives” with terrorist threats. We fight back and win when we are at war.

It’s time to reclaim our future and it begins by condemning Black Lives Matter, organizers and inspiration for hate, friend to enemies of law and order.

Clarke is the Milwaukee County sheriff. Follow him @SheriffClarke

The views expressed by Contributors are their own and are not the views of The Hill.