Poll: Biden holds double-digit lead over field of 2020 Dem presidential contenders
Former Vice President Joe Biden Joe BidenDemocrats vow to repeal tax reform, putting taxes in focus for 2020 America is ready for a woman president — when the right candidate appears Two years after Trump's Paris climate move, frustrated Democrats eye 2020 MORE has a double-digit lead over the next closest contender in a new poll of potential 2020 Democratic presidential candidates.



According to the latest data from Harvard CAPS/Harris Poll, provided exclusively to The Hill, Biden has 27 percent among Democrats.



The next closest candidate is Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersProtester takes mic from Kamala Harris while on stage at event Media blockade on progressives is helping rig the Democratic primaries again America is ready for a woman president — when the right candidate appears MORE (I-Vt.), at 16 percent, followed by 2016 Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonHickenlooper booed in San Francisco for denouncing socialism House Democratic campaign chief defends efforts to keep big tent for party Mueller seeks quiet retreat from public life MORE and media mogul Oprah Winfrey, each at 13 percent.



Sen. Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth Ann Warren2020 Dems react to Virginia shooting: 'We must act' Trump launching 2020 campaign on June 18 with Florida rally Poll: Biden leads 2020 Dem field by 19 points MORE (D-Mass.) is the only other candidate to pull double-digit support, at 10 percent. Rounding out the field are Sens. Cory Booker Cory Anthony Booker2020 Democrats celebrate Pride Month by expressing support for LGBT rights 2020 Dems react to Virginia shooting: 'We must act' Warren unveils new plan to allow presidents to be indicted MORE (D-N.J.) and Kamala Harris Kamala Devi HarrisProtester takes mic from Kamala Harris while on stage at event 2020 Democrats celebrate Pride Month by expressing support for LGBT rights 2020 Dems react to Virginia shooting: 'We must act' MORE (D-Calif.), with 4 percent support each. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) gets 2 percent support and New York Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand Kirsten Elizabeth GillibrandProtester takes mic from Kamala Harris while on stage at event 2020 Democrats celebrate Pride Month by expressing support for LGBT rights Gillibrand marks Pride Month with LGBT rights agenda MORE (D) is at 1 percent.



“Biden is now emerging as a very early front-runner — he beats handily even the celebrity candidates that have been floated,” said Harvard CAPS/Harris Poll co-director Mark Penn.

ADVERTISEMENT

“The results show the broad constituency of the party favoring someone who has an appeal to the Working Class voters that Trump captured,” Penn said. “While early leads mean little, the results show Biden is well positioned this time for a run. The rest right now have fairly limited national constituencies for president but have a lot of time yet to build up their images.”Biden has said that he planned on running in 2016 until his son, Beau Biden, was diagnosed with brain cancer and passed away. In a December interview with The View, Biden, 75, did not rule out a 2020 run.“If I were offered the nomination by the Lord Almighty right now, today, I would say no because we're not ready, the family's not ready to do this,” Biden said. “If, in a year from now, if we're ready, and nobody has moved in that I think can do it, then I may very well do it.”Democrats are expecting a large field of candidates eager to take on, whose approval rating is historically low for a first-term president.Earlier this month, Winfrey ignited a frenzy of speculation over a potential run after a well-received speech at the Golden Globes.At 89 percent, Winfrey has near-universal name recognition. She is viewed favorably by 57 percent of voters, with only 32 percent having a negative view of her. Winfrey is viewed positively by 77 percent of Democrats, 56 percent of independents and 35 percent of Republicans — the best showing among Republicans for any Democratic candidate.Sanders is similarly well-known and remains one of the most popular elected officials in the country at 53 favorable and 36 unfavorable.Clinton’s favorability rating has not recovered in her time away from the spotlight. She is at 38 percent favorable and 57 unfavorable.The rest of the field of candidates is not as well known. Only 70 percent recognize Warren’s name. The Massachusetts senator sits at 34 percent favorable and 35 unfavorable.The Harvard CAPS/Harris Poll online survey of 1,192 registered voters was conducted from Jan. 13 to Jan. 16 The partisan breakdown is 37 percent Democrat, 31 percent Republican, 29 percent independent and 4 percent other.The Harvard CAPS/Harris Poll is a collaboration of the Center for American Political Studies at Harvard University and The Harris Poll. The Hill will be working with Harvard/Harris Poll throughout 2017. Full poll results will be posted online later this week.The Harvard CAPS/Harris Poll survey is an online sample drawn from the Harris Panel and weighted to reflect known demographics. As a representative online sample, it does not report a probability confidence interval.