Dem reps: Trump is 'moving' toward impeachment
Two Democratic members of the House said Wednesday that President Trump is marching down the path toward impeachment after firing FBI Director James Comey, even if they don’t have the votes yet to follow through in the House.



Speaking on a conference call organized by the Progressive Change Campaign Committee, Reps. Ruben Gallego (D-Ariz.) and Mark Pocan Mark William PocanAppeals court rules House chaplain can reject secular prayers Dems counter portrait of discord Divided Dems look to regroup MORE (D-Wis.) said Comey's firing would unite Democrats in an effort to impeach the president.

The Democrats said they would first need to prove Trump was guilty of obstruction of justice or criminal malfeasance in colluding with a foreign government.

ADVERTISEMENT

Before Trump fired him, Comey had been investigating potential links between the Trump campaign and Russia, which is suspected of working to influence the outcome of the presidential election.



The lawmakers also acknowledged Democrats would likely need to take back the House in 2018 before any impeachment could proceed.



“We are certainly moving down that path,” said Gallego. “There is a lot of runway until we get there, but the president is not helping himself by firing the person investigating him. … We don’t have the numbers to do something right now, but when it comes to a point when we feel there is no other recourse, you’d have — I think — we’d have the full support of the Democratic caucus.”



Pocan said that if Democrats had an "impeachment clock" like the "doomsday clock" meant to warn of nuclear war, it would have just moved one hour closer to midnight.



“We always, as we talk to people, say [impeachment] is one of the tools we have on the table to try and get the administration to do the right thing,” Pocan said.



“This has got to still be on the table as an option if there was obstruction of justice by firing FBI director. … We’re seeing Democrats and Republicans concerned with timing of this decision. … We would first need a majority in Congress or some Republican votes … but we need to keep every tool available to make sure president follows the law.”