Rubio pushes back on media for calling Bible verses ‘Republican’
Sen. Marco Rubio Marco Antonio RubioFlorida questions Senate chairman over claim that Russians have ‘penetrated’ election systems A paid leave plan cannot make you choose between kids or retirement New sanctions would hurt Russia — but hurt American industry more MORE (R-Fla.) on Sunday pushed back at a news article that claimed the conservative lawmaker was tweeting "the most Republican part of the Bible."

"Proverbs is the Republican part of the bible? I don't think Solomon had yet joined the GOP when he wrote the first 29 chapters of Proverbs," Rubio said tongue-in-check, while retweeting Politico Magazine's story on the matter.

Marco Rubio is tweeting the most Republican part of the bible https://t.co/fBnowNmlBa via @POLITICOMag pic.twitter.com/QMO8errGVg — POLITICO (@politico) July 9, 2017

Rubio's response aimed to poke holes in the article's claim that the proverbs are Republican, making a crack at the fact that U.S. political parties did not exist at the time the proverbs were compiled.

ADVERTISEMENT

Sen. James Lankford (R-Okla.) also came to Rubio's defense, weighing in that the Bible is "inspired by God" and that it is "greater than any political party."

The Bible is not Republican nor Democrat. It's so much greater than any political party... it's inspired by God. (2 Timothy 3:16) https://t.co/qWFvhpdhf0 — Sen. James Lankford (@SenatorLankford) July 9, 2017

Joel Baden, a professor at the Yale Divinity School, authored the article titled: "Marco Rubio is tweeting the most Republican part of the bible."

In it, he argued that the proverbs try to show people how they can live righteously, which has a set system for rewarding and punishing individuals.

"Proverbs is notable in that is presents a fairly consistent view of the world: The righteous are rewarded, and the wicked are punished," Baden wrote in part. "In the understanding of Proverbs, everyone gets what is coming to them; behavior is directly linked to reward or punishment."

Baden suggested adherence to the proverbs would spill into the lawmaker's policy efforts.

"This worldview has social consequences: Those who succeed in life must be more righteous than those who struggle," he wrote.

The article then points to several tweets the Florida senator began making on Twitter since mid-May.

“They will die from lack of discipline, lost because of their great follow Proverbs 5:23,” Rubio tweeted Wednesday, which was cited as an example.

“Commit to the LORD whatever you do, and your plans will succeed," Rubio also tweeted last month.