Schumer says he offered to discuss border wall as part of Trump deal
Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer Charles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerDemocratic strategist says McConnell's comments on Supreme Court vacancy are 'a blessing' Democrats blast McConnell for saying Republicans would fill a 2020 Supreme Court vacancy McConnell says Republicans would fill 2020 Supreme Court vacancy MORE (D-N.Y.) said early Saturday that he agreed to discuss the U.S.-Mexico border wall as part of negotiations with President Trump Donald John TrumpLondon mayor says UK is 'on the wrong side of history' with Trump visit Hickenlooper booed in San Francisco for denouncing socialism Cuomo calls Trump base 'mostly middle aged angry white males' MORE, but wasn't able to win him over.

"During the meeting, in exchange for strong [Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals] protections, I reluctantly put the border wall on the table for the discussion. Even that was not enough to entice the president to finish the deal," Schumer said from the Senate floor.

Schumer and Trump met at the White House earlier in the day Friday to talk about a potential deal ahead of the midnight deadline.

ADVERTISEMENT

Schumer said early Saturday morning that the two had a "lengthy and substantive discussion," and Trump appeared to be on board during their meeting.

"In my heart, I thought we might have a deal tonight. That was how far we had come. That's how positive our discussion felt. We had a good meeting," he said.

Schumer's floor speech comes after Democrats emerged from a closed-door caucus meeting on Friday evening, claiming that the two men had been close to a deal but the president balked.

A Senate aide confirmed that Trump had walked away from a potential deal.

Trump has long championed building a wall along the United States's southern border, while Democrats have sharply criticized his policies aimed at combatting illegal immigration.

Republicans on Capitol Hill have signaled they will not move an immigration bill if it doesn't have Trump's support.