Senate GOP tax bill will include repeal of ObamaCare mandate
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTaylor Swift urges GOP senator to support Equality Act: 'I personally reject the President's stance' Two years after Trump's Paris climate move, frustrated Democrats eye 2020 Hillicon Valley: Mueller remarks put spotlight on election security bills | US to ask visa applicants for social media info | Tech blasts Trump tariffs on Mexico MORE (R-Ky.) announced Tuesday that the Senate tax bill will include language to repeal ObamaCare’s individual mandate, which could make it tougher for moderate Republicans to support.

Conservatives led by GOP Sens. Ted Cruz Rafael (Ted) Edward Cruz'Chernobyl' producer spars with conservative radio host Bongino over socialism Beto O'Rourke spoke with Hillary Clinton about his 2020 campaign The Hill's Morning Report — Trump turns the page back to Mueller probe MORE (Texas), Rand Paul Randal (Rand) Howard PaulThe Memo: Trump's anti-Mueller rage is for real Trump campaign manager calls Amash 'Phony,' 'Grandstanding Swamp Creature' Amash gets standing ovation at first town hall after calling for Trump's impeachment MORE (Ky.) and Tom Cotton Thomas (Tom) Bryant CottonGOP senator says Iran needs to 'stop acting like an outlaw' Sen. Tom Cotton: 'Memorial Day is our most sacred holiday' The Hill's Morning Report — After contentious week, Trump heads for Japan MORE (Ark.) pushed hard to include the provision, which would eliminate the federal penalty on people who do not buy health insurance. President Trump has also pushed for the provision to be part of the tax bill.

McConnell told reporters that adding the individual mandate repeal will make it easier to muster 50 votes to pass the bill.

ADVERTISEMENT

“We’re optimistic that inserting the individual mandate repeal would be helpful and that’s obviously the view of the Senate Finance Committee Republicans as well,” McConnell said.

It will raise an estimated $300 billion to $400 billion over the next year that could be used to pay for lowering individual and business tax rates even further.

Sen. John Thune John Randolph ThuneTo-do list piles up for Congress Frustration boils over with Senate's 'legislative graveyard' Hillicon Valley: Assange hit with 17 more charges | Facebook removes record 2.2B fake profiles | Senate passes anti-robocall bill | Senators offer bill to help companies remove Huawei equipment MORE (S.D.), the Senate's No. 3 Republican, told reporters there has been a whip count and he is confident Republicans can pass a tax bill that includes a measure to repeal the mandate.

Thune said a compromise bill negotiated by Sens. Lamar Alexander Andrew (Lamar) Lamar AlexanderTaylor Swift urges GOP senator to support Equality Act: 'I personally reject the President's stance' Overnight Health Care: Democratic governor signs Louisiana abortion bill | US measles cases break 25-year record | FDA to hold first hearing on CBD products Friday Overnight Health Care — Presented by PCMA — Senators unveil sweeping bipartisan health care package | House lawmakers float Medicare pricing reforms | Dems offer bill to guarantee abortion access MORE (R-Tenn.) and Patty Murray Patricia (Patty) Lynn MurrayOvernight Health Care: Democratic governor signs Louisiana abortion bill | US measles cases break 25-year record | FDA to hold first hearing on CBD products Friday On The Money: Trump hits Mexico with new tariffs over immigration | White House starts clock on approval for new NAFTA | Third House Republican blocks disaster aid bill Democratic senators rip Trump administration's trade aid to foreign firms, demand a halt MORE (D-Wash.), aimed at stabilizing ObamaCare markets, would be brought up separately. That bill funds key payments to insurers for two years in exchange for more flexibility for states to change ObamaCare rules.

“I’m pleased the Senate Finance Committee has accepted my proposal to repeal the Obamacare individual mandate in the tax legislation," Cotton said in a statement.

"Repealing the mandate pays for more tax cuts for working families and protects them from being fined by the IRS for not being able to afford insurance that Obamacare made unaffordable in the first place. I urge the House to include the mandate repeal in their tax legislation."

Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer Charles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerDemocratic strategist says McConnell's comments on Supreme Court vacancy are 'a blessing' Democrats blast McConnell for saying Republicans would fill a 2020 Supreme Court vacancy McConnell says Republicans would fill 2020 Supreme Court vacancy MORE (D-N.Y.) blasted the move, saying in a statement, "Republicans just can’t help themselves. They’re so determined to provide tax giveaways to the rich that they’re willing to raise premiums on millions of middle-class Americans and kick 13 million people off their health care."

Republican members of the Senate Finance Committee had met Monday night to discuss the repeal issue, Republican aides said. The full Senate GOP caucus discussed the idea at its lunch meeting on Tuesday.

Sen. John Kennedy John Neely KennedyMORE (R-La.) said the bulk of the GOP's policy luncheon Tuesday was focused on repealing the individual mandate through tax reform. He said the decision wasn't unanimous, but that no one threatened to vote against tax reform if it were included.

"This is totally different from health care. Nobody was standing up saying, 'If you do this, I'm not going to vote for the bill.' There's none of that. Everybody wants to get to yes," he said.

Discussions over repealing the individual mandate sparked a tussle in the Finance Committee's tax-bill markup following Senate lunches on Tuesday. Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch Orrin Grant HatchTrump to award Medal of Freedom to economist Arthur Laffer Trump gambles in push for drug import proposal Biden's role in Anita Hill hearings defended by witness not allowed to testify MORE (R-Utah) resumed the markup following lunches by saying he's "still working to finalize the details of the modification.”

Hatch urged committee members not to ask the expert witnesses about the individual mandate during the markup because it was not in the current version of the bill. He is expected to release modifications later on Tuesday.

“Long story short, no one needs to be talking about the individual mandate at this point,” he said.

Sen. Ron Wyden Ronald (Ron) Lee WydenSECURE Act will give Main Street workers needed security Ben & Jerry's vows to release CBD-infused ice cream once it's legalized Democratic senator threatens to block Treasury nominees over info on Trump's tax returns MORE (Ore.), the top Democrat on the committee, warned that repealing the individual mandate "will cause millions to lose their healthcare and millions more to pay higher premiums."

Wyden said none of the amendments filed in advance of the markup addressed the individual mandate or health care. He asked that lawmakers have until 5 p.m. on Wednesday to submit additional amendments to address other health issues.

Hatch rejected Wyden's request, saying that lawmakers can modify existing amendments. Wyden maintained that including individual mandate repeal in the tax bill "redefines the scope of this markup" and appealed Hatch's ruling that no additional amendments could be filed. But his appeal failed on a party-line vote of 11-14.

Hatch said that about 60 blank amendments had been filed and can be changed as long as they fall into the scope of the bill, which is the Internal Revenue Code.

Thune said that repealing the individual mandate would be germane.

“My understanding is the individual mandate is a tax collected by the IRS,” he said.

Thune also said the Alexander-Murray bill would be brought up separately, while the bill's GOP sponsor, Alexander, said that his legislation to temporarily stabilize the ObamaCare insurance marketplace "seems to be an indispensable companion to repeal of the individual mandate."

Experts have predicted repealing the mandate would undermine the stability of ObamaCare. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) has said 13 million people would lose health insurance. Alexander added that experts have called the penalty too low to make much of a difference, and the CBO recently revised its estimates of the mandate repeal.

"So I don't think we know [the impact], but I think it would be a very bad idea to repeal the individual mandate and not pass Alexander-Murray," Alexander said.

Kennedy said the savings of including the individual mandate repeal in the tax plan could "give relief to those middle and upper middle taxpayers who are not getting as much relief as they should" because of the bill's elimination of state and local tax deductions.

“Repealing the individual mandate as part of tax reform will provide working families in Louisiana with even more tax relief," agreed Sen. Bill Cassidy William (Bill) Morgan CassidyBipartisan senators reveal sweeping health care package Senate passes bill to undo tax increase on Gold Star military families Overnight Health Care — Presented by Campaign for Accountability — House passes drug pricing bills amid ObamaCare row | Senate Republicans running away from Alabama abortion law | Ocasio-Cortez confronts CEO over K drug price tag MORE (R-La.). "In 2015, more than 100,000 Louisianans paid a fine for not having health insurance. About 37 percent made less than $25,000 a year, and 78 percent made less than $50,000."

"Getting rid of Obamacare’s tax on people who choose not to buy a plan or can’t afford the premiums is the right thing to do. It’s also another step toward our promise to improve our health care system. I will continue working with my Finance Committee colleagues to make our tax cut bill even better for working families."

– Jessie Hellmann and Nathaniel Weixel contributed

Updated: 3:56 p.m.