Clinton tops 2008 rivals, gets $530M in earmarks
Home Leading The News Clinton tops 2008 rivals, gets $530M in earmarks Clinton tops 2008 rivals, gets $530M in earmarks Leading The News Clinton tops 2008 rivals, gets $530M in earmarks By Alexander Bolton Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton (N.Y.) has won tens of millions of dollars more in federal earmarks this year than her rivals for the Democratic presidential nomination, even though two of them have significantly more Senate seniority.



A review of the first three appropriations conference reports finished by Senate and House negotiators shows that Clinton has successfully requested at least $530 million worth of projects.







Clinton’s greater haul of federal funds may be due partly to her four more years of Senate seniority than Obama. But seniority is only part of it.



Sen. Joseph Biden (D-Del.), who is also running for president and first won election to the Senate in 1972, garnered $67 million worth of projects.



Sen. Chris Dodd (D-Conn.), who came to the Senate in 1981, helped place $100 million worth of earmarks in the three spending bills that have emerged from House-Senate negotiations.



Sen. John McCain (Ariz.), the lone Republican presidential candidate in the Senate, did not win a single earmark in the spending bills. He has chosen instead to position himself on the hustings as a leading critic of excessive government spending.



“He has never requested an earmark,” said McCain spokeswoman Melissa Shuffield.



Clinton has seized funds at an impressive rate by knowing what she wants and working methodically to reach her goal, which is the way she is reputed to work on almost everything.



Most of Clinton’s project money came in legislation funding military construction and the Department of Veterans Affairs. A list of earmarks included in the conference report attributed nine projects worth $348 million to the collective efforts of Clinton, her home-state colleague Charles Schumer (D-N.Y.) and President Bush. Clinton and Schumer won another four earmarks worth $30 million by working with New York House lawmakers.



Clinton helped place 59 projects worth $130 million in the defense bill, the largest of the annual spending bills. Obama won nine projects worth $34 million in that bill. Dodd helped garner 27 earmarks worth $70 million; Biden requested 17 worth $36 million.



Clinton’s position on the Senate Armed Services Committee helps in steering defense funds to her home state.



“She’s a member of the Armed Services Committee, and that carries a lot of weight,” said Faiz Shakir, who once handled veterans’ issues for then-Sen. Bob Graham (D-Fla.).



“Her staff is very efficient,” Shakir said. “They’re on top of the legislative process a lot more than even the staffs of more senior members of the committee.



“On top of that, they know what they want; they are knowledgeable about the process and get requests in early, and I think that has a lot to do with it.”



Shakir became familiar with Clinton’s staff while working in the Senate. He is now research director at the Center for American Progress, a left-leaning think tank.



John Podesta, president of the Center for American Progress, is helping with Clinton’s campaign, though the think tank itself is neutral, said Shakir.



While Clinton’s position on the authorizing committee of jurisdiction helped her win money in the defense and military construction bills, Obama did not derive as much of an advantage from his seat on the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee.



Obama successfully requested eight projects worth $2.9 million in the Labor-Health and Human Services spending bill. Clinton, who ranks immediately ahead of Obama on that panel, won 54 projects worth more than $22.6 million.



Dodd, the second-ranking Democrat on the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, helped slot 12 projects worth $4.3 million in the labor and health spending bill, the largest non-defense spending bill Congress passes annually.



Biden collected six projects worth about $1.7 million.



Clinton worked closely with Schumer on her appropriations requests. Every project except one attributed to Clinton in the three conference reports was also attributed to Schumer. She was the lead sponsor of 19 projects bearing her name in the labor bill. He was lead sponsor of six projects also attributed to Clinton.



Clinton, Dodd, Biden and Obama also sponsored two projects worth a combined $57 million in the bill. These were left out of The Hill’s tally because they had more than 40 Senate co-sponsors each. Share this story Digg Delicious NewsVine Reddit Also On The Hill Duncan running to keep RNC job Auto deal hinges on GOP votes Ill. scandal roils Congress Clues to identity of candidates #1-6 Republicans hail swing of the pendulum

BLOGS ADVERTISER