RNC fumbles Sotomayor talking points
Whoops. The Republican National Committee (RNC) has released to the media its list of talking points on the nomination of Judge Sonia Sotomayor to the Supreme Court.







Here are the talking points:



President Obama’s nomination of Judge Sonia Sotomayor to the Supreme Court is an important decision that will have an impact on the United States long after his administration.



Republicans are committed to a fair confirmation process and will reserve judgment until more is known about Judge Sotomayor’s legal views, judicial record and qualifications.



Until we have a full view of the facts and comprehensive understanding of Judge Sotomayor’s record, Republicans will avoid partisanship and knee-jerk judgments — which is in stark contrast to how the Democrats responded to the [Chief Justice John] Roberts and [Justice Samuel] Alito nominations.



To be clear, Republicans do not view this nomination without concern. Judge Sotomayor has received praise and high ratings from liberal special interest groups. Judge Sotomayor has also said that policy is made on the U.S. Court of Appeals.



Republicans believe that the confirmation process is the most responsible way to learn more about her views on a number of important issues.



The confirmation process will help Republicans, and all Americans, understand more about Judge Sotomayor’s thoughts on the importance of the Supreme Court’s fidelity to the Constitution and the rule of law.



Republicans are the minority party, but our belief that judges should interpret rather than make law is shared by a majority of Americans.



Republicans look forward to learning more about Judge Sotomayor’s legal views and to determining whether her views reflect the values of mainstream America.



President Obama on Judicial Nominees



Liberal ideology, not legal qualification, is likely to guide the president’s choice of judicial nominees.



Obama has said his criterion for nominating judges would be their “heart “and “empathy.”



Obama said he believes Supreme Court justices should understand the Court’s role “to protect people who may be vulnerable in the political process.”



Obama has declared: "We need somebody who's got the heart, the empathy, to recognize what it's like to be a young teenage mom, the empathy to understand what it's like to be poor or African-American or gay or disabled or old — and that's the criterion by which I'll be selecting my judges."



Additional Talking Points



Justice Souter’s retirement could move the Court to the left and provide a critical fifth vote for:



Further eroding the rights of the unborn and property owners;



Imposing a federal constitutional right to same-sex marriage;



Stripping "under God" out of the Pledge of Allegiance and completely

secularizing the public square;



Abolishing the death penalty;



Judicial micromanagement of the government's war powers.