Senate passes $700B defense bill
The Senate easily cleared a nearly $700 billion defense policy bill on Monday, despite a fight over amendments that slowed down the legislation.

Senators voted 89-8 on the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA), which includes roughly $640 billion in base defense spending and $60 billion in war funds.

Sens. Bob Corker Robert (Bob) Phillips CorkerPoll: Blackburn, Bredesen locked in tight Senate race in Tennessee Kavanaugh refuses to answer questions on Trump pardons Phil Bredesen wants to show a Dem can win in Tennessee MORE (R-Tenn.), Kirsten Gillibrand Kirsten Elizabeth GillibrandOvernight Defense: Officials rush to deny writing anonymous op-ed | Lawmakers offer measure on naming NATO headquarters after McCain | US, India sign deal on sharing intel Lawmakers introduce resolution to back naming NATO headquarters after McCain ICE arrests and removals continue to surge under Trump MORE (D-N.Y.), Patrick Leahy Patrick Joseph LeahyDemocrats up the ante in Kavanaugh hearings Live coverage: Trump court pick returns for final day of questioning Kavanaugh thoroughly understands the role of impartiality in America's judicial system MORE (D-Vt.), Mike Lee Michael (Mike) Shumway LeeLive coverage: Trump court pick returns for final day of questioning Kavanaugh declines to answer question on whether he's talked about Mueller probe with people at Trump's attorney's firm The Hill's Morning Report — Sponsored by Better Medicare Alliance — Steady Kavanaugh proves to be a tough target for Democrats MORE (R-Utah), Jeff Merkley Jeffrey (Jeff) Alan MerkleyOvernight Defense: Officials rush to deny writing anonymous op-ed | Lawmakers offer measure on naming NATO headquarters after McCain | US, India sign deal on sharing intel Lawmakers introduce resolution to back naming NATO headquarters after McCain Senate Dems want DOJ review of Giuliani's work for foreign entities MORE (D-Ore.), Rand Paul Randal (Rand) Howard PaulTrump allies want Congress to find anonymous op-ed author Rand Paul: Trump should use lie-detector tests to find anonymous op-ed author Congress faces September scramble on spending MORE (R-Ky.), Bernie Sanders Bernard (Bernie) SandersDisney votes in deal with union for an hour minimum wage Whole Foods workers begin attempt to unionize Impending ‘Battle of the Bases’ will make governing afterward difficult — no matter who wins MORE (I-Vt.) and Ron Wyden Ronald (Ron) Lee WydenTrump, Trudeau dig in as NAFTA talks resume Trump notifies Congress of trade deal with Mexico Overnight Health Care: Manchin hits opponent on pre-existing conditions | Dems press Trump on handling of ObamaCare | Comments on Kentucky Medicaid changes largely negative MORE (D-Ore.) voted against the mammoth bill.

GOP Sens. Lindsey Graham Lindsey Olin GrahamDemocrats up the ante in Kavanaugh hearings Live coverage: Trump court pick returns for final day of questioning Dems switch tactics on second day of hearings MORE (S.C.) and Marco Rubio Marco Antonio RubioOvernight Defense: Officials rush to deny writing anonymous op-ed | Lawmakers offer measure on naming NATO headquarters after McCain | US, India sign deal on sharing intel Rubio's wrong: Don't send the Marines into Venezuela Twitter permanently bans Alex Jones, InfoWars MORE (Fla.), as well as Democratic Sen. Bob Menendez Robert (Bob) MenendezDems urge tech companies to remove 3D-gun blueprints Dem senators introduce resolution calling on Trump to stop attacking the press Booming economy has Trump taking a well-deserved victory lap MORE (N.J.) missed the vote.

ADVERTISEMENT

Senators will now need to go to conference with House lawmakers to reconcile differences between their two versions of the bill. They'll then have to pass a compromise deal by the end of the year and send it to President Trump's desk.

Monday night's passage of the bill comes after lawmakers filed more than 400 amendments to the legislation. Only one, a failed effort by Paul to sunset the 2001 and 2002 war authorizations, got a vote.

The hang up, according to Sen. John McCain John Sidney McCainOvernight Defense: Officials rush to deny writing anonymous op-ed | Lawmakers offer measure on naming NATO headquarters after McCain | US, India sign deal on sharing intel Democrats up the ante in Kavanaugh hearings Lawmakers introduce resolution to back naming NATO headquarters after McCain MORE (R-Ariz.), stemmed around four proposals that lawmakers wanted a vote on, including a push by Sen. Tom Cotton Thomas (Tom) Bryant CottonOvernight Defense: Trump denies report he's looking at Mattis replacements | Inhofe officially gets Armed Services gavel | Trump revives shutdown threat WaPo columnist: White House discussing replacements if Mattis leaves Lawmakers come down hard on Google for skipping Senate hearing MORE (R-Ark.) to "end sequestration" and a measure from Sen. Dick Durbin Richard (Dick) Joseph DurbinDemocrats up the ante in Kavanaugh hearings Flake rebuts Trump: Anonymous op-ed author did not commit 'treason' Senate Dems want DOJ review of Giuliani's work for foreign entities MORE (D-Ill.) stripping limitations on medical research funded by the Pentagon

Cotton knocked Democrats for not agreeing to lift the spending caps, saying they are "holding our troops hostage to politics solely because their leader wants them to."

"Whenever a Democratic senator says they are worried about the state of our military, they are horrified about the kind of cuts we're making ... don't believe them. They don't mean it. They're not serious," he said.

The stalemate on amendments forced Senate leadership to start wrapping up the bill late last week and run out the Senate's clock on debate time.

Despite the slow walking, the legislation was still widely expected to easily pass before lawmakers leave Washington mid-week. Senators agreed to speed up a series of final procedural votes on Monday evening.

McCain and Sen. Jack Reed John (Jack) Francis ReedOvernight Defense: Biden honors McCain at Phoenix memorial service | US considers sending captured ISIS fighters to Gitmo and Iraq | Senators press Trump on ending Yemen civil war Senators press Trump administration on Yemen civil war Inhofe poised to take over McCain’s powerful Senate role MORE (D-R.I.), the top two members of the Armed Services Committee, also got a deal to tuck more than 150 noncontroversial amendments into the Senate bill.

And leadership offered their support for both the overall defense bill and McCain ahead of Monday's vote.

"The members of that committee, from both parties, came together to support this year’s NDAA and send it to the Senate floor. It’s yet another testament to the leadership of Sen. McCain, the committee’s top Republican, and Sen. Reed, his Democratic counterpart," said Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellCentrist Dems defend tough tactics at Kavanaugh hearing Overnight Health Care: Kavanaugh questioned if Roe v. Wade was 'settled law' in leaked email | Senate to vote next week on opioid package | Officials seek to jail migrant children indefinitely | HHS chief, lawmakers meet over drug prices Senate to vote next week on opioid package MORE (R-Ky.).

Now that the Senate has cleared its legislation, they will need to work with the House to hammer out a deal, including coming to an agreement on defense spending.

The Trump administration requested a $603 billion base defense budget and $65 billion for the war fund, known as the Overseas Contingency Operations account.

But the House's defense bill, contrasting with the Senate, includes only $632 billion in base spending, but $65 billion in war funding.

The House's bill also backed creating a new military branch dedicated to space, called the Space Corps, while the Senate's version did not.