DOD: Gitmo costs in 2013 to top $450M
The cost to run the detention facility at Guantánamo Bay in 2013 is $454 million — a figure significantly higher than previous estimates, according to a new Pentagon assessment.

The newest price tag, which was sent to the House Armed Services Committee by Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel Charles (Chuck) Timothy HagelOvernight Defense: Senators plan 22 resolutions to block Saudi arms sale | Trump defends transgender military plan | Trump, lawmakers prep to mark D-Day anniversary The Hill's Morning Report - Mueller finally speaks. What now? Swalwell says he will convene a bipartisan 'blended cabinet' if elected president MORE, will fuel Democratic arguments that Guantánamo is too expensive to continue holding detainees.

Senate Intelligence Committee Chairwoman Dianne Feinstein Dianne Emiel FeinsteinHillicon Valley: GOP senator wants one agency to run tech probes | Huawei expects to lose B in sales from US ban | Self-driving car bill faces tough road ahead | Elon Musk tweets that he 'deleted' his Twitter account Hillicon Valley: GOP senator wants one agency to run tech probes | Huawei expects to lose B in sales from US ban | Self-driving car bill faces tough road ahead | Elon Musk tweets that he 'deleted' his Twitter account New push to regulate self-driving cars faces tough road MORE (D-Calif.) and Senate Majority Whip Dick Durbin Richard (Dick) Joseph DurbinOvernight Defense: US to send 1K more troops to Mideast amid Iran tensions | Iran threatens to break limit on uranium production in 10 days | US accuses Iran of 'nuclear blackmail' | Details on key defense bill amendments Overnight Defense: US to send 1K more troops to Mideast amid Iran tensions | Iran threatens to break limit on uranium production in 10 days | US accuses Iran of 'nuclear blackmail' | Details on key defense bill amendments On The Money: Democrats move funding bills as budget caps deal remains elusive | Companies line up to weigh in on 0B China tariffs | Trudeau to talk trade with Pelosi, McConnell MORE (D-Ill.) announced the new cost assessment at a Senate hearing to examine closing the prison, held to ramp up congressional support for shuttering the facility.

“This is a massive waste of money,” Feinstein said.

ADVERTISEMENT

Hagel sent Rep. Adam Smith David (Adam) Adam SmithOvernight Defense: Pompeo blames Iran for oil tanker attacks | House panel approves 3B defense bill | Trump shares designs for red, white and blue Air Force One House panel approves 3B defense policy bill House panel approves 3B defense policy bill MORE (D-Wash.), the top Democrat on the House Armed Services Committee, the three-page Pentagon assessment that outlined costs to run Guantánamo over the past decade.

The assessment, obtained by The Hill, said that the U.S. government has spent $4.7 billion to run the prison since 2002.

Smith and Rep. Mike Pompeo (R-Kan.) appeared in the upper chamber Wednesday to testify at the Senate's Guantánamo hearing.

Wednesday’s Judiciary subcommittee hearing, chaired by Durbin, is the first congressional hearing on closing the prison since 2009, when President Obama first pledged to close Guantánamo.

Obama vowed to revamp White House efforts to close the facility this year, and said he would resume detainee transfers to third countries.

But there remains congressional opposition to moving detainees out of the facility, and there have been multiple votes this year where lawmakers voted to prevent moving detainees onto U.S. soil or to Yemen, one of the countries where Obama wants to restart transfers.

Both Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy Patrick Joseph LeahyOvernight Defense: US to send 1K more troops to Mideast amid Iran tensions | Iran threatens to break limit on uranium production in 10 days | US accuses Iran of 'nuclear blackmail' | Details on key defense bill amendments Overnight Defense: US to send 1K more troops to Mideast amid Iran tensions | Iran threatens to break limit on uranium production in 10 days | US accuses Iran of 'nuclear blackmail' | Details on key defense bill amendments Democrats aim to block defense money from being used on Trump border wall MORE (D-Vt.) and Feinstein joined Wednesday’s subcommittee hearing to express their opposition to keeping the prison open.

“For over a decade, the indefinite detention of prisoners at Guantánamo has contradicted our most basic principles of justice, degraded our international standing and, by itself, has harmed our national security,” Leahy said. “It is shameful that we are still debating this issue.”

Hitting on the cost issue, Durbin said that it would be much cheaper to hold Guantánamo prisoners in a federal supermax prison, saying the cost was $78,000 per prisoner at a supermax facility compared to $2.7 million per detainee at Guantánamo.

"This would be fiscally irresponsible during normal economic times, but it is even worse when the Defense Department is struggling to deal with the impact of sequestration," Durbin said in his opening statement.

Sen. Ted Cruz Rafael (Ted) Edward CruzOvernight Health Care: Democrats attack after Trump revives talk of ObamaCare replacement | Cruz, Ocasio-Cortez efforts on birth control face major obstacles | CVS investing M to fight teen e-cig use Overnight Health Care: Democrats attack after Trump revives talk of ObamaCare replacement | Cruz, Ocasio-Cortez efforts on birth control face major obstacles | CVS investing M to fight teen e-cig use Biden says he will beat Trump in Texas, Georgia and South Carolina MORE (R-Texas), the ranking member on the Judiciary subcommittee, defended Guantánamo, saying there was no alternative for keeping the terrorists who are held there.

“Until we are presented with a good viable strategy for what to do with terrorists who would work night and day to murder innocent Americans, I have a hard time seeing how it is responsible to shut down our detention facilities and send these individuals home, where they almost surely would be released and almost surely would return to threaten and kill more Americans,” Cruz said.