McConnell: Senate will try to repeal ObamaCare with delayed replacement
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTaylor Swift urges GOP senator to support Equality Act: 'I personally reject the President's stance' Two years after Trump's Paris climate move, frustrated Democrats eye 2020 Hillicon Valley: Mueller remarks put spotlight on election security bills | US to ask visa applicants for social media info | Tech blasts Trump tariffs on Mexico MORE (R-Ky.) said on Monday night the Senate will try to separate the ObamaCare repeal and replacement efforts, closing the door on the current GOP healthcare legislation.

"In the coming days, the Senate will vote to take up the House bill with the first amendment in order being what a majority of the Senate has already supported in 2015 and that was vetoed by then-President Obama: a repeal of Obamacare with a two-year delay to provide for a stable transition period," McConnell said in a statement.

The move means Senate Republicans will try to repeal ObamaCare now, while kicking a replacement until after the 2018 midterm elections.

ADVERTISEMENT

The 2015 ObamaCare repeal bill passed the Senate 52-47, with Sen. Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsSenate GOP vows to quickly quash any impeachment charges The Hill's Morning Report - Trump says no legislation until Dems end probes Collins offering bill to boost battery research as GOP pushes energy 'innovation' MORE (Maine) and then-Sen. Mark Kirk Mark Steven KirkEx-GOP Sen. Kirk registers to lobby The global reality behind 'local' problems Dems vow swift action on gun reform next year MORE (Ill.) the only Republicans to oppose it.

McConnell will need to overcome procedural hurdles if he wants the Senate to get to a vote on a repeal-only proposal. He'll need at least 51 senators to support getting on the House-passed legislation, which is being used as a vehicle for any Senate action.

And separating the two could force Republicans to get 60 votes — and the support of Democrats — on the replacement legislation.

It wasn't immediately clear when the Senate would try to pass the repeal legislation. The upper chamber is expected to be in session until Aug. 11, when members will leave town until early September.

McConnell's announcement comes after GOP Sens. Mike Lee Michael (Mike) Shumway LeeOvernight Energy: Trump allows use of ethanol gas in summer | Move to benefit farmers | Britain goes two weeks without using coal | EPA watchdog hands Pruitt probe findings to Congress On The Money: Senate passes disaster aid bill after deal with Trump | Trump to offer B aid package for farmers | House votes to boost retirement savings | Study says new tariffs to double costs for consumers Senate passes disaster aid bill after deal with Trump MORE (Utah) and Jerry Moran Gerald (Jerry) MoranGOP senator rescued from Camelback Mountain in Arizona after injuring ankle On The Money: Judge upholds House subpoena for Trump financial records | Trump vows to appeal ruling by 'Obama-appointed judge' | Canada, Mexico lift retaliatory tariffs on US | IRS audit rate falls GOP senator calls for resolution of trade dispute: 'Farmers and ranchers are hurting' MORE (Kan.) said Monday night that they couldn't support the current legislation, known as the Better Care Reconciliation Act.

With a 52-seat majority McConnell can only afford to lose two GOP senators and still rely on Vice President Mike Pence Michael (Mike) Richard PenceTrump launching 2020 campaign on June 18 with Florida rally Trump announces tariffs on Mexico over immigration White House starts clock on approval for new NAFTA MORE break a tie. GOP Sens. Susan Collins (Maine) and Rand Paul Randal (Rand) Howard PaulThe Memo: Trump's anti-Mueller rage is for real Trump campaign manager calls Amash 'Phony,' 'Grandstanding Swamp Creature' Amash gets standing ovation at first town hall after calling for Trump's impeachment MORE (Ky.) were already expected to oppose the legislation.

With four Republican senators opposed to the current GOP bill, McConnell officially closed the door on the legislation late Monday night.

“Regretfully, it is now apparent that the effort to repeal and immediately replace the failure of Obamacare will not be successful," he said.

It remains to be seen if McConnell will be able to wrangle enough support to repeal ObamaCare without a replacement plan hashed out.

Repeal with a delayed replacement was Senate GOP leadership's original plan, which they backed away from earlier this year due to lack of support.

McConnell himself shot down the idea earlier this month, instead warning that Republicans could be forced to work with Democrats to stabilize the insurance market.

"We are going to stick with that path," McConnell said at an event in Kentucky earlier this month. "Failure has to be possible or you can't have success."

But even as McConnell continued to push back against separating ObamaCare repeal and replacement, moving a repeal-only bill gained the support of President Trump and a growing number of conservative senators.

"Republicans should just REPEAL failing ObamaCare now & work on a new Healthcare Plan that will start from a clean slate. Dems will join in!" Trump tweeted on Monday night after Lee and Moran's statements.

Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) — who teamed up with Lee and Sen. Ted Cruz Rafael (Ted) Edward Cruz'Chernobyl' producer spars with conservative radio host Bongino over socialism Beto O'Rourke spoke with Hillary Clinton about his 2020 campaign The Hill's Morning Report — Trump turns the page back to Mueller probe MORE (R-Texas) earlier this year to demand "full repeal" — quickly added on Twitter: "As @realDonaldTrump and I discussed last week. Clean repeal now!"

Repealing portions of ObamaCare without enacting a replacement could leave 18 million people without health insurance the following year, according to a report released Congressional Budget Office (CBO) in January.

After the elimination of ObamaCare's Medicaid expansion and insurance subsidies, 27 million people would lose insurance, and then 32 million by 2026, the CBO found.

The 2015 measure guts the law by repealing authority for the federal government to run healthcare exchanges and scrapping subsidies to help people afford plans bought through those exchanges. It zeros out the penalties on individuals who do not buy insurance and employers who do not offer health insurance.

The push to separate repeal and replacement comes after some GOP senators used the setback on the Senate bill to instead argue for a bipartisan process, with open hearings.

Moran, in announcing his opposition, also said senators should "start fresh with an open legislative process."