British health secretary fires back at Trump over universal health care claims
British Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt on Monday fired back at President Trump Donald John TrumpSanford at risk in primary shadowed by Trump McConnell cements his standing in GOP history Ready for somebody? Dems lack heir apparent this time MORE’s use of a London protest to say "no thanks" to any Democratic push for universal health care.

“I may disagree with claims made on that march but not ONE of them wants to live in a system where 28m people have no cover,” Jeremy Hunt tweeted.

“NHS may have challenges but I’m proud to be from the country that invented universal coverage — where all get care no matter the size of their bank balance,” he added.

I may disagree with claims made on that march but not ONE of them wants to live in a system where 28m people have no cover. NHS may have challenges but I’m proud to be from the country that invented universal coverage - where all get care no matter the size of their bank balance https://t.co/YJsKBAHsw7 — Jeremy Hunt (@Jeremy_Hunt) February 5, 2018

Trump earlier Monday used a weekend march in London in protest of health service budget cuts to bolster his argument against adopting universal health care in the U.S.

ADVERTISEMENT

“The Democrats are pushing for Universal HealthCare while thousands of people are marching in the UK because their U system is going broke and not working,” Trump tweeted.

“Dems want to greatly raise taxes for really bad and non-personal medical care. No thanks!” he added.

Trump's tweet came after former UK Independence Party leader Nigel Farage discussed the march on "Fox & Friends," Buzzfeed noted.

Republicans repeatedly failed last year to repeal and replace ObamaCare. The repeal of ObamaCare's individual mandate that most people have health insurance or pay a fine, however, was included in the GOP tax overhaul that passed late last year.

Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) has long pushed for a government-run, single-payer health-care system. The Vermont lawmaker last year introduced "Medicare for All" legislation, which received support from some prominent Democrats like Sens. Kamala Harris (D-Calif.) and Kirsten Gillibrand (D-N.Y.), both considered potential 2020 presidential candidates.

Trump, then the president-elect, said in an interview early last year that his health-care plan would include “insurance for everybody.”