Manchin organizing bipartisan healthcare meeting Tuesday night
Centrist Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin Joseph (Joe) ManchinSenate GOP beats expectations with expanded majority Van Jones calls election results 'heartbreaking' GOP to retain Senate majority MORE (D-W.Va.) is organizing a bipartisan group of senators who are former governors to discuss possible bipartisan action on healthcare, with a meeting planned for Tuesday night.

The meeting comes as talk of bipartisan action to stabilize ObamaCare markets is picking up in the wake of the collapse of the Republican healthcare bill.

ADVERTISEMENT

In an interview with Bloomberg TV earlier on Tuesday, Manchin said the questions he has on health reform are: “How do you fix the private markets? How do you save the private markets?”

Sen. Mike Rounds (R-S.D.), a former governor, said he was attending.

“We're going to meet as a group of governors, former governors, this evening and we're going to be talking about what we can do,” Rounds said. “We look at it pretty pragmatically. The goal is to have a healthcare system in this country that actually works and is sustainable. And so we'll go back to the drawing board if we can and see if we can't find something that might work.”

Sen. Lamar Alexander Andrew (Lamar) Lamar AlexanderBlackburn keeps Tennessee seat in GOP hands Overnight Health Care — Presented by Purdue Pharma — Judge urges insurers to drop challenge over non-ObamaCare plans | Azar vows to push ahead with drug pricing proposal | No increase for ObamaCare outreach budget Dems blast Trump rule changes on ObamaCare MORE (R-Tenn.), another former governor, announced Tuesday that the health committee, which he chairs, will be holding hearings on ways to stabilize the markets.

Options include guaranteeing funding for key ObamaCare payments to insurers known as cost-sharing reductions, which President Trump has threatened to cancel in order to cause chaos in the markets.

Republican leaders also left the door open to a bipartisan bill.

“We will have demonstrated that Republicans by themselves are not prepared at this particular point to do a replacement and that doesn’t mean the problems all go away, and you’ll have to look at our committee chairmen and their ranking members,” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellMidterms: The winners and losers Senate GOP beats expectations with expanded majority Rosen defeats Heller in Nevada Senate race MORE (R-Ky.) said Tuesday.

Sen. John Cornyn John CornynTop Republican criticized for sharing Pelosi 'collateral damage' comments after shooting O'Rourke picks up third Texas newspaper endorsement over Cruz Social media is the machine gun of modern disinformation war MORE (R-Texas), the No. 2 Senate Republican, said he did not want simply a “bailout” of insurance companies, but left the door open to a compromise.

“I'm against just bailouts with no reforms,” Cornyn said.

Asked what reforms he would like to see included, Cornyn pointed to the replacement bill that Republicans just proposed.

“There's a lot of things in the Better Care Act that I would like to see and so we ought to try to find somewhere to meet in the middle,” Cornyn said.