House GOP questions FBI lawyer for second day
House Republicans grilled former FBI lawyer Lisa Page behind closed doors on Monday as they sought to make the case that bias influenced the bureau’s investigations of President Trump Donald John TrumpLondon mayor says UK is 'on the wrong side of history' with Trump visit Hickenlooper booed in San Francisco for denouncing socialism Cuomo calls Trump base 'mostly middle aged angry white males' MORE and Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonHickenlooper booed in San Francisco for denouncing socialism House Democratic campaign chief defends efforts to keep big tent for party Mueller seeks quiet retreat from public life MORE.

It was the second day of a grueling interview for Page, whose emails and text messages with FBI agent Peter Strzok have been cited by GOP lawmakers as suggesting the FBI was biased against the Republican presidential candidate.

ADVERTISEMENT

Lawmakers from the House Judiciary and House Oversight and Government Reform committees remained mostly tight-lipped on the details of her testimony, though multiple Republicans praised her as cooperative and forthcoming.

“Lisa Page today and again on Friday demonstrated a transparency that we didn’t see from Peter Strzok,” said Rep. Mark Meadows Mark Randall MeadowsFive takeaways from Barr's new powers in 'spying' probe Trump declassification move unnerves Democrats Conservative blocks House passage of disaster relief bill MORE (R-N.C.), chairman of the House Freedom Caucus and one of the FBI’s and Justice Department’s fiercest critics.

Strzok’s public hearing on Thursday led to fireworks and personal attacks, with the FBI agent offering a loud defense of the FBI and Republicans attacking his credibility. Rep. Louie Gohmert Louis (Louie) Buller GohmertHillicon Valley: Facebook, Google face tough questions on white nationalism | Nielsen's exit raisers cyber worries | McConnell calls net neutrality bill 'dead on arrival' | Facebook changes terms for EU data Republicans offer 'free market alternative' to paid family leave YouTube shuts down comments on House hearing on white nationalism over hateful remarks MORE (R-Texas) at one point asked Strzok how many times he had looked into his wife’s eyes and lied about his relationship with Page, with whom he’d had an affair.

One Democrat on the panel responded by saying Gohmert needed to take his medication.

Meadows said there are no plans to ask Page to testify publicly but added that some of Page’s answers were interesting because they offered new information or contradicted other statements from witnesses.

Rep. John Ratcliffe John Lee RatcliffeGOP takes aim at Comey, Brennan Mueller mystery: Will he ever testify to Congress? GOP ready to step up spying case MORE (R-Texas), a House Judiciary member, also pointed to differences in Page’s testimony.

“In many cases, she admits that the text messages mean exactly what they say, as opposed to agent Strzok, who thinks we have all misinterpreted his own words on any text message that might be negative,” Ratcliffe said.

Democratic Rep. Raja Krishnamoorthi Subramanian (Raja) Raja KrishnamoorthiHouse Intelligence enjoys breakthrough with Justice Department Lawmakers celebrate 100th anniversary of women getting the right to vote Lawmakers say improving transparency in higher education offers chance for bipartisanship MORE (Ill.), however, said he had not heard any contradictions.

Strzok’s testimony continued to reverberate, both on Capitol Hill and in Finland, where Trump criticized the FBI agent during his press conference with Russian President Vladimir Putin in Helsinki.

Trump, speaking with Putin beside him in front of a global audience, criticized Strzok and the investigation into Russia’s involvement in the election in stark terms.

“And if anybody watched Peter Strzok testify over the last couple of days, and I was in Brussels watching it, it was a disgrace to the FBI,” he said. “It was a disgrace to our country. And you would say, ‘That was a total witch hunt.’ ”

Trump’s remarks were widely criticized by Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill, though some in the GOP defended Trump for doubting Russia’s actions because of a corrosion in trust caused by Page and Strzok.

“We saw the downgrading of Hillary Clinton’s criminal activity, the words being changed on Peter Strzok’s own computer. So for the president to cast doubt is not unreasonable,” Rep. Darrell Issa Darrell Edward IssaFive times presidents sparked controversy using executive privilege GOP plots comeback in Orange County The Hill's Morning Report — Shutdown fallout — economic distress MORE (R-Calif.) told reporters.

Strzok served on special counsel Robert Mueller Robert (Bob) Swan MuellerMueller seeks quiet retreat from public life Democratic lawmaker: 'The only thing I can get on TV to talk about' is impeachment Biden campaign: Impeachment 'may be unavoidable' now MORE’s Russia probe before he was removed after an internal Justice Department watchdog uncovered his anti-Trump text messages.

A report from the department’s inspector general examining FBI conduct during the election found a text message where Strzok told Page “We’ll stop it” after being asked, “[Trump’s] not ever going to become president, right? Right?!”

The inspector general said Strzok displayed a “biased state of mind” during a key phase of the probe into Clinton’s use of a private email server while secretary of State, but that no decision made during the course of the investigation was affected by bias or improper influence.

Strzok repeatedly argued that personal political opinions did not inform his professional decisionmaking during the 2016 race.

“At no time, in any of these texts, did those personal beliefs ever enter into the realm of any action I took,” Strzok said.

The “We’ll stop it” text, he said, was “written late at night, off the cuff and it was in response to a series of events that included then-candidate Trump insulting the immigrant family of a fallen war hero.”