DREAM Act carries some harsh realities By By Rep. Lamar Smith (R-Texas) - Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) plans to bring the DREAM Act to the Senate floor. The bill’s name sounds harmless, so it’s important to know the facts. It subsidizes education for illegal immigrants, grants them mass amnesty, encourages more illegal immigration and inevitably takes jobs from American workers. Simply put, the DREAM Act is a nightmare for the American people.



Allowing illegal immigrants to receive in-state tuition rates at public universities puts them ahead of U.S. citizens. It tells parents whose children go to an out of state school that they will have to pay higher tuition bills than do individuals in the country illegally. And the bill means illegal immigrants will take the places of deserving American students.







Under the bill, the administration can decide not to deport amnesty recipients who are deportable criminals if this would cause “hardship.” That means enforcement is arbitrary and in the hands of an administration that favors amnesty for nearly all illegal immigrants.



It doesn’t stop there. Once the DREAM Act’s amnesty recipients become citizens and turn 21, they can sponsor their illegal immigrant parents for legalization. This will encourage more illegal immigration since illegal immigrant parents will bring their children to the U.S. with the expectation that they, too, will benefit from the DREAM Act.



Widespread fraud likely will drive the number of those given amnesty much higher as many illegal immigrants falsely claim they arrived in the U.S. before the age of 16. And the DREAM Act makes it possible for almost any illegal immigrant to evade the law. Once they file an application, no matter how fraudulent, the federal government is prohibited from deporting them.



Apparently the Obama administration sees nothing wrong with illegal immigration.



Today, Americans under the age of 35 face an unemployment rate of 14.5 percent. And 28 percent of all African-Americans under age 35 have no job. So why are the Democrats considering this bill? Didn’t they hear the voters on Nov. 2? The American people want a strong and growing economy, not more competition for scarce jobs.



One reason might explain why the Democrats are willing to hurt American workers. These are their own words: “The legalization of 11 million new immigrants would likely cement the [Democratic] party’s position as the majority party for decades to come.”



So the promise of political power has made some politicians sell out American workers. How little they must value working families — the men and women who labor, produce and make our country strong.



The DREAM Act would give nightmares to the millions of Americans who have lost their jobs, are under-employed or are threatened with layoffs. It assaults the rule of law and would dramatically increase illegal immigration.



Anyone who cares about American workers should call their Member of Congress and tell them to vote no on a national nightmare — The DREAM Act.



Rep. Smith is the ranking member on the House Judiciary Committee.



Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) plans to bring the DREAM Act to the Senate floor. The bill’s name sounds harmless, so it’s important to know the facts. It subsidizes education for illegal immigrants, grants them mass amnesty, encourages more illegal immigration and inevitably takes jobs from American workers. Simply put, the DREAM Act is a nightmare for the American people.Allowing illegal immigrants to receive in-state tuition rates at public universities puts them ahead of U.S. citizens. It tells parents whose children go to an out of state school that they will have to pay higher tuition bills than do individuals in the country illegally. And the bill means illegal immigrants will take the places of deserving American students.According to the Migration Policy Institute, the DREAM Act also could mean mass amnesty for more than 2 million illegal immigrants. The bill grants amnesty to those who are younger than 35 and complete two years of college or military service. But the Department of Homeland Security can waive these requirements because of “hardship.”Under the bill, the administration can decide not to deport amnesty recipients who are deportable criminals if this would cause “hardship.” That means enforcement is arbitrary and in the hands of an administration that favors amnesty for nearly all illegal immigrants.It doesn’t stop there. Once the DREAM Act’s amnesty recipients become citizens and turn 21, they can sponsor their illegal immigrant parents for legalization. This will encourage more illegal immigration since illegal immigrant parents will bring their children to the U.S. with the expectation that they, too, will benefit from the DREAM Act.Widespread fraud likely will drive the number of those given amnesty much higher as many illegal immigrants falsely claim they arrived in the U.S. before the age of 16. And the DREAM Act makes it possible for almost any illegal immigrant to evade the law. Once they file an application, no matter how fraudulent, the federal government is prohibited from deporting them.Apparently the Obama administration sees nothing wrong with illegal immigration.Today, Americans under the age of 35 face an unemployment rate of 14.5 percent. And 28 percent of all African-Americans under age 35 have no job. So why are the Democrats considering this bill? Didn’t they hear the voters on Nov. 2? The American people want a strong and growing economy, not more competition for scarce jobs.One reason might explain why the Democrats are willing to hurt American workers. These are their own words: “The legalization of 11 million new immigrants would likely cement the [Democratic] party’s position as the majority party for decades to come.”So the promise of political power has made some politicians sell out American workers. How little they must value working families — the men and women who labor, produce and make our country strong.The DREAM Act would give nightmares to the millions of Americans who have lost their jobs, are under-employed or are threatened with layoffs. It assaults the rule of law and would dramatically increase illegal immigration.Anyone who cares about American workers should call their Member of Congress and tell them to vote no on a national nightmare — The DREAM Act. Source:

http://thehill.com/special-reports/lame-duck-december-2010/131255-dream-act-carries-some-harsh-realities The Hill Archives: Senate | House | Administration | Campaign | Business & Lobbying | Capital Living | Opinion View News by Subject:

Defense & Homeland Security | Energy & Environment | Healthcare | Finance & Economy | Technology | Foreign Policy | Labor | Transportation & Infrastructure