Transcript of Obama Presser
Barack Obama Press Avail

Watertown, South Dakota

May 16, 2008

Q and A:

Q: Were you offended by what the President said?

A: Yes

Q: At a personal level?

BO: Well I don't take what Bush says personally, but I was offended by what is a continuation of a strategy from this White House now mimicked by Senator McCain that replaces strategy and analysis and smart policy with bombast exaggerations and fear mongering. That's what we heard yesterday. The notion that you would go before the Israeli Knesset on the 60th Anniversary of Israel's independence and use a term like appeasement and suggest somehow that Democrats, people like myself who believe that we should have tough diplomacy to accompany our military power in dealing with problems in the region, is wrong. And for Senator McCain then to compound it by somehow suggesting that I couldn't protect the safety of the United States when it is George Bush's policies, supported by John McCain, that have empowered Iran. That's in undisputed. There is not an observer of Middle East politics that would not say that the single biggest contributor to Iran's expanding in the Middle East is George Bush's policies and our invasion in Iraq. For them to somehow suggest that they are they are who have been keeping Iran at bay is ridiculous. One last point. Senator McCain has really enjoyed over the last several weeks repeating this comment about, oh, you know, Hamas supports Obama, implying or suggesting that I would talk to Hamas, despite the fact that I have been crystal clear time and time again that, until Hamas renounced violence, recognized Israel and abided by previous agreements, we should not deal with Hamas. Then, we find out, on the very same day that he is making the sorts of statements he made yesterday, that in a previous interview, he suggested, well, maybe we are going to have to deal with Hamas. So not only was he not truthful about my policies but it turns out that he is on record suggesting a much more friendly policy towards Hamas than I am. That's the kind of I think distortions, I think, that people are tired of. They certainly contradict the kind of stability that John McCain suggested in the morning that he wanted to pursue.

Q: The Republicans and the McCain campaign said you are trying to distance yourself from comments that you made last year about meeting with the leaders of rogue nations?

BO: I haven't distanced myself at all. I say that in every town hall meeting that we have and every rally. What I have said is that I will meet with not just our allies and our friends but I will initiate tough diplomacy with our enemies. That includes Syria, Iran, North Korea, and Venezuela. I would meet with them and I would meet with them without preconditions although with preparation. I would present to them very clearly what my expectations would be in terms of them changing their behavior. If it was in the case of Iran, stop threatening Israel, stand down on nuclear weapons development; stop funding Hamas and Hezbollah and stop stirring up problems inside of Iraq. If they are willing to change behavior, then, we would offer inducements and benefits diplomatically. If they don't, we will continue to ratchet sanctions and isolations on Iran. That has been a consistent policy that I have presented throughout. There are no contradictions I have no idea where it is that they are suggesting that somehow there has been a change in policy. As I said, the real shift in policy is John McCain, who has been attacking me for and implying that somehow I wanted to negotiate with Hamas when it is turns out that he is quoted saying we have to deal with them. Somebody who, up until yesterday, was insisting that you couldn't lay out a timetable for starting to bring down our troops and then, suddenly, apparently, had a vision in which he now believes that all our troops will be out by 2013, although can't spell out any concrete steps in terms of how he we are going to achieve it. It strikes me; he is the one who has been inconsistent.

Q: Senator many of the things you would say to Iran some of the things you say have been said already. What would change?

BO: I would engage in direct talks. They haven't been said, that is not true. We have not had direct talks this administration has been specific about rebuffing direct talks about Iran. That is a different approach, a different philosophy. The approach I am suggesting, the tough but engaged diplomacy that I am suggesting is the kind that was carried out by John Kennedy, it was carried out by Richard Nixon, and it was carried out by Ronald Reagan. There is a strong bipartisan tradition of engaging in that kind of diplomacy. You mirror military strength with aggressive, effective, tough diplomacy. That's what's been lacking. And ironically, the one area where the Administration started making some progress in dealing with rogue nations was when it figured out that in not talking to North Korea had resulted in them developing numerous nuclear weapons that they had tested and realizing maybe we should actually be involved in talks and those six party talks, although imperfect, have at least yielded some progress and some commitments from North Korea to stand down. So we have an example of where they've tired something and it didn't work. And changed positions in the direction that I am suggesting our foreign policy should go where we have actually seen some progress. But that's not what this is about. The speech yesterday wasn't about an actual policy argument. It was about politics and it was about trying to scare the American people. And that's what will not work in this election, because the American people can look back at the track record of George Bush, supported by John McCain, and say to themselves, let's see, we were told that there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. There were none. We were told that we would be there relatively briefly. We have been there over five years. We were told that this would cost maybe 50 billion, 60 billion.

We are now on $600 billion. We were told this would make us safer and that this would be a model of democracy in the Middle East. Hasn't turned out that way. We were told this would not serve as a distraction in Afghanistan. You have Bin Laden sending out videotapes, today. And our own intelligence estimates say that Al Qaeda is stronger now in Afghanistan and in the foothills of Pakistan than in anytime since 2001. And Iran is stronger now than before we invaded. So the American people are going to look at the evidence and they are going to say to themselves, you know, we don't get a sense that this has been a wise foreign policy or a tough foreign policy or a smart foreign policy. This has been a policy that often times has been revolved around a lot of bluster and big talk but very little performance. What the American people want right now is some performance.

Q: The White House yesterday and even today [inaudible] continues to suggest that the comments that you aimed at you they never mentioned you...

BO: I am not even taking them personally, but for them to suggest that somehow hey weren't aimed. Who is the some? Was this some amorphous sum. Was this just a straw man they were setting up? And if so, what was the purpose of the remarks? That's been disingenuous. I mean I'm less concerned about whether the remarks were directed against me personally, because, frankly, there is no evidence out there that I have ever suggested we should engage terrorists. So, obviously, it didn't apply to me. But the implication and this White House is very media savvy, it knows what it is doing, the implication was that if you object to George Bush's policies of non engagement, then, you know, you are being soft. And as I said, the White House may be making those claims. I think it would be hard for John McCain to make those claims. Since he was on a bus and definitely talking about me.

Q: Senator it sounds as if the stands you were taking, you have decided that in 2008, it is better to have this position of risking forget that the republicans <inaudible> about inexperience, that you are naive. You seem to believe that those arguments will no longer work with the public as they did in 2004 against Kerry. Saying that he is too soft, that he is the anti-war candidates the public broke in Bush's favor?

BO: I guess, you know, look, I don't know how the politics of this plays out but I know that what we have done over the last eight years does not work. As a candidate for President, my job is to present my vision about what I think will work to make the American people safe, to put us in a position where our strategic interests in the Middle East and around the world are properly served. I have presented my vision. I am happy to have a debate with John McCain and George Bush about foreign policy. If John McCain wants to meet me, anywhere, any time to have a debate about our respective policies in Iraq, Iran, the Middle East or around the world that is a conversation I am happy to have. Because I believe that there is no separation between John McCain and George Bush when it comes to our Middle East policy. And I think their policy has failed. And I will make that case as strongly as I can to the American people. And I trust the American people to trust their own eyes and to see what the results have been. Again, it is hard for me to fathom how John McCain can suggest that I'm being soft on Iran when he supported the very policies that every objective observer says has strengthened Iran over the last eight years. Iraq used to be a counter weight to Iran. We eliminated that. That's why they have influence in Iraq, is because of our invasion. I wasn't the one who suggested that we have elections in the Palestinian territories. Even though this administration was warned by the Israelis that Hamas would do well. The administration pushed them forward. And apparently, were surprised when Hamas did well. That's what strengthened their hand in Gaza and that's what strengthen their hand in the Palestinian territories. Those were this administration's policies supported by John McCain. And so it boggles the mind for them to somehow suggest that critics of their policies are strengthening Iran.

Q: Senator, I would like to get a little more clarification on the notion of direct presidential diplomacy as it flows out of the YouTube debate remarks you made. When you say that you would be involved. Do you mean from the get-go of the president of the United States or do you mean an Obama administration through the National Security Council, special (inaudible), state department?

BO: The latter. Understand what the question was. The question was a very specific question. Would you meet without preconditions? Preconditions as it applies to a country like Iran for example were a term of art. Because this Administration has been very clear that it will not have direct negotiations with Iran until Iran has meet preconditions that are essentially negotiations with Iran until Iran has met preconditions that are essentially what Iran used and many other observers would view as the subject of the negotiations. For example, their nuclear program. The point is that I would not refuse to meet until they agree to every position that we want. But that doesn't mean that we would not have preparation, and the preparation would involve starting with lower level diplomatic contacts, having our diplomatic corps work through with Iranian counterparts, an agenda. But what I have said is that at some point I would be willing to meet. And that is a position. I mean, what's puzzling is that we view this as in any way controversial, when this has been the history of U.S. diplomacy, until very recently. This whole notion of not talking to people, it didn't hold in the 60s, it didn't hold in the '70s, it didn't hold in the '80s, it didn't hold in the '90s, against much more powerful adversaries; much more dangerous adversaries. I mean, when Kennedy met with Khrustiev, we were on the brink of nuclear war. When Nixon met with Mao that was with the knowledge that Mao had exterminated millions of people. And yet we understood that we could advance our national security interests by at least opening up lines of communication. And this was bipartisan. And it's a signal of how badly our foreign policy has drifted over the last eight years; how much it has been skewed by the rhetoric of the Bush Administration that this should even be a controversial proposition. Yes.

Q: You said in your speech today (inaudible) that Hamas had been strengthened because of Democratic elections in the Palestinian Authority. Are you saying that that's been a bad (inaudible)?

BO: What I am saying is that this Administration has not operated in a consistent, thoughtful manner when it comes to a whole host of problems around the region. And, when it came to elections in the Palestinian Authority, this Administration was warned, repeatedly, that given the problems with Fattah, given the corruption, given the lack of grassroots support, that initiating elections could end up resulting in big wins for Hamas. And this Administration went ahead, because this Administration's policy has been a combination of extraordinary naivety. The notion that, you know, we'll be greeted as liberators, flowers will be thrown at us in Iraq, we'll be creating a Jeffersonian democracy, that its a model, that same rhetoric carried over when it came to elections in the Palestinian territories. And yet, when you end up seeing Hamas winning, you've got rhetoric coming out of the administration saying, Of course we would never deal with them. That tells me they didn't think through their policies. And that, I think, is what has weakened us. It's not the notion of democracy, per se or elections, per se. It's the lack of understanding that in this region of the world and regions all across or in the Middle East and in areas all across the world, that democracy is not just going to the ballot box. It's how we are strengthening our civil institutions, what are we doing with the press, what are we doing with the judiciary. Are there economic structures in place that are helping to build a middle class? Is there rule of law? You know a host of issues that this Administration typically neglected in the run-up to some of these elections. Okay.

Q: (inaudible) question. If you can talk about the campaign's new faith initiative, what you are trying to accomplish with that and are you worried at all that the strong imagery, religious imagery we see in Kentucky, South Carolina, some other states, might offend some voters moving into the general election?

BO: This isn't actually new. I mean, it was interesting. I guess it was written up.

Q: Jeremiah Wright told me that there is a new. (inaudible)

BO: Jeremiah Wright?

Q: Sorry, Joshua.

BO: I didn't know he was my faith director, but..

Q: Josh, Excuse me.

BO: Josh Dubois. Yeah. I mean, this is I guess my point is, though, we have been building. We've had a faith outreach program since the beginning of this campaign. And I don't think it should offend anybody. I have been a long-time believer that there are people of faith in the evangelical community, in the Catholic Church, in a whole host of areas that Democrats haven't reached out to and as a consequence, you know, we haven't been able to make our case about why many of our ideas are consistent with those in the faith community. And so, you know, my theory is that you show up. You know, you go to an AIDS forum hosted by Rick Warren. You go to various church events. Now, whenever we do this outreach, we make sure that it's consistent with the concepts of separation of church and state. And I am very clear and unequivocal about the belief that that separation strengthens our religious life and church as well as ensuring that the state doesn't become captive to a particular set of religious beliefs. But I think the idea that people of faith should be involved in the public square, in the debate, is something that I have talked about for a long time. I gave a speech two years ago in Washington on this precise topic. There is a whole chapter in my book, "The Audacity of Hope" about it and it's something that we are trying to apply in this campaign.

Q: Are you worried that they are going to use this as a wedge issue, and if so, how are you going to (inaudible) get around (inaudible)?

BO: What do you think, [inaudible]. Of course they're going to-I mean, they'll try, of course. I mean, they have got the same play book every election, and guns are going to be one of those issues. And I understand that it's been effective for them in the past. All I can do is describe to the voters what I believe and what I think. And what I believe is that there is a Second Amendment right. I think it is an individual right. I think people have the right to lawfully bear arms. I do believe that there is nothing inconsistent with also saying that we can institute some common sense gun laws so that we don't have kids being shot on the streets of cities like Chicago that we can institute strong background checks, that we can trace guns back to potential unscrupulous gun dealers who have pedaled them to people that shouldn't be getting them. You know, those are laws that I think the majority of Americans believe in. And now, the NRA has a different position. Their basic view is any law related to gun ownership is a potential camel's nose under the tent. And that if we allow even, you know the smallest concession, that somehow guns are going to be taken away from everybody. You know, if you subscribe to that view, then you, you know, and then you are not going to agree with me. If, on the other hand, you are a gun owner here in South Dakota who uses your gun to hunt or to protect your family and does so in a lawful way, then you have nothing to worry about from me. And they can try to stir up as much fear as they want. But I ask the voters; listen to what I'm saying. And there is nothing in my record that would contradict those positions.