Toomey defends plan to ensure form of Social Security privatization
Article Tools Font size – + Share This

JASON FARMER / STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER Pat Toomey, Republican candidate for Arlen Specter's seat in the U.S. Senate, speaks with The Times-Tribune editorial board on Thursday. JASON FARMER / STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER Republican U.S. Senate candidate Pat Toomey speaks with The Times-Tribune editorial board on Thursday.

Republican U.S. Senate candidate Pat Toomey defended his proposal Thursday to ensure Social Security's future with a form of privatization and accused Democrat Joe Sestak of distorting his position.

"I've put a proposal on the table and the result is my opponent has mischaracterized it, attacked me for it and demagogued on it while he has said nothing about the long-term structural problems we've got with entitlements," Mr. Toomey told The Times-Tribune editorial board.

Under Mr. Toomey's proposal, the government would guarantee the Social Security benefits of people currently at or approaching retirement age.

"Any change for those folks would be outrageous and unreasonable. Those people who have worked a lifetime paying into a system with a promised set of benefits need to get what they were promised," Mr. Toomey said. "But if we're going to be honest about it, we know the program can't continue in its current form."

Social Security is expected to start paying out more in benefits than it collects in taxes in 2015, according to the latest report of its financial health issued in August. After that, its reserves will be exhausted by 2037, and it will be able to pay only 75 percent of benefits.

Mr. Toomey would allow younger workers to voluntarily divert a portion of their Social Security payroll tax into private savings accounts they would control and invest any way they want. A young worker who did not want to do that could stay with the current system of a guaranteed benefit.

"Over the course of 45 years or so, the accumulated savings from putting a little bit of money away every week or every month for 45 years would add up to a very significant nest egg, and that could form the basis of a very significant portion of their retirement," he said.

Mr. Toomey said he would require the private accounts to be professionally managed with diversified investments to minimize the risk. The money would be shifted to less risky investments as a person approaches retirement age.

"I would argue that you don't really have to worry about a fluctuation in the stock market because this is a 45-year period of time, and you are gradually transitioning out of stocks as you get older and get closer to the point where you need to draw on those funds," he said.

The stock market would rise and fall, but over 45 years an investor from a private account would end up ahead, he said.

"If you don't believe in that, then you're giving up on the American economy," he said. "I mean, there's never been a 20-year period in our history where we haven't had a positive performance in the stock market, much less a 40-year period. If we don't have growth over a 40-year period, we got serious problems."

Critics say removing the money to create private accounts would require massive new borrowing to pay current benefits, and people could lose in the stock market and be left with a diminished retirement. They point to the stock market meltdown of two years ago.

But Mr. Toomey said massive new borrowing will be required anyway to keep current benefits the same once the trust fund is exhausted. Borrowing would no longer be required once the number of retirees in the traditional system is small enough to reduce what the system must pay out to a figure that's less than the taxes the fund takes in.

He argues that would happen because retirees in the traditional system would want to shift once they see people with private accounts earning more for retirement.

On other issues, Mr. Toomey said:

- He favors keeping troops in Afghanistan until the situation is stabilized rather than removing them too soon.

- The nation's recovery is not farther along "because there's a series of policies being pursued in Washington that are having a chilling effect on economic growth." They include the Wall Street and automobile industry bailouts and spending money on "a breathtaking scale" that leads to large deficits.

"The combined weight of all this is absolutely dissuading entrepreneurs and small-business owners and medium-sized businesses from expanding because of this downside uncertainty," he said. "They know they've got new costs, new threats, new risks, but it's impossible to quantify them. And so people do the rational thing, which is to scale back and not move (expand their businesses)."

Contact the writer: bkrawczeniuk@timesshamrock.com