Mango for governor kickoff hits Scranton
Article Tools Font size – + Share This



Former business consultant Paul Mango vowed Thursday to oppose taxing extraction of the state’s abundant natural gas fields if he’s elected governor, but promised gas-industry-spurred jobs that keep children from moving to other states.

On the second day of his campaign kickoff tour, Mango, 58, of Pine Twp., a Pittsburgh suburb, espoused a typical litany of Republican ideas, lower taxes and less regulation chief among them, to a group of about 50 at Lackawanna College.

He also promised to harness Pennsylvania’s energy and technology sectors and access to markets to produce “a global leader in manufacturing” and “the Saudi Arabia of energy exports.”

Mango, a West Point graduate and six-year Army veteran, joined state Sen. Scott Wagner, R-28, York, in formally announcing bids for the Republican governor nomination. State House Speaker Mike Turzai, R-28, Allegheny, has signaled plans to run, too. The governor election is next year.

Mango was a director at McKinsey & Co., a global management consulting firm in Pittsburgh, from 1988 until February. He said that and his Army experience gave him the “conservative leadership skills” a governor should have.

In an interview with reporters after his speech, Mango blasted Democratic Gov. Tom Wolf for failed leadership.

“I refer to him as Thomas the Tax Engine Wolf,” he said. “He has never met a tax he doesn’t like. He has requested almost $6 billion in taxes in the years he’s been in office. We cannot afford anymore of Tom Wolf.”

House and Senate Republicans blocked Wolf’s largest proposed tax increases.

Mango said taxing natural gas extraction would block development of job-creating businesses that produce chemicals, fertilizers, textiles, carbon fiber and fiber optics.

Mango, whose Harvard Business School master’s degree and expertise at McKinsey was in health care, declined to comment on the U.S. House Republicans’ plan to repeal and replace President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act. He said he would wait until the Senate comes up with its version, but said he favors repealing Obamacare because it has increased health insurance premiums and cost people coverage.

State Democratic Party spokesman Beth Melena ripped Mango for “dodging” on the Republican plan, which she said would cost millions of Pennsylvanians to lose health care and increase rates on seniors and the five million Pennsylvanians with a pre-existing condition

Mango has a local connection. He said his grandfather, Bernard William Mango, emigrated from Italy, settled in Susquehanna Depot in Susquehanna County, worked on the railroad and started a family there.

Contact the writer:

bkrawczeniuk@timesshamrock.com; 570-348-9147;

@BorysBlogTT on Twitter