THOMAS (Library of Congress)
Bill Summary & Status

109th Congress (2005 - 2006)

S.1828

CRS Summary

Back to Bill Summary and Status

{link: 'http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d109:S.1828:@@@D&summ2;=m&',title: 'THOMAS - BSS - S.1828 - CRS Summary' }

Influenza Vaccine Security Act of 2005 Sen Clinton, Hillary Rodham [NY] (introduced 10/6/2005) Cosponsors (2)10/6/2005 Referred to Senate committee. Status: Read twice and referred to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.10/6/2005--Introduced.

Influenza Vaccine Security Act of 2005 - Amends the Public Health Service Act to require the Secretary of Health and Human Services to: (1) determine an annual production target for influenza vaccine; (2) coordinate with the private market to encourage the production of such vaccine in amounts that will meet the annual target; and (3) establish an influenza vaccine buyback protocol to purchase excess stock of influenza vaccine.

Amends the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to require the Secretary to award technical assistance grants to entities seeking to enter the U.S. influenza vaccine market, expand their vaccine production capacity, or improve their ability to remain within such market. Requires the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to develop a regulatory roadmap to address issues surrounding emergency use authorization of influenza vaccine.

Requires the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases to solicit proposals for research to improve technologies for influenza vaccine development. Requires the Director of the Institute to review current vaccine development research.

Requires the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to: (1) establish an electronic tracking system for the influenza vaccine; and (2) revise and expand influenza-related education materials.

Allows the Secretary to designate a qualified pandemic influenza technology during a public health emergency. Deems a covered person, such as a manufacturer, distributer, or licensed health care professional, to be an employee of the Public Health Service with respect to liability for personal injury or death related to such a qualified technology. Provides for an exclusive federal cause of action for such claims.