Thom Tillis
Meet Thom



Businessman Thom Tillis has only been in politics for a few years, but his impact on North Carolina is undeniable. Tillis, 53, helped lead a conservative revolution to claim control of the State House, for generations the bedrock layer of Democrat power in the Tarheel State.

As the House Speaker and leader of the first true Republican governing majority in a century, Tillis has turned conservative principles into real reform of state policy.

Tillis’ long career as a successful businessman has shaped both his conservative, free-market ideology and his results-oriented leadership style. After forcing through conservative regulatory relief, Tillis, in 2013, helped lead a bold tax reform effort that will reduce North Carolinians’ income taxes by $2 billion over the next five years. Experts predict this will take North Carolina’s business tax climate from the sixth-worst in the country to the 17th least, boosting job growth.

Born into a working-class family, Tillis learned a fierce work ethic at a young age. He went to work immediately after high school and later worked his way through college with a combination of community college and extension courses, graduating at age 36. Tillis rose to the position of Partner in the national business consulting firm PriceWaterhouseCoopers and advised North Carolina’s largest bank and other major national corporations.

Tillis defeated an incumbent Republican to join the legislature in 2006. He became Republican Whip as a sophomore and helped engineer the 16-seat gain in the 2010 elections that made the conservative party a majority and Tillis its presiding officer. Just one year later, Tillis was named national “Legislator of the Year” by the conservative American Legislative Exchange Council. In addition to his widely-noted pro-business reform, Tillis and his House colleagues have pushed a ban on gay marriage, pro-life protection laws, and required drug testing for welfare recipients.

Tillis is honoring his pledge to serve only four terms in Raleigh and moving to take his conservative reform agenda to Washington. As North Carolina’s U.S. Senator, Tillis will push for repeal of Obamacare, a balanced budget, and conservative economic policy.

With a federal government in gridlock and even Republicans unable to get much accomplished, a dose of effective reform conservatism from Thom Tillis is just what Washington needs.

Thom Tillis, his wife Susan, and their children Lindsay and Ryan, have lived in the North Mecklenburg area for 15 years. Thom and his family relocated from Fairfax, Virginia to Cornelius in 1998.

Where I Stand on the Issues

Under the Obama Administration, big government handouts and bailouts have increased while millions of Americans have lost their jobs. Thom knows that big government doesn’t create jobs—the private sector does. Government has simply become too big, too expensive, and too intrusive in our lives and businesses. In the Senate, Thom will work to shrink the size of our federal government to its core Constitutional role so the private sector can thrive.



After a long career in private business, balancing budgets is not just theory; it’s what he does. As the leader of the reform movement that took over the North Carolina legislature, Thom Tillis led the passing of a balanced budget every year he’s been Speaker. Because of these accomplishments, North Carolina has seen a reduction in state debt. In the Senate, Thom will be a stalwart conservative reformer, pushing at every opportunity for the tough decisions it will take to balance the budget every year by cutting spending, and reducing our outrageous $17 trillion national debt. Thom believes in the "Cut, Cap, and Balance" approach - cut spending now, cap spending in the future, and require a balanced budget every year.



ObamaCare is a cancer on our national economy and it threatens the quality of every American's health care. It is paralyzing business expansion, displacing families from the health coverage they have now, raising costs, and threatening the federal treasury for all future years. ObamaCare is ridden with policies that are bad for families, bad for seniors, bad for businesses, and bad for the economy. Thom will fight in the Senate for full repeal of ObamaCare, for defunding ObamaCare, and he will work to implement private sector solutions to reduce healthcare costs for North Carolinians.



As a lifelong businessman, Thom Tillis knows that in order to grow the economy, we must create an environment where businesses can flourish and create jobs. Government needs to get out of the way, so that entrepreneurs and innovators can thrive. Thom's effort to lead a conservative reform movement to take over the North Carolina legislature helped make our state one of the best places to create new jobs in America.



As a former PTA president, Thom understands the importance of education. Thom’s leadership as Speaker resulted in the passage of a balanced budget that provides teachers with a historic 7 percent average salary increase, moving North Carolina from 46th to 32nd in the national rankings. Thom has been a strong advocate for charter schools and helped establish an opportunity scholarship program for lower income students.



Thom believes the traditional family is the bedrock of America's culture and a driver of our nation's well being. Thom is committed to defending the institution of the traditional family. He believes that marriage is between one man and one woman and believes in protecting the rights of the unborn. Thom believes all life is sacred and as Speaker, he promoted pro-life policies and helped reverse the pro-abortion state policies Democrats had put in place for decades. In the Senate, Thom will promote a culture of life and he will champion the appointment of qualified pro-life judges.



Our porous border threatens our national security and undermines our rule of law. Thom believes we must provide border patrol agents with the additional resources, personnel, and technology needed to effectually protect us and keep out those who want to do us harm, those who are transporting narcotics, and those who would break our laws. Thom opposes amnesty and he believes Congress should solve our border security crisis now - before it even debates any other changes to our immigration laws.



The anti-energy policies of Kay Hagan and Barack Obama have destroyed jobs and caused energy prices to skyrocket. Thom understands we need an all-the-above approach to make America energy independent. Thom strongly supports the construction of the Keystone Pipeline and favors expanding offshore drilling to make our nation less dependent on foreign oil. And unlike Hagan, Thom opposes cap and trade and will fight the EPA’s job-killing regulations.



North Carolina families and businesses are suffering greatly as a result of costly and excessive federal government regulation. These unnecessary regulations drive up the cost of everyday purchases such as groceries and cripple small businesses with additional costs and uncontrollable red tape. As a businessman who led the reform movement that swept the North Carolina Capitol, Thom has made regulatory reform his signature crusade. As a result, the state legislature recently passed an extensive regulatory overhaul measure that will free North Carolina businesses of numerous government regulations that hinder economic growth and job creation. In Washington, Thom will continue his fight for regulatory reform to get our oppressive government out of our families and small businesses.



Senator Kay Hagan and many like her in Washington are pushing legislation that threatens our constitutional freedom to keep and bear arms and Thom knows now it’s more important than ever that North Carolinians have a strong voice in the Senate to defend our 2nd Amendment rights. In the state legislature, Thom has fought to protect 2nd Amendment rights for law-abiding citizens and pushed to increase criminal penalties for those who don’t. Thom will oppose any gun or ammunition ban in the U.S. Senate and he will fight any effort to require federal permission for firearm transfers between friends and relatives. The Second Amendment is a vital protection for an honest citizenry and it must be defended.



As United State Senator, Thom will serve as a strong advocate for our nation's veterans, fighting to ensure that America keeps her commitment to all those who served. Thom will work to protect quality healthcare for our veterans and oppose any reductions in TRICARE or VA Benefits



Thom Tillis believes we must restore the original intention of the Constitution and redirect the federal government toward the purposes our founding fathers intended. Government is too big, regulation is too comprehensive, and our liberty is being threatened daily. Thom will steadfastly defend our liberties and fight government over-reach every day. Thom knows that if we do not make a stand now, our grandchildren will live in a nation we would not recognize. The time to act is now for every American who loves freedom.



In the state legislature, Thom led a massive tax reform effort that lowered personal income tax for every single North Carolinian and cut business taxes by more than $2.4 billion over the next five years. Thom helped eliminate the existing three-tiered tax bracket system and cut the income tax rate in North Carolina down to a flat, fair 5.8% for 2014 and 5.75% for 2015. In 2011, Thom led the effort to cut taxes by $1.5 billion by allowing Kay Hagan’s tax increases to expire. Thom knows that lower taxes are vital for economic growth and prosperity and he is the only candidate with a proven record of lowering taxes.