Read the Full Summary of Donald Trump's Physical
Good afternoon, everyone. All right, so to start with, what I’m going to do is I’m going to read to you the summary of the President’s physical. And so I’ll just read through this, and then after I’m done reading this, immediately after the brief, we’ll make this available to everyone exactly as I read it here. And then I’ll take a few questions.

So to start with: President Donald J. Trump has completed his first periodic physical examination as President of the United States. I performed and supervised the examination with appropriate specialty consultations and diagnostic testing.

The exam was conducted January 12, 2018, at the Walter Reed National Military Medical Center. The purpose of the exam was to provide the public with an update of the President’s current health status and to ensure the President continues to enjoy all the benefits of good health.

This examination focused on evidence-based health screening and disease prevention. With President Trump’s consent, I release the following health information.

Vitals as follows:

Age: 71 years and 7 months at the time of the exam.

Height: 75 inches.

Weight: 239 pounds.

Resting heart rate: 68.

Blood pressure: 122/74.

Pulse oximetry: 99 percent on room air.

Temperature was 98.4.

Physical examination, by system, to include any studies that were done, by system:

Eyes: The President’s uncorrected physical acuity is 20/30 bilaterally with corrected visual acuity of 20/20 bilaterally. His visual fields were normal. Funduscopic exam was normal bilaterally. His intraocular pressures were normal, and no ocular pathology was discovered.

Head, ears, nose, and throat: Normal exam of the head, ears, nose, mouth, and throat.

Dental exam: He has healthy teeth and gums. There were no other dental findings.

Neck: Normal thyroid exam. No noted lymphadenopathy. Auscultation of his carotid arteries were normal.

Pulmonary exam: His lungs were clear to auscultation. A screening low-dose CT of the chest demonstrated no pulmonary pathology.

Cardiac exam: Heart exam was normal. Regular rhythm. No murmurs or other abnormal heart sounds were noted. His ECG, or commonly EKG, was normal sinus rhythm with a rate of 71, had a normal axis, and no other significant findings.

He had a transthoracic echocardiogram done, which demonstrated normal left ventricular systolic function, an ejected fraction of 60 to 65 percent, normal left ventricular chamber size and wall thickness, no wall motion abnormalities, his right ventricle was normal, his atria were grossly normal, and all valves were normal.

He had an exercise stress echocardiogram done, which demonstrated above-average exercise capacity based on age and sex, and a normal heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac output response to exercise. He had no evidence of ischemia, and his wall motion was normal in all images.

Gastrointestinal exam: He had a normal exam, no masses, no hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. He had a normal optical colonoscopy done in 2013 — June of 2013 — that demonstrated no polyps or abnormal findings. And because of that, a repeat colonoscopy was not indicated at this time and will be deferred until his next periodic physical exam.

Genitourinary exam was normal. Extremities and musculoskeletal — normal throughout. Full range of motion in all joints. He had strong distal pulses and good capillary refill in all extremities. He had no swelling or edema.

Neurological exam: examination of the cranial nerves, cerebellar function, deep tendon reflexes, motor function, and sensory system were all normal.

A cognitive screening exam using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment was normal, with a score of 30 over 30.

Dermatologic exam: normal. No evidence of melanoma, basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, or any other significant dermatologic diseases.

I’m going to very briefly go over some of the labs here that I feel are most important — most providers would be interested in and then you can look at the details when I put out the written.

But laboratory results summarized: A lipid panel. He had a total cholesterol of 223. Triglycerides of 129. HDL of 67. An LDL cholesterol of 143. And his total cholesterol to HDL ratio is 3.3.

His complete blood count, to include his white blood cell count, his hemoglobin, hematocrit, and platelet count were all normal. And the values are on the written copy you’ll get.

His extended metabolic panel, as follows: His fasting blood glucose was 89. His BUN was 19. His creatinine was 0.98; indicators of his renal function. His liver enzymes: His ALT was 27; his AST was 19 — normal. His hemoglobin A1c was 5 percent. His vitamin D was 20. His PSA was 0.12. And his thyroid screen with the TSH was 1.76. He had a urinalysis done that was clear and had no evidence of protein, ketones, glucose, or blood.

His past medical history includes hypercholesterolemia and rosacea.

His past surgical history: had an appendectomy at age 11.

His social history: He has no past or present use of alcohol. No past or present use of tobacco.

His medications, as follows: He takes Crestor, 10 milligrams daily to lower his cholesterol. He takes aspirin, 81 milligrams daily, for cardiac health. He takes Propecia, 1 milligram daily, for prevention of male-pattern hair loss. He takes Soolantra Cream, as needed, for Rosacea. And he takes a multivitamin each day for health maintenance.

Immunizations: The President, during his physical exam, had a Prevnar 13 immunization to prevent pneumococcal pneumonia and he had Number 2 dose of his Twinrix to prevent hepatitis A and B. His routine vaccinations, to include his seasonal influenza are all up to date, and all indicated travel vaccinations are up to date.

In summary: The President’s overall health is excellent. His cardiac performance during his physical exam was very good. He continues to enjoy the significant long-term cardiac and overall health benefits that come from a lifetime of abstinence from tobacco and alcohol.

We discussed diet, exercise, and weight-loss. He would benefit from a diet that is lower in fat and carbohydrates, and from a routine exercise regimen. He has a history of elevated cholesterol and is currently in a low dose of Crestor.

In order to further reduce his cholesterol level and further decrease his cardiac risk, we will increase the dose of this particular medication. The President is currently up to date on all recommended preventive medicine and screening tests and exams.

All clinical data indicates that the President is currently very healthy and that he will remain so for the duration of his presidency.