Tim Ryan For Congress
17 Things Congressman Ryan has done for the 17th District

Jobs... Jobs... Jobs...

Helping to create jobs — Job retention and creation has always been a priority for Congressman Ryan. His lead in supporting the Youngstown Business Incubator, negotiating the plant expansion for V&M Star and his support for the GM Lordstown Complex and UAW autoworkers helped create and save thousands of jobs.

2) Promoting business development — Congressman Ryan has worked closely with local elected officials to make sure that Youngstown and the surrounding regions entice entrepreneurs to start or move their business to the Mahoning Valley. It must be working: Entrepreneur Magazine featured Youngstown on the cover of their August issue as one of the Best 10 Place to Start a Business, and SITE Selection magazine ranked the Youngstown-Warren area as one of the top 10 metro areas for business expansion in 2009. More businesses, more jobs.

3) The Green Energy Boom — One way to revive manufacturing in the Valley is to focus and invest in alternative energy. With our steel producing know-how in the 17th District, we are in the perfect position to manufacture parts for solar panels and windmills. Congressman Ryan has taken the lead on this and will make sure we don’t miss the green energy boom.

4) Providing a boost — Congressman Ryan supported President Obama’s Stimulus package (American Recovery & Reinvestment Act of 2009) which has sent $152,215,000 to the Mahoning Valley as of the end of October, 2009 (source: http://recovery.ohio.gov).

Tim Ryan Brings Federal Dollars Back to the Valley

5) Homeland Security — Congressman Ryan led the fight to preserve the Youngstown Air Reserve Station (YARS) and secured funding for the tremendously successful aerial spray system and critically needed base lodging. He also secured $2,000,000 for the Ravenna Arsenal Ohio National Guard Barracks to help keep America safe.

6) Roads, Bridges & Water Infrastructure — Congressman Ryan has secured millions of dollars to make our roads and bridges safer, putting local construction and trades people to work to create a logistical environment for the most efficient movement of goods and services.

7) Quality of Life — Congressman Ryan has secured $3,950,000 for The National Packard Museum, Packard Music Hall and the Riverwalk projects in Warren to help improve the quality of life in the Valley. Congressman Ryan preserves our rich history, culture and traditions and promotes local beautification.

8) Improving the Lives of Our Children — Congressman Ryan secured over $2.6 million for community programs to help teenage mothers, youth drug abuse programs, children hospitals, domestic violence homes and rehabilitation centers for children.

9) High-Tech R&D — Congressman Ryan has secured millions for research and development of alternative energy fuel cell generation and metal fabrication systems for local employer Ajax Tocco, all of which will help make the 17th District more competitive.

10) More on the way — Congressman Ryan has secured a grand total of $116,838,763 to date and has an additional $27,095,000 pending in FY2010 spending bills. That means more money to help promote economic growth, strengthen America’s infrastructure and improve the quality of life in the Mahoning Valley!

Congressman Ryan Realizes the Importance of Education for our Children

11) Making College Affordable — Congressman Ryan passed legislation that was included as part of the College Opportunity & Affordability Act that permitted funding to universities to start a textbook rental program. The legislation passed without any opposition. With his help, thousands of college students could save hundreds of dollars per semester.

12) Money for Universities — Kent State University, the University of Akron, Youngstown State University and NEOUCOM have been fortunate enough secure $14,800,000 in funding, with another $8.1 million pending in FY2010 appropriations bills to help make our college graduates more competitive in the global market.

13) Rich Center for Autism — Congressman Ryan helped to secure over $420,000 to help the Rich Center for Autism, a non-profit organization located on the campus of YSU dedicated to assisting autistic children in their special needs.

Congressman Ryan Fights for Fair Trade

14) Creating a level playing field — China has been manipulating their currency for years, making U.S. exports to China artificially expensive and uncompetitive in the Chinese market, while giving Chinese products an unfair advantage in the U.S. market. Congressman Ryan introduced H.R. 2378, The Currency Reform for Fair Trade Act to help remedy this unfair trade situation.

15) Supporting Local Employers — Congressman Ryan supported the 35% tariff on Chinese tires that come into the U.S. to help create a level playing field at the international level. He has also testified at several International Trade Commission hearings on behalf of companies like Wheatland Tube, Denman Tire and V&M Star.

Lastly, Tim Ryan Fights the Tough Fights

16) Healthcare Reform — Congressman Ryan has joined with his Democratic colleagues in the fight to provide affordable healthcare benefits for all American's and to reduce the growing costs of healthcare premiums stifling our businesses and citizens.

17) Fighting for Delphi Retirees — Congressman Ryan formed a coalition with other Members of Congress to fight for and support the Delphi retirees who face losing portions of their healthcare and pension benefits, and also co-sponsored the Emergency Retiree Health Benefits Protection Act of 2009.