Peanut Butter Recall
Elliott Minor/Associated Press

On Jan. 13th, 2009, the Peanut Corporation of America issued a recall for products it had made over the past six months, after five people had died and more than 400 had fallen ill with salmonella poisoning as a result of contamination. Two weeks later, the recall was extended to more than 400 consumer products made since Jan. 1, 2007, including Jenny Craig nutritional bars and Keebler Peanut Butter Sandwich Crackers, while the toll from the contamination had reached eight dead and more than 500 sickened in 43 states, half of them children.



The company's factory in Blakely, Ga., which was the source of the contamination, supplied some of the largest food makers in the nation. The outbreak illustrated the complexities of the industrial food chain, and left consumers scrambling to figure out if some food in their cabinets posed a a danger. The recall of peanut products is the latest in a series of increasingly severe food contamination scares involving tomatoes, spinach, cantaloupes and other foods that have enraged legislators on Capitol Hill.



The Georgia plant, which is closed, packed peanut butter in bulk ranging from 5 to 1,700 pounds, much of which was shipped to institutions. Many school districts have pulled peanut butter from menus, with some substituting more commonly recognized supermarket brands. New York City school officials said they had not bought any peanut butter or products with ingredients that originated at the Georgia plant.



The plant also produced peanut paste, a more concentrated product used in candy, crackers and many other kinds of foods. Tracking how the paste travels through the food supply can be challenging, because several companies can be involved in making the final food. For example, one manufacturer might coat the paste in chocolate and make a peanut butter cup, which is then sold to another company that mixes it into ice cream that may or may not also contain peanut butter. A grocery chain might buy that ice cream and sell it under a private label.

An F.D.A. inspection team that visited the plant on Jan. 9 discovered that on 12 occasions in 2007 and 2008 tests conducted by the company found salmonella contamination in its products but that it shipped the contaminated products to customers after a retest found no contamination and did nothing to clean the plant.



Prior to the outbreak, F.D.A. officials said, they had relied on inspections by the Georgia Department of Agriculture, a common situation. State inspectors found rust that could flake into food and gaps in warehouse doors big enough for rodents to enter at the Peanut Corporation of America plant. But agriculture officials desccribed the violations as minor.



The federal inspection in January, however, concluded that the plant should never have been allowed to make peanut butter at all because it did not adequately separate raw and finished products, among other problems. Finished products should be stored far from raw materials to reduce the chances of re-contamination of the finished goods, according to food and drug agency rules.

On Jan. 30, the F.D.A. announced that it had begun a criminal investigation into the actions of the company.