Tech Investigations
TECH INVESTIGATIONS

Facebook

On April 2, Attorney General Josh Hawley today announced that his Office issued an investigative subpoena to social media giant Facebook Inc. in connection with an investigation into the company’s business practices related to the sharing and tracking of consumers’ user data. Recent news reports reveal that at least 50 million Facebook profiles may be have been shared with third-party software developers. Facebook has nearly 2 billion user profiles around the world. The investigative demand seeks to determine whether or not Facebook exercises the appropriate care with regards to the extensive private consumer data they collect, and whether Facebook accurately discloses to its users how those users’ sensitive data will be used.

Press Release - AG Hawley Issues Investigative Demands to Facebook

Interview - Investigating the legality of Facebook's data collection

Google

On November 13, 2017, Missouri Attorney General Josh Hawley announced that his Office has issued an investigative subpoena to Internet giant Google, Inc., in connection with an investigation into the company’s business practices. Specifically, the investigation will seek to determine if Google has violated the Missouri Merchandising Practices Act—Missouri’s principal consumer-protection statute—and Missouri’s antitrust laws.

In July, Attorney General Hawley served a new investigative subpoena on Google relating to allegations that the company took improper steps to enhance its market power.

Press Release - AG Hawley Serves Additional Investigative Subpoena on Google

Press Release - AG Hawley Issues Investigative Demands to Google, Inc.

Fact Sheet: Google Investigation

Interview - Missouri Attorney General opens investigation on Google

Interview - Missouri AG: I want the facts about Google's data collection





Uber

On September 26, 2018, Attorney General Hawley announced that he, along with 49 other states and the District of Columbia, has reached an agreement with California-based ride-sharing company Uber Technologies, Inc. (Uber) to address the company’s one-year delay in reporting a data breach to its affected drivers. As part of the nationwide settlement, Uber has agreed to pay $148 million to the states. Missouri will receive over $2.2 million. In addition, Uber has agreed to strengthen its corporate governance and data security practices to help prevent a similar occurrence in the future.



On November 22, 2017, the Attorney General’s Office sent a letter to Uber CEO Dara Khosrowshahi demanding that Uber take immediate action to notify all consumers affected by the Uber data breach, protect those consumers’ personal information, and prevent any future breaches. Read more about the Uber investigation here.

Equifax

The Office is also investigating the Equifax Data breach. You can read more here.