Julian Castro and Juan Hernandez discuss Hispanic vote — and its potential impact on elections to come
The Hispanic vote — and its importance in the 2012 presidential election — will be discussed for many years to come.

As we reported in today’s paper, Republicans are now confronting the demographic reality that helped propel Barack Obama — especially in swing states like Florida, Nevada and Colorado — and that could endanger the GOP’s political strength going forward.

In reliably Republican Texas, where Hispanics represent about 38 percent of the population, the power of the Hispanic vote could play an even bigger role in upcoming elections.

So with that in mind, we chatted Thursday with two Texas politicos who have a unique perspective on the topic: Julian Castro, the Democratic mayor of San Antonio, and Juan Hernandez, a co-founder of Hispanic Republicans of Texas.

Julian Castro, San Antonio mayor, keynote speaker at Democratic National Convention

Q: What’s the big lesson learned from Tuesday night’s results?

A: “It’s clear that the Democratic Party is the big tent party. The challenge for Republicans is to broaden their appeal. In substance and in tone, the Republican Party has become too extreme and has lost its appeal not just to Hispanics, women and gays and lesbians, but to the moderate middle.”

Q: To gain support among Hispanics, some Republicans are now suggesting that they need to soften their tone on immigration. Will that work?

A: “The last few years of extreme policies mean that Hispanics will be more firmly Democratic, at least for awhile. But Hispanics are like everyone, of course. They evaluate what each party has to offer. So it makes sense for Republicans to moderate in terms of substance and tone. It’s not impossible for Republicans to make up ground in the future.”

Q: What then must Democrats do to maintain strong support in the Hispanic community?

A: “To continue to advocate for policies that resonate with all Americans and particularly Hispanics, on education, on health care, on immigration reform. They need to also ensure there’s legislation on the DREAM Act and comprehensive immigration reform sooner rather than later.”

Q: Polls show that Hispanic voters consider the economy and jobs – not immigration – the most important issue. How did that play out in this election?

A: The Hispanic community has the same concerns, same values and same aspirations as everyone else. The economy was a huge issue, and that’s why, like the majority of Americans, they supported the progress that President Obama has led. … The Republican Party has become so focused on people who have already made it, who have already experienced success. The overwhelming majority of Hispanics are working hard, but they are still aspiring. … So when they hear about policies that will benefit the relatively wealthy, it doesn’t resonate in the same way.

Q: Will Texas soon turn Democratic? And if so, when?

A: “The next six to eight years. I’m confident it will turn purple and then blue. Of course, nobody knows for sure how long that will take.”

Q: What are your future political plans then?

A: “I’ll be here in San Antonio, if the voters will have me, until my term is over in 2017. And then I’ll look around and see what’s possible, if I’ve done a good job here.”

Juan Hernandez, co-founder of Hispanic Republicans of Texas and an adviser to former Mexican President Vincente Fox

Q: What’s your biggest takeaway from Tuesday’s results, in which 71 percent of Hispanics supported President Barack Obama?

A: “The Republican Party must recognize that the electorate body of the U.S. is different than what it was eight years ago. We now have Hispanics voting in large numbers. … The Republicans must adjust their expectations. They must analyze issues that are important to Hispanics and not be the exclusive party, but the inclusive party.

Q: What are ways that Republicans can appeal to Hispanics?

A: “Personally, I have been militant in favoring a comprehensive immigration reform, ala John McCain. Most people will say that Hispanics are interested in the same issues as the rest of Americans, that they have top of mind jobs and the economy. And they are right. But if you are talking about my family members and my friends being deported … and start using vocabulary that minimizes their importance, then I’m going to have a difficult time voting for you. … So it’s not just immigration reform, but it starts with immigration reform.”

Q: Given the demographic shifts, will Texas turn Democratic in the near future?

A: “No, because I see Texas [Republicans] moving very quickly to incorporating Hispanics. … We got the super-majority in [the state House] with Hispanics. So it can be done. … The state party platform included immigration reform, which everyone thought impossible. Texas passed a state DREAM Act before any other state in the nation. So Texas is different.”

Q: How important is electing Hispanic Republicans, such as Ted Cruz, to office in appealing to the demographic?

A: “Once you get Hispanics into politics, they will be ones making the decisions related to the Hispanic community and not others. They understand better some of these issues maybe Republicans haven’t addressed as much as they should nationally. … The Democrats speak very loud and very well with regard to Hispanic issues. … So we need to get work, starting now, showing our compassionate and our practical views.”