Democrats paint Sen. Ted Cruz as latter-day McCarthy over Hagel insinuations
WASHINGTON– Fellow senators today compared Texas freshman Ted Cruz to the infamous Joe McCarthy, accusing him of sleazy tactics aimed at tarring Defense nominee Chuck Hagel.

Republicans managed to delay Hagel’s confirmation today, as Democrats were unable to muster the 60 votes needed to force a final vote.

On Tuesday, as the Senate Armed Services Committee approved the nomination on a 14-11 party line vote, Cruz suggested that Hagel – a former Republican senator – has taken money under the table from adversaries.

“We do not know, for example, if he received compensation for giving paid speeches at extreme or radical groups,” Cruz said before the committee vote. “It is at a minimum relevant to know if that $200,000 that he deposited in his bank account came directly from Saudi Arabia, came directly from North Korea.”

Cruz demanded financial disclosures from Hagel covering five years, three more than required, asserting that without that, the “only reasonable inference” is that “there was something in there that they did not want to make public.”

Sen. Bill Nelson, a Florida Democrat, chastised Cruz for violating standards of “comity and civility that this committee has always been known for….To question in essence whether somebody is a fellow traveler with another country, I think is taking it too far….You basically have impugned the patriotism of the nominee.”

Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., also distanced himself from Cruz’ comments. “Sen. Hagel is an honorable man. No one on this committee should impugn his character and integrity,” he said.

Left-leaning pundits quickly compared Cruz’ insinuation to those used during the 1950s Red Scare – intimidation by insinuation. On the Senate floor on Thursday, Democrats echoed the allegation, making Cruz’ tactics a focus of debate as they tried to force “cloture,” a procedural tactic to clear the way for a final confirmation vote. (The effort fell short.)

Armed Services Chairman Carl Levin, D-Mich., referred to Cruz’s assertions as “innuendo” that lacked factual basis.

Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., made an allusion to McCarthy, recalling a time when senators would make insinuations by claiming to have a speech someone once made in his pocket, casting aspersions without producing evidence.

“It was reminiscent of some bad times,” she said.

Cruz was on the Senate floor but didn’t take the microphone to hit back; at a hearing Wednesday he passed on questioning Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano, noting that he had lost his voice (and joking that he’d probably lost it cheering during President Obama’s State of the Union speech the night before).

“For a senator to lose his voice – what is worse than that,” said Sen. James Inhofe, R-Okla., who defended Cruz during this afternoon’s floor debate. “He knew that he was entitled to have all of his questions answered. He’s tried for weeks now. He’s been stonewalled. He’s not making any accusations. He’s just saying let him know what he’s asked for.”

Cruz spokeswoman Catherine Frazier took issue with the comparisons.

“The senator’s questions are not attacks. It would be wrong for him to avoid speaking the truth about someone’s record and past policy positions, even if doing so inevitably subjects him to personal criticism from Democrats or the media,” she said. “Sen. Cruz has repeatedly praised Chuck Hagel’s character, patriotism, bravery, and personal service defending our nation — at the confirmation hearing, in writing, and at the committee hearing casting his vote on Senator Hagel’s nomination. His focus has been exclusively on Senator Hagel’s past positions and record and on his refusal to provide the financial disclosure requested by 25 members of the Senate.”