Perry, Cornyn, Cruz assail Medicaid expansion as unwise
Gov. Rick Perry and leading GOP members of Texas’ congressional delegation said Monday the state would be unwise to expand Medicaid as allowed under the federal health care law – and won’t.

“Texas will not be participating in Medicaid expansion,” Perry said at a Capitol news conference.

He was flanked by top state and federal officials; two doctors wearing lab coats; and leaders of several anti-tax groups, which help re-enforce the Legislature’s conservative fiscal leanings by encouraging people to oppose incumbent lawmakers who defy the groups by mounting challenges in Republican primaries.

Scores of demonstrators who support enlarging Medicaid stood outside the Governor’s Office shouting, “Perry, take the money!”

The Republican governor, though, noted it was April Fool’s Day.

Perry said Texas will stand strong against a bid by President Barack Obama’s administration “to force us into this fool’s errand of adding more than a million Texans to a broken system.”

Perry said expanding Medicaid would eventually lead to ruinous costs, hurting education and public safety. He said there’s “no such thing as ‘free’ money,” and dismissed as a chimera the prospect of at least $9 of federal Medicaid matching funds for each dollar the state would spend to enlarge the program.

“It would benefit no one in our state to see their taxes skyrocket and our economy crushed, as our budget crumbled under the weight of oppressive Medicaid costs,” Perry said.

While Perry has said the federal government should give the federal match to Texas in the form of a block grant, freeing the state from federal rules on eligibility and benefits, Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst said that even with new discretion, he’s not sure the Medicaid program can be fixed.

U.S. Sen. John Cornyn noted federal budget austerity is coming.

“So why in the world would we keep expanding this flawed system and jamming more and more people into a program where they can’t find a doctor who will see them?” the state’s senior senator said.

U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz had a message for the protesters.

“Our friends who are saying they want health care do not realize that expanding Medicaid will worsen health care options for the most vulnerable among us in Texas,” Cruz said.

States may add low-income adults to their Medicaid rolls under the federal health care law, although the U.S. Supreme Court last summer made the decision optional for states, not virtually mandatory.

Under President Barack Obama’s signature health law, Medicaid would be expanded to cover working age adults who earn about $15,400 or less each year, which is 138 percent of the federal poverty line for a single person. Current income limits in Texas depend on several factors, but can be as low as about $1,340 a year.

Next January, the Medicaid expansion takes effect in some states and Travelocity-like marketplaces for health coverage known as health insurance exchanges kick off in all states. Because many lower- and moderate-income families will become eligible for federal tax credits to help them buy private plans, families will check out their coverage options, experts say. The families then will sign up several hundred thousand Texas children for Medicaid — youngsters who already are eligible but haven’t been enrolled.

The state Health and Human Services Commission, which helps run the state-federal Medicaid program, has estimated that by the end of the next two year state budget cycle, about 300,000 children will be added who are currently eligible but not enrolled. If Texas expanded Medicaid to cover the adults, about 775,000 of them would enroll by 2015, the commission estimates. It says that by 2023, state Medicaid rolls would swell by about 438,000 children and 1.1 million adults.

Over the 10 years, the state could draw down $100.1 billion in federal Medicaid matching funds to cover the new adults and additional children, the commission has said. That would require Texas to spend an additional $15.6 billion of state tax dollars through 2023.