In DC, Gov. Abbott addresses personal faith and huddles with senators on EPA
WASHINGTON — Gov. Greg Abbott warned against expanding “assaults on faith,” and touted Texas’ defense of religious liberties in Washington D.C. today at the National Catholic Prayer Breakfast.

“In America today, we are in a time of great need. There is an urgent need to pray now more than ever, especially the need to pray for our religious liberties,” said Abbott, Texas’ first Catholic governor in over 150 years.

He converted to Catholicism after a 1984 accident when he was struck by a falling tree, leaving him partially paralyzed.

At Thursday’s breakfast, Abbott recounted the harrowing experience, calling it a challenge that ultimately made him stronger.

“In hindsight I am tremendously thankful that God did not grant my every wish, because he knew far better than I the right path to take. And looking back I can tell you that if you’d seen all that I’d seen, if you’d gone through all that I had gone through, you would never again question the Lord. You would never fear the valley of the shadow of death,” Abbott said.

Abbott credited his wife Cecilia, who is also Catholic, as a “tremendous partner and guidepost for me. Not just as a wife, but as a partner who is a guider for me in my Catholic faith.”

Past speakers at the annual breakfast include Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia and former House Speaker Newt Gingrich. Former President George W. Bush spoke at the event four times.

Abbott also recounted legal victories against “assaults on faith,” including winning the right to keep a monument of the Ten Commandments on the state Capitol grounds, and battles over abortion and same-sex marriage.

“Religious liberty is being tested by some who want to silence the faithful and purge God from the public square,” Abbott said. “We see this in the never-ending battle to defend the unborn. And we see this with the legal assault on marriage defined by God. But we know that God’s law cannot be undone by man’s law.”

The U.S. Supreme Court will rule this summer on whether states have the right to ban same-sex marriage.

Rev. Paul Sullins, a sociology professor at The Catholic University of America in Washington, said he found Abbott “very direct” and “inspiring.” This was the first time he had heard Abbott speak.

“It’s extremely encouraging to hear a politician stand up for faith and family,” Sullins said. “I wish I could get a Xerox machine and run him off a couple hundred times.”

Jacqueline Halbigvon Schleppenbach of Lincoln, Neb. was also impressed by Abbott’s speech.

“He conveyed very sincerely what it’s like to have a personal faith,” she said.

After the breakfast, Abbott spoke briefly with reporters about Operation Jade Helm 15, a military exercise that will Special Operations personnel will conduct this summer. The exercise, which will take place in Texas and six other southwestern states, drew attention from conspiracy theorists and talk show hosts, who thought it could be a precursor to martial law.

Abbott ordered the Texas State Guard to monitor the exercise. The White House and other conservative Texans such as Sen. John Cornyn and Rep. Mac Thornberry, who heads the House Armed Services Committee, have called the exercise a normal operation and nothing to worry about.

Abbott said he issued the order to “facilitate communication and to make people comfortable and informed about what’s going on.”

“The problem that we have is there’s some people who are uninformed, and I think we’re setting them at ease. I think we are all together on the same page in making sure we rally behind and support our military, and at the same time making sure our fellow Texans seem more at ease,” Abbott said.

While in Washington, Abbott also met with Cornyn, Sen. Ted Cruz, and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., to discuss a proposal from the Environmental Protection Agency that would impose stricter carbon dioxide emissions standards on states.

In a written statement, Abbott said that the “burdensome regulations” of the Clean Power Plan represent “an unprecedented meddling with Texas in order push the Obama Administration’s liberal climate change agenda.”

“The EPA’s proposed action will burden Texas far more than any other state, killing jobs and stagnating Texas’ unprecedented economic growth, and I offered my full support for his efforts to fight this federal government overreach,” Abbott said.

EPA officials claim the plan would help slash health care costs and catalyze clean, efficient energy growth.

Abbott is a familiar foil for the EPA. He sued the agency multiple times during his tenure as attorney general.