Cruz shrugs off complaints about “anchor baby” epithet, addresses birthright citizenship
DES MOINES, Iowa — Sen. Ted Cruz insisted Friday that he has consistently sought to end birthright citizenship, positioning himself to avoid being outflanked on immigration by hardliner Donald Trump.

Speaking with reporters at the Iowa State Fair, Cruz also chided rival Jeb Bush for suggesting he’d benefited from birthright citizenship. And he shrugged off complaints that the term “anchor babies” – referring to American citizens born on U.S. soil to parents in the country illegally — is offensive.

“There’s nothing that the press likes more than a sideshow on some politically correct debate. Who cares?” Cruz said.

The plan Trump released earlier this week would tighten the border, deport millions, and end the automatic right of citizenship to anyone born on U.S. soil. Cruz lauded his billionaire rival, the current front-runner, for rekindling a national debate on immigration.

And he insisted that he is no Johnny-come-lately to the issue.

“In 2011 and today, I said we should end birthright citizenship. Because it doesn’t make sense as a policy matter to incentivize and encourage illegal immigration,” Cruz said.

He said he supports Trump’s call for a constitutional amendment to overturn the 14th Amendment, which courts have for decades interpreted to confer automatic citizenship for anyone born on American soil. He also said Friday that he supports another approach – a bill proposed by Iowa congressman Steve King intended to reverse the court’s ruling.

In 2011, while running for the Senate, Cruz said on a questionnaire that he wanted to end birthright citizenship but didn’t elaborate.

“There’s a good faith argument on both sides as to whether to take a constitutional amendment or take a statute,” he said Friday.

Democrats pointed out that Cruz hasn’t gone out of his way to advocate for either approach. As recently as April, discussing the birthright issue, he avoided embracing the King bill.

He finessed the issue on Friday by arguing for putting the focus on more urgent solutions. He supports the goal, he said, but changing the birthright policy by law or amendment could take years.

“The highest priority needs to be securing the border.… A new president can get that done in the first year in office,” he said.

King, interviewed separately at the fair, said he welcomed Cruz’s support for his bill, which he views as a far more efficient approach. He declined to directly weigh in on whether the senator’s position has evolved.

Cruz distanced himself from parts of Trump’s immigration plan. Trump would reduce the number of visas for high skilled workers. Cruz seeks a 500 percent boost.

Americans, he said, understand the rationale: “Legal good. Illegal bad.”

And he took reporters to task for pressing him on the derogatory term “anchor babies,” a coinage often invoked by immigration hardliners.

“What I find objectionable is the fact that our border is unsecured, that we do not know who is coming into this country and who isn’t coming into this country, and that the Obama administration is releasing violent criminal illegal aliens,” Cruz said, noting that in 2013, 196 convicted murderers were released from federal custody despite their lack of permission to be in the United States.

Cruz also tackled the suggestion Bush made a day earlier in New Hampshire that he and Sen. Marco Rubio had benefited from birthright citizenship. He called Bush “confused.”

“I am a United States citizen because my mother was a United States citizen, born in Wilmington, Delaware. And it has been the law since the beginning of the country that the children of American citizens born here or abroad are American citizens by birth,” Cruz said. “It seems Gov. Bush has that confused with the very different notion that someone who comes here illegally should not have the law grant automatic citizenship to their children if they are here illegally.”

Cruz encountered one heckler.

As he making his way off the fairgrounds after a four hour visit, shaking hands and posing for photos, a man seated on a bench began shouting.

“Where’s your birth certificate?” the man shouted. Cruz ignored him, but he shouted it again. Cruz shot back: “It’s stored with Hillary’s email.”

The man refused to give his name but said he lives in Des Moines.

“He’s not born in the United States,” the man said, insisting that to be president, “You have to be natural born citizen.”