Under fire from Democrats, Dallas lawmaker stands by Tweet with Nazi meme
AUSTIN – Rep. Jason Villalba is standing by a Tweet he made during Tuesday’s Democratic debate that included an image connecting presidential hopeful Bernie Sanders’ standing as a “Democratic socialist” to Nazism.

Under fire from Texas Democrats, the Dallas Republican said it was “ridiculous” to say that he compared Democrats to Nazis in the social media message.

Villalba said the Tweet’s attached image, which refers to Nazis, was just a “meme that was floating around the web.” He pointed instead to the text of his Tweet, which blasted the Democratic Party for being “filled with Democratic Socialists and soft socialists.”

“It’s perfectly accurate,” he said. “I was in no way making a comparison to the current Democratic Party and Nazis. If they want to read it that way, then that’s their prerogative. That’s not what the intent is.”

The modern Democrat Party is filled with Democratic Socialists and soft socialists. Is this where we are in America? pic.twitter.com/ymyBmmfbAv — Jason Villalba (@JasonVillalba) October 14, 2015

Texas Democrats, however, aren’t buying it.

Noting that Villalba has called out his fellow Republicans for “divisive rhetoric” toward immigrants, a state Democratic Party spokesman said Villalba showed that he is “nothing more than another Tea Party Republican politician.”

“Representative Villalba ought to be ashamed of himself for pandering to the Trump/Carson wing of his party,” said Manny Garcia, who noted that Sanders is Jewish. “There is no excuse for such a gross act of disrespect.”

The exchange stems from Sanders’ description of himself as a “Democratic socialist.”

The image Villalba attached to his Tweet noted that fact. It then said that Nazis, who were called National Socialists, were “Democratic socialists.” The “meme” continued by saying that a World War was fought to “stop the advance of Democratic socialists.”

“Look, Bernie Sanders is a Democratic socialist,” said Villalba, who faces a challenger in the March GOP primary. “I know that the Nazi Party was usually referred to as National Socialists.

“But the fact is this is a [Democratic] party that claims to be representative of primarily Americans and they are calling themselves Democratic socialists,” he continued. “I think that’s troubling to any person watching this debate.”