Ted Cruz: returning to Iowa, threatening to block debt ceiling hike
WASHINGTON – Sen. Ted Cruz returns to Iowa next month – his fourth trip in eight months, ensuring ongoing speculation about his 2016 ambitions.

This time, it’s an appearance March 18 before the Network of Iowa Christian Home Educators, an important audience for any conservative hoping to win Iowa’s presidential caucuses. As usual, Cruz wouldn’t say if he’s made up his mind about running for the White House nomination.

“I’m happy to have the opportunity to return [to Iowa], and in particular to speak to a rally of home schoolers,” he said on a call Tuesday with Texas reporters (a rarer event for Cruz than a visit to Iowa or New Hampshire). “School choice has been a passion of mine for decades, and I have long been an advocate for the rights of home schoolers to teach their children, free of unnecessary barriers from government. “

Two weeks ago, he appeared at a rally for school choice at Houston’s Minute Maid Park, along with Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, D-Houston.

“School choice is the Civil Rights Act of this century. We should demand that every child in America have the opportunity to receive an excellent education, regardless of what ZIP code they live in,” Cruz said.

The tea party senator’s last visit to Iowa was a two-day trip at the end of October. He got a warm but somewhat muted reception at a state GOP dinner in Des Moines, then went pheasant hunting with Rep. Steve King, a leading immigration hardliner in Congress. That was just after the two-week government shutdown triggered largely by the pressure Cruz put on House Republicans to resist a budget deal without repeal of Obamacare – a demand that many GOP leaders called unrealistic, and which Democrats rejected out of hand.

The next looming fight in Congress is over the debt ceiling.

The House voted Tuesday 221-201 to suspend the ceiling until March 15, 2015, without conditions. The Senate will consider the measure soon. (Only 28 House Republicans supported the measure, none of them from Texas. All Texas Democrats voted for it. Roll call here.)

Cruz hinted at a possible filibuster unless Congress imposes fresh spending constraints at the same time.

“If you get outside Washington, D.C., this issue is practically a no brainer,” Cruz said.

“President Obama is asking Congress for a blank check. …Under no circumstances will I consent to the debt ceiling being raised with only a 50-vote threshold. I think Senate Republicans should stand united and insist upon a 60-vote threshold. And that is my intention,” he said.

The call to “stand united” echoes Cruz’s demands ahead of the government shutdown.