Texas Democratic convention is all about the Castro brothers
SAN ANTONIO — The Castro brothers are bringing the buzz — and the money — to a political party convention in their hometown that was sorely in need of both.

U.S. Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julián Castro was poised to deliver Texas Democrats’ keynote convention speech late Friday, while twin brother Congressman Joaquin Castro raised nearly one-third of the $500,000 needed to stage the three-day event.

Joaquin Castro also won unanimous election as the convention’s presiding officer — permanent chairman.

“There are no Texas Democratic politicians with the firepower today of Julián and Joaquin Castro,” said Rice University political scientist Mark Jones. “Wendy Davis enjoyed a similar stature. But after 2014, that is no longer the case.”

Davis, the party’s last nominee for governor, lost by 20 points to Republican Greg Abbott.

While the convention’s theme is building a deeper bench of Democratic officeholders, it seemed at least initially to offer little more than around-the-clock Castro.

Friday afternoon, Joaquin Castro joined other party elected officials at a news conference denouncing presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump, who is raising money and holding rallies this week in Texas.

Ninety minutes later, the two held another media availability that drew more than three dozen reporters and photographers.

Leaving the press room in the basement of the Alamodome, Julián Castro did what amounted to a star walk down a corridor.

TV crews mobbed him about his prospects — diminishing, it appears — of being Hillary Clinton’s vice presidential running mate.

Castro said he’s not being vetted and doesn’t “believe that that’s going to happen,” but is confident Clinton will make a good choice.

Meanwhile, party officials confirmed that Joaquin Castro raised about $150,000 to help defray costs of the gathering.

The congressman also deployed his political team to help Texas Democratic Party Chairman Gilberto Hinojosa organize the state convention and select convention committee members, officials said.

Throughout the day, both brothers carefully talked up Texas Democrats’ prospects of making incremental gains this fall, taking pains not to raise expectations too high.

“You can’t kid yourself. Things are not going to change overnight,” Julián Castro said.

Both stressed it’s ironic that Texas Democrats’ best years for turnout — presidential years — are not when voters choose the state’s top leaders, such as governor and lieutenant governor. Those are decided in non-presidential years, when many Democratic-leaning voters — minorities and young people — fail to vote.

“So you’re limited, obviously, in the momentum you can garner from a presidential year,” Joaquin Castro said.

Rice’s Jones said both men probably expect more success for their party in 2020 and 2022 than anytime sooner.

“From the Castros’ point of view, at some point Texas Democrats need to start thinking about a medium-term rebuilding plan, and that’s where the Castros are focused,” he said. “They’re not focused on taking back the state for Democrats in 2016 and 2018.”

Rest assured, though, they are testing lines of attack.

Julián Castro, a former San Antonio mayor, said voters may recall that former Gov. Rick Perry liked to gig “big, bad, liberal California” for its economic woes.

“Today, California is kicking our butt, creating more jobs and more economic growth than Texas,” he said. “Maybe what we need to do is trade in [California] Gov. Jerry Brown for Gov. Greg Abbott and get better results.”

Both Castros stressed that state government has issued more than $1 billion in no-bid contracts, often to the companies top leaders’ campaign donors. They hit GOP leaders for “cronyism” and neglecting education and health care.

Joaquin Castro sought to spread across the entire GOP leadership collective responsibility for the alleged ethical lapses of two of their colleagues — Attorney General Ken Paxton and Agriculture Commissioner Sid Miller.

“You’ve got an attorney general who’s … under indictment and under federal investigation, and the governor of the state won’t even acknowledge there’s a problem,” he said. “You have a sitting agriculture commissioner who at taxpayer expense has gone to a rodeo in Louisiana and … to take a ‘Jesus shot’ in Oklahoma.”

Paxton faces charges that, while he was a member of the House, he failed to register as a financial adviser and failed to tell people he persuaded to invest in a company that he was being paid by the firm. Paxton contends he’s innocent and is fighting to have the charges dismissed.

Julián Castro, though a staunch Clinton supporter, said Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders “added an important voice to the Democratic campaign.”

Asked if he believed Sanders supporters were behind critical news stories last spring about his department’s management of home mortgages on the verge of foreclosure, the housing secretary said he did not.

“In some quarters, there were politics involved,” he said. “But … there’s a way for folks to work together in a positive direction” in getting more of the bad loans sold to nonprofits, rather than to Wall Street banks, he said.

Political scientist Jones said Castro is unlikely to be Clinton’s running mate pick, but not because of the mortgages sold to Wall Street.

“Castro’s hopes of being Clinton’s vice president were dashed the day Marco Rubio dropped out of the [GOP presidential] race,” Jones said.

Against a Hispanic Republican nominee, Clinton might have needed help in courting Hispanics. But against Trump, she probably needs a running mate who can help with working class whites, particular swing states and bring “a wealth of executive experience,” Jones said.

And Julián Castro, he noted, has “a pretty light résumé.”