Rubio: Cruz, who once defended Chinese company, can’t be “tough on China”
WASHINGTON — Florida Sen. Marco Rubio questioned Ted Cruz’s ability to be “tough on China” Monday, referring to an intellectual property case in which Cruz defended a Chinese company accused of infringing on an American’s patents.

In 2009, Jordan Fishman, a tire designer from Sarasota, Fla., sued Shandong Linglong Rubber Co., a Chinese tire company, for stealing blueprints leaked by one of his former employees. The following year, a federal jury awarded Fishman $26 million in damages. Cruz — then a lawyer for the private firm Morgan, Lewis & Bockius — represented Shandong Linglong in appealing the verdict.

Rubio, when asked about the dispute by a Fox News reporter, cited Cruz’s representation of the company as proof the Texas senator could not be trusted to negotiate with the country.

“When Ted Cruz had to choose as a lawyer, he was choosing to represent the Chinese,” Rubio said at a campaign stop with Iowa Sen. Joni Ernst in Des Moines. “He represented a Chinese company that stole secrets and a product from an American company.”

“You can’t go around saying you’re tough on China but then have a legal record in which you were paid a lot of money to defend the Chinese who had taken a product away from an American unjustly, unfairly and illegally,” he added.

This is not the first time Cruz’s role in the case has been used as an attack. in 2012, then-Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst aired a TV ad featuring Fishman during his race against Cruz for the U.S. Senate.

“Ted is defending a Chinese company who stole things from an American citizen, and it’s not only from us, it’s from the people who work for us,” Fishman said in the ad.

Cruz, at the time, pushed back, saying the case was a commercial dispute. Voters agreed — Dewhurst lost the primary, and Cruz went to Washington.

Later Monday, Cruz shot down Rubio’s comments at a campaign stop in Manchester, Iowa.

“It’s a bogus attack,” Cruz told reporters. Millions were spent against him on that case in the 2012 Senate race, he said, and it didn’t work then, either. Both sides in the litigation were making tires in China, he said, dismissing the allegation that he was representing Chinese government interests.

Todd J. Gillman of the Washington Bureau contributed to this report.