Barton calls drilling moratorium stupid
"The moratorium in the gulf of Mexico is stupid," Barton said at a forum sponsored by the Dallas Regional Chamber. "Eighty percent of the oil we're discovering, we're discovering in the deep gulf. When you put a six-month moratorium in place that could last indefinitely, you're not exploring for the very resource we need in America."

Barton, R-Arlington, warned that not drilling in the Gulf of Mexico, where much of the county's domestic energy is produced, would increase America's dependency on foreign oil and cause energy prices to rise.

Rep. Joe Barton on Thursday called the country's moratorium on off-shore oil drilling "stupid" and called for an energy policy that centered on domestic sources.

Last month the Obama Administration issued a moratorium on deep-water offshore drilling that will last until Nov. 30.

The administration has argued that the moratorium is needed to make sure oil and gas companies implement safety measures and are prepared to handle spills. The moratorium is a reaction to BP's massive oil spill in the gulf.

But Barton said the moratorium was an overreaction. He said he would that it would go beyond six months.

"We need an energy policy that maximizes domestic energy, in my opinion, across the board."

In June Barton drew criticism from Republicans and Democrats when he apologized to BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward after President Barack Obama convinced the oil giant to fund a $20 billion escrow account for damage claims related to the spill. Barton called it a "shakedown." He later backed off the remark.

The Chamber forum featured Reps. Michael Burgess, Ralph Hall, Jeb Hensarling and Barton_ all Republicans.

Rep. Eddie Bernice Johnson, D-Dallas, did not attend.

For much of the luncheon, the Republicans warned against letting the tax cuts implemented under George W. Bush expire, the new national health care law, the growing federal deficit and other conservative concerns.

But Hall, a former Democrat, also called for unity in Washington.

"There are a lot of good Democrats there. On both sides there are good people," he said. "Somewhere, sometime we've got to be Americans instead of Republicans and Democrats."