Transcripts
Return to Transcripts main page

ANDERSON COOPER 360 DEGREES

Clinton: Trump Campaign Built on "Prejudice and Paranoia"; Interview with Donald Trump; ; Trump: Clinton Is "Selling" African Americans "Down The Tubes". Aired 8-9p ET

Aired August 25, 2016 - 20:00 ET

THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED.



[20:00:09] ANDERSON COOPER, CNN ANCHOR: Good evening.



Tonight, a 360 exclusive and a big campaign headline. Donald Trump just 24 hours after signaling on national television that he is softening, his word, on deporting millions of undocumented immigrants is now saying this.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



DONALD TRUMP (R), PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE: I don't think it's softening. I think it's --



COOPER: But 11 million people are no longer being deported.



TRUMP: I've had people say it's a hardening, actually.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



COOPER: That's not all he said in our conversation today. He also closed off the path to legal status for undocumented immigrants just 24 hours after setting off a storm within his base. And Immigration is far from what we talked about this afternoon at a campaign stop in New Hampshire. As you'll see shortly, he also more than doubled down on his speech last night, calling Hillary Clinton a bigot.



For her part, Secretary Clinton was on the stump laying out a verbal indictment of Donald Trump and that happened in Reno, Nevada.



Our Jeff Zeleny is there.



It was, Jeff, a blistering attack by Hillary Clinton on Donald Trump.



JEFF ZELENY, CNN SENIOR WASHINGTON CORRESPONDENT: Anderson, we've heard so many speeches at this point in the campaign about Donald Trump from Hillary Clinton, but this one was different in tone and substance. There was no mocking of his ability to serve in the Oval Office. There was no sort of playing, you know, about his business record.



This was about race. What he believes. She said that he is divisive. She says he's radical and she said he's unprecedented in American politics. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



HILLARY CLINTON (D), PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE: It's like nothing we've heard before from a nominee for president of the United States. From the start, Donald Trump has built his campaign on prejudice and paranoia. He is taking hate groups mainstream and helping a radical fringe take over the Republican Party. His disregard for the values that make our country great is profoundly dangerous.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



ZELENY: And interesting, the audience at this speech, she was trying to reach some Republicans, Anderson. She was talking about Bob dole, George W. Bush, John McCain, and gave specific examples fro each of them how they, you know, tried not to hate. How they reached out and tried to put racism aside. She said Donald Trump is something altogether different.



So, it was more than extending a hand to Republicans. She was urging them to study what Donald Trump was saying and to come over to her campaign. Of course, it's an open question if she is a credible messenger to many Republicans in this country.



COOPER: Right. And, of course, I asked Donald Trump about that and you will hear from him shortly.



Jeff, she was clearly looking to link Trump to the so-called alt-right conservative group. Did she offer any specifics?



ZELENY: Anderson, she offered several generalizations, mainly through the Breitbart website. Of course, Steve Bannon now, you know, the chief of Breitbart is now the CEO of the Trump campaign. She used a lot of Breitbart headlines and she even read some of them, some incendiary headlines, some racist headlines and anti-immigrant and anti-Muslim headlines. She mentioned David Duke. She mentioned white supremacy. But it is difficult to tie Donald Trump directly to any of these.



She talks about how she's been talking about these things on the campaign trail, but she's talking about how his language was dangerous, but again tying him directly to any of these specific things is difficult, and, of course, he would push back on that.



TRUMP: Yes, and he did today. Jeff Zeleny -- Jeff, thanks very much.



Before leaving for New Hampshire, Donald Trump held a roundtable with African-Americans and Latino communities. And I spoke about that as well.



First, Phil Mattingly with more on the matter itself.



So, what about this meeting? Continuing to try to renew focus on minority voters. What's the latest about it?



PHIL MATTINGLY, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Yes, that's right, Anderson. It's one of the number of meetings we've seen over the last couple of weeks from Donald Trump on this issue specifically. Now, I spoke to a couple of people who attended the meeting, fellows at the Republican Leadership Institute, and the reviews were all very positive, said Donald Trump was very attentive and wanted to talk about their issues.



Now, they're Republicans and most of them are supporting Donald Trump, but what you're seeing right now is a very contained strategy by the campaign, and it's twofold, really, Anderson. It's not just trying to reach out to minority voters, trying to reach out to black or Hispanic voters where Donald Trump's numbers are abysmal. It's also a second prong, perhaps a more important one.



Donald Trump is trying to soften his image and one poll in July, Anderson, 65 percent of people polled associated the word "racist" at least slightly with Donald Trump and the bigger issue here in that softening, Donald Trump has a major problem with women voters, specifically white women voters. Hillary Clinton leading in the most recent polling on white women, that's a group Mitt Romney won by 14 points according to exit polls back in 2012 when he talked to Republican consultants, Republican officials who are paying attention to this. They believe Donald Trump needs to soften and that's exactly what he's trying to do with meetings like the one he had today.



COOPER: Yes, on the issue of immigration, his campaign has postponed a long-awaited speech that's supposed to take place this week. Any more news on that?



MATTINGLY: We heard that it might be next week and campaign advisers have started to walk that back, as well.



[20:05:03] What you're seeing with the speech frankly, Anderson, is you know well from your interview today, what we're seeing on the immigration issue specifically is there is a lot of wrestling internally about what Donald Trump's final policy is going to be.



Look, there's going to be a wall, there's going to be key principles that Donald Trump has stuck to throughout of the course of this campaign. But when you talk to advisors, they say Donald Trump is really wrestling with the complexity of this issue, specifically on the issue of deportation. As you noted, one that has gone back and forth and his advisers have gone back and forth over repeatedly over the last couple of days.



So far, no answers on the specifics of that and no answers on when that long-touted immigration speech is going to be -- at least not yet, Anderson.



COOPER: Yes, you will hear more about that in just a second from Donald Trump himself.



Phil Mattingly, thanks.



To that note, by the time I spoke to Donald Trump this afternoon, immigration hardliners were already erupting over what he said at the taping of a FOX News town hall that aired last night. It was essentially a 180 from what he's been saying on the campaign trail practically from day one. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIPS)



TRUMP: We have a law, right? You're supposed to come in legally. I would get people out, and I would have an expedited way of getting them back into the country so they can be legal. They're illegal immigrants. They've got to go out.



CHRIS CUOMO, CNN ANCHOR: But how do you do it in a practical way? You really think you can round up 11 million people?



TRUMP: But you know what? At some point, we're going to try to get them back, the good ones.



You're going to have a deportation force and you're going to do it humanely.



ERIN BURNETT, CNN ANCHOR: Are you going to be sending in officers -- a force of people into people's homes to get them out?



TRUMP: We're going to be sending people in a very nice way. We're going to be giving notice. We're going to be saying, you have to go.



We have at least 11 million people in this country that came in illegally. They will go out. They will come back -- some will come back, the best, through a process. They have to come back legally.



(END VIDEO CLIPS)



COOPER: So that was Donald Trump's position before the Hannity town hall and throughout much of the primary. Here's the 180 he said on Hannity.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



TRUMP: And there certainly can be a softening because we're not looking to hurt people. We want people -- we have some great people in this country, and we have some great, great people in this country, so, but we're going to follow the laws of this country.



(CROSSTALK)



TRUMP: You know, we -- people don't realize -- what people don't realize is we have very, very strong laws.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



COOPER: And that, as we said, made a lot of hardliners furious and it set off plenty of snarky comments including from Jeb Bush saying that Trump's new policy looked a lot like his, and that's where things stood when I met with Donald Trump at a campaign stop in Manchester, New Hampshire, today. Here's part one of our exclusive conversation.



(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)



COOPER: One of the big things you talked about during the primaries. We had interviews about this and you talked about the debates, 11 million undocumented immigrants in the country. They've got to go. The good ones can come back in, you said, a door in the wall, the good ones can come back in. It's going to be done humanely, you said. There will be a deportation force.



That's no longer -- it seems there's been contradictory statements lately, but that seemed like they're no longer your policy.



TRUMP: I don't even know --



COOPER: Is that your policy?



TRUMP: Let me just tell you what my policy is, and I'm not going to go into all of it because we're doing a speech on immigration which I think will explain it in even greater detail.



But we're going to build a great wall. The wall will be paid for by Mexico. People are not going to be able to tunnel because we're going to have tunnel technology. We're going to have all sorts of things, there's going to be a real wall.



Drugs will stop flowing into our nation and poisoning our youth and everybody else. We're going to have all sorts of E-verify and everything you can think of in terms of immigration. People will not come into our country illegally. We're going to fix that.



We are going to make it like it's never been before. I don't know if you know, but the border patrol agent, 16,500 border patrol agents endorsed Donald Trump. They've never done that for a president before because they're great people that want to do their job. They don't want to stand there and watch people pour through our borders.



COOPER: Eleven million who are here?



TRUMP: Let me explain. We're going to build a wall. We're going to build a real wall, a wall that absolutely works and they do absolutely work if it's done properly.



Right now, it's a joke. You have walls that are this high. That's number one.



We are going stop illegal immigration pouring into our country. My first day in office, I am going to notify law enforcement authorities that all of the bad dudes, and we have a lot of them, that are here illegally, that are the heads of gangs and drug cartels and all sorts of people --



COOPER: People --



(CROSSTALK)



TRUMP: Probably millions of them, but certainly hundreds of thousands. Big numbers. They're out. They're out.



Excuse me, the police know who they are. I've spoken to many police. The police know who they are. They deal with them all of the time. They're nothing, but problems. COOPER: You talked --



TRUMP: We are going to end sanctuary cities. We are going to run a country like it's supposed to be run. We're going to have borders, very strong borders.



And after that, we're going to see what happens, but we are going to find people and we're getting immediately, and I mean, first hour of my -- the first document I will sign will say get the bad ones out of this country, bring them back where they came --



[20:10:09] COOPER: You know, I've got to follow up. You said on Hannity, you used the word softening and last night on Hannity, you talked about --



TRUMP: Well, I don't think it's a softening. I think it's --



COOPER: But 11 million people are no longer being deported.



TRUMP: Look, I've had people say it's a hardening, actually.



COOPER: But 11 million who have not committed a crime.



TRUMP: No. We're then going --



COOPER: There's going to be a path to legalization, is that right?



TRUMP: You know it's a process. You can't take 11 at one time and just say, boom, you're gone. We have to find where these people are. Most people don't even -- nobody even knows if it's 11. It could be 30 or and it could be five. Nobody knows what the number is.



I'll tell you what we know, let me explain --



COOPER: But if somebody hasn't committed a crime, will they be deported?



TRUMP: Let me tell you what, we know the bad ones. We know where they are, who they are, we know the drug cartel people. We know the gangs and the heads of the gangs and the gang members. Those people are gone.



COOPER: But that's a huge number.



TRUMP: No, it's not --



COOPER: But that's Jeb Bush's policy.



TRUMP: I don't know anything about Jeb Bush. He wasn't building a wall. Jeb Bush wasn't building a wall. Jeb Bush wasn't making strong borders, and I'm not knocking Jeb Bush, but I was with him for a long time.



COOPER: Right, but he was mocked for saying that, look, you can't deport 11 million people and it now seems like, I know you're not really focusing -- TRUMP: First, I want to see what's going to happen. We are going to



deport many people, many, many people.



COOPER: The vast majority of those 11 million are not criminals.



TRUMP: Well, we don't know. We're going to find out who they are. We have crime all over this country.



COOPER: If they haven't committed a crime, will there be a path to legalization?



TRUMP: No. There is no pass -- there is no path to legalization, unless people leave the country --



COOPER: You talked about paying back taxes.



TRUMP: Well, when they come back in, if they come back in, then they can start paying taxes.



COOPER: So, they still have to leave the country?



TRUMP: There is no path to legalization, unless they leave the country and come back.



COOPER: So that means of the 11 million who are here, even if they haven't committed a crime.



TRUMP: But you don't know -- you keep saying 11 million. You don't know what the number is. You know, millions of people --



COOPER: However many, that's the estimate.



TRUMP: -- and using the existing laws of our country, and using the existing laws, millions of people are deported every year.



COOPER: Right.



TRUMP: You know that, right? People don't talk about that. It's Obama. They don't talk about that.



COOPER: (INAUDIBLE)



TRUMP: A lot of people being deported. We're going to do that vigorously, we're going to go with the laws that are existing, but we're going to have a very strong border and we're not going to have people pouring back in.



And when these people, the drug lords and all of these guys that are thrown out, they're not coming back into the country.



COOPER: So, if you haven't committed a crime and you've been here for 15 years and you have a family here and you have a job here, will you be deported?



TRUMP: We're going to see what happens once we strengthen the border. We're going to have a strong border, as strong as any border there is anywhere in the world. We're going to have a real wall and tremendous protection, both technological protection and everything else, and then we're going to see what happens.



But there is a very good chance the answer could be yes, we'll see what happens and before we do anything, I want to get rid of the bad ones, there are a lot of them. I want to get rid of all of the bad ones and that will be the single first order I sign.



We are going to stop. Right now, I'm in New Hampshire, you saw the crowd, you saw the enthusiasm. I won the primary in New Hampshire. The people of New Hampshire asked me one favor, "Please, Mr. Trump, stop the drugs from coming across the southern border."



You have heroin that's pouring across the southern border and destroying the youth and other people in New Hampshire and every other state. We're going to stop all drug trafficking. It's not going to happen anymore. We're going to stop it.



We're going to have a strong border. We're going to have a tremendous wall. We're going to have a wall that Mexico pays for, which will be very easy because they are making a fortune with us, the wall is peanuts compared to the money that they make.



We are going to have a border again. We are not going to allow drugs to come into this country and poison our youth, and then we're going to see what happens. But there's no legalization. There's no amnesty. And if someone wants to go the legalization route, what they'll do is they'll go leave the country, hopefully come back in, and then we can talk.



And one other thing, there are millions of people right now online trying to come into our country. It's very unfair to them, some of the rules, regulations and policies that I've seen. These are millions of people that want to come into our country legally and it would be very unfair to them.



(END VIDEOTAPE)



COOPER: We'll he much more of our conversation with Donald Trump. Ahead, I asked him if he really thinks that Hillary Clinton is personally, as he said last night, a bigot.



Reaction from the panel next on this immigration issue when we come back.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



[20:18:01] COOPER: Welcome back.



The first two headlines from our 360 exclusive conversation with Donald Trump from what he said today to me, no path to legal status for people in the country illegally, and the hardening, he says, not a softening -- both his words -- by the way, on deportation.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



COOPER: You said on Hannity, you used the word softening and last night on Hannity, you talked about --



TRUMP: Well, I don't think it's a softening. I think it's --



COOPER: But 11 million people are no longer being deported.



TRUMP: Look, I've had people say it's a hardening, actually.



COOPER: But 11 million who have not committed a crime.



TRUMP: No. We're then going --



COOPER: There's going to be a path to legalization, is that right?



TRUMP: You know it's a process. You can't take 11 at one time and just say, boom, you're gone.



But there's no legalization. There's no amnesty, and if somebody wants to go the legalization route, what they'll do is they'll go leave the country, hopefully come back in and then we can talk.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



COOPER: Let's bring in the panel. Clinton supporter and New York state Democratic Clinton Party executive director Basil Smikle, Pro- Clinton super PAC adviser Paul Begala, CNN political analyst and "New York Times" presidential correspondent Maggie Haberman. Also, Trump supporter, Scottie Nell Hughes. Conservative Trump critic, Tara Setmayer, and Trump supporter Andre Bauer, the former lieutenant governor of South Carolina.



Maggie, let's start with you. Is it clear to you that Donald Trump knows what he wants his immigration policy regarding the 11 million or however many undocumented people or immigrants are in this country now?



MAGGIE HABERMAN, CNN POLITICAL ANALYST: No. It is clear to me he said two very different things and one to you, one to Sean Hannity.



Sean Hannity, he talked about being in favor or open to a softening, his words, of the immigration laws, talked about working to keep some people here, talked about paying back taxes. That is not all just similar to language that comprehensive immigration reform supporters in the Republican Party support, but it's also similar to some arguments that President Obama has made and what he would like.



So, I don't get the sense. I haven't heard anyone call it a hardening other than he said it there. I think he likes the way the rhetoric sounds. What I didn't hear him repeat was the deportation force.



[20:20:02] Again, he seems to have moved off of that and realized that you can't actually round people up and send them home. But what he's describing is essentially a touchback program where somebody goes back to their country. I don't think he realizes it's a year's long process and it is not quick. It would require a change in the laws.



I don't think this has clarified anything and I think that mostly what I heard today from the left and the right was confusion and this did not --



COOPER: It's understandable. Let's just play again some of what he said on Hannity about the softening.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



TRUMP: And there certainly can be a softening because we're not looking to hurt people. We want people -- we have some great people in this country. We have some great, great people in this country.



So, but we're going to follow the laws of this country what people don't realize, we have very, very strong laws.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



COOPER: And last night on Hannity, he ended up polling the audience on what they thought the policies should do and a lot of people came up to him and said you can't be so tough. You can't be so tough. They've been here 15 years.



Paul, I mean, is this -- what do you make of what you're hearing?



PAUL BEGALA, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: It's incoherent. This is 75 days before the presidential election. Facts aren't changing. This is an important issue and we've been debating it at least for years in America. And he seems to not know the first -- honestly, I watched your speech, and I didn't see your interview until now.



But I'm going to repeat what I said when I watched the speech, don't let him in the debate, if I work for him. But as a Hillary guy, she's going to destroy him. I don't supposed to set expectations, but I'm not going to lie.



He's unprepared. He doesn't know the first thing about his most important issue. This isn't some, like, abstract, OK, what are you going to do? These are hard problems and foreign policy and he clearly doesn't know, OK.



He doesn't know what he's talking about. He said to you, well, we don't know how many are here and we don't know who they are. And in the same breath, but we know exactly who the bad guys are and we'll go and get them.



He said no legal status. Not citizenship. No legal status, if you have no legal status, you have to leave. You can be deported.



It was completely incoherent. I think I should shut up and just play the tape.



COOPER: Scottie, as a Trump supporter, do you feel you know his immigration policy and I'm not talking about the wall or going after criminals and people that committed felony, about people who have been law-abiding, who have had jobs and been here for 10, 15 years. Do you know what Donald Trump would do as president?



SCOTTIE NELL HUGHES, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: I absolutely feel like I've got a good base. Unlike the liberals and I feel sorry that you are confused. I feel bad for that clarification.



COOPER: You're not confused?



HUGHES: I really am not because I know that we have a problem --



COOPER: So what happens to those 11 million?



HUGHES: Well, let me say this, we have a problem here in the United States and Donald Trump is the only one that's offering solutions, or trying to work with it.



COOPER: What happens to the 11 million?



HUGHES: The 11 million is simple. We did not import these illegals to the United States. It's very hard to just say, you're going to will mass deport them. We already do have a deportation group already. It's called ICE. It's just they need the strength and support to be able to carry through.



We have a problem.



COOPER: So, Donald Trump early on in the primary said they've got to leave. The good ones can come back. They've got it leave. That's foreign policy.



HUGHES: Enforce the laws that are on the books right now. If that is exactly what ICE was testing, the second largest federal enforcement, law enforcement agency is ICE.



COOPER: You still believe that Donald Trump believes all 11 million have to leave?



HUGHES: It's humanely, and I think it's simple. Just cut off the government entitles that are costing taxpayers that these illegals are not paying the system.



Anderson, $113 billion per year, these illegals in the United States are costing and that's falling on the middle class, 64,000 convictions of illegals.



COOPER: Do you hear Trump talking about 11 -- I keep asking, 11 million, many of whom have not committed crimes and what happens to them? He says it's a process.



HUGHES: It's a process. If you cut off all government entitlements to keep them here, that government entitlement that we the taxpayers are paying for right now, they will leave as families and you simplify --



(CROSSTALK)



BEGALA: That's not Trump's position, Scottie. Trump isn't (ph) saying it.



HUGHES: Hold on. May I finish? But I agree with Paul that it does take a year and I think Mr. Trump



agrees that we need to simplify the system, so those that want to come into our community and add as Americans, add to the taxpayers.



COOPER: Tara?



TARA SETMAYER, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: As someone who has worked on the actual issue of illegal immigration in the legislative branch, which is what it would take to actually implement any of these things, you never hear Donald Trump talk about the fact that anything he's proposed has to go through Congress. He keeps saying, you know, we're going to build the wall, I'm going to build a wall, I guarantee it, I, I, I.



COOPER: He said he's going to sign an order on the first day.



SETMAYER: He can't.



(CROSSTALK)



SETMAYER: Let me finish. The money has to be appropriated and the appropriation process goes through Congress. I was there when they passed the border fence bill, and that never got built because of all the other problems and that was under a Republican Congress and a Republican president. So, it's not as simple.



He's been over promising something to people because they don't A, understand the process, neither does he, and he can't do that, number one. It's unconstitutional.



Number two, no one knows, like Scottie, do yourself a favor, what he has done is just completely muddied this issue in a way because he's fledgling now because he overpromised in the primary, promising and building on the resentment of people because of illegal immigration.



[20:25:07] Those statistics are true. What he's proposing isn't going to solve that. All of them propose the exact same thing.



(CROSSTALK)



COOPER: Andre, there is an argument that he clearly has some advisers who are probably saying to him, you've got to soften in order to reach out to some key demographics. You've got to do something. I mean, to you as a supporter, does it seem like he's caught between kind of needing to reach out to maybe some new voters and what he said in the past?



ANDRE BAUER, DONALD TRUMP SUPPORTER: I think the folks that surround him said you need to soften on this, it's not doable. And he doesn't have to get to the budgeting for it because the Mexico is going to pay for it. You misspoke.



(LAUGHTER)



SETMAYER: How do you think the money goes there? Just in fairness --



(CROSSTALK)



COOPER: You, even though you're a supporter.



BAUER: There's no question he's softened on the issue, and I think that's because of the people --



SMIKLE: Let's be clear. Flip-flopped on the issue.



HUGHES: No.



SMIKLE: We talk about the 11 million and there's another number, 81 million and it includes undocumented and also documented immigrants and their -- and undocumented immigrants and their U.S.-born children. He does not have a policy for these 81 million individuals in this country 75 days away from this election. That is unconscionable for the leader of a major political party in this country. I don't understand how we've gotten to this point and he does not have a policy. That said --



HUGHES: But what does Hillary have to offer? What has Hillary said to solve the problem?



SMIKLE: That said -- that said --



(CROSSTALK)



SMIKLE: That said my -- my concern is that even if we want to extract some measure of legitimate policy on him, it will depend on the room that he's in at the time. And that to me is incredibly dangerous because if you're trying to sort of get to him and say even if you're a Republican that is not a Trump supporter and you want to have some measure of immigration| reform, mind you, he vanquished 16 or 17 of his colleagues that actually believed in some kind of immigration reform during the primary, even if you want to believe him, you can't -- there's nothing you can do to actually --



COOPER: We've got to take a quick break. A lot more to come in part two of our exclusive interview. I asked Donald Trump whether he truly believes Hillary Clinton is herself as he's been calling her, starting last night, a bigot, literally.



His answer right after this.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



[20:31:30] COOPER: Welcome back. As you heard at the top of the program, Hillary Clinton had the sharpest words yet for Donald Trump saying his real message is, and I'm quoting her, "Make America hate again".



Now her overall assessment is nothing really new, but some of the language and the bluntness of it is from her. Donald Trump meantime has long accused her of being divisive. He's now saying that she herself is "a bigot", he said that last night in a speech. Now, because that's such a strong allegation because he's previously sparked a controversy from that came that she and President Obama, the co-founders of ISIS, something at later called sarcasm.



I want to give him the opportunity to explain what he meant by that, so that's what I asked him about today.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



COOPER: You called last night Hillary Clinton a bigot. Previously you called her policies bigoted, you directly called her a bigoted.



DONALD TRUMP, (R) PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE: Well, she is a bigot, because when you look at what's happening to the inner cities and you look at what's happening to African-Americans and Hispanics in this country where she talks all of the time, she talking look at the vets where she said the vet are being treated essentially just fine and that it's over exaggerated what's happening to the vets, not so long ago.



COOPER: How is she bigoted, bigoted is ...



(CROSSTALK)



TRUMP: Because she's selling them down the tubes. Because she's not doing anything for those communities. She talks a good game.



COOPER: So, you think she has hatred or dislike of black people?



TRUMP: Her policies are bigoted because she knows they're not going to work.



COOPER: But you're saying she is personally bigoted?



TRUMP: Oh she is, of course, she is. They're her policies, she's comes up with the policies and others that believe like she does also, but she came out with policies over the years. This is over the years, a long time. She's totally bigoted, there's no question about it.



COOPER: It does imply that she doesn't -- she has antipathy, she has hated toward or in this case ...



(CROSSTALK)



TRUMP: I think she has been extremely, extremely bad for African- Americans, I think she's been extremely bad for Hispanics. You look at what happens to her policies and the policies of President Obama and others. Look at the poverty. Look at the rise in poverty. Look at the rise in violence.



COOPER: But hatred is at the core of that or dislike of African- Americans?



TRUMP: Or maybe she's lazy. I don't know what it is. All I can tell you is I've been hearing the same stuff from her and others for years and the inner cities today are worse than they ever have been.



COOPER: Have you always thought she was bigoted though, I mean you were support her in that (ph). TRUMP: Honestly I never thought of it, I never thought. As a business person I never thought of it. I got along with all politicians. But she got a long ...



COOPER: She has a history of working ...



TRUMP: Anderson as you know, working, but not doing the job, and I'm now bringing it out for the first time. She hasn't done the job.



COOPER: So the overwhelming number of African-Americans who support her, what did they ...



TRUMP: Well, take a look at what's happened over the last two weeks since I've been talking about the subject. Take a look at what's happened, take a look at your most recent polls. I mean the ones over the last 3 or 4 ...



COOPER: Do you think it would make a difference, you can get a higher number among African-Americans?



TRUMP: Oh, I think we're going to do well with the African-Americans, because they're going to give me a chance, because frankly look what she's done, what to give a chance, I mean she's been a disaster. The inner cities are worse than they've ever been. You have 40 percent rates of poverty. You have black youth that can't get jobs, 58 percent can't get jobs, education is a disaster.



They've been talking about this since I was 5 years old and understood what was going on. They have been talking about this for years. Hillary Clinton talks about it all of the time. She has done a horrible job, and then you add all of the scandal and the lies and the deception to the e-mails, she should be in jail.



COOPER: What ...



TRUMP: Hillary Clinton should be in jail. You know it. The FBI director knows it, everybody else knows it, she should be in jail. What she did with erasing 33,000 e-mails, she shouldn't be out even talking about inner cities or running for president.



[20:35:02] COOPER: One of the things you've been saying recently in talking to African-Americans addressing them in large rallies is saying what have you got to lose? What the hell have you got to lose?



TRUMP: Absolutely. That's the way I look at it.



COOPER: The way you've been categorizing though we've been, you know, interviewing a lot of African-American voters, some of them are insulted by some of the language you've been using.



TRUMP: I don't think they are. I think if they actually heard me they wouldn't be insulted at all.



COOPER: What you're saying ...



TRUMP: I actually take them ... COOPER: ... you get shot in your street, you don't have jobs, you don't have schools.



TRUMP: Excuse -- well that's the fact. They're shot on their streets. Look at Chicago.



COOPER: But for the vast majority of African-Americans that's not -- I mean vast majority do not live in poverty.



TRUMP: 40 percent are living in poverty, we just say ...



COOPER: 46 percent.



TRUMP: ... that's a pretty big -- well I have 40. I have a different stat than you do.



COOPER: The Conservative Foundation has 26 percent.



TRUMP: I have 40 percent, whether it's 26 or 40. Look, you can look at it any way and I know you want to protect her as much as you possible can.



COOPER: No, I'm not ...



TRUMP: But let me just tell you, Anderson. She has done a horrible job, her policies don't work, it's a disaster for African-Americans and you see what's happening because many of them who watch my speeches are saying, you know, he's right. They've been doing this for 50, 60, 70 years and I say what do you have to lose.



COOPER: Some of you ...



TRUMP: And I'll tell you something, not only what do you have to lose, I will fix it.



COOPER: Some of the African-American supporters that we talked said they would like you to go into an African-American church or direct can talking to ...



TRUMP: I'm going to do that very soon. In fact, I'm going to Detroit and I'll be going to some other places. I've been invited to many. I'll be doing that very soon.



COOPER: So you -- that's definitely something you are going to do?



TRUMP: Oh I'm going to do it, yeah sure, I look forward to. In fact, I think I'm doing it over the next two weeks, I'm a doing a couple of visits.



COOPER: How much improvement do you think you can make with the African-American vote?



TRUMP: I can only tell you, I can only tell you I can fix the inner cities, but she can't ...



COOPER: Let me talk ... TRUMP: ... is she isn't -- not only can't she, she doesn't have a chance.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



COOPER: And back with the panel. Scottie, do you really think he has a chance to get a lot more African-American support?



HUGHES: I would have so, because there's nothing in more appealing than offering a job and offering hope. I think that's what Barack Obama was first elect in 2008 for, with the fact that he offer the idea of hope and change. And I think the more that we educate the folks about what the Republican Party has to offer and how Mr. Trump was never considered to be a racist, to -- he's never had the problem before until he ran for president. He has a long track record that actually supporting the African-American community.



(CROSSTALK)



HUGHES: Let's go back to when he donated an entire floor in Wall Street to Jesse Jackson the Rainbow Coalition because he wanted to encourage diversity and give them the place ...



SETMAYER: He got a tax write-off for that.



HUGHES: You're going to have a ...



SETMAYER: I'm just telling you the truth.



(CROSSTALK)



HUGHES: He actually chose to partner with Jesse Jackson and actually chose to encourage diversity and give them the place.



BASIL SMIKLE, POLITICAL ANALYST: He called for the killing of five black teens.



(CROSSTALK)



SMIKLE: But that's -- but that's beside the point. but that's beside the point.



COOPER: Let Scottie answer.



HUGHES: Let's remember the real victim that was a woman who was brutally raped and she was left for dead.



SMIKLE: Absolutely correct.



HUGHES: And the entire city of New York was looking for a solution and problem to that. And this ...



(CROSSTALK)



SMIKLE: But no, no, no. Since you raised it.



(CROSSTALK)



HUGHES: I know, I read it.



(CROSSTALK)



SMIKLE: Let me tell you the solution he offered.



HUGHES: ... to be innocent. The problem was he was emotional. It was one of those things that New York City were for a problem and we're getting ...



(CROSSTALK)



COOPER: And by the way ...



(CROSSTALK)



COOPER: No, guys, stop! Guys, stop! No viewers know what you're talking about. The Central Park Five, who were falsely accused, sent to prison for years and years and years and there was no evidence. There was no DNA evidence and it was all this witch hunt by the media at the time, by New York politicians, Donald Trump I think took out what a full-page ad.



HUGHES: But the jury -- but the jury actually convicted them, too. He was backing up the guilty verdict up to theory (ph). Hold them accountable ...



(CROSSTALK)



SMIKLE: I'll describe that a very quickly. I was 17 years old at the time and when he was talking about -- we institute in death penalty for these children I was -- I took that personally. He stoked the racial animosity ...



HUGHES: That was ...



SMIKLE: Excuse me. He stoked the racial animus in this city at that time. When you had to be there to really experience that, and that was hurtful. That was hurtful and it continued even after they were exonerated and got a settlement from the city.



HUGHES: Not by Donald Trump.



SMIKLE: Absolutely ...



HUGHES: At the time they were convicted ...



(CROSSTALK)



SMIKLE: absolutely by Donald Trump.



(CROSSTALK)



COOPER: Guys. SMIKLE: But let me go further. His so-called engagement of the African American community is only this. It's talking about black people and all he has done in talking about black people is throw up every negative, racial stereotype of the African American community. On the other hand -- on the other hand.



HUGHES: He didn't support promoting with his own organization African-American men and women. He base on ...



SMIKLE: But that's -- let me -- but this is something completely different because when he goes out there and talks about you could be shot walking through the streets of a black neighborhood. Anybody could be shot. Tell me where he was when everyone's calling for gun control and going against his Republican colleagues could -- did he do that? No, but he wrapped himself in the flag of the NRA.



HUGHES: Hold on here. That is a false fact, because in that ...



SMIKLE: Really.



HUGHES: ... in those cities that have the toughest gun control laws is where we're having the highest gun control crime. Evils ...



SMIKLE: What is Donald Trump doing with respect to issues that are endemic to my community? What is he doing?



[20:40:02] HUGHES: He's offering jobs and to offer incentives for companies to go into the urban areas.



SMIKLE: For whom?



HUGHES: Unlike Hillary Clinton who has a long record sort of actually a lot of by she sat there and praised Senator Byrd saying that he was her mentor, that he should be respected and he was a leader of the KKK.



SMIKLE: Yes, but let's talk about ...



HUGHES: He was a leader that actually voted against the civil rights, I mean and he actually stood up against it.



SMIKLE: Let's talk about Hillary Clinton ...



HUGHES: So let's talk about.



SMIKLE: So let's talk about Hillary Clinton and the Senate. Hillary Clinton who started six schools to support African-American and Latino young men to going to college and improved their college going and career.



HUGHES: She praised the KKK grand rugged recruiter.



(CROSSTALK)



COOPER: One at a time. One at a time.



(CROSSTALK)



SMIKLE: Not only that, but she has worked with ministers across the state of New York on economic development and housing priorities for them. That is real. That is documented. She has engaged African- Americans on all -- in every policy area where they have previously been discriminated. Donald Trump is only exasperated that.



COOPER: We got to take a break, we're going to continue this conversation and after the break we have s lot more, my interview with Donald Trump ahead, and more on his thoughts on Hillary Clinton and her comments about him today. All of that, stay tuned.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



[20:45:07] COOPER: I've got more of my interview with Donald Trump ahead and you can hear his response when I asked him being sued for allegedly refusing to rent to African-Americans in the 1970s which is I brought it up because Secretary Clinton brought it up. Today I wanted to give him a chance to respond as you know he's added the notion that Hillary Clinton is a bigot to his repertoire and he stopped by when I spoke with him today.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



COOPER: You called last night Hillary Clinton a bigot, previously you called her policies bigoted. You directly called her bigoted ...



TRUMP: Well she is a bigot, because you look at what's happening to the inner cities, you look at what's happening to African-Americans and Hispanics in this country where she talks all of the time, she talking look at the vets where she said the vet are being treated essentially just fine and that it's over exaggerated what's happening to the vets, not so long ago.



COOPER: How is she bigoted, bigoted is ...



(CROSSTALK)



TRUMP: Because she's selling them down the tubes. Because she's not doing anything for those communities.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



COOPER: Back with the panel. Tara, what do you think the idea on leveling this charge against Hillary Clinton now at the same time that she's essentially leveling a similar charge against Donald Trump? Is it to try to negate that in some way?



SETMAYER: I think it's classic projection, I mean Donald Trump has a history of bigotry in areas that we can point to starting with the house discrimination case in the 1970s where it wasn't just once. It was, you know, three times the Justice Department had to go after him for it and you know, it starts there and then the Central Park five which we just talked about which he never apologized for, by the way.



COOPER: Look, a lot of Republicans will say, look this is a charge that's always made against Republicans.



SETMAYER: Right. That is true. That is something that's thrown at us a lot, except that there are none of those candidates had an actual record that people could point to. Donald Trump has a problem in this area, and Hillary Clinton, god help me, but she laid out a pretty good case about that today with things that are documented. We're not making this up.



Look, Donald Trump even with the documented cases, even in his language the way that he speaks about the issues and the minority communities is stereotyping and insulting. You know, Jack Kemp who was someone who influenced me a lot in my conservatism, Jack Kemp approached everything from an economic perspective and he said that, you know, economic empowerment knows no color and that people of all colors, they want an access to the ladder of opportunity that everybody, including black families, Hispanic families everybody, they want the ability to make a living, educate their children and leave a nest egg for their kids.



And if Donald Trump approached things that way, then maybe something ...



COOPER: Andre ...



SETMAYER: ... listen, telling black people that your going to got shot when you walk down the street and assuming every black families ...



COOPER: OK, I get it.



SETMAYER: ... that's not the way to do it?



BAUER: Hillary Clinton has been in hibernation. She hadn't taken any questions from the press, if she's anywhere around, she's got a roped off line. All of a sudden when she gets beat up a little bit on more of her indiscretions with the secret server and the bridge (ph) be input to where ...



COOPER: And the Clinton Foundation.



BAUER: Absolutely, all that comes up, all a sudden, bam, let's go after Donald Trump being a bigot. I made a couple of notes. She did support Robert Byrd. This was her icon. Let me tell you what Robert Byrd said, he said, I shall never fight in the arm forces with a negro Obama by side.



You want to talk about bigot? That is bigot.



SETMAYER: And Robert Byrd apologized though, be fair.



BAUER: Yeah.



SETMAYER: He apologized for that and spent a lot of his adult life, apologizing for that.



(CROSSTALK) BAUER: In 1964 he was still filibustering, he ...



(CROSSTALK)



COOPER: Tara, don't step on him, because we can't hear anything.



BAUER: He organized the 150 members of the KKK in West Virginia, where like he's just a member ...



SETMAYER: Yeah.



BAUER: He organized it. In 1960s he blocked. She also -- was against same-sex marriage. Now she's what she say she unswaped, but she did. She mentioned super predators, she talked about carrying hot sauce in her purse.



SMIKLE: She actually does do that, have to say. Tell me what's wrong with that?



BAUER: Usually I'm the most fair and even keel guy, yeah but this and this aggravates me. I have a whole lot more left, Anderson.



(CROSSTALK)



COOPER: Maggie what about the charge that, you know, Democrats often will level this charge against Republicans?



HABERMAN: There is something to the fact that Democrats in election after election have said this about a candidate, it was said about Mitt Romney, it was said in certain ways about George W. Bush who at the moment is looked at in a very different way and who had to prominent black officials in this cabinet. Yeah, it's just not the same thing.



For Trump gets very, very upset and people around him get very upset at the accusations about racism and I think what you have seen him do today is what we have seen him do over the last several weeks which is a charge that she levels at him, Clinton he levels basically back in that same form.



He does have opportunities he could take that he is not availing himself of and that has been confusing. He lives in a city with a large black community. There are churches he can go to. There are places outside of Trump Tower he can go to, where yes, there is a risk of some doing, but he also would probably be well received for at least doing it and they're not doing those things and those could be effective.



[20:50:03] COOPER: Up next, we got more of my interview with Donald Trump. I ask him if he's embracing the alt-right movement which is something Hillary Clinton charge him of today. How he responded, that when we come back.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



COOPER: Welcome back. Now for part three of the interview with Donald Trump in New Hampshire today, I asked him about the lawsuit we reported about on this program last night which Hillary Clinton brought up, his battle with the Justice Department over allegations his company systematically kept African-American tenants out of his buildings, this was many decades ago.



We also spoke about the Alt-Right Movement, an ideology that's full of white nationalism in some cases, and misogyny and even anti-semitism. Trump's campaign CEO Steve Bannon told Mother Jones last month that his website, Breitbart, had become, "The platform for the Alt-Right.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



COOPER: I want to start by what Hillary Clinton is now coming at you with. I talked to her last night. She called into my show. She said you are bringing hate mainstream by embracing the so-called Alt-Right Movement, that you're peddling bigotry, prejudice and paranoia.



TRUMP: Well, first of all, we are bringing love. You see these rooms. They are packed with people that have been just left behind. I call it the Forgotten Men and Women. They have been left behind Anderson by people like her who are third rate politicians who talk and they don't produce.



[20:55:03] You look at our inner cities, our inner cities are a disaster and the African-American people are realizing that the Democrats who have run these inner cities for 75 and 100 years, they just left them.



COOPER: Are you embracing the Alt-Right movement?



(CROSSTALK)



TRUMP: Nobody even knows what it is. And she didn't know what it was. This is a term that was just given that frankly, there's no Alt- Right or Alt-Left. All I'm embracing is common sense.



COOPER: But Steve Bannon said Breitbart is sort of the voice of the Alt-Right Movement.



TRUMP: I don't know what Steve said. All I can tell you, I can only speak for myself. You see the crowds we have, you see the enthusiasm, I know these are great people. These are people that have not been heard for many years and now they have been heard. First time in many, many decades.



In fact, some people say the first time, period. And I think we are going to do very well. You see what's going on with the polls over the last three or four days. I think we are going to do very well. But ...



COOPER: I want to read.



TRUMP: ... she is somebody that's all talk, no action. Look at the lies, look at the deception, look at what's happened with her e-mails, look at the erasing of 33,000 e-mails. She should be ashamed of herself. She should get back to work for the people. She doesn't do that.



COOPER: I want to read you one more thing she said today in her speech. She said, this is what I want to make clear today, a man with a long history of racial discrimination who traffics in dark conspiracy theories drawn from the pages of supermarket tabloids and the far reaches of the internet should never run our government or command our military.



TRUMP: Well, it's an incorrect statement. First of all, we were sued many, many years ago when I was very young by the government, sued many, many companies. You know that. It wasn't me. They sued many companies.



COOPER: The company was sued for not allowing black people ...



TRUMP: And you know what, they found nothing. They found absolutely nothing.



COOPER: You settled.



TRUMP: They bring up the case. I settled, with no awards, no nothing.



COOPER: Assume people in your company use the word C ...



TRUMP: I don't even know. Honestly, what a superintendent does in a building, that I can't tell you. But I can just tell you that they settled the case and that was the end of it. It was many years ago. And I guess they found we did nothing wrong because we didn't have to do anything. We didn't have any payments to make, we didn't have to pay $20 million in fines. We didn't have any ...



COOPER: You didn't pay any money in order to settle?



TRUMP: This is a long time ago but I don't believe so, no.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



COOPER: Well, much more ahead on this two-hour edition of "360" including that blistering indictment of Donald Trump today by Hillary Clinton in Nevada, accusing him of building his campaign as we just talked to Donald Trump about on prejudice and paranoia.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)