About Us
Mission

The National Center for Transgender Equality advocates to change policies and society to increase understanding and acceptance of transgender people. In the nation’s capital and throughout the country, NCTE works to replace disrespect, discrimination, and violence with empathy, opportunity, and justice.

Vision

NCTE envisions a society in which transgender people not only survive, but thrive, with accepting families and communities, full self-determination over their identities and bodies, and freedom from disrespect, discrimination and violence. For this vision to become a reality, we must also create equity, equal opportunity, safety, health, and economic well-being for all people over their entire lifetimes.

History

The National Center for Transgender Equality was founded in 2003 by transgender activists who recognized the urgent need for policy change to advance transgender equality. With a committed board of directors, a volunteer staff of one, and donated office space, we set out to accomplish what no one had yet done: provide a powerful transgender advocacy presence in Washington, D.C.

Today, NCTE has grown to a staff of over 20 and works at the local, state, and federal levels to change laws, policies and society.

Projects

Racial and Economic Justice Initiative (REJI)

NCTE's Racial and Economic Justice Initiative ensures the perspectives and priorities of transgender people of color, and those who live in urban and rural poverty, are part of the national policy and advocacy agenda. This includes federal policy, local and state advocacy, and collaborating with other racial, social, economic and criminal justice movements and initiatives. Currently, the Initiative’s work includes reforming detention conditions for transgender people in correctional facilities and in immigration detention. Click here to learn more about REJI.

Trans Legal Services Network (TLSN)

NCTE helps ensure every transgender person can navigate the complicated name and gender change process and confidently address other legal issues they may face. NCTE created the Trans Legal Services Network to increase support for organizations across the country who are serving or aiming to serve the legal needs of our communities. Comprised of over 50 organizations, the Network shares advice, provides technical support and legal resources to support their work and expand their services. Click here to learn more about TLSN.

Voices for Trans Equality (VTE)

Voices for Transgender Equality (VTE) empowers transgender people and allies so that they can better advocate for transgender rights. VTE allows community members to connect directly with NCTE, to receive resources and opportunities as well as to help NCTE stay informed about transgender rights issues in communities across the country. There’s no cost to join, and members never have to share their stories or be public if that’s not the right decision for them. Overall, this group will help ensure that trans people and allies are able to use their voices to demand dignity and respect for all. Click hear to learn more about VTE.

Families for Trans Equality (FTE)

Families for Transgender Equality (FTE) is a network of families with trans youth, and groups that support these families, who all want to change policies and society to improve trans people’s lives. There’s no cost to join, and families never have to share their stories or be public if that’s not the right decision for them. Overall, this group will help ensure that all families with trans youth are being treated well, and that trans youth are able to live their lives with dignity and respect. Click here to learn more about FTE.