Kurt Russel Just SHOWED Overpaid Celebs It’s Time To Shut Up About Trump – Hits Them Where It Hurts!
Since the second that Donald Trump was declared as our next president, liberals have not stopped complaining about the outcome, even after more than a year with him in the White House. The despicable display reached the height of annoyance during every ego-stroking awards ceremony since President Trump was elected. All have turned into a Trump-trashing session for pissed of celebrities to get far too much off their chest about our unapologetic leader.

However, not everyone in Hollywood shares the same opinion as the most outspoken offender, Meryl Streep, as Kurt Russell just showed her and all of Trump’s other famous foes that it’s time to shut up about our president.

If you haven’t heard much from Russell lately, it’s because he falls into the rare category of celebrities who isn’t crying over Hillary Clinton’s loss and doesn’t feel that he needs to make his political opinions known. He’s simply doing what he’s paid well to do and wishes others in the biz would too. Since they continue to throw tantrums and trash Trump on a public stage, Russell reached his breaking point and finally fired back hard.

“This is a business that’s heavily promulgated by people who have a politically liberal bent,” Russell began in his blistering beratement of these overpaid crybabies after what Streep said at the Golden Globes. “I don’t begrudge them that. I’m a libertarian; frankly, I think my liberalness goes far beyond theirs in a lot of ways,” he added, as reported by the American Lookout. “But yeah, we think differently, and maybe that’s cut me out of some things. I don’t care,” he said before dropping a brutal announcement on these Streep and her lemmings that left them burning.

Explaining that they’re not empowered in this business by their disgraceful attitudes against our leaders, the badass actor said they better be prepared to put their money where their nasty mouths are since they could be out of work. “People know I get along great with all kinds of directors, all kinds of actors. And I tell you, you hire me, I will show up, 24/7, and I will give you 100%. I will help you fix whatever problems come up. You hire me, I’m your boy. It’s just, it’s all about the work. And when that’s done, I am done.”

Kurt has said recently that “the last thing I like to watch is entertainers or actors get political,” which he just proved by clearly pointing out that nobody cares what celebrities have to say about politics, and that their obnoxious behavior only shows how unemployable they are. They need to just stick to what they are overpaid to do and leave the rest to the adults in charge.