Hispanic Americans in Congress
Since 1822, when Delegate Joseph Marion Hernández of Florida became the first Hispanic American to serve in Congress, a total of 128 Hispanic Americans have served as U.S. Representatives, Delegates, Resident Commissioners, or Senators. This Web site, based on the publication Hispanic Americans in Congress, contains biographical profiles of former Hispanic Members of Congress, links to information about current Hispanic Members, essays on the institutional and national events that shaped successive generations of Hispanic Members of Congress, and images of each individual Member, including rare photos.

Member Profiles Read biographical profiles of former Hispanic-American Representatives, Delegates, and Senators that focus on their congressional careers. These profiles also contain suggestions for further reading and references to Members’ manuscript collections.

Hispanic Americans in Congress: An Introduction Over the last two centuries, Hispanic Americans have worked their way from the outer edges to the inner rings of power in Congress. They have represented diverse areas from Territorial New Mexico to the island of Puerto Rico. Since 1899, at least one Hispanic American has served in every Congress. These Members make up an important but often over-looked chapter of the American experience.

From Democracy's Borderlands, 1822–1898 Shaped by America’s continental expansion and its geopolitical upheaval, many of the earliest Hispanic Americans to serve in Congress did so as Delegates from the New Mexico Territory. They often confronted racial prejudices, as well as statutes and House Rules limiting their powers as legislators. Though these Members often served only briefly, they worked to weave the western territories into the national fabric.

“Foreign in a Domestic Sense,” 1898–1945 Following the Spanish-American War, the United States gained territories in the Pacific and the Caribbean, forcing Congress to change how it administered the country’s insular affairs. While Puerto Rico’s relationship with the U.S. remained unclear, the creation of the Office of the Resident Commissioner gave the island a modest voice in the House. Other Hispanic Members used influential committee assignments to bolster the economy during the Great Depression, and to articulate common concerns.

Separate Interests to National Agendas, 1945–1977 Many Hispanic Members launched trailblazing careers after World War II. While fostering grassroots activism, they expanded the boundaries of U.S. citizenship and protected civil liberties. And with the creation of the Estado Libre Asociado, Puerto Rico’s Resident Commissioner helped the island win a greater measure of self-governance. These bold efforts culminated in the creation of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus.