‘Peacemaker’ heals city in wake of Trayvon Martin killing — MSNBC
(Page 2 of 2)

While mediators attended nearly every rally or protest in town, they always stayed on the periphery.

“They want to be seen as completely neutral and be able to go from party to party to assist in facilitating whatever is needed without being seen as on one side or another,” Bonaparte said. “To me the main thing is that the other side felt that [the CRS] could be trusted. They might not trust us but they certainly should be able to trust the DOJ.”

Dena Iverson, a spokeswoman for the Justice Department said the CRS will remain in Sanford throughout Zimmerman’s trial, and that it will continue to consult with local officials and community leaders on how best to prevent any flare ups of racial tension.

In preparation, CRS workers have held workshops with local ministers and taken a field trip to court to go over trial procedures. The agency also helped a group of pastors secure four seats in the courtroom for Zimmerman’s trial. Leadership from the religious community is where Battles and his team have concentrated their greatest efforts and yielded their biggest successes.

Religious leaders break bread

One of Battles biggest feats, at least among some folks, simply boiled down to a guest list for lunch at a local Cracker Barrel restaurant.

When Martin was killed, Rev. Harry Rucker, a black preacher well known for his beliefs that integration was a mistake, organized rallies and meetings and called for justice. Jeff Krall, a popular white pastor and founder of Sanford Ministers Fellowship, wanted to hold a city-wide prayer vigil. But Martin’s family— at the urging of some of the city’s black ministers— said no. His group was simply too white, Revs. Derrick Gay and Valarie Houston told MSNBC.

Related: Victims of gun violence gather at Zimmerman trial

Battles approached Krall and Rucker separately and asked if they’d be willing to break bread, according to Krall. They agreed, and over biscuits they talked about the past, how the Martin case had consumed the community and could be a powder keg if unchecked.

Rucker and Krall stayed in touch. Two weeks later, more than a dozen other pastors representing the larger community joined them at Cracker Barrel.

“It was just so joyful, everyone was getting along and loving on one another and passing out business cards and talking like old friends,” Krall recalled.

From that meeting a new group was formed: Sanford Pastors Connecting.

They held joint public events to pray for both Martin’s and Zimmerman’s families. They held meetings and mini-summits that drew dozens of ministers from across the city. There was frank conversation about all the past wrongs and perceived wrongs committed among them. And for the first time in as long as many could remember, there was frank talk about racial animosity and healing.

“If you don’t have lunch or breakfast or hang with any of the other black pastors, if you don’t have friends from another culture, you only know about that culture from the news,” said Pastor Krall, a co-chair of Sanford Pastors Connecting. “I find we are robbing each other of our humanity, and I think it goes both ways.”

‘Good is going to come out of it’

Sanford has had no shortage of racial tensions and issues. And Martin’s killing and its initial handling by the Sanford Police Department, has been seen by some, particularly in the black community, as a stinging injustice.

In the aftermath of the shooting, hurt feelings over a string of past incidents have bubbled up, rekindling distrust over the way police and courts have handled such cases.

In 2011, then-police chief Brian Tooley was forced from office following a scandal involving a lieutenant’s son who was captured on video attacking a homeless black man. Police officers questioned the officer’s son but did not arrest him for several weeks and only then after a video recording of the attack went viral.

In 2005 the killing of a black teenager, Travares McGill, by two white security guards at an apartment complex, one the son of a Sanford Police officer, badly damaged race relations.

The two men claimed McGill tried to run them down in a car. Both fired and later claimed they did so in self-defense. McGill was pronounced dead at the scene. The pair was arrested and charged, one with manslaughter and the other with firing into an occupied vehicle. But a judge later cited lack of evidence and dismissed both cases. According to autopsy reports, McGill suffered fatal gunshot wounds to the back.

The CRS can’t heal it all and some say the tensions within the community have not abated since Martin’s killing.

Many pastors, both black and white concede that finding common ground, even among the willing has been difficult.

“There has definitely been some headway made, although I don’t think as much has been done as could’ve been done,” said Gay, an African-American member of Sanford Pastors Connecting.

But out of tragedy has come an opportunity.

“I believe that in this bad situation —what was intended for evil—good is going to come out of it,” Gay said. “It opened up a dialogue where people are now talking and saying we can make our city a better city.”