Jeb Bush tells Michael Medved he would take a pass on DACA, DAPA, and Scooby van - twitchy.com
Asked on Seattle radio if he would undo President Obama's executive orders on immigration, Jeb Bush says: "The DACA and DAPA? Yes, I would." — Patricia Mazzei (@PatriciaMazzei) April 21, 2015

It’s been difficult to nail down exactly where Jeb Bush stands on immigration and amnesty, but in a radio interview Tuesday with host Michael Medved, Bush said that, as president, he would undo President Obama’s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) and Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents (DAPA) policies.

.@JebBush, when asked if he would undo President Obama's immigration actions: "The DACA and DAPA? Yes I would." http://t.co/SY1ln2KfP2 — America's Voice (@americasvoice) April 21, 2015

Would he repeal DACA + DAPA? Yes, I would, @JebBush says, asked about Obama exec orders #immigration — lesley clark (@lesleyclark) April 21, 2015

“The DACA and DAPA? Yes I would [undo them],” Bush said, adding that “I think the better answer is to fix the immigration problem, to solve it the regular order way, which is to go to Congress, have a proposal, work on a bipartisan fashion to fix a broken immigration system.”

Any chance that Bush would consider procuring his own Scooby van like Hillary Clinton for the purposes of voter outreach?

"Scooby Doo van? No, probably won't do that," Jeb Bush tells Seattle radio, calling Hillary Clinton campaign "a little contrived." — Patricia Mazzei (@PatriciaMazzei) April 21, 2015

"Scooby Doo van? Probably won't do that," Jeb Bush says on Medved show, adds that Clinton campaign looks "contrived." — Michael C. Bender (@MichaelCBender) April 21, 2015

"Scooby-Doo van? No. Probably won't do that," @JebBush says, "but I will connect with people." — Alex Leary (@learyreports) April 21, 2015

@learyreports @BretBaier Dem's have Scooby Doo and the Repub's remind me more of the Wacky Races cartoon. Ted Cruz=Peter Perfect — J.E. Johnson (@Hickorygolfer53) April 21, 2015

For what it’s worth, Rick Perry shot down the idea of touring the country in his own Mystery Machine last week.

Q: "Are you going to get yourself a Scooby van?" Rick Perry: "No, sir." — Reid J. Epstein (@reidepstein) April 16, 2015

Follow @twitchyteam