San Antonio Ordinance to Allow Men into Women’s Restrooms?
An important question to ponder – when has it ever made sense for Texas to follow California’s radical policies?

You may have heard that California Governor Jerry Brown (D) has signed into law a “Transgender Bathroom Bill” that allows public school students to use the bathroom and locker room of their choice – regardless of their actual biological gender. Homosexual advocates around the nation are applauding the law and calling it a “watershed moment not only for California, but for the entire nation.”

Not surprisingly, as Todd Starnes with Fox News reports, many in California, especially parents, are understandably outraged over the law:

“This is a very radical idea,” she said. “You’re going to have first-grade boys going to the restroom next to first-grade girls without any supervision.” – Karen England “Think of all of the parents and all of the students that would be uncomfortable in this situation, and that a student has no burden but to declare that ‘I want to be in the boys shower or the girls shower’ that day.” – California State Sen. Jim Nielson

This is clearly a misguided and dangerous policy – but that’s just California, right?

Wrong.

Shockingly, a similar policy may be coming to Texas as a part of San Antonio’s proposed ordinance that we have been referring to as the Anti-Religious Freedom Ordinance. While we have outlined many of the serious religious freedom problems with the ordinance, particular for Christians, citizens of San Antonio need to also understand the ordinance would also contain “Transgender Bathroom” language. Except, this language would not just apply to schools – but to all public access bathrooms – likely including those in private businesses.

Specifically, the ordinance makes it illegal to deny “facilities” because of a person’s “gender identity.” These facilities are commonly understood to include bathrooms, locker rooms, and other changing facilities.

The proposed ordinance contains no exemption for places in which people are customarily in various states of undress, such as a locker room or bathroom. This will force citizens in San Antonio, including children, to share bathrooms/locker rooms with those that choose a “transgender” identity and are of the opposite sex. Simply put, men will be allowed to use women’s restrooms.

The danger of this policy is clear – women and children will be put needlessly at risk as heterosexual, sexual predators will be able to gain easier access to their targets. The City Council has a duty to protect women and children, not place them at risk. They are simply placing political correctness above the safety of their citizens.

The San Antonio City Council’s proposed ordinance is severely misguided policy and has major constitutional concerns. Stay tuned to our website as we will be following up this post with more details on other serious concerns with the proposed ordinance.

Action Opportunity:

You can contact the San Antonio City Council about the propose ordinance here.

Image source (Christian Post)