The Paris Agreement
Work programme under the Paris Agreement In preparation for the implementation of the Paris Agreement and the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, an online platform, put in place pursuant to decision 1/CP.23, paragraph 3, can be accessed through the link below. The content of the platform reflects the latest status of the negotiations and it will be updated as new information becomes available.

Overview (online platform) The progress tracker for the work programme resulting from the relevant requests contained in decision 1/CP.21 can be found below (version 19 January 2018_REV)





Progress tracker

Paris Agreement: essential elements The Paris Agreement’s aim is to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change by keeping a global temperature rise this century well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase even further to 1.5 degrees Celsius. Additionally, the agreement aims to strengthen the ability of countries to deal with the impacts of climate change. To reach these ambitious goals, appropriate financial flows, a new technology framework and an enhanced capacity building framework will be put in place, thus supporting action by developing countries and the most vulnerable countries, in line with their own national objectives. The Agreement also provides for enhanced transparency of action and support through a more robust transparency framework. There will be a global stocktake every 5 years to assess the collective progress towards achieving the purpose of the Agreement and to inform further individual actions by Parties. Further information on key aspects of the Agreement can be found here. Nationally determined contributions The Paris Agreement requires all Parties to put forward their best efforts through “nationally determined contributions” (NDCs) and to strengthen these efforts in the years ahead. This includes requirements that all Parties report regularly on their emissions and on their implementation efforts. Further information on NDCs can be found here.