3 of 29 October 2004
International covenant on Civil and Political Rights Distr.

GENERAL CCPR/C/SYR/2004/3

29 October 2004



Original: ENGLISH Human Rights Committee

CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS SUBMITTED BY STATES

PARTIES UNDER ARTICLE 40 OF THE COVENANT



Third periodic report SYRIA *

______________

*The report is issued unedited, in compliance with the wish expressed by the Human Rights Committee at its sixty-sixth session in July 1999

.









[Original: Arabic]

[5 July 2004]



Introduction

1.

The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights places the States parties thereto under certain obligations in order to ensure that their legislation and their legal and judicial systems are in conformity with the provisions of the Covenant.

2. In this report, the Syrian Arab Republic will diligently endeavour to show, in a clear and reliable manner, the extent to which Syrian legislation is compatible with the rights recognized in the Covenant by listing those rights, article by article, and comparing them with the domestic laws and legislation in force in Syria in order to acquaint the Committee with the legal framework within which the provisions of the Covenant are being implemented in the Syrian Arab Republic.

3. In accordance with the provisions of article 40 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, under which the States parties undertake to submit reports on the measures they have adopted which give effect to the rights recognized therein, this report has been prepared in the light of the guidelines formulated by the Human Rights Committee for reports on the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

4. Syria acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on 21 April 1969 under the terms of Legislative Decree No. 3 and, consequently, the Covenant became part of its domestic legislation and, as such, is enforceable in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.

5. The Constitution is the fundamental law in the country. The rights referred to in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights are guaranteed in the Syrian Constitution, which is the country’s basic law, and in the legislation in force in the country. This is confirmed by article 12 of the Constitution, which stipulates that: “The State shall serve the people and its institutions shall protect the basic rights of citizens and enhance their lives … etc.”



PART I Syrian Arab Republic: An overview

a.

Geopolitical data

6. The Syrian Arab Republic is situated on the eastern coast of the Mediterranean and borders Turkey in the north, Iraq in the east, Palestine and Jordan in the south and Lebanon and the Mediterranean in the west. Its borders extend 845 km with Turkey, 596 km with Iraq, 356 km with Jordan, 74 km with Palestine and 359 km with Lebanon, while its Mediterranean coast extends about 183 km, making a total of 2,413 km of Syrian borders on all four sides.

7. Area : The overall area of the Syrian Arab Republic is 185,180 km 2 or 18,517,971 hectares, of which 6 million hectares are arable land while the remaining area is mountainous and desert. In 1967, Israel occupied 1,260 km 2 of the Golan territory of which a part was recovered in addition to Kuneitra in the wake of the liberation war in October 1973. Today, 1,200 km 2 remain under Israeli occupation. The total area of the Golan is 1,860 km 2 and is bordered almost entirely by Kuneitra Governorate.

8. Climate : Overall, the climate of the Mediterranean region prevails, with rainy winter, dry summer and two short transitional seasons.

9. Administrative divisions : Syria’s territory is divided into 14 governorates, each of which is normally divided into districts, and districts are divided into sub-districts, each comprising a number of villages, which are the smallest administrative units. A governorate is headed by a governor, a district or a sub-district is headed by an administrator, and a village is run by a council headed by a mayor who is in charge of the village and its farming land. Governors are appointed by a decree, while administrators of districts and sub-districts are appointed by the Ministry of the Interior. Mayors are administratively subordinate to the governor but report to the administrator of the sub-district who in turn reports to the administrator of the district; this latter reports to the Governor. The seat of the governorate is normally in the city after which the governorate is named; and the seat of a district is the town which bears its name. In addition to 14 governorate seats, there are 61 districts and 210 sub-districts.

10. Demography : Various ancient civilizations were fused in Syria thousands of years ago: Assyrian, Kanaanite, Aramaic, Phoenician, Syrianic and Ebla, the last of which gave the world its first alphabet in history, Ugharit. For this reason Syria has been called the cradle of civilizations, and its people have many different ethnic and religious origins. According to statistical estimates of 2003, Syria has a population of 17.34 million, of whom 8.874 are males and 8.466 are females, with 52 per cent living in rural areas and 48 per cent in urban areas. Annual population growth between 1995 and 2000 has been estimated at 0.027 per thousand. In 2001, the fertility rate was 3.8 per thousand. The balanced demographic distribution was disturbed by the Israeli occupation of Syrian territory in 1967, forcing the displacement of over 150,000 persons. With natural growth, the number of displaced persons has reached 305,661 in 2004. Five per cent of the population of remote villages of Golan remained in the villages of Mossaadah, Bakaaba, Ein Qenieh, Ghagar (gypsy) and S’heita, with a total of 25,000 inhabitants in 2003. On 14 December 1981 Israel annexed the occupied Golan territory and imposed on the population Israeli identity cards and Israeli laws, but the Security Council adopted resolution 497 (1981) which declared this annexation null and void. The occupation forces also us ed villages and agricultural land to establish 44 settlements since 1967, and are expanding the settlements to accommodate 4,500 new Jewish immigrant families over the next 10 years.

b. Political data

11. The Constitution :

The Constitution of the Syrian Arab Republic was enacted on 13 March 1973 to govern the State and its various institutions, serving as the basis of all legislation. It comprises a Preamble and four Chapters: Chapter 1 on political, economic, educational and cultural principles and freedoms, rights and public duties (arts. 1-49); Chapter 2 on powers of the State, comprising three parts, legislative power, executive authority and judicial authority (arts. 50-148); Chapter 3 on amending the Constitution is made up of one article, article 149, and Chapter 4, on general and transitory provisions, also made up of one article, article 150. The Preamble states that the Constitution is based on major principles, notably that freedom is a sacred right, and a citizen’s freedom can be complete only with economic and social liberation.

Features of the system of government in the Syrian Arab Republic

12. The Syrian Arab Republic is a democratic, people’s socialist sovereign State. No part of its territory can be ceded. It is a part of the Arab homeland (article 1 of the Constitution). The system of government is republican and sovereignty is vested in the people (article 2 of the Constitution). The Socialist Arab Ba’th Party is the leading party in society, and leads a patriotic and progressive front seeking to unify the resources of the people’s masses and place them at the service of the Arab nation’s goals, (article 8 of the Constitution). At present, this front comprises nine parties, including the Ba’th Party. People’s councils are organs elected in a democratic way at which the citizens shall exercise their rights in administering the State and leading the society (article 10 of the Constitution).

13. In Chapter 2 the Constitution provides for three powers, namely the legislative authority, the executive authority and the judiciary.

Legislative authority

14. The People’s Assembly assumes legislative authority in accordance with article 50 of the Constitution:

“The members of the People’s Assembly shall be elected by general, secret, direct and equal ballot in accordance with the provisions of the Electoral Law” (art. 50). “For four years beginning on the date of its first meeting. This term can be extended by law only in a state of war” (art. 51).

15. Under article 71 of the Constitution, the People’s Assembly assumes the following functions:

(a) Nomination of the President of the Republic;

(b) Approval of laws;

(c) Debate of cabinet policy;

(d) Approval of the general budget and development plans;

(e) Approval of international treaties and agreements;

(f) Approval of general amnesty;

(g) Acceptance or rejection of the resignation of a member of the Assembly;

(h) Withholding confidence in the cabinet or a minister.

16. The Constitution provides that two-thirds of the members of the People’s Assembly may propose The Constitution provides that two-thirds of the members of the People’s Assembly may propose amending the Constitution (art. 149). It further states that the amendment proposal shall include the provisions to be amended and the reasons for it. Upon receipt of the proposal the People’s Assembly shall set up a special committee to examine it.

Executive Authority

17. The Executive Authority in the Syrian Arab Republic comprises the President of the Republic, the Cabinet of Ministers and local people’s councils (town councils).

18. Nomination for the post of President is made by the People’s Assembly upon a proposal by the Arab Socialist Ba’th Party Regional Command and the nomination shall be put to a referendum among citizens. The President exercises executive authority on behalf of the people within the limits defined in the Constitution (art. 93) as follows:

1. He shall, through consultation with the Cabinet, lay down the State’s general policy and supervise its implementation, (art. 94).

2. He may call a cabinet meeting under his chairmanship. He may also request reports from the Ministers, (art. 97).

3. He shall promulgate the laws approved by the People’s Assembly, and may veto these laws through a decision giving the reasons for his objection within a month after the receipt by the President. If the Assembly again approves them by a two-thirds majority the President of the Republic shall issue them, (art. 98).

4. He shall issue decrees, decisions and orders in accordance with the legislation in effect, (art. 99).

5. He may declare war and general mobilization and may conclude a peace agreement after approval by the People’s Assembly, (art. 100).

6. He may declare and terminate a state of emergency in the manner stated in the law (art. 101).

7. He shall accredit the heads of diplomatic missions to foreign governments and accept the accreditation of the heads of foreign diplomatic missions, (art. 102).

8. He is the supreme commander of the army and armed forces, (art. 103).

9. He shall ratify and abolish international treaties and agreements in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution (art. 104).

10. He may issue amnesty and reinstatement decisions (art. 105).

11. He can bestow decorations, (art. 106).

12. He may dissolve the People’s Assembly through decision giving the reasons. Elections shall be held within 90 days from the date of the dissolution, (art. 107).

13. He may call on the People’s Assembly to convene in extraordinary session, (art. 108).

14. He shall appoint civilian and military officials and terminate their services in accordance with the law, (art. 109).

15. He may draft project laws and submit them to the Assembly for approval, (art. 110).

16. He shall assume legislative authority at times specified in the Constitution, (art. 111).

19. The Council of Ministers is the State’s highest executive and administrative body. It is constituted of the Prime Minister, his deputies and the ministers and it supervises the execution of the rules and regulations and supervises the operation of the State machinery and institutions. The Prime Minister supervises the activities of the ministers, (article 115 of the Constitution).

20. The local people’s counc The local people’s councils are bodies which exercise their powers within the administrative units in accordance with the law, (article 129 of the Constitution).

The judicial authority

21. The judicial authority comprises judges, public prosecution office and the Supreme Constitutional Court. Article 131 of the Constitution stipulates that the judicial authority is independent and that the President of the Republic shall guarantee this independence with the assistance of the Higher Council of the Judiciary. The Supreme Constitutional Court is composed of five members, of whom one would be the President and all of whom shall be appointed by the President of the Republic by decree, (article 139 of the Constitution). The mandate of the Supreme Court is to determine the validity of the special appeals regarding the election of the members of the People’s Assembly and to submit to the Assembly a report on its findings, (article 144 of the Constitution). It shall also examine and rule on the constitutionality of laws (article 145 of the Constitution).

22. The judiciary are independent and have full authority to act in accordance with article 131 of the Constitution. Judges are independent and are subject to no authority except that of the law, (article 133 of the Constitution).

Some international conventions in the field of human rights to which Syria has acceded: 23. Syria is a party to a large number of international instruments which establish rights and obligations and ensure respect for human dignity and fundamental human rights. These include: 1. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, of 16 December 1966, to which Syria acceded on 21 April 1969. 2. The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of 16 December 1966, to which Syria acceded on 21 April 1969. 3. The Slavery Convention of 1926 to which Syria acceded on 25 June 1931. 4. Protocol amending the Slavery Convention signed at Geneva on 25 September 1926, to which Syria acceded on 4 August 1954. 5. Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practises Similar to Slavery of 7 September 1956 to which Syria acceded on 17 September 1958. 6. The four Geneva Conventions of 1949 to which Syria acceded on 2 November 1953. 7. The First Protocol Additional to the Four Geneva Conventions of 1977 to which Syria acceded on 14 November 1983. Syria also acceded to the Second Additional Protocol. 8. The International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid of 31 December 1965, to which Syria acceded on 18 June 1976. 9. The International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination of 31 December 1965, to which Syria acceded on 21 April 1969 and accepted the amendment of article 8 thereof in 1998. 10. The International Convention Against Apartheid in Sports of 10 December 1985 to which Syria acceded on 28 November 1988. 11. The Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 9 December 1949 to which Syria acceded on 25 June 1955. 12. The International Convention for the Suppression of Traffic in Women and children, signed in Geneva on 30 September 1921, as amended by the Protocol signed in New York on 12 November 1947, to which Syria acceded on 17 November 1947. 13. Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others and its Final Protocol adopted in New York on 21 March 1950, to which Syria acceded on 12 June 1959. 14. Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children. 15. Protocol Amending the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and Children, concluded in Geneva on 3 September 1921 and the Convention for the Suppression of Illicit Trafficking in Adult Women concluded in Geneva on 11 October 1933, to which Syria acceded on 17 November 1949. 16. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women of 28 December 1979 to which Syria acceded on 27 March 2003. 17. Convention on the Rights of the Child of 30 November 1989, to which Syria acceded on 15 July 1993. 18. The First Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, to which Syria acceded on 17 October 2003. 19. The Second Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography, to which Syria acceded on 17 October 2003. 24. Syria also joined 48 Conventions relating to the rights of workers and trade union freedoms which were adopted by the International Labour Organization, including: 1. Convention No. 1 on Hours of Work, 1919. 2. Convention No. 2 on Unemployment, 1919. 3. Convention No. 11 on Right of Association (Agriculture), 1921. 4. Weekly Rest (Industry) Convention, 1921. 5. Workmen’s Compensation (Accidents) Convention, 1925. 6. Forced Labour Convention, 1930. 7. Holidays with Pay Convention, 1936. 8. Minimum Wage-Fixing Machinery Convention, 1928. 9. Working Hours (Commerce and Offices) Convention, 1990. 10. Convention on Equal Treatment between National and Foreign Workers in Respect of Compensation for Accidents. Syria has also acceded to a number of international conventions relating to cultural and intellectual human rights adopted by UNESCO. c. Economic aspect Features of the economic system in the Syrian Arab Republic 25. In article 13, the Constitution of the Syrian Arab Republic defines the economic system as a planned socialist economy which seeks to end all forms of exploitation. The law regulates ownership which is of three kinds (art. 14): 1. Public ownership, which includes natural resources and public utilities. 2. Collective ownership which includes property belonging to popular and professional organizations. 3. Individual ownership which includes property belonging to individuals. 26. Since the 1960s the Syrian Arab Republic has adopted the principle of comprehensive planning of economy, and the first five year plan was announced for the period 1960-1966. Currently the tenth five year plan is under way. The main objective of these plans is to establish foundations of social justice and to accomplish economic development. Since 1970, and with the onset of the Corrective Movement, the economic approach in Syria has been built on economic pluralism under which each of the public, private and mixed sectors plays a role in the process of economic and social development, with emphasis on the leading role of the public sector. However, the nature and size of each sector in the overall structure of national economy has not remained static throughout successive phases of development, but rather varied to meet economic and social requirements of each phase. It should be noted that the social aspect has always enjoyed relative importance in the economic policy of Syria. 27. As of the early years of the 1990s the approach of economic pluralism has been characterized by additional freedom for the private sector and the mixed sector and several laws and regulations were adopted at the time to support these two sectors. Foremost among these laws was Law No. 10 and its amendments to promote investment, which allowed these two sectors to exercise activities in the areas of production, distribution, import and export and in the areas of investment and services, which were previously reserved for the public sector. 28. The central question facing the political leadership in the management of the economy in Syria at present is “the process of economic liberalization” and “the modernization of the system of economic pluralism”, as this process will not only further expand the private and mixed sectors but also further develop procedures and management in the public sector. According to the latest statistics by the Central Office of Statistics for 2003, gross domestic product reached LS 1,672 billion at constant prices, with a rate of growth of 2.7 per cent compared with 2001, in which gross domestic product had reached LS 1,627 billion. At current prices the figure is LS 1,708 billion, a growth rate of 4.4 per cent compared with 2001 in which the figure was LS 1,626 billion. 29. In 2000 national income was LS 820,307 million, and increased in 2001 by 6.3 per cent to reach LS 842,400 million and LS 912,935 million in 2002, an increase of 4.6 per cent from 2001. 30. The implementation of the ninth five year plan of the Ministry of Economy and its affiliate bodies was characterized by the modernization of legislation and laws and by structural reform of economic policies in order to ensure the transition of the economy from traditional forms to the information economy, and to provide for the development of economic relations with Arab and foreign countries. This plan was divided into two phases: (a) From 2001 to 2003: follow-up of reform and structural adjustment; and (b) From 2004 to 2005: consolidation of opportunities for growth on the basis of high-level directives to ensure the continuation of the policies of economic reform, modernization and development. 31. Banks in Syria have an extremely important role to play in the promotion of economic and social activities. For this reason the State oversees, manages and directs the banking system. Each of the six currently operating banks is assigned a specialized activity, role and objectives different from the others. With their network of branches in the capital and capitals of governorates as well as other areas of Syria these banks offer services and facilities to institutions and individuals within their own regulations and terms of reference. 32. Significant achievements of Syrian banks may be summed up as follows: (a) Protection of savings by citizens, ensuring their growth and investment to finance various sectors; (b) Helping the State to implement its monetary policy and to adjust this policy to take account of public interest; (c) Provision of banking services to public, economic and social sectors; and (d) Performing an effective role as a tool of financial control of public institutions and profits. Recently, the private sector received funding from the Islamic Development Bank and the Syrian Commercial Bank to finance Arab exports to non-Arab countries. 33. Syria has endeavoured to develop its commercial and economic relations with all countries of the world and to defend its interests and the interests of the third world in international economic forums. It entered into trade and economic, scientific and technical cooperation agreements with many developed and developing countries, in addition to other agreements for protection of investment and elimination of dual taxation. Syria also maintains cooperation with EU countries and expects to sign a partnership agreement with the EU in the framework of the Barcelona process that aims at the creation of a European-Mediterranean free trade zone. Syria is also a member of the larger Arab free trade zone, which constitutes the first step within the framework of the League of Arab States to set up a joint Arab market. Syria also actively participates in international economic forums and is a member State in the Economic and Social Commission for West Africa (ESCWA).

Recent legislations and laws and concrete measures to ensure the growth of the national economy 34. In the period from 2000 through 2003 many agreements, protocols and memoranda of understanding were signed with various Arab and foreign countries, and actions have been taken for the functioning of joint high-level and ministerial committees with Arab and foreign countries, trade committees, and follow-up and expert groups. 1. Ratification and implementation of agreements to set up free trade zones jointly with a number of Arab and foreign countries. 2. Ratification of numerous international trade agreements. 3. Conclusion of agreements with various countries to promote and guarantee investments. 4. Support of the Syrian business sector in its second phase since 2000 with funds amounting to €12 million over five years. 5. Elaboration of the memorandum of justification for the accession of Syria to the World Trade Organization. 6. Creation of an executive secretariat of the National Committee formed by Syria and member States of ESCWA to facilitate transportation and foreign trade, achieve trade efficiency and promotion of technological tools among providers of trade services (small and medium level). 7. Decrees to create free zones in Syria, including coastal free zones in a number of Syrian coastal cities. 8. A decree on the accession of Syria to the treaties of cooperation on patents. 9. Decree No. 40 of 27 January 2003 on the new investments system and free zones. 10. Decree No. 141 of 3 April 2003 creating the Monetary and Credit Council which issued decisions to authorize a number of private banks to operate in Syria and issued decision No. 4 of 28 May 2003 to amend interest rates on loans and credits of public banks. 11. Legislative Decree No. 33 of 8 July 2003 on measures to combat smuggling of precious coins and metals. 12. Legislative Decree No. 44 of 12 August 2003 increasing the Syrian contribution to the capital of the International Agency for the Insurance of Investment. 13. Legislative Decree No. 49 of 21 August 2003 on the creation of a banking training centre within the Ministry of Economy. 14. Decree No. 54 of 2 September 2003 amending the clause for the addition of another clause in the law on the real estate charges in respect of fees of voluntary or compulsory insurance of debts and mortgages. 15. Legislative Decree No. 59 of 9 September 2003 to combat money laundering. 16. Decree No. 120 of 22 March 2003 incorporating foreign trade bodies into one institution called the General Authority for Foreign Trade, which entered into force as of 1 July 2003. 17. Legislative Decree No. 13 of 15 February 2003 amending article 156, paragraph 2, of the Customs Law No. 9 of 1975 to exempt donations and gifts from within Syria or from outside sources to ministries and other State departments and authorities from taxes and customs on condition that the donor has no interest or benefit in any State organization. 18. Legislative Decree No. 36 of 21 July 2003 on conditions for the importation of vehicles for the disabled. 19. Law No. 15 of 2003 ratifying the trade and economic agreement with Saudi Arabia. 20. Law No. 17 of 14 October 2003 ratifying the Agreement on the Establishment of the Arab Academy for Electronic Business. 21. Legislative Decree No. 11 of 2003 on the accession of Syria to the Treaty of Cooperation on Patents. 35. In 2004 successive laws and legislative decrees were issued for the modernization of laws as a cornerstone in economic development and for the promotion of the private sector as an important component of national wealth and the continued investment in human development and rehabilitation of managerial cadres as a basis for modernization. Special mention should be made of Legislative Decree No. 16 of 14 February 2004 on the abolition of economic security tribunals. Earlier, another decree was issued to permit the use of foreign currencies. Syria is currently seeking to join the World Trade Organization given that it was one of the first States that had signed the GATT Agreement.

PART II Compliance of the Syrian Arab Republic with provisions of the Covenant Article 1. The right to self-determination

36. As a founding member of the United Nations, Syria exercises and applies the right of people to self-determination in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations under which all peoples have the right to self-determination by virtue of which they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development. Syria has joined the international community in its efforts to promote human rights and the freedom of peoples to determine their status and to dispose of their wealth and natural resources. Hence, Syria supported the relevant General Assembly resolutions, particularly resolution 514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and the subsequent resolutions, thus confirming its commitment to defend the principles of international law Syria considers that self-determination forms a firm basis for respect for human rights. One of the guiding principles of Syria’s foreign policy is defence of the right of peoples to self-determination and rejection of all forms of colonialism and racial discrimination. 37. Article 1 of the Covenant affirms that people should not be deprived under any circumstance of their own means of living. The Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan since 5 June 1967 constitutes a barrier that prevents Syrian citizens in the occupied Golan from exercising their political, economic and social rights and exploitation of the natural resources of the Syrian people and deprives Syria of the possibility to apply provisions of the Covenant on all its territories. 38. The democratic political life in the Syrian Arab Republic guarantees the enjoyment by the Syrian Arab people of their right to adopt the political and economic systems of their own free choice. This right is guaranteed by the Constitution which stipulates in article 2 that sovereignty is vested in the people and that every individual has the right to participate in political, economic, social and cultural life (art. 26) and to vote and stand as a candidate in elections. To enshrine these principles the Law of Local Government was issued under cover of Legislative Decree No. 15 of 11 May 1971 providing for, inter alia: 1. Concentrating responsibility in the hands of the people to exercise leadership functions and to expand as far as possible areas for the application of democracy and the realization of the will of the people as well as ensuring their continued watch over sound implementation through their representatives in the elected local councils. 2. Giving the local administrative units the responsibility for economy, culture and services within the limits of general plans, laws and regulations adopted by the State. 3. Transferring powers in respect of these matters to local authorities so that the functions of the central authority may be confined to planning, legislation, introduction of new technologies, rehabilitation, training and implementation of major projects.

Article 2

39. Syria ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in 1969, since which time it has formed part of the country’s domestic legislation. When the Republic’s Constitution was drafted in 1973, the legislature showed due regard for the provisions of that Covenant and of other conventions and treaties which it had ratified. Accordingly, there is no conflict between the articles of the Constitution and the provisions of the Covenant. It is noteworthy that, in the event of conflict between any domestic legislation and the provisions of an international treaty to which Syria is a party, the provisions of the international treaty prevail. In its ruling No. 23, of 1931, the Court of Cassation stipulated that: “No domestic legislative enactment can lay down rules that conflict with the provisions, or even indirectly affect the enforceability, of a prior international treaty”. This understanding was further reinforced in another decision by the Civil Chamber of the Court of Cassation, decision 1905/366 of 21 December 1980, which was published in the Lawyer’s Journal , p. 305, 1981. This decision states that national courts do not enforce agreements on grounds that the State has entered into international obligations for their implementation but on grounds of the fact that these treaties have become part of the State laws. In case of any conflict between a treaty provision and a domestic law the national court shall apply provisions of the international treaty and give it weight over domestic law. Article 25 of the Syrian Civil Code further stipulates that: “The provisions of articles that are superseded by, or conflict with, an international treaty in force in Syria shall cease to apply”. Furthermore, article 311 of the Syrian Code of Criminal Procedure stipulates that: “The above rules shall apply without prejudice to the provisions of treaties concluded in this connection between Syria and other States”. 40. Syria has justifiably been called the “land of civilizations” since, for thousands of years, numerous civilizations have merged in its territory, which is inhabited by citizens of various racial and religious origins. Consequently, the phenomenon of discrimination or preference on grounds of race, religion or colour is unknown and alien to Syrian society. 41. These social values are reflected in the Republic’s Constitution, article 25 of which stipulates that citizens are equal before the law in regard to their rights and obligations and every citizen has the right to participate in political, economic, social and cultural life, this right being regulated by law. In order to ensure harmony between the need to establish legal rules to implement the Covenant, on the one hand, and to implement the universal legal rule that “there is no crime and no punishment without a provision in the law” and the principle that “an accused person is innocent until convicted”, legal rules were developed to ensure the implementation of the These social values are reflected in the Republic’s Constitution, article 25 of which stipulates that citizens are equal before the law in regard to their rights and obligations and every citizen has the right to participate in political, economic, social and cultural life, this right being regulated by law. In order to ensure harmony between the need to establish legal rules to implement the Covenant, on the one hand, and to implement the universal legal rule that “there is no crime and no punishment without a provision in the law” and the principle that “an accused person is innocent until convicted”, legal rules were developed to ensure the implementation of the Covenant. However, notwithstanding the absence of any form of discrimination in Syrian society, the legislature has taken preventive measures to deter any attempt to promote discrimination. Article 307 of the Penal Code prescribes a penalty of imprisonment for six months to two years, together with a fine of LS 100-200, for any act that is intended to instigate confessional or racial bigotry or provoke conflict among the various communities and component elements of the nation or which results in such instigation or provocation. Article 308 prescribes the same penalty for anyone belonging to an association that has been established for the above-mentioned purpose and also makes provision for the dissolution of the association and the confiscation of its property. 42. All citizens, regardless of their occupational or social status, have a legally guaranteed right to seek legal remedy in respect of any act of injustice committed against them. Article 319 of the Penal Code stipulates that: “Any act that is likely to prevent a Syrian from exercising his civil rights or fulfilling his civil obligations shall be punishable by detention for a term of one month to one year”. Article 57 of the Syrian Code of Criminal Procedure is also explicit in this regard, since it affirms that: “Anyone who deems himself to be the victim of a felony or a misdemeanour has the right to file a complaint with the Department of Public Prosecutions, which has an obligation to institute public proceedings if the complainant brings a personal action”. In regard to the exercise of this right, the Code makes no distinction between one person and another on grounds of colour, gender, race, religion, language or even nationality and this legal right applies to any offence committed against the claimant. 43. Any violation of the constitutional rights recognized in the Covenant is an offence punishable under the Penal Code. In order to deter officials from any abuse of their authority or influence, Syrian law regards abuse of authority as an aggravating circumstance that merits a heavier penalty insofar as article 367 of the Penal Code stipulates that: “With the exception of cases in which the law imposes special penalties for offences committed by officials, those of them who commit any offence in their official capacity or by abusing the authority or influence derived from their posts, through incitement, collusion or involvement, merit the heavier penalties prescribed in article 247”. The judiciary, which is an independent authority in accordance with the Constitution and Act No. 98 of 1961, as amended, adjudicates in any dispute brought before it as a result of a complaint concerning any violation of the rights of citizens. 44. The incorporation of the provisions of the Covenant in the Syrian national legislation constituted an effective tool to raise awareness of the Covenant and has even made these provisions part of everyday culture in the life of Syrian citizens. As is known, laws acknowledge the legislative rule of “no ignorance of law”, and Sy The incorporation of the provisions of the Covenant in the Syrian national legislation constituted an effective tool to raise awareness of the Covenant and has even made these provisions part of everyday culture in the life of Syrian citizens. As is known, laws acknowledge the legislative rule of “no ignorance of law”, and Syrian laws are published in the Official Gazette and the mass circulation newspapers in Syria. Familiarizing the judiciary and administrative authorities with the provisions of the Covenant is a more specialized process, and the two faculties of law in Syria function as a forum to ensure awareness of rights and duties and international obligations. As a result, the precepts of the Covenant constitute an essential basis for the work of the judiciary. A judge must be a graduate of the Faculty of Law and many officials in the State machinery are graduates of the Faculty of Law. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs undertakes to inform concerned authorities of developments in international law, international obligations and human rights, and transmits to them all information, circulars and resolutions dealing with the evolution of the concepts of human rights. In their turn these competent authorities incorporate these rights in the culture of personnel in the respective departments in keeping with Syria’s international obligations, including the Covenant. 45. The late President Hafez al-Assad had created a Complaints Bureau under the Ministry of Presidential Affairs by virtue of article 25 of Presidential Decree No. 29 of 1971. The Bureau receives and investigates complaints and grievances filed by citizens and takes appropriate action thereon and submits a monthly report to the President of the Republic, thereby ensuring that all citizens enjoy the right to lodge a complaint in respect of any violation of their rights or freedoms. A complaint may be referred to the Central Authority of Oversight and Inspection to investigate whether it contains charges that may constitute a violation of the duties of an official. Article 25, paragraph 2, of the Constitution provides that “the supremacy of law is a fundamental principle in the society and the State” and “the State ensures the principle of equal opportunities for citizens”. Article 28, paragraph 4 states that “the right of litigation, contest, and defence before the judiciary is safeguarded by the law”. A judicial or administrative decision or public notices in Syria cannot disregard the rule of law but rather confirm and are consistent with its provisions, thereby ensuring the implementation of decisions taken in favour of a wronged citizen. 46. In line with the concern of the Syrian Government with human rights education and the harmonization of national legislation with these rights and monitoring violations of human rights, the Prime Minister issued decision No. 2989 of 2 June 2004 to form the National Committee for International Humanitarian Law under the Minister of State for the Affairs of the Red Crescent and composed of representatives of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Defence, the Interior, Justice and Higher Education and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent organization. The Committee was given the task of fostering and coordinating national action for integrated awareness of international humanitarian law, harmonizing national legislation, monitoring violations of human rights and raising awareness of these rights, including in the ranks of the armed forces and internal security forces.

Article 3. Gender equality and non-discrimination

47. In the Syrian Arab Republic women exercise all rights as men without any discrimination between women and men. The Syrian Constitution contains provisions that safeguard the rights of women. Article 26 stipulates that “Every citizen has the right to participate in the political, economic, social and cultural life. The law regulates this participation.” Article 45 further provides that “The State shall guarantee for women all opportunities enabling them to fully and effectively participate in the political, social, cultural and economic life. The State must remove the restrictions that prevent women’s development and participation in building the … society.” There is no inconsistency between articles 26 and 45, but rather they are complimentary because article 25 provides for equality among citizens in regard to their rights and obligations and enjoins the State to exert all efforts to promote the advancement of women and their participation in various aspects of life. 48. Education in Syria is free, and the Ministry of Education applies Law No. 35 of 1981 on compulsory education, which provides for the enrolment of all boys and girls of the age of 6-12 years in primary schools. Law No. 32 of 2002 has made education compulsory up to the age of 15 and considered that both primary and preparatory stages of education constitute basic education. This helps in the eradication of illiteracy, in addition to efforts by officials of compulsory education to restore drop-outs to schools and monitor their attendance through cooperation and coordination with competent authorities to implement the law. Provisions of articles 7-65 of the Law of Compulsory Education No. 35 of 1981 apply to parents who refuse to send their children of both genders to school. These articles provide that if persuasion fails parents may be prosecuted and may face a financial penalty and imprisonment for a period of no more than one month.

In the workplace 49. Women enjoy, on an equal footing with men, the same opportunities for employment and appointment in public office in various sectors of the State on the same terms and conditions of work and for similar remuneration. Article 1 of the Labour Act No. 91 of 1959, as amended, defines an employer in these terms: “An employer is any individual or body corporate employing one or more workers for any form of remuneration.” It may be noted that the concept of the employer is expressed in gender-neutral language covering both men and women on an equal footing. This is also true of the definition of “agricultural employer contained in article 4 of the Agricultural Relations Act No. 134 of 1985, as amended. This equality between men and women is also enshrined in the definition of “worker” contained in article 2 of the above-mentioned Labour Act which stipulates that: “A worker shall be understood to mean any male or female workin Women enjoy, on an equal footing with men, the same opportunities for employment and appointment in public office in various sectors of the State on the same terms and conditions of work and for similar remuneration. Article 1 of the Labour Act No. 91 of 1959, as amended, defines an employer in these terms: “An employer is any individual or body corporate employing one or more workers for any form of remuneration.” It may be noted that the concept of the employer is expressed in gender-neutral language covering both men and women on an equal footing. This is also true of the definition of “agricultural employer contained in article 4 of the Agricultural Relations Act No. 134 of 1985, as amended. This equality between men and women is also enshrined in the definition of “worker” contained in article 2 of the above-mentioned Labour Act which stipulates that: “A worker shall be understood to mean any male or female working for any form of remuneration …”. Article 5 of the Agricultural Relations Act likewise defines an agricultural worker as “any man, woman or adolescent engaged in remunerated agricultural work for an agricultural employer or a farmer …”. 50. Article 1 of the Civil Service Statutes (Act No. 1 of 1985) defines “civil servant” in neutral terms that apply to both men and women since, in accordance with that definition, a civil servant is “anyone appointed to a post for which provision is made in the organizational structure of a public body”. This equality is explicitly confirmed in article 130 of the Labour Act which stipulates that: “Without prejudice to the provisions of the following article, all the stipulations regulating the employment of male workers shall also apply, without discrimination, to female workers performing the same type of work”. 51. Equality between men and women is further confirmed by Legislative Decree No. 4 of 1972 under which female employees are entitled to the same family allowances as male employees in the circumstances specified therein. The Social Insurance Act No. 92 of 1959 likewise places men and women on an equal footing in regard to all insurance benefits. 52. All Syrian citizens enjoy equal eligibility to participate in running the affairs of the State, without any discrimination or distinction as to race, colour or gender. The Syrian Constitution goes even farther in article 25 where it considers this participation not as a right but also as a duty and provides that each citizen, male or female, should participate in public affairs through democratically elected people’s councils. Through these councils citizens exercise their right to run the State and lead the society either directly or through their representatives. 53. Furthermore, we also find that men and women enjoy equal opportunities in the political sphere. The Electoral Law promulgated by Legislative Decree No. 26 of 1973 provides for the right of women to vote in public elections and to stand as candidates in elections to the People’s Assembly. Men and women are subject to the same conditions for candidates in category A or category B established by the Electoral Law. In the last elections for the People’s Assembly male candidates were 9,556 while female candidates were 849. In the current session of the People’s Assembly there are 30 women members out of 250 or 12 per cent of total membership. In the judiciary, females represent 13.1 per cent. There are two female ministers in the current cabinet and women occupy several important posts in other departments of the State. 54. In other occupations, Syrian women working in the agricultural sector represent more than 25.5 per cent of all workers while in industry they represent 14 per cent. Business women have become part of the fabric of Syrian society, representing more than 1.3 per cent of the business community, and associations of industrial business women were formed, reflecting the role of women in economic integration. In the public sector women account for more than 20 per cent and they constitute the larger segment in the field of education with more women teachers than male teachers. Girls attending vocational training also increased their numbers to 20 per cent. 55. Syrian law protects women against all forms of violence, rape and abuse. The Syrian Penal Code promulgated by Legislative Decree No. 148 of 1949, as amended, punishes rape in its articles 489, 490 and 492. In articles 500-501 it punishes abduction and in articles 510-511 it punishes incitement to obscenity or violation of ethics and public morality. 56. Anti-Prostitution Law No. 10 of 1961, as amended, makes it a crime to commit or facilitate obscenity or prostitution in articles 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7. 57. In Syria there are no cases of systematic rape and sexual slavery or practices similar to slavery. Any cases of rape or abduction are individual cases and the perpetrator is punished under applicable laws and statutes.

Development and modernization of laws relating to women 58. Syrian laws and legislation concerning women were modernized to fulfil the need to develop Syrian legislation so that it may cope with the evolution of the social system. 59. Since 2000 the following acts and laws relating to women were promulgated: 1. Law No. 78 of 31 December 2001 amending some articles of the Law of Social Security No. 92 of 1959 as amended, establishing the right of a working woman to bequeath her pension payments to her lawful heirs. 2. Legislative Act No. 35 of 13 May 2002 amending article 54 of the Civil Service Statutes Act No. 1 of 1985 to extend maternity leave for working women. 3. Decree No. 257 of 10 August 2002 ratifying the Agreement Establishing the Organization of Arab Women, signed in Cairo on 15 July 2002. 4. Decree No. 330 of 25 September 2002 providing for the ratification by the Syrian Arab Republic of the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in resolution 34/180 of 28 December 1979. 5. Law No. 18 of 2003 amending article 19 of Law No. 34 of 1975 as follows: “the term of custody ends on the day a boy reaches the age of 13 and a girl reaches the age of 15”. 60. Finally, it should be noted that the Women’s Federation, which was established under the terms of Act No. 33 of 1975, as amended, as a Syrian popular organization enjoying independent corporate personality and financial autonomy, is playing an effective role in Syrian political life through participation in the formulation of development plans and programmes on an equal footing with other popular organizations such as the General Federation of Trade Unions, the General Federation of Farmers and the Federation of Craftsmen. Women are fully entitled to seek to eliminate any obstacles impeding their enjoyment of their rights. In fact, one of the tasks of the Women’s Federation is to defend women’s rights if they are obstructed in any way.

Articles 4 and 5

61. The State of Emergency Act, which was promulgated in Legislative Decree No. 51 of 22 December 1962, as amended by Legislative Decree No. 1 of 9 March 1963, and which is currently in force in the Syrian Arab Republic, is an exceptional constitutional regime, based on the concept of an imminent threat to the country’s integrity, under which the competent authorities are empowered to take all the measures provided by law to protect the territory, territorial waters and air space of the State, in whole or in part, from the dangers arising from external armed aggression by transferring some of the powers of the civil authorities to the military authorities. Article 101 of the Constitution states that the President of the Republic can declare and terminate a state of emergency in the manner stated in the law. Article 1 of this Act specifies the reasons justifying its promulgation by stipulating that a state of emergency can be proclaimed in the event of war, a situation entailing the threat of war or a situation in which security or public order in the territory of the Republic, or any part thereof, is jeopardized by internal disturbances or the occurrence of general disasters. 62. Since 1948, the Syrian Arab Republic, which was a founding member of the United Nations, has been subjected, like other neighbouring Arab States, to a real threat of war by Israel and, on many occasions, this threat of war has culminated in actual aggression against the territory, territorial waters and air space of the Syrian Arab Republic, particularly in 1967 when Israel seized part of the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic, which it is still occupying, and expelled a large proportion of its population. The latest incident of Israeli aggressions was in Ein El-Saheb on 5 October 2003. 63. This state of affairs, consisting in a real threat of war, the continued occupation of part of the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic and the existence of a real threat of seizure and ongoing occupation of further land in violation of United Nations resolutions, gave rise to an exceptional situation that necessitated the rapid and extraordinary mobilization of forces in the Syrian Arab Republic and, consequently, the promulgation of legislation to ensure the Administration’s ability to act rapidly in the face of these imminent threats when application of the ordinary legislation cannot guarantee rapid action in such circumstances. Accordingly, there was a need to promulgate this Act and maintain it in force. It should be borne in mind that all countries of the world have applied exceptional legislation, in one form or another, when they were faced with a state of war or a threat of war in order to protect their national security. This is a fundamental right recognized in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, article 4 of which stipulates that: “In time of public emergency which threatens the life of the nation and the existence of which is officially proclaimed, the States Parties to the present Covenant may take measures derogating from their obligations under the present Covenant to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of the situation”. 64. Under the terms of article 4 of the Emergency Act, the Martial Law Administrator, the Prime Minister or his deputy (the Minister of the Interior) are empowered to issue written orders for the adoption of measures, restriction of the liberty of persons, censorship of correspondence, communications and the information media, specification of the opening and closing times of public establishments, withdrawal of firearms and ammunition licences, evacuation or isolation of certain areas, appropriation of movable or immovable property, placement of companies under State control and prescription of penalties, up to a maximum of three years’ imprisonment and a fine of LS 3,000, for any violation of those orders. 65. The composition of the Higher State Security Court and the procedures that it applies do not differ in essence from the composition and procedures of the ordinary courts empowered to hand down final judgements. The Higher State Security Court consists of two divisions, each of which comprises three judges, two of whom are civilians and the third a military judge. The presence of the military judge on the bench is intended solely to ensure the Court’s competence to hear cases involving military personnel who might be brought before it on charges relating to the Code of Military Justice in order to cover all aspects and all stages of the trial proceedings in a uniform manner. This is consistent with the legislation in force concerning the composition of the courts of cassation, in which a military judge also sits for the same above-mentioned reasons. The military judges assigned to these courts do not act in any military capacity during the trial proceedings. 66. In view of the sensitive nature of the cases referred to the Higher State Security Court, its judgements are final but are not enforceable until they have been ratified by the Head of State who, by law, has the right to annul the judgement, order a retrial or a stay of proceedings to reduce or commute the penalty. The President of the Republic may issue amnesty for those convicted by the court; in fact he has exercised this power several times. This provides an indication of the legislature’s desire to safeguard the country’s security and integrity in the exceptional circumstances with which it is faced and which necessitated the promulgation of the Emergency Act. 67. In accordance with article 7 of Decree No. 47/68 under which the Higher State Security Court was established, defendants appearing before this Court enjoy the same guaranteed right of defence that they would have before the ordinary courts. 68. The application of the provisions of the Emergency Act in Syria does not mean in any way a suspension of the provisions of the Constitution and other laws nor a derogation from other international obligations, including obligations in which Syria has entered by virtue of bilateral or multilateral international agreements, such as provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the obligation to submit reports under article 40 of the Covenant. Furthermore, the grounds for a declaration of a state of emergency do not involve any discrimination on grounds of race, colour, gender, language, religion or social origin. The declaration of the state of emergency has not led to any violations of articles 6, 7, 8, paragraphs 1 and 2, 11, 15, 16 and 18, which remain enforceable under the Constitution and laws, in conformity with the Covenant. 69. Available mechanisms for recourse against exercise of exceptional powers in a state of emergency: To prevent any abuse in the enforcement of a state of emergency the law restricts the application of emergency laws and empowers administrative tribunals to annul decisions made by the martial law administrator. A Committee is set up to examine the application of martial laws prior to their imposition: 1. Article 25, paragraph 2, of the Constitution states that: “the supremacy of law is a fundamental principle of the society and the State”. 2. Article 164 of the Civil Code states that “any person who commits an error that causes injury to others shall be liable to pay compensation”. It is obvious that this article does not distinguish between a private citizen or an official who commits such an act. 3. Article 138 of the Penal Code provides that “any person who commits a felony that causes moral or material injury to others shall be obliged to pay compensation”. 4. Pursuant to the Constitution, applicable laws penalize torture or the use of mental or physical pressure to obtain a confession to serve as a ground for prosecution and punishment, even if such acts are committed by a public official (article 391 of the Penal Code). 5. Article 358 of the Penal Code provides for “imprisonment for 1-3 years for the wardens and guards of prisons or other penal or disciplinary institutions if they admit a person or keep him beyond the legal term without a judicial writ or order”. 6. All decisions made by the martial law administrator are administrative decisions and may be revoked by administrative tribunals if they are found to be legally defective. In fact, administrative tribunals have revoked a number of decisions by the martial law administrator after appeals from the affected citizens. 69. Finally, it should be noted that, although the Emergency Act remains in force, in actual fact it is virtually in abeyance since it is applied only in a limited number of cases solely involving offences against the security of the State in keeping with the directives which the President of the Republic announced before the People’s Assembly to the effect that this Act should be applied to the minimum extent and with great circumspection. To formalize this position, Administrative Decree No. 16 of 14 February 2004 was issued to abolish economic security tribunals which were considered a feature of emergency laws and an example of extraordinary tribunals.

Article 6

71. Since the right to life is one of the most sacred human rights, the Syrian legislature has taken care to prescribe the severest penalties for anyone who deprives a human being of this right. In fact, the penalty for intentional homicide ranges from life imprisonment with hard labour to capital punishment (arts. 533, 534 and 535 of the Penal Code). 72. The requirement that the executive authority should implement laws does not mean in any way that this authority has powers to implement these laws outside of the established framework, and any person who oversteps these boundaries shall be held accountable. 73. Article 28, paragraph 2, of the Constitution states that: “No one shall be kept under surveillance or detained except in accordance with the law.” 74. An accused or convicted person, or any other person under judicial investigation, may not be exposed to any mental or physical pressure to obtain an admission of an act punishable by law (article 391 of the Penal Code). 75. The death penalty is applied in accordance with the provisions of article 6 of the Covenant and is imposed only in rare cases when the crime is deemed to be exceptionally atrocious or is committed by a highly dangerous habitual criminal. Following is a discussion of crimes punishable by the death penalty and the circumstances for the actual implementation of sentence: Serious offences committed against persons 76. Premeditated murder: Article 535 of the Penal Code prescribes the death penalty for homicide if it is committed: (a) Wilfully; (b) In preparation for, or during the commission of, a felony or with a view to facilitating the flight of the instigators, perpetrators or abettors of a felony or enabling them to evade punishment; (c) Against any of the offender’s ascendants or descendants. Offences committed against public or private property 77. Article 577 of the Penal Code prescribes the death penalty for an act of arson that leads to loss of life in the circumstances specified in articles 573 and 574. Article 573 refers to “a deliberate act of arson in a building, factory, workshop or warehouse, in any inhabited or uninhabited property situated in a town or village, in a train, railway carriage or vehicle transporting one or more persons other than the offender, in a ship sailing or moored in any harbour or in an aircraft flying or parked at an airport, regardless of whether or not the offender owns them”. 78. Article 574 refers to “a deliberate act of arson in a building that is inhabited or ready for habitation outside populated areas, or in a forest, woodland, orchard or farmland before the crop has been harvested, regardless of whether or not the offender owns them”. Offences against State security which include the following: 79. Crimes of treason which cover the following offences: (a) Any Syrian who bears arms against Syria in the ranks of the enemy (article 263, paragraph 1, of the Penal Code); (b) Any Syrian who conspires or enters into contact with a foreign State with a view to inciting it to commit aggression against Syria or providing it with the means to do so, provided that his act produces an effect (article 264 of the Penal Code); (c) Any Syrian who conspires or enters into contact with the enemy with a view to helping, in any manner whatsoever, to ensure the triumph of its forces (article 265 of the Penal Code); (d) Any Syrian who, with a view to paralysing the country’s national defence, in any way damages installations, facilities, ships, aircraft, equipment, supplies, provisions, communications or anything of a military nature or intended for use by the armed forces, provided that such acts take place in time of war or the expected outbreak thereof, or if they lead to the death of any person (article 266 of the Penal Code); (e) Any act of aggression designed to provoke civil war or intercommunal strife by arming Syrians, encouraging them to bear arms against each other or instigating mass murder or the looting of commercial premises, provided that such acts achieve their aim (article 298 of the Penal Code); (f) Gangsters: Any group of three or more persons roaming the public highways and countryside in the form of armed gangs seeking to rob passers-by, attack persons and property or commit any other act of banditry and any member of such a group who, during the commission of such a felonious act, kills or attempts to kill or subjects a victim to torture or barbaric treatment (article 326, paragraph 3, of the Penal Code). 80. Serious military crimes in time of war: (a) Any member of the armed forces who commits the offence of desertion to the enemy (article 102, paragraph 1, of the Code of Military Justice); (b) Any member of the armed forces who deserts, through a conspiracy, in the face of the enemy, or who leads a conspiracy to flee the country, in time of war (article 103, paragraph 5, of the Code of Military Justice); (c) Any member of the armed forces who refuses to obey an order to attack the enemy or insurgents (article 112 (e) of the Code of Military Justice); (d) Insubordination or rebellion in the face of the enemy (article 113, paragraph 7, of the Code of Military Justice); (e) Acts of incitement to insubordination under martial law or in wartime (article 114, paragraph 3, of the Code of Military Justice); (f) Anyone who subjects a wounded or sick soldier to acts of violence that aggravate his situation with a view to rendering him defenceless in an area of operations of a military combat force (article 132 (b) of the Code of Military Justice); (g) Any member of the armed forces who, intentionally and in any way whatsoever, burns, destroys or damages buildings, installations, warehouses, water supply lines, railway lines, telegraph or telephone lines or exchanges, air bases or airports, ships, steamers, vehicles, any immovable army property or anything used for purposes of national defence (article 137 of the Code of Military Justice); (h) Any Syrian soldier or soldier in the service of Syria who bears arms against Syria and any prisoner who is recaptured after breaking a pledge to refrain from bearing arms (article 154 of the Code of Military Justice); (i) Any member of the armed forces who surrenders to the enemy, or in the interests of the enemy, the troops under his command or at the position assigned to him, army weapons, ammunition or supplies, maps of military positions, factories, harbours and docks, secrets of military operations, campaigns or negotiations, and any member of the armed forces who enters into contact with the enemy in order to facilitate the latter’s operations or who takes part in a conspiracy designed to influence the decisions of the competent military commander (article 155 of the Code of Military Justice); (j) Anyone who, in wartime or in an area in which martial law has been proclaimed, intentionally aids the enemy, causes harm to the army or to the forces of allied Governments, divulges a secret, a signal, a directive or a password for sentries or guard posts, falsifies service-related news or orders in the face of the enemy, guides the enemy to positions held by forces of the army or of allied States, guides the said forces in a wrong direction, spreads panic in a Syrian military unit or causes it to carry out incorrect movements or operations or prevents dispersed troops from regrouping (article 156 of the Code of Military Justice); (k) Any member of the armed forces who commits the acts of espionage referred to in articles 158, 159 and 160 of the Code of Military Justice. 81. The Narcotic Drugs Act No. 2 of 1993 also makes provision for the death penalty in the following articles: Article 39 (a): The death penalty shall be imposed on anyone who commits the following acts: i. The smuggling of narcotic substances; ii. The illicit fabrication of narcotic substances; iii. The illicit cultivation of plants listed in Schedule No. 4, the smuggling of such plants at any stage of their growth or the smuggling of their seeds; iv. If mitigating circumstances can be invoked, the court may commute the death penalty to life imprisonment. 82. Mitigating circumstances are inadmissible in the following circumstances: (a) Repeated commission of any of the offences referred to in this article or in article 40 of this Act. Final foreign convictions for similar offences shall constitute evidence of a repeated offence; (b) Commission of the offence by a civil servant assigned to combat drug-related offences; (c) Use of a minor to commit any of the offences referred to in this article; (d) Commission of any of these offences by a person belonging to, working for or collaborating with an international drug-smuggling ring; (e) Exploitation by the offender of his official authority, position or legal immunity in order to commit, or facilitate the commission of, any of the offences referred to in this article. 83. Article 40 (a) of the Narcotic Drugs Act: v. Anyone who possesses, acquires, purchases, sells, delivers, receives or traffics in narcotic substances or plants listed in Schedule No. 4, or who cedes them, acts as an intermediary therein or offers them for consumption with a view to trafficking therein, in an illicit manner; vi. Anyone who transports narcotic substances or plants or the seeds of plants listed in Schedule No. 4 if he is aware that he is transporting narcotic substances for purposes of illicit trafficking therein; vii. Anyone who, being authorized to possess or use narcotic substances for a specific purpose, disposes of them in a manner inconsistent with that purpose; viii. Anyone who manages, prepares or makes available premises in which drugs can be consumed in return for payment; ix. The penalty shall be capital punishment in the cases referred to in subparagraphs (i) to (v) of paragraph (b) of the preceding article 39. The same shall apply if the offences referred to in these articles are committed in educational establishments or their service facilities, in cultural, sports or reform institutions, in houses of worship, in camps or prisons or detention centers or in the immediate vicinity of educational establishments or camps. 84. Article 50 prescribes the death penalty for anyone who intentionally kills a civil servant responsible for the implementation of the Act during or by reason of his discharge of his duty. Enforcement of the death penalty in practice and its rare implementation 85. The application of the death penalty does not mean that law enforcement authorities have the power to implement this penalty outside the framework of law. Any person who does that is punished by the law. 86. Under the terms of the Code of Criminal Procedure, promulgated in legislative Decree No. 112 of 13 March 1950, as amended, every accused person has a guaranteed right to be informed of the charge brought against him and the evidence presented in substantiation thereof. He is given sufficient time and means to prepare his defence and contact a lawyer and has the right to a trial without undue delay since the Code does not allow the judge to delay the resolution of a case or the collection of evidence therein. Trials are normally held in the presence of the accused but, if he is unable to attend, he can be tried in absentia. At trials attended by persons accused of a felony, the latter have the right and the obligation to avail themselves of the services of a lawyer and, if they fail to do so, a lawyer is appointed by the court. 87. Under the legal aid system, the Bar Association designates a lawyer to defend an accused person at no cost to himself. The accused person can summon witnesses and present any evidence that might help to substantiate his pleas. He can also present arguments based on this evidence and contest the evidence presented by his adversaries. 88. All the proceedings must be translated into a language that the accused understands and, to this end, the court assigns an interpreter through whom he is informed of the trial proceedings. The Code does not permit the extortion of confessions, nor does it allow the accused to testify against himself. He is merely questioned about the events, which he is totally free to deny or admit. The accused also has the right o lodge an appeal with the Court of Cassation against any criminal sentence within one month from the date on which it is handed down in his presence. 89. Notwithstanding the above-mentioned provisions for death penalty, the implementation of this penalty is restricted by many guarantees so that it may not be carried out except in cases that provoke a public outcry in a society that believes that the right to life is a sacred right and at the same time believes that deterrent punishment should be applied to a murderer in order to protect the lives of the innocent. It should be noted however that Syrian laws do not provide for this penalty for the mere act of murder if it were not combined with other crimes that indicate that the felon is an extremely dangerous person, such as combining murder with rape or theft, defilement of the corpse or multiple murders or the death of multiple victims, especially children and women. 90. Although the death penalty is provided for in the law, it is not often applied by the judge. The rights of the defendant before, during and after the trial are protected by many procedural and substantive guarantees provided for in the Constitution and the law in keeping with the provisions of the Covenant. Thus this penalty is applied only to the most serious crimes with due regard to the principle of non-retroactivity unless it is in the interest of the defendant. A death sentence should also be handed down by a competent court in accordance with the law. General or individual amnesty, commutation of the penalty in accordance with the law and practice and the principle of doubt are all to be interpreted in the interest of the defendant and lay the burden of proof on the prosecutor. The death penalty is not applied on juveniles under 18 or on pregnant women. Other guarantees provided for in article 14, paragraph 3, of the Covenant are elaborated in the Syrian law as follows: (a) The death penalty can be imposed only for an offence that was punishable by this penalty at the time of its commission. However, the offender benefits from the most lenient legislation, even if it is promulgated after his commission of the offence. No penalty that was not prescribed at the time of commission of the offence can be imposed (article 6 of the Penal Code). No legislation prescribing a heavier penalty can be applied to offences committed before its entry into force (article 8 of the Penal Code); (b) Accordingly, a penalty that is less severe than capital punishment can be imposed if new legislation abolishes the death penalty for the offence in question or prescribes an alternative penalty, since any offence punishable by a penalty or a preventive or reform measure that has been abolished by new legislation no longer has any legal standing and criminal sentences imposed in respect thereof are no longer enforceable (article 2 of the Penal Code). Any new legislation that abolishes or reduces a penalty applies to offences committed prior to its entry into force unless they formed the subject of a final judgement (article 8 of the Penal Code); (c) A death sentence cannot be imposed for offences committed by a person under 18 years of age pursuant to article 29 (a) of the Juveniles Act, as amended by Legislative Decree No. 52 of 1 September 2003; (d) A death sentence imposed on a pregnant woman is not carried out until her delivery (article 43, paragraph 4, of the Penal Code and article 454, paragraph 4, of the Code of Criminal Procedure). Death sentences are not carried out on Fridays, Sundays or official or religious holidays (article 454, paragraph 3, of the Code of Criminal Procedure); (e) In judicial practice, death sentences are rarely imposed on pregnant women and no death sentence has been carried out in Syria on a pregnant woman or young mother after her delivery; (f) Anyone found to be insane at the time of commission of an offence is exempted from the penalty (article 230 of the Penal Code). If the offender is afflicted with insanity after committing an offence, during the investigation or trial or after sentencing, enforcement of the penalty is deferred until he is cured. The customary practice is consistent with the provisions of the law in this regard; (g) Impaired discretion or mental capacity at the time of commission of an offence constitute grounds for the imposition of a lesser penalty. Consequently a mentally retarded person who commits an offence punishable by death is liable only to a lesser penalty (articles 232 and 233 of the Penal Code); (h) There is no special law of evidence concerning offences punishable by death. The Syrian judiciary applies the principle of moral certainty under which the judge has full discretion to admit evidence that satisfies his conscience, subject to the general rule that the accused should benefit from any reasonable doubt. There are numerous instances in which, due to doubts concerning the evidence presented in court, the Syrian judiciary has acquitted persons of crimes that might have been punishable by death; (i) No death sentence has ever been carried out on an offender against whom a final judgement has not been handed down or before completion of the legal procedures needed to confirm its enforceability after it has become final; (j) The death penalty is not carried out on a person sentenced thereto until the Board of Special Pardons, consisting of five judges, has been consulted. Execution of the sentence must also be approved by the President of the Republic in a decree ordering its execution at a specified time and place. 91. Death sentences are carried out by hanging in the case of ordinary persons, or by firing squad in the case of military personnel, with the minimum amount of suffering. They are carried out in the prison unless a public execution is ordered by decree. The execution is attended by the president of the judicial body that passed the sentence or by a judge chosen by the Attorney-General or one of his assistants, and also by the president of the court of first instance, the clerk of the court that passed the sentence, the convicted person’s lawyer, a minister of religion, a physician, the prison warden and a police officer. The last death sentence imposed in Syria was handed down on 2 August 1987 against Samih Fahd Awwad, who was found guilty of felonious complicity in the murder of his father. The last judgement confirming a death sentence was handed Death sentences are carried out by hanging in the case of ordinary persons, or by firing squad in the case of military personnel, with the minimum amount of suffering. They are carried out in the prison unless a public execution is ordered by decree. The execution is attended by the president of the judicial body that passed the sentence or by a judge chosen by the Attorney-General or one of his assistants, and also by the president of the court of first instance, the clerk of the court that passed the sentence, the convicted person’s lawyer, a minister of religion, a physician, the prison warden and a police officer. The last death sentence imposed in Syria was handed down on 2 August 1987 against Samih Fahd Awwad, who was found guilty of felonious complicity in the murder of his father. The last judgement confirming a death sentence was handed down on 6 June 1993 against the same person. 92. Since then and until 2001 no death penalty was passed until 2002 when the death sentence was implemented on a number of criminals convicted of cruel and savage crimes such as defilement of a corpse, rape, dismemberment or the murder of a number of people for a petty reason. Following are the crimes and the decrees approving the death penalty: murder and rape, Decree No. 173; murder and rape, Decree No. 174; murder and rape, Decree No. 175; murder, stabbing and obscene act, Decree No. 228; deliberate murder, Decree No. 227; murder and rape, Decree No. 229; murder, Decree No. 283; and obscene act, Decree No. 284; deliberate murder, Decree No. 285; murder for the purpose of robbery, Decree No. 307; deliberate patricide, Decree No. 308; murder of three children in the course of robbery, Decree No. 309; deliberate murder, Decree No. 352; murder and robbery, Decree No. 353; deliberate murder, Decree No. 354 and deliberate murder, Decree No. 369. 93. In 2003 the death penalty was implemented on a number of criminals convicted of the following crimes: murder and robbery, Decree No. 63; deliberate murder and robbery, Decree No. 64; murder and armed robbery, Decree No. 157; murder and robbery, Decree No. 296; deliberate murder, Decree No. 297; deliberate murder, Decree No. 298; deliberate murder, Decree No. 411; murder of husband, Decree No. 412; murder, robbery and looting, Decree No. 428; murder for a base motive, Decree No. 430 and deliberate murder, Decree No. 429. 94. It should be noted that the above-mentioned death penalties were applied for criminal acts that were committed a long time before judgement was passed. The execution of the sentence also took place after a long time from the date of the judgement. 95. The Syrian legislation in force provides all the guarantees needed to safeguard the rights of persons facing the death penalty as such persons can lodge an appeal with the Court of Cassation against their sentence and, if they fail to lodge such an appeal, article 240 of the Code of Criminal Procedure places the Department of Public Prosecutions under an obligation to lodge an appeal on their behalf. Even if the Court of Cassation upholds the sentence, it cannot be carried out until the Board of Special Pardons, consisting of five judges, has been consulted (article 459 of the Code of Criminal Procedure). The next stage preceding enforcement of the death sentence is approval by the President of the Republic, who has the constitutional right to grant a pardon. 96. Any person sentenced to death is entitled to apply to the Head of State for a pardon and may renew his application after one year in the event of its rejection. 97. There is always the possibility of applying for a special pardon or commutation of a death penalty, as there are no specific offences which cannot be pardoned. This applies to all cases in which death sentences are imposed. A special pardon can be requested after a death sentence has been imposed until the time when it is carried out. 98. Accordingly, in Syria death sentences are not carried out until the file has been examined by a number of judicial and legal bodies and any person sentenced to this penalty therefore enjoys a number of safeguards that usually protect him from any judicial error. 99. The surveys conducted by the Ministry of Justice of the Syrian Arab Republic confirm that the number of cases in which death sentences are imposed or carried out is very limited due to the judicial and legal procedures that their enforcement requires, as well as the general amnesty decrees that are regularly promulgated. In actual practice, this penalty is applied only in very rare cases involving heinous offences the circumstances of which preclude any prospect of the offender’s reform. 100. As we have affirmed in our response to the comments and recommendations made by the Committee in the context of its consideration of our country’s second periodic report, the Syrian Government never prevented any non-governmental organization from observing the situation of human rights in Syria. We have no objection in the future to authorize any such non-governmental organization, under applicable laws and regulations, to do so. Indeed there are a number of human rights committees and human rights activists who express their views without fear of, or objection from, the executive authorities as long as they carry out their activities in accordance with the law.

Article 7

101. Article 28, paragraph 3, of the Syrian Constitution stipulates that: “No one may be subjected to physical or mental torture or degrading treatment, the perpetrators of which shall be liable to the legally prescribed penalties.” 102. Under the legislation in force, it is prohibited to subject an accused or convicted person, or any person under judicial investigation, to any mental or physical pressure with a view to the extortion of a confession or information. Article 391 of the Penal Code stipulates as follows: “1. Anyone who subjects a person to illegal acts of violence with a view to obtaining from him a confession to an offence or information pertaining thereto shall be liable to a penalty of detention for a term of three months to three years. 2. If such acts of violence cause sickness or wounds, the minimum penalty shall be one year’s detention.” 103. Any act that is likely to prevent a Syrian from exercising his civil rights or fulfilling his obligations is punishable by detention for a term of one month to one year if it is committed through the use of threats, violence or any means of physical or mental coercion (article 319 of the Penal Code). 104. The courts look into any allegation by a citizen concerning his subjection to physical or mental torture or degrading treatment, award appropriate compensation and impose the prescribed penalty. A number of complaints in this connection have been brought against police officers, who have been punished and ordered to pay compensation. 105. If an accused person claims that his confessions were extracted by force the judge shall investigate the claim and reject the confessions. This is an established practice by the Syrian judiciary in confirmation of the principle that confession is to be made freely and is to be rejected if extracted by force. 106. Anyone claiming to be the victim of such illegal acts merely has to file a complaint with legal costs and prosecution of a civil servant, the amounts of which are assessed by the judicial authority. The Department of Public Prosecutions then has an obligation to institute public proceedings before the competent judicial body (article 1 and article 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure). 107. Pursuant to article 138 of the Penal Code and article 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, any injured person may go to court to claim compensation for the injury. 108. The Complaints Bureau attached to the Office of the President of the Republic investigates complaints from citizens claiming to be the victims of torture or cruel or inhuman treatment and takes the necessary action in regard thereto. 109. The law provides for the creation of mechanisms to ensure that no one is subjected to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and assigned the pursuit of perpetrators of such legal abuses to the law enforcement authorities. Article 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that “officials of law enforcement have the task of investigation of offences, collection of evidence and apprehension of perpetrators and bringing them to courts where they may receive their punishment”. 110. According to article 7 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, functions of law enforcement are performed by the Public Prosecutor, his deputies, assistants and examining magistrates. 111. The Public Prosecutor is assisted in his functions by governors, director-general of the police, directors of the police including prison wardens, director of public security, superintendents of public security who are formally assigned as heads of police stations or divisions and heads of public security departments, captains of naval vessels and aircraft and all other officials entrusted with law enforcement powers. They all perform the functions of law enforcement within the limits established by the law and under the authority of the Public (art. 8). 112. The Public Prosecutor oversees the overall administration of justice, supervises judiciary divisions, prisons, detention centers and oversees law enforcement. He represents the Executive Authority before tribunals and judiciary divisions” (art. 15, para. 1). He institutes procedures on behalf of public authorities and implements penal sentences. 113. The Public Prosecutor may admonish any law enforcement officials or magistrates who fail to perform their functions and he may recommend to their superiors the application of disciplinary measures. 114. In order to ensure separation between legislative and executive authorities the law provides that a judge may not rule in a case in which he performed the function of public prosecution. 115. As noted above, the judiciary authority, Public Prosecution Office and the Ministry of the Interior oversee detention stations and prisons to ensure observance of the law and respect of prisoners and detainees. 116. Article 423 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that the treatment of persons in detention centers and prisons shall be inspected by an examining magistrate and a judge of the peace at least once a month and by a presiding judge of a criminal court at least once every three months. 117. Article 8 of the Prison Regulations provides that the Minister of the Interior shall appoint an inspector or inspectors of prisons to visit prisons and to investigate actions by prison guards or inmates in the prison. 118. To protect the freedom of a person from unlawful imprisonment the law requires any person who learns that a person is detained in a place other than places assigned by the Government for imprisonment and detention to inform the Public Prosecutor, his assistants or the judge of peace thereof (article 424 of the Code of Criminal Procedure). 119. When officials mentioned above are informed of such detention they shall immediately go the place where a person is so detained and release whoever is detained illegally (art. 425). 120. If they fail to take the above-mentioned action they shall be considered accomplices in the offence of denying the personal liberty and they shall be prosecuted accordingly.

Article 8

121. Article 25 of the Constitution stipulates that “Freedom is a sacred right and the State has an obligation to safeguard the personal liberty, dignity and security of its citizens”, “All citizens are equal before the law in regard to their rights and obligations” and “The State shall safeguard the principle of equality of opportunity for its citizens”. 122. Article 555 of the Penal Code prescribes a penalty of detention for a period of six months to two years for anyone who in any way deprives another person of his personal liberty. 123. Accordingly, there is no form of slavery in Syria, as all citizens are equal before the law and Syria is a party to all the international conventions and instruments prohibiting Slavery, particularly the Slavery Convention of 1926, and the Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Salve Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery of 1956. 124. In keeping with article 8, paragraph 3 (b), of the Covenant, persons punished by imprisonment with hard labour only serve in fact simple imprisonment. Since the enactment of the Penal Code in 1949, hard labour has been only a theoretical penalty as persons punished by this penalty are treated exactly like other prisoners. 125. The Prison Regulations promulgated in Decree No. 1222 of 1929, as amended, set forth the principles governing work in prisons (arts. 93-100). Under the terms of Legislative Decree No. 139 of 1935, prisoners may also be required to engage in building work, tree planting and road construction, maintenance, repair and sign-posting work in return for payment. Persons sentenced to imprisonment with hard labour are not required to engage in other forms of work not provided for in the Prison Regulations, any infringement of which is punishable, under the Penal Code, as an abuse of authority and a breach of the law. 126. By law, juveniles who have reached the age of 10 but are under 18 years of age cannot be sentenced to any penalty, being liable only to a penalty of confinement in a juvenile reform institution (article 30 of the Juveniles Act No. 18 of 1974, as amended most recently by Legislative Decree No. 52 of 1 September 2003.

Article 9

Paragraph 1 127. As already indicated, freedom is a sacred right guaranteed by the Constitution and the law (articles 424 and 425 of the Code of Criminal Procedure). By law, no one may be detained without charge, since this would constitute the punishable offence of illegal deprivation of liberty. 128. Article 357 of the Penal Code stipulates that: “Anyone who arrests or detains a person in circumstances other than those provided for by law shall be liable to a term of imprisonment with hard labour.” Under article 358, any warden or guard of a prison or a disciplinary or reform institution, and any official vested with their powers, who admits a person into the institution without a court order or instruction or who retains a person therein for a period longer than that ordered is liable to a penalty of detention for one to three years. Paragraph 2 129. Any person detained under provisions of Syrian law is to be informed of the reasons for his detention and the nature of offence that caused his detention as well as the legal provision under which it is punishable (article 108 of the Code of Criminal Procedure). He is also to be delivered copies of the arrest warrant and detention order, (art. 109). 130. The examining magistrate may, in charges of crimes and misdemeanour, issue only an arrest warrant but may, after cross-examination of the defendant, change it to a detention order if necessary (art. 102). 131. If a defendant is arrested under a warrant and stays in custody for more than 24 hours without a cross-examination or without being referred to the Public Prosecutor, his detention is to be considered an arbitrary act and the official responsible for this act may be prosecuted under article 105 for illegal deprivation of personal liberty as provided for in article 358 of the Penal Code. 132. When an accused person appears before an examining magistrate the magistrate shall verify his identity, inform him of the charges against him and asks for his plea, cautioning him that it is his right not to respond except in the presence of a lawyer. This caution is to be entered in the investigation record. If the accused person refuses to retain a lawyer, or if no lawyer is retained on his behalf within 24 hours, the investigation is to proceed without a lawyer (article 69, paragraph 1, of the Penal Code). 133. If the accused person is unable to retain a lawyer in a criminal charge the Bar Association or the judge may retain a lawyer on his behalf (article 69, paragraph 2, of the Penal Code). Paragraph 3 134. Syrian law ensures expeditious proceedings in the interest of the accused. For example, article 104 of the Code of Criminal Procedure places the examining magistrate under an obligation to promptly question an accused person who has been summoned to appear before him. Any suspect who is arrested under the terms of a warrant must be questioned within 24 hours from the time of his arrest and, on the expiration of this deadline, the senior officer at the police station automatically sends the suspect to the public prosecutor, who requests the examining magistrate to question the suspect. If the examining magistrate is absent or refuses to question him, the public prosecutor requests another examining magistrate, a president of a court of first instance or a justice of the peace to question him and, if they were unable to do so, the public prosecutor must release the suspect immediately. 135. Provisions of Syrian laws underline the need for speedy implementation of procedures in the interest of the accused person: (a) Under article 115 of the Code of Criminal Procedure: “Anyone arrested under the terms of a warrant must be taken, without delay, to the public prosecutor in the district of the examining magistrate who issued the warrant and the public prosecutor must provide the arresting officer with a receipt of delivery of the suspect, after which the latter is remanded in custody and the examining magistrate is duly notified.”; (b) Under article 116 of the Code, any failure to observe the above instruction in summonses, processes and arrest warrants must be immediately notified to the public prosecutor and the examining magistrate and the clerk responsible therefor is liable to a fine; (c) Under article 117 of the Code, a person arrested on the charge of committing a misdemeanour for which the maximum penalty is one year’s detention must be released within five days from the time of his arrest if he has a fixed abode in Syria and is not a repeat offender; (d) Article 122 sets a deadline of 24 hours for any appeal against a decision to release a suspect; (e) Under article 131 of the Code, the public prosecutor must make his requests known to the examining magistrate within a maximum of three days from the date on which he receives the file; (f) Under article 136, whenever the public prosecutor has reason to believe that a subject has committed a misdemeanour or a contravention, he must send the case file, together with the bill of indictment, to the clerk of the competent court within two days from the date of his receipt thereof; (g) Under article 137, if the examining magistrate deems the act allegedly committed by the suspect to be of a criminal nature, he must immediately order the dispatch of the investigation file to the public prosecutor so that the requisite indictment procedures can be completed; (h) Under article 140, any appeal against a decision by the examining magistrate must be lodged within 24 hours and notice thereof must be served within a similar period; (i) Under article 144, the public prosecutor must prepare his case within five days from the time of his receipt of the file and he must draw up his report within the following five days; (j) Under article 145, the judge to whom the case is referred must decide on the admissibility of the public prosecutor’s requests either immediately or within three days; (k) Under article 158, the public prosecutor must draw up his report within five days from the time on which he receives the file from the judge to which it was referred; (l) Under article 161, the accused person must be sent to the place of custody at the criminal court within 24 hours from the time when he is notified of the decision to prosecute; (m) Under article 220, courts of conciliation must render judgement during the trial hearing or, at the latest, at their next session; (n) Under article 232, concerning trial procedures for misdemeanours committed in the presence of witnesses, the court must sit immediately or, at the latest, on the following day. Article 233 empowers the public prosecutor to summon the witnesses orally in such cases and article 234 does not permit a delay of more than three days; (o) Under article 235, if the court believes that the case is not ready for judgement it may postpone the trial until the first feasible date; (p) Under article 253, in the event of an appeal against its judgement, the court of first instance must transmit the file to the court of appeal within three days; (q) Under article 263, the president of the criminal court must question the accused on arrival; (r) Under article 273, this must be done not later than 24 hours from the time of arrival of the accused at the place of custody. Paragraph 4 136. Any person who has been deprived of his liberty because of det