NDC registry
Your location: Home > NDCs NDC Registry Click here to access the NDC Interim Registry According to Article 4 paragraph 2 of the Paris Agreement, each Party shall prepare, communicate and maintain successive nationally determined contributions (NDCs) that it intends to achieve. Parties shall pursue domestic mitigation measures, with the aim of achieving the objectives of such contributions. Furthermore in accordance with Article 4 paragraph 12 of the Agreement, NDCs communicated by Parties shall be recorded in a public registry maintained by the secretariat . The COP, by its decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 29, requested the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) to develop modalities and procedures for the operation and use of the public registry referred to in Article 4, paragraph 12, of the Paris Agreement, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) at its first session.

The interim NDC registry Decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 30 requested the secretariat to make available an interim public registry in the first half of 2016 for the recording of NDCs submitted in accordance with Article 4 of the Paris Agreement, pending the adoption by the CMA of the modalities and procedures referred to in paragraph 29. The interim registry is publicly accessible platform which records NDCs pursuant to Article 4, paragraph 2 of the Paris Agreement. Further development of the registry will proceed in accordance with the modalities and procedures to be agreed by the SBI. NDC Interim Registry user guide. (5865 kB) Any questions or requests for clarification should be addressed directly to: NDCs@unfccc.int

Communication of first NDCs By its decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 22, the Conference of the Parties (COP) invited Parties to communicate their first NDC no later than when the Party submits its respective instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession of the Paris Agreement. In the same paragraph, the COP further stated that if a Party has communicated an INDC prior to joining the Agreement, that Party shall be considered to have satisfied the provision of decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 22, unless that Party decides otherwise. The following Parties have deposited an instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, and are therefore considered to have satisfied the provisions of 1/CP.21, paragraph 22. The INDCs of these Parties are available on the INDC platform. More information about the status of communicated NDCs can be found on the NDC interim registry. The Secretariat has received communications from Parties in relation to their NDC available here. Parties have ratified of 197 Parties to the Convention On 4 November 2016, the Paris Agreement entered into force.

More information News and Updates Communication of first NDCs under the Paris Agreement (1061 kB) INDC submission portal NDC Spotlight Online dialogues on NDCs Update on Negotiations Information on APA agenda item 3