Sheriffs Call For Obama’s Lynching While Leader Meets With GOP Senators
President Obama is a lightening rod for criticism, as to be expected. This is part of the job that comes along with being POTUS. However, the blatant racism and calls for his death have everything to do with the color of his skin and the hatred in the hearts and minds of some people….but Sheriffs?

Members of the ultra right wing Constitutional Sheriffs and Peace Officers Association and their leader, Sheriff Richard Mack, went to Washington DC during December for a meeting with some GOP congressional leaders. Mach sat down with Senators Jeff Sessions (R-AL) and David Vitter (R-LA), and Rep. Martha Blackburn (R-TN) in the Senate building on Dec. 10th.

The details of the meeting were not disclosed, but outside of the building a small protest of right wingers who are not pleased with Obama, his Immigration policy or anything else gathered to voice their displeasure with the world the President is doing.

According to the Southern Poverty Law Center’s Hate Watch, the small gathering of disgruntled sheriffs and officers were chanting.

-- ADVERTISEMENT --

[ADSENSE2]

Here is what they said:

A small group of protesters supporting the sheriffs gathered at the White House and began shouting slogans and demanding the removal of President Obama. Some in the crowd demanded the president be lynched–”Hang the lying Muslim traitor!” one of them shouted.

Sheriff Mack tried to distance himself, the Senators and the Representative after the meeting from the group of protestors with his words, but it became obvious they were all together.

The same group of protesters then proceeded to the Senate building where the sheriffs were meeting, but were not permitted inside and instead lingered in the foyer. When the meeting ended, the demonstrators lustily greeted the emerging law enforcement officers and Congress members, some of them shaking hands and hugging the participants.

You might remember Sheriff Mack from his suggestion of using women as human shields while defending Cliven Bundy, the man who claimed to have sovereign rights to his ranch a few years back. It seems like his delusion and hatred of the President hasn’t waived since.

How Can You Threaten The President?

In this world of cracking down on dangerous rhetoric, how is it possible for someone to stand outside government buildings in DC and threaten the President of the United States?

Source: AddictingInfo.org

PUBLIC NOTE: The opinions expressed in this article are the author's own and do not reflect the view of the Urban Intellectuals, affiliates or partners. -- ADVERTISEMENT -- DO YOU AGREE OUR HISTORY IS IMPORTANT? FIGHT MISEDUCATION!!! CLICK HERE TO LEARN MORE ABOUT OUR BLACK HISTORY FLASH CARDS AND GET 40% OFF IF YOU ACT FAST