urbansociology
1.1 The City: What Is It?

During my many years of being a sociologist, one output of human society that never ceases to amaze me, both at the infrastructural and aesthetic levels, and at the level of intellect, is the city. Cities are crucially important in the lives and destinies of human beings, yet they are also one of the most taken for granted sites of social life, making their inhabitants forget that cities today essentially “function as command-and-control centers of the world economy” (Brunn, Hays-Mitchell, and Zeigler 2012:13). According to the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA 2012), as of 2007 more people chose to reside in cities than rural areas. Yet in spite of this tectonic shift to urban human habitation, there remains no simple definition to capture a generalized and evocative dynamic of such an urban space. Additionally, in my many years of teaching an upper division sociology course on urban environments, most students asked to answer my query “So, what is a city?” are similarly tongue-tied. They are tongue-tied not because they are ignorant of the city, but because they know that relying on clichés can only incrementally capture the dynamism of the city. As such, noting the city as a “crowded” or “modern” place only illuminates that common tendency that humans have to oversimplify dynamics they take for granted. However, a simple definition of the concept of the “city” is arguably still warranted if we adopt a definitional simplicity that includes making visible its relationship to the human condition. That is, the city is more than an urban entity that only affects us infrastructurally. It is when we attempt to extract the anatomy of the “modern” city only as a place of configured physical structures that we run into problems: Roman-era structures were made from concrete, yet as a city it still had to satisfy its residents as well as spatially organize them.

In spite of definitional complexities regarding the city, we do know what cities should do. According to the official UNFPA website, a city’s normative basis must be based on offering:

...a more favourable setting for the resolution of social and environmental problems than rural areas. Cities generate jobs and income. With good governance, they can deliver education, health care and other services more efficiently than less densely settled areas simply because of their advantages of scale and proximity. Cities also present opportunities for social mobilization and women’s empowerment. And the density of urban life can relieve pressure on natural habitats and areas of biodiversity. The challenge for the next few decades is learning how to exploit the possibilities urbanization offers. The future of humanity depends on it (2007).

Given the complexities inherent in understanding the city as an objective entity, I thus include in my work how the city affectively shapes the human condition and consciousness. The combination of the human condition with urban forms is thus the key equation from which positivistic, ethnographic, and historical approaches of the city will be explored. As such, interwoven with technical discussions of the city will be subjective perceptions of the urban experience as well. By ignoring different approaches in reading and experiencing the city we risk reifying the city in ways that make us forget that all cities are ultimately products of human hopes and actions. Additionally, interspersed in the discussions will be attempts to ground the reader in the visceral aspect of the city where examples of urban stimuli can be seen across the present and across time. By fusing the subjectively nuanced and complex world of cities with technical approaches toward understanding and analyzing them, a deeper understanding of the trajectory of cities can be attained. This work thus employs demographic information, statistical tables—in other words, highly technocratic and economistic readings of cities—alongside the existential effects of urban stimuli upon the social being.

The reasoning behind my approach is based on my hope that this work will be able to lay the foundations of understanding cities for those who plan to globe trek around the world. The perspectives and concepts introduced and discussed in this work should allow readers to not be intimidated by any city’s dynamics, be they cultural, social, and infrastructural. This work thus draws on a rich legacy of, theoretical, architectural, urban-ethnographic, qualitative, and even philosophical readings of the city. Given that most globe-trekkers are not researchers embarking on an urban study with fruitful funding, but nomadic travelers in search of a new presence, new humanities, as well as existential growth, I write this book with in hopes of inspiring urban globe trekkers to immerse themselves into the human conditions of the cities they may one day visit.

Readers may ask why this syncretic approach, one that ultimately privileges the human condition toward the urban experience, is adopted with so much emphasis. One reason is if one surveys a variety of works on urban sociology, it becomes apparent that many chapters are dedicated to a top-down view of the city; that is, the size of the city is discussed, followed by a discussion of the infrastructure, architecture, and aesthetics that make up the content of the city; statistics are then presented and human actions appear consequential as a result. Another reason is more personal and stems from an important indoctrination I personally had with my American geographical womb, the dynamic city of Los Angeles, California, the “City of Angels.” Yet, I only moved to Los Angeles as an immigrant in my youth. Prior to this, and by coincidence, I was raised in the other “City of Angels”: Bangkok, Thailand. Krung Thep, as Bangkok is referred to by all Thais, does indeed mean “City of Angels,” and the similarities between Los Angeles and Bangkok have some other interesting historical links as well. Jeff Kenworthy’s (1995) comparative study of Bangkok and Los Angeles summarizes these links nicely:

In 1781, the Spanish Governor of California, Felipe de Neve, established the community that we know today as Los Angeles, or the “the City of Angels”. In 1782, in an almost prophetic leap that would seal a strange connection between the two places, King Rama I of Thailand established a new capital for his country, the original name of which translates to “the Great City of the Angels” (Kenworthy 1995:31).

However, being in Bangkok was not the only source inspiring me to analyze cities: during my senior year in college, I managed to have one final opportunity to enroll in an elective course outside my major in Communications. A course on urban sociology sounded rather interesting at the time, and my positive experiences with other social science courses at the time inspired me to enroll during spring of 1992. The plan was that upon completion of the course I would then graduate and enter the suit-wearing nine-to-five world of corporate work.

The course was interesting: theories abounded, diagrams of city layouts were presented and demographic statistics were discussed. However, it would be the Los Angeles Riots of 1992 over the acquittal of Los Angeles Police Department officers who severely beat Rodney King that changed my life immeasurably. That the police officers were white while King was African American ignited the racial polarization that already existed in a city with unresolved inequalities and voluntarily segregated pockets of urban life. During the five days of rioting, many areas of what was then known as South Central Los Angeles (now named South Los Angeles so as to avoid the historical stigma associated with the event) was set alight amidst looting and killings. It was the bona fide acute ethnic conflict experience of my generation. Graphic images of arson, looting, and street fights were beamed on the airwaves. Korean grocers were seen atop the roofs of their retail stores with rifles readied to fire, while darkened skies and smoke billowed from local stores in the area, eerily creating in its aftermath reddened sunsets. During the rioting, ashes from the area were carried by the wind to many suburban areas throughout Los Angeles. The ashes carried by the wind ended up in my neighborhood, about 15 miles away as the crow flies, and in a surreal manner, sprinkled themselves atop my parents’ cars, a snowing of despair at the risk of waxing poetic. The National Guard did finally arrive to quell the rioting, but by this time over 50 residents had been killed, 17,000 people arrested, 5,000 saw their day in court, and property damage exceeded 1 billion dollars (Jencks 1993). It was for architectural theorist Charles Jencks “the most violent American civil disturbance since the Irish poor burned Manhattan in 1863” (1993:79).

What the Los Angeles riots taught me personally and intellectually was that in spite of the brilliant intentions of urban planners to establish ideal living conditions, the city is never perfect. One might make an overarching brush stroke in arguing that all cities have gross imperfections since they attempt to, perhaps too ambitiously, collect all of humanity’s social, political, cultural, and economic dynamics. As such, they also collect the discrepancies of humanity primarily in the forms of varying inequalities, with class inequalities being most egregious. Yet a city’s imperfections are not the same over time. In the case of Los Angeles during the 1992 riots, observers such as Jencks noted how the city had witnessed America’s first multiethnic uprising, “the first civil disturbances led by several minorities trapped in inner city poverty” (1993:84). This attribute sets the Los Angeles Riots of 1992 distinctly apart from the other five day Watts Riots of 1965, also in Los Angeles, a riot that entrenched the population and institutions of social control in a black versus white context.

The rioters’ vengeance...was aimed at Koreatown. There ninety percent of the Korean-owned liquor stores, markets and “swap meets” were wiped out. Why should this minority take the brunt? Not only because the Koreans were newly arrived immigrants, not only because they had become successful middle entrepreneurs displacing blacks from neighborhoods and jobs, but because of one act that represented the widespread legal injustice blacks had been suffering—the recent shooting of Latasha Harlins. Her fate, even more than the televised beating of Rodney King, was the ultimate symbol of inequity. Shot in the back of the head by a Korean grocer [who] was let off with a five hundred dollar fine and some community service...when Rodney King’s verdict was announced...the Crips and Blood gangs, were already poised to strike against society in general and the Koreans in particular (1993:85).

In both events, residents’ historical relationships with law enforcement led to stored up tensions that broke out in rioting. However, with the 1992 riots, Hispanics, Koreans, and African Americans were affected in the conflagration, reflecting in the Hispanic case the changing social demographics of Los Angeles itself. Thus in this case it can be seen that the imperfections of cities can hardly be singled out as resulting from poor design, but rather from communal relations that were amiss due to the inequalities.

As the Rand Corporation pointed out, fifty-one percent of the defendants in court were Hispanic, only thirty-six percent black and the rest divided among the other L.A. minorities (1993:84).

It was during this historical period that the professor of our course organized a field trip to the area for the students. Sitting on the subway line that ran through the riot areas, he proceeded to “read” the city for us while armed National Guard troops patrolled the area. Scenes of urban destruction remain ingrained in my mind to this day. It was this surreal and affective immersion during a city’s systemic crisis that made me realize how the urban human experience often transcended a myriad of books about cities. The lesson I learned was that urban knowledge must be readily applicable to daily living because most of us spend our daily lives in urban environments. Not long after I decided to apply to graduate school as a sociologist. To this day, when I teach urban sociology, I recount this story to my students, reminding them that humanity’s passions and frailties are all integral components of urban life. The story of urban life includes skyscrapers and highways and downtowns, but it is also about the people and their social experiences as they try to maneuver through them.