FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: 110 Page Error Document from Governor Arrives as JFC Prepares for Executive Session
Official media release from the Democratic members of the Wisconsin Joint Finance Committee View this email in your browser FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

April 15, 2015

Contact: Sen. Lena Taylor (D-Milwaukee) 608-266-5810

Sen. Jon Erpenbach (D-Middleton) 608-266-6670

Rep. Chris Taylor (D-Madison) 608-266-5342

Rep. Gordon Hintz (D-Oshkosh) 608-266-2254

110 Page Error Document from Governor Arrives as JFC Prepares for Executive Session

MADISON – Yesterday at 4p.m., members of the Joint Committee on Finance unexpectedly received a 110 page errata report highlighting even more errors contained in the Governor’s proposed 2015-17 State Budget. This comes just hours before the committee begins executive action on the budget today at 10am, including items from the last-minute error document.



“The massive document is alarming, especially arriving hours before we are supposed to start voting on the budget. Voting on these issues today, after just receiving multiple modifications to the Governor’s budget seems incredibly irresponsible,” said Senator Lena Taylor (D- Milwaukee).



“The 110 page erratum highlights the careless way in which this budget was written. Governor Walker gives us a Budget of Errors to blindly sift through while he runs from state to state and out of the country. Once again we see Wisconsin taking a backseat to our Governor’s higher ambitions,” stated Representative Gordon Hintz (D-Oshkosh).



“Some of these modifications were dated back in February and we are suddenly receiving them all now. Governor Walker needs to come home and pay attention to that state that elected him. The timing on this is a clear indication it is impossible to govern from 35,000 feet,” said Senator Jon Erpenbach (D-Middleton).



“Drafting errors may happen, but I highly doubt that 110 pages and millions of dollars’ worth of mistakes and unintended consequences are anything but the product of an extremely distracted Governor not putting his home state first. The unusual timing of this document is even more concerning, by giving our committee hours to digest its entirety,” said Representative Chris Taylor (D-Madison).



On Monday, the Department of Administration had circulated a four page document containing only 12 error items. The new 110 page errata report highlighting errors and modifications to the Governor’s proposed budget arrived just before close-of-business Tuesday, with JFC to take up multiple agencies for executive action at 10am on Wednesday. As Governor Walker focuses on another European mission, the JFC must grapple with a budget filled with errors and careless mistakes.

# # # Facebook JFC Website