Intel's new $5 billion plant in Arizona has Obama's blessing

CHANDLER, Ariz. — Few people get to step inside a fabrication laboratory, yet here I am in Fab 32 — clad in a bunny suit, looking like an astronaut — shuffling through Intel’s $3.5 billion chipmaking facility in the desert.

It’s an impressive facility, with multimillion-dollar machines book-ended, side by side, in a glitzy assembly line to convert silicon wafers into microprocessors. Devices with names such as Ion Implanter and Lithography bake, etch, layer and smooth wafers so they can be used in everything from PCs to tablet devices to smartphones.

But as impressive as Fab 32 may be, it’s the warm-up act for Fab 42, a new $5 billion chip-manufacturing plant about to go up next door. When finished in 2013, it will be the most advanced high-volume semiconductor manufacturing facility in the world, according to Intel.

Fab 42 is the crown jewel of the most ambitious construction push in a decade for the world’s No. 1 chipmaker. In the next few years, it will pour more than $10 billion into constructing the 1 million-square-foot Fab 42, another manufacturing plant in Hillsboro, Ore., and upgrades to facilities in Arizona, Oregon and New Mexico.

“The big part of my job is when to decide to build a new lab,” says Brian Krzanich, Intel’s head of manufacturing. “It’s a very large, complex construction process. Think of making one of the world’s largest nuclear reactors. And I have not missed one deadline yet.”

The heat is on, though not in the climate-controlled Fab 32, which is maintained at 72 degrees. Intel, like other computer parts makers, is recalibrating a chunk of operations to capitalize on growth in tablet and smartphone markets. Meanwhile, it’s leading tech efforts in creating jobs in the U.S. and advances in the classroom.

Intel CEO Paul Otellini made the Fab 42 announcement last month at the company’s plant in Hillsboro, after he gave President Obama a tour of the facility.

Obama visited to highlight the company’s support for education in science, technology, engineering and math — one of the cornerstones in the president’s State of the Union Address. The previous night, Obama dined with a dozen high-tech executives — including Apple CEO Steve Jobs, Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg and Google CEO Eric Schmidt — to hash out ideas on technology, jobs and a smarter workforce.

But Intel’s multibillion-dollar investment is neither cheap nor a sure thing. At the new facility, Intel is “making a $5 billion bet on products not yet designed, for manufacturing processes not yet refined, for a market that doesn’t exist,” says Intel spokesman Chuck Mulloy.

Betting big on chips

Intel says it will spend $9 billion on chip factories and other capital improvements this year — compared with $5 billion in 2010 — to prepare the company to move to the next generation of manufacturing technology: 22-nanometer technology (the number falls with each advance). That would let Intel pack about 10 million transistors in a space the size of the period at the end of this sentence.

Intel Chief Financial Officer Stacy Smith said the company’s move from a three-factory model to a four-factory model explains why Intel is spending more money in 2011. Intel is growing its revenue quickly, and that also necessitates the added investment in capital spending. Otellini said demand for 22-nanometer Intel chips is expected to be “outstanding.”

The company has never been shy about spending money during downturns, especially in the teeth of the worst economic crisis in several generations.

And if Intel is bullish, other chipmakers are also likely to spend more, creating a boom in chip-equipment sales for vendors such as Applied Materials.

Each chip factory costs Intel $3.5 billion to $4 billion. Intel said it will also spend about $7.3 billion on research and development in 2011.

The spending is all the more staggering, considering Intel spent $7.7 billion to acquire security-software vendor McAfee. Intel has $16.7 billion in cash and short-term investments and expects total 2011 revenue of $11.7 billion (plus or minus $400 million), up from $11.5 billion (plus or minus $400 million).

It’s a calculated gambit, nonetheless. Though Intel builds chips that power 80% of the world’s PCs, it cannot escape the inevitability of the mobile age. As billions of people use smartphones in addition to computers, and more shift to tablets such as the iPad, Intel needs to shift its manufacturing might to reflect, and meet, the demand.

Worldwide unit shipments of smartphones soared 71% last year, to 302 million, says eMarketer. Worldwide PC shipments, meanwhile, are expected to improve 11%, to 387.5 million this year, says market researcher Gartner.

An intricate process

Access to fab labs are rare. With the exception of Obama, who toured Intel’s Oregon operation in February, not many people are allowed inside. The multibillion-dollar facilities are like temperamental sports cars, delicate machines that, in the case of the Arizona plant, are susceptible to contaminants from humans.

To enter the rarefied air of Fab 32, one needs to don a bunny (jump) suit, with two layers of gloves, specialized shoes, a hair net and, if necessary, a beard/stubble net. Plastic glasses must be worn, exposing only the nose and upper lip. Gum, perfume and a long list of other items are barred. Decontaminated paper and pens are allowed inside to take notes.

Though the process of turning wafers into microprocessors requires hundreds of steps, there is almost no manual handling of wafers. “Overhead placed vehicles” — a fancy name for automated cranes — transport wafers from one process to another.

Quality control borders on the obsessive. A team of some 30 specialists, housed in an air traffic control-like setting, monitor computer screens 24 hours a day, seven days a week, to look for any kinks in machinery or wafers.

When a rare defect is discovered, the faulty equipment is scanned, reviewed, investigated and shut down in a few hours.

Testing can scan wafers for glitches down to 1,500 defects across the width of a human hair.

It is an intricate, detailed, meticulous process.

“We are persnickety,” says Josh Walden, vice president of fab/sort manufacturing.

With so many sensitive machines (a couple were repaired, installed or tweaked during a 45-minute tour), nothing is infallible.

In January, Intel said it found a design flaw in a recently released computer chip, code-named Cougar Point, and would discontinue its production. It said the issue will reduce revenue by about $300 million in the first quarter.

Still, industry analysts such as Dan Hutcheson of VLSI Research agree Intel is a generation ahead of the competition in terms of manufacturing technology. It’s been building 32-nm chips for a year, while others have not yet begun high-volume production. For Intel, it’s a competitive advantage that helped it produce record gross margins (66%) last year.

The more chips it can build on a given wafer, the lower its manufacturing costs. In addition, by investing in 22-nm technology, Intel says, it can continue those cost advantages; incorporate more functions, such as graphics processing, onto a single chip; reduce power consumption; and encourage more innovation based on chip capabilities.

Manufacturing leadership is also important in its efforts to crack the fast-growing tablet and smartphone markets.

Intel believes chip design will be less important in the smartphone business than the capabilities of the chip itself (power, performance and energy use).

“By continuing to push our manufacturing leadership, Intel has a great opportunity to be a significant force in markets where it hasn’t traditionally been a factor,” Hutcheson says.

A quick history lesson

Intel’s devotion to refreshing its manufacturing properties is the residue of its origins.

When co-founder Gordon Moore was asked to write a paper at an engineering conference in the mid-1960s, he fiddled with a diagram to give himself ideas. What he came up with boldly predicted the future of tech as no one before — or since — has done.

Moore’s Law, in many respects, is an economics paper. It posits that every 18 months to two years, technology will double in capacity, reducing the cost of computing dramatically.

Consider the cost of computer memory. One megabyte of dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) fetched $34,820 in 1974. Today, that costs about a penny, says IDC analyst Shane Rau.

“Everything we do in manufacturing is a result of Moore’s Law,” says Krzanich, who routinely visits manufacturing plants for automakers and other industries to swap ideas. “That clarity of purpose, mission, gives us the ability to introduce 22-nm technology in 2011, 14-nm in 2013 and 10-nm in 2015. We have the regularity of this treadmill based on Moore’s Law. It’s like Ford making the transition from diesel to hybird on the fly.” In other words, think of it as a multibillion-dollar high-wire juggling act.

As technologies become more sophisticated, and tools get bigger and more complicated, more space is necessary. In the case of Fab 42, it will be built on a standard layout, like a tract house, but with room to expand as its operations expand.

While Fab 42 is erected, older plants are getting up to speed on 14 nm. And the process continues, as new technologies evolve. That means mixing and matching pieces — in this case, multimillion-dollar machines — so they fit seamlessly in the ultimate tech jigsaw puzzle.

“Some say this is a risky business model, but we are betting on our ability to deliver tech, as we have for years,” Krzanich says. “You have to be very good at rollover business.”

Brent Jones. For publication consideration in the newspaper, send comments to For more information about reprints & permissions , visit our FAQ's. To report corrections and clarifications, contact Standards Editor. For publication consideration in the newspaper, send comments to letters@usatoday.com . Include name, phone number, city and state for verification. To view our corrections, go to corrections.usatoday.com