History Department
Major Requirements

A student majoring in history must take a minimum of 30 semester hours (ten courses) in history, of which 18 semester hours (six courses) must be on the advanced level (300 or 400). Two 400 level seminars are required. Pass/Fail courses will not be included in the 30 hours requirement. For the full list of Pass/Fail guidelines visit the Registrar's website by clicking here.

Two of the students' advanced courses must be chosen from a departmental list of seminars devoted mainly to writing and discussion. (two 400 level seminars required)

In addition, students who matriculated since fall 2014 must take at least one course in four of the following five fields:

A. Premodern : one course minimum

B. Europe: one course minimum

C. United States : one course minimum

D. Asia, Latin America, Africa : one course minimum

E. Transnational, Comparative, World: one course minimum

***Additional notes:

HIST 390 only counts towards History degree ONCE. Any repetitions in the class (up to 4) will only count towards general credit, not History.

500, 600, 700, and 800 level classes DO NOT take the place of a 400 level seminar

We are always willing to work with other departments for credit - if you take a class that is historical, but does not have the HIST coding (ex ASIA 3XX: History of China, SCI 2XX: History of Science), please bring the director of undergraduate studies the syllabus for the class to see if it can count towards your history degree. This must be done BEFORE enrolling in the class if you plan to count it towards your History degree.

Please note that 30 credit hours are required for the History degree, NOT just 10 classes.



Students who matriculated before fall 2014 have the option of fulfilling the previous requirements, taking at least one course in the following four fields.

A. Premodern : one course minimum

B. Europe: one course minimum

C. United States : one course minimum

D. Asia, Latin America, Africa : one course minimum

Seminars

Additional Requirements

History majors also are advised to acquaint themselves with humanistic disciplines other than history (for example, literature, fine arts, and philosophy) and also with social sciences such as political science, sociology, economics, and anthropology whose contributions to historical studies are vital. Some foreign language proficiency is desirable for a history major, and the department highly recommends that students contemplating graduate work in history study at least one foreign language in some depth (most graduate schools require a reading knowledge of French and German for the Ph.D. degree).

In addition to the departmental requirements for the major, students must also satisfy the distribution requirements and complete no fewer than 60 semester hours outside the departmental requirements for a total program of at least 120 semester hours. See Degree Requirements and Majors in the current General Announcements.

Distribution Credit

For a full listing of all courses that count for distribution credit, please click here.