Trump’s Last Stand Against the Communist Take Over of America
By Dave Hodges

In many ways, America is a great nation. America is an amazingly resilient nation. The attempted take down of the United States was formerly announced with the assassination of American president, John Kennedy. For 55 years, the subversive communist influences in America have been engaged in a covert operation to turn America into a communist nation. America still has fight left within her. It has proven to be a difficult nation to kill, despite the best efforts of the globalists.

January 10, 1963: A Red Letter Day In America

On January 10, 1963, the House of Representative and later the Senate began reviewing a document entitled “Communist Goals for Taking Over America, written by Cleon Skousen and it contained an agenda of 45 individual goals that shocked American representatives at the time. Today, these goals have become the mainstay of the Democratic Socialist Party with Hillary Clinton as the matriarch. In hindsight this was quite shocking back then and is equally shocking today.

I was reviewing Cleon Skousen’s list of 45 communist goals for America and some more of the notable one’s stood out. Please allow me to remind everyone that 1963 was a very dark year for America. It was the year that an American President, John F. Kennedy was murdered by the criminal elite in an action that eventually wrestled away control of the government and fully entrenched the “shadow government” that still controls the Deep State today.

I have previously referenced Trevor Louden’s stellar work in his documentary, Enemies Within, in which Louden exposed 80 Democratic members of Congress as being members of front groups for either the American Communist Party (eg Arizona Senatorial candidate Kirsten Sinema, Senator Elizabeth Warren) or the Muslim Brotherhood (eg former Senator and the disgraced Al Franken and Keith Ellison). Former representatives, McKinney and West, validated Louden’s claims. In fact, I am preparing a tell-all on Kirsten Sinema who is involved in a dead heat senate race with former F-16 combat fighter pilot, Martha McSally. I will be revealing how Sinema is being groomed and bankrolled by George Soros. I will also be revealing her blatant communist background dating back to an 2004 interview she did with FreedomsPhoenix.com’s Ernie Hancock in which her communist vision for America was laid out in stunning detail. This investigation is nearly complete and will be published in the near future.

The following paragraphs address Cleon Skousen’s publication of 1963 established communist goals for America through an examination of a few of these 45 goals for American communists like Kirsten Sinema and Elizabeth Warren.

The Communist Take Down of America

This article is intended only as an overview of the communist subversion attacks upon the United States. I have isolated just a few of the 45 goals identified by Skousen in his book, The Naked Capitalist.

4. Permit free trade between all nations regardless of Communist affiliation and regardless of whether or not items could be used for war

To date, Donald Trump’s major accomplishment, among many, has been to eliminate most of the negative effects of the various free trade agreements that blindly permitted greedy corporations to shut down their American operations and relocate overseas for the cheap labor and then send their products, duty free, back to the US. Corporate profits soared, but unemployment went up, benefits and salary went down when adjusted for inflation. In fact, from 1993 to the Trump Presidency, Americans were working 20% longer for 20% less when adjusting for inflation. Under Donald Trump, he killed the sovereignty sucking TPP which would be totally destroyed free enterprise and representative government within the United States.

Included in the free trade agreements were “bilateral technology exchanges”. The most heinous and example of this practice was when President Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore, sold Silkworm missile technology to China. Some of the profits ended up in the DNC. Amazing how history keeps repeating in the Clinton family in which Hillary used the same game plan to sell uranium to the Russians in one of the most treasonous acts in American history. And these products ended up in the Clinton Foundation and was funneled back into the Presidential race in 2016.

If and when the Democrats ever return to any kind of position of power in the federal government, we will see the end of America program continue at breakneck speed and all of these economic destroyers will bring America down.

11. Promote the U.N. as the only hope for mankind

If and when the United States is ever invaded, it will be by foreign nations wearing the blue helmets of the United Nations. I have previously covered the Kigali Principles which Obama signed that allows the UN the unilateral power to enter the US without permission and conduct military operations from full scale invasion to a coup against the prevailing administration.

20. Infiltrate the press. Get control of book-review assignments, editorial writing, policymaking positions

Except for Fox News, the entire mainstream media begins the news cycle each day with insults about Trumps outdated notions of nationalism and they highlight how America is being shunned by world leaders. The fact is, Trump is temporarily saving us from the tyranny of globalism which has genocide as one of its final goals as they champion the 90% reduction in global population which is why we see so many slow-kill methods being applied.

24. Eliminate all laws governing obscenity by calling them “censorship” and a violation of free speech and free press

25. Break down cultural standards of morality by promoting pornography and obscenity in books, magazines, motion pictures, radio, and TV

Many of the cold war era Soviet defectors warned us that this was in progress. It was not until 1968 did a TV show permit a married man and woman to appear in the same bed and this tood place in an episode of The Brady Bunch. In the last 50 years, our entertainment industry has traveled down a road of ever-increasing depravity which mocks Jesus. The formerly abnormal has become normal and the normal has become symbols of oppression, racism and sexism.

Despite the left’s demand for freedom of the press with regard to the unconventional life styles that that the entertainment and news industry worships, any political and conservative viewpoints are discriminated against with extreme censorship by Google, Twitter and Facebook. America has been subjected to a Marxist soci0-cultural revolution and the good guys are losing. Facebook just eliminated 800 alt-media sites in advance of the midterm elections.

26. Present homosexuality, degeneracy and promiscuity as “normal, natural, healthy.”

A couple of years ago, Target became the standard bearer for moral depravity by letting in “men” to female restrooms, thus endangering women and girls. I could care less if people want to “transgender”, we all have to answer for our choices at the end of days. However, this opened the door to endangerment, not necessarily from transgender people, but from those pretending to be who would prey upon our females.

27. Discredit the Bible and emphasize the need for intellectual maturity, which does not need a “religious crutch.”

28. Eliminate prayer or any phase of religious expression in the schools on the ground that it violates the principle of “separation of church and state.”

The youth of the 1960’s began to rebel against God. It is no coincidence that the Supreme Court ruling that removed prayer from our classrooms was a large contributing factor.

The practice of 501 c3 nonprofit corporations was used to control church preaching. Under this rule, the preached content could not be political or greedy pastors, who act more Judas than a representative of the word of God, made religion into a silly parlor game. God became the big slot machine in the sky.

The presence of the Department of Homeland Security’s Clergy Response Team allowed for governmental infiltration into the church’s hierarchy. When I telephonically interviewed Walter Mansfield, one of the first pastors to be recruited to the Clergy Response Team, he told me that FEMA camp assigned pastors were told to comfort but do not do so using the word of God.

40. Discredit the family as an institution. Encourage promiscuity and easy divorce

A natural outcome of the depravity of Hollywood, which young people will mimic, has been to confuse them with the joys of sensual pleasure while sacrificing their collective souls.

The birth control pill and “no-fault” divorce decrees also encouraged a breakdown of the family.

The father of modern sociology, Amatai Etzioni once said, “the family can survive without the state”, but the state cannot survive without the family”. Etzioni just described the biggest threat against America, the attacks upon traditional family values.

44. Internationalize the Panama Canal

The Communist Chinese are in control of the Panama Canal and have been since Sol Linowtiz orchestrated the giveaway of the canal to China. The Chinese have asserted their influence by becoming military allies in Central America. In other words, this was the genesis of what would become the Red Dawn invasion force.

Conclusion

If and when the Democrats takeover, again, we will witness all of these communist principles coming to fruition and becoming the new normal in America. There will be no due process, no First Amendment, only mob rule. It will be mob rule just like what we are beginning to see from the Democrats in the lead up to the midterm elections.

The most important election in American history was the election of Donald Trump. The second most important election in American history will be the upcoming midterms because all of the progress made by the Trump administration, can be given back in the blink of an eye with liberals in charge.