Donna Brazile knows Seth Rich was murdered by the Clintons
Former interim head of the Democratic National Committee and long-time Democratic operative Donna Brazile wrote in an upcoming book due out this week that she feared for her life in the days and weeks after DNC tech worker Seth Rich was murdered last year as he walked home late from a local bar in Washington, D.C.

According to a tweet from Internet guru Matt Drudge, Brazile also shut her blinds so that snipers could not see her.

“Brazile writes she was haunted by the murder of DNC Seth Rich, and feared for her own life, shutting the blinds so snipers could not see her,” Drudge tweeted.

https://twitter.com/DRUDGE/status/926892115044343808

Her book, titled, “Hacks: The Inside Story of the Break-ins and Breakdowns That Put Donald Trump in the White House,” is slated to be released on Tuesday.

Why would Brazile have to fear for her life after the Rich murder — if, as we’ve been told, it was simply a robbery gone bad? Does she suspect someone of the murder?

Does she suspect the Clintons? (Related: STORM: ‘Complete panic’ at DNC after Kim Dotcom says he was in on Seth Rich’s effort to get stolen docs to WikiLeaks.)

Consider some things before you dismiss that conspiracy theory out of hand.

— As The Blaze noted, Drudge’s tweet got no small amount of attention, earning more than 13,000 retweets and tens of thousands of “likes.”

Several news websites have reported for months regarding Seth’s murder, even as the so-called “mainstream media” has all but ignored the murder. In fact, when the MSM discusses Rich at all these days, it’s usually to mock the alternative news site reporting on the latest development (like this one).

The fact that the murder impacted Brazile in such a way that she would put it in her book lends much new credence to the suspicion that his death was somehow tied to politics.

— Also, Brazile heavily criticized Hillary Clinton in her book, claiming that she essentially took over the DNC, used it as her campaign’s own personal fundraising vehicle, and only gave the organization a stipend with which to live on, NewsTarget reported last week.

When it was all said and done, Brazile said Clinton left the DNC penniless and heavily in debt.

Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Florida, who ran the organization at the time, “was not a good manager,” Brazile wrote in Politico, in which she discussed Clinton’s “secret takeover” of the party. “She hadn’t been very interested in controlling the party — she let Clinton’s headquarters in Brooklyn do as it desired so she didn’t have to inform the party officers how bad the situation was.”

— When Brazile took over the DNC on an interim basis after Wasserman Schultz was fired, she discovered evidence that Clinton, the Florida congresswoman and the party leaders conspired to rig the nomination process in favor of Hillary, essentially cheating her primary challenger, Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., out of it.

She said she discovered a joint fundraising agreement “between the DNC, the Hillary Victory Fund, and Hillary for America.” At that point, Brazile figured out that the DNC had been subjugated by the Clinton campaign almost a full year before Hillary actually got the nomination.

“The agreement — signed by Amy Dacey, the former CEO of the DNC, and Robby Mook with a copy to [lawyer] Marc Elias — specified that in exchange for raising money and investing in the DNC, Hillary would control the party’s finances, strategy, and all the money raised,” Brazile said.

“Her campaign had the right of refusal of who would be the party communications director, and it would make final decisions on all the other staff. The DNC also was required to consult with the campaign about all other staffing, budgeting, data, analytics, and mailings,” she noted further.

Is Brazile’s insider, tell-all book naming Clinton as being responsible for taking over the DNC, perhaps illegally, her way of protecting herself in the wake of Rich’s murder? You could certainly make that argument.

J. D. Heyes is a senior writer for NewsTarget.com and editor-in-chief of The National Sentinel.

Sources include:

NewsTarget.com

TheBlaze.com