Rick Santorum: ”Sometimes Pregnancy Is God’s Way Of Comforting Rape Victims”
“Standing steadfast as the most socially right-wing candidate in the GOP presidential field, Rick Santorum has repeatedly touted his extreme anti-choice position, which dictates that abortion should be uniformly illegal, even in cases of rape or incest. He even suggested that physicians who provide abortions to such victims should be criminally charged.

“Last Friday, CNN’s Piers Morgan asked Santorum to clarify his reasoning behind such a callous position. Insisting that “it’s not a matter of religious values,” Santorum explained that sexual assault victims should “accept this horribly created” pregnancy because it is “nevertheless a gift in a very broken way” and that, when it comes down to it, a victim just has “to make the best out of a bad situation.”

“You know, terrible things are happening all over the world,” Santorum elaborated. “There are murders, wars, mass genocides and other atrocities being committed across the globe almost daily. And when you think about it, what compensation does someone whose entire family gets killed in a suicide bombing have? None. They’re left alone in this world until they themselves die. On the other hand, and I assure you I’m not drawing any parallels here, rape victims are often impregnated by their assailants. It’s not the happiest outcome, but I do believe it is one marginally better than losing your entire family within seconds.”

When Morgan asked Santorum whether he was comparing rape and suicide bombing victims, the former U.S. Senator from Pennsylvania responded, “No, not in the least. I just told you I’m not making any parallels.”

“Then what are you, in fact, saying?” Morgan continued inquiring. Santorum explained: “Look, a tragedy is a tragedy no matter which form it happens in. And tragedies will continue to happen long after we’re all gone. That’s just the way of the world. But, life goes on, and healing and overcoming bad experiences is what life is mostly about. So, maybe it would be better to perceive post-rape pregnancies as God’s way of saying, ‘I understand your pain and I bless you with this child to comfort you in your life ahead.’ That is certainly a better and mentally healthier perspective than aborting the child; after all, it’s not its fault.”

Comments

comments