Class of 2017 & beyond
The History major is for students who understand that shaping the future requires knowing the past. History courses explore centuries of human experimentation and ingenuity, from the individual to the global scale. History majors learn to be effective storytellers and analysts, and to craft arguments that speak to broad audiences. They make extensive use of Yale’s vast library resources to create pioneering original research projects. Students of history learn to think about politics and government, sexuality, the economy, cultural and intellectual life, war and society, and other themes in broadly humanistic—rather than narrowly technocratic—ways.

History is one of Yale College’s most popular and intellectually diverse majors, encompassing nearly every region and time period of the global past. The study of history is excellent preparation for careers in many fields, including law, journalism, business and finance, education, politics and public policy, social activism, and the arts.

Introduction to the New Major

Over the past two years, the Yale history department completed a full review of our undergraduate major and voted to approve several reforms. These reforms provide more structure as well as more flexibility within the History major, and highlight the strengths of Yale’s History offerings. The reforms preserve what was best about the old Yale History program, while allowing for changes that will make the major more responsive to the interests of current and future undergraduate students.

Under the former Yale History major, all students completed the same program, governed by a “Rule of 2.” They took a total of 12 history courses, including 2 in U.S. history, 2 in European history, and 2 in the history of other areas of the world. They were also required to take 2 pre-industrial courses (covering material before about 1800). Finally, all students took 2 departmental seminars, and all students completed a 2-semester independent senior essay.

The new program preserves many of these features. Students who wish to complete the Yale History major more or less as it has existed during the past decade will still be able to do so. In addition, however, the new history major will offer two significant new options:

– a “Specialist” track for students who choose to specialize within a particular geographic region or thematic pathway within the major

– a 1-semester option for the senior essay requirement

Overview: The New Global and Specialist Tracks

Rather than offer a one-size-fits-all approach to the history major, the new reforms offer students a choice of two tracks: the Global Track or the Specialist Track.

The Global Track: The “Global” Track operates much like the old Yale History major, encouraging students to take a wide range of courses from different geographical regions and time periods. This track is designed for students seeking a broad understanding of major trends and approaches in the history of human societies. The new version of this track makes one important change from the former requirements, however. Under the former system, students took 2 courses each in 3 geographical regions: the U.S., Europe, and what has colloquially been known as the “Rest of the World.” Departmental faculty and students have long recognized the problematic nature of this last category, as well as its anachronistic quality. The new Global Track will split the world into 5 regions: U.S., Europe, Latin America, Asia, Africa/Middle East. Students will be required to take 1 course in each of these 5 regions, for a total of 5 out of their 10 history courses (not including the senior requirement). The pre-industrial and seminar requirements will remain the same. The “Global” Track operates much like the old Yale History major, encouraging students to take a wide range of courses from different geographical regions and time periods. This track is designed for students seeking a broad understanding of major trends and approaches in the history of human societies. The new version of this track makes one important change from the former requirements, however. Under the former system, students took 2 courses each in 3 geographical regions: the U.S., Europe, and what has colloquially been known as the “Rest of the World.” Departmental faculty and students have long recognized the problematic nature of this last category, as well as its anachronistic quality. The new Global Track will split the world into 5 regions: U.S., Europe, Latin America, Asia, Africa/Middle East. Students will be required to take 1 course in each of these 5 regions, for a total of 5 out of their 10 history courses (not including the senior requirement). The pre-industrial and seminar requirements will remain the same.

The “Specialist” Track: The “Specialist” Track also preserves many aspects of the former Yale History major, including the pre-industrial and seminar requirements. Unlike the Global Track, however, it offers students the ability to “specialize” in a particular region or pathway within history, and comes with a different set of distributional requirements. This track was created in response to students’ desire to focus in particular areas of interest earlier in the History major, to connect with faculty advisers in their areas of interest at an earlier stage, and to allow their focus to build over time into genuine expertise. Students who opt for the Specialist Track will take at least 5 (and up to 8) courses within their chosen region or pathway, as well as at least 2 courses outside of that region or pathway. Their overall coursework must include courses from at least 3 geographic regions. The “Specialist” Track also preserves many aspects of the former Yale History major, including the pre-industrial and seminar requirements. Unlike the Global Track, however, it offers students the ability to “specialize” in a particular region or pathway within history, and comes with a different set of distributional requirements. This track was created in response to students’ desire to focus in particular areas of interest earlier in the History major, to connect with faculty advisers in their areas of interest at an earlier stage, and to allow their focus to build over time into genuine expertise. Students who opt for the Specialist Track will take at least 5 (and up to 8) courses within their chosen region or pathway, as well as at least 2 courses outside of that region or pathway. Their overall coursework must include courses from at least 3 geographic regions.

Overview: The New Senior Essay Requirement

The new major preserves the traditional 2-semester independent senior essay as a requirement for receiving distinction in the History major. In addition, the new major will offer a 1-semester seminar-based option for students who do not intend to receive distinction in the major. Students who choose this second option will be required to take 11 rather than 12 credits to complete the history major.

This new option brings the History department into accord with most other departments at Yale (and most other history departments in the country), none of which require a mandatory 2-semester senior research project for all majors. We anticipate that this new option will be particularly appealing to double majors.

The Details

Prerequisite The prerequisite for the major is two term courses in History. Courses completed in fulfillment of the prerequisite may be applied toward the requirements of the major.

Requirements of the major Ten term courses in History are required, plus the senior essay (see below). There are no specific required courses in the History major and there are no specific prerequisites that must be fulfilled. Upon declaration, all History majors select either the Global or Specialist track, which are governed by slightly different distributional requirements. Majors may switch tracks as late as the end of course selection period in the fall of senior year.

In both tracks, students may count the same courses toward geographical, preindustrial, and seminar requirements. For instance, a departmental seminar on premodern Japan would simultaneously fulfill the preindustrial, seminar, and Asia geographical requirements. Within these requirements, students are free to choose their own classes.

The Global Track: This track is designed for students seeking a broad understanding of major trends in the history of human societies throughout the world. Students are required to take 1 course each in 5 different geographic regions (see below) for a total of 5 out of 10 required History courses. In addition, 2 of those 10 courses must be “pre-industrial ” (designated as “Pre-Ind”), covering material before the year 1800. Finally, students must take 2 departmental seminars, identified by the “J” suffix in the course number (i.e., HIST 136J).

The “Specialist” Track: The “Specialist” Track is designed for students seeking to specialize in a particular geographic region or thematic pathway within world history. Students may choose from the following areas of specialization:

Regions

Pathways

Individual Option

Students are required to take at least 5 courses within their chosen region or pathway—half of their 10 required courses. In addition, they must take at least 2 courses outside of their area of specialization. Their overall coursework must include at least 3 geographic regions. Listings of courses designated in each region and pathway are available on the history department web site. Students may also design an individual area of specialization in consultation with a faculty adviser and with the Director of Undergraduate Studies.

The remaining requirements are the same as the Global Track. Students must take at least 2 courses designated as “pre-industrial” (or “Pre-Ind”), covering material before the year 1800. Students must also complete two departmental seminars, identified by the “J” suffix in the course number (i.e., HIST 136J).

Departmental seminars and preregistration All students who declare the History major are entitled to preregister for two departmental seminars (designated by a course number ending in J, such as HIST 136J). Many seminars are popular and fill up quickly. Students may use their preregistration privileges at any time after declaring the major, in their sophomore, junior, or senior years. Sophomores contemplating study abroad are urged to consider taking at least one seminar in the sophomore year. Residential college seminars, study-abroad courses, and courses in other departments that count toward the History major do not fulfill the departmental seminar or senior essay requirements.

Senior essay Students in the History major are not passive consumers of historical knowledge: they create original works of history themselves. As seniors, all History majors are required to complete a work of original research in close consultation with a faculty adviser. The range of acceptable topics is wide, but most essays fall into two categories. The first involves the study of a significant historical subject through research in accessible primary source materials. The second is a critical assessment of a significant historical controversy or historiographical issue.

Most students are expected to write a 2-semester independent senior essay, for a total of 12 course credits within the History major. This 2-semester essay is required for all students seeking to earn distinction in the History major. A smaller number of students may choose to write a 1-semester essay within the context of a departmental seminar, for a total of 11 course credits within the History major.

The 2-semester senior essay: All History majors seeking to earn distinction in the major must complete a 2-semester independent senior essay under the guidance of a faculty adviser. The typical senior essay is 40-50 pages (no more than 12,500 words), plus a bibliography and bibliographical essay. Seniors receive course credit for satisfactory completion of their departmental essays by enrolling in HIST 495 (fall) and HIST 496 (spring) during the senior year. The grade for the final essay, determined by an outside reader in consultation with the faculty adviser, is applied retroactively to both semesters. For more detail about the senior essay, see the Senior Essay Handbook available on the History department web site.

The 1-semester senior essay: History majors may choose instead to write a 1-semester senior essay in the context of an additional departmental seminar (for a total of 3 departmental seminars overall). Students who choose this option will consult with the seminar instructor to determine an appropriate balance between seminar and essay requirements. Students who choose the 1-semester option are not eligible for distinction in the History major.

Additional options: Some students who embark on the 2-semester essay may discover that their choice is not a good fit. Other students who embark on the 1-semester essay may discover that they are passionate about the subject and wish to expand their paper in a second semester of independent research. For these reasons, the History major offers both an “opt-in” and an “opt-out” clause for the 2-semester senior essay. Students who begin the year by writing a research paper in the context of a seminar may “opt in” to the 2-semester essay by enrolling in HIST 496 in the spring, with the permission of the faculty adviser and the Senior Essay Director. Students who enroll in HIST 495 in the fall but choose not to continue in the spring may “opt out” and instead enroll in a third departmental seminar.

Advising All students who declare the History major are assigned an adviser from among the departmental faculty. The adviser is available throughout the year for consultation about courses and the major. Students in the Global Track will be assigned an adviser from the general History faculty. Students in the Specialist Track will be assigned an adviser in their area of specialization. At the beginning of each term, students majoring in History must have their schedule signed and approved by their departmental adviser or by the Director of Undergraduate Studies.

Course substitution History majors are permitted to include up to 2 courses taught outside the department toward the fulfillment of the major, with the approval of the Director of Undergraduate Studies. Courses taught outside of the History department may fulfill geographic, region/pathway and pre-industrial distribution requirements. They may not be used to fulfill the departmental seminar or senior essay requirements.

Cr/D/F History majors may include up to two lecture courses taken Cr/D/F toward the requirements of the major. Departmental seminars may not be taken Cr/D/F.

Combined B.A./M.A. degree program Exceptionally able and well-prepared students may complete a course of study leading to the simultaneous award of the B.A. and M.A. degrees after eight terms of enrollment. See “Simultaneous Award of the Bachelor’s and Master’s Degrees” under Special Arrangements, Exceptionally able and well-prepared students may complete a course of study leading to the simultaneous award of the B.A. and M.A. degrees after eight terms of enrollment. See “Simultaneous Award of the Bachelor’s and Master’s Degrees” under Special Arrangements, section K , in the Academic Regulations . Interested students should consult the director of undergraduate studies prior to the sixth term of enrollment for specific requirements in History.

Summary of Requirements

Prerequisites 2 term courses in hist

Number of courses 10 term courses (incl prereqs) plus the senior essay

Distribution of courses

Global Track: 1 course in each of 5 geographic regions (U.S., Europe, Asia, Latin America, Africa/Middle East); 2 pre-industrial courses; 2 departmental seminars

Specialist Track: 5 courses in region or pathway and at least 2 courses outside of region or pathway; 2 pre-industrial courses; 2 departmental seminars. Overall coursework must cover at least 3 geographic regions.

In both tracks, students may count the same courses toward geographical, preindustrial, and seminar requirements. For instance, a departmental seminar on premodern Japan would simultaneously fulfill the preindustrial, seminar, and Asia geographical requirements.

Substitution permitted Up to 2 non-departmental courses, with approval of the DUS

Senior requirement 2-semester independent senior essay (required for distinction) or 1-semester seminar-based essay