Utah Olympic Legacy Foundation
Terms and Conditions

This website is operated by Utah Olympic Legacy Foundation. Utah Olympic Legacy Foundation offers this website, including all information, tools and services available from this site to you, the user, conditioned upon your acceptance of all terms, conditions, policies and notices stated here. By visiting our site and/ or purchasing something from us, you engage in our “service” and agree to be bound by the following terms and conditions. These Terms & Conditions apply to all users of the site, including without limitation users who are browsers, vendors, customers, merchants, and/ or contributors of content. Please read these Terms & Conditions carefully before accessing or using our website. By accessing or using any part of the site, you agree to be bound by these Terms & Conditions If you do not agree to all the terms and conditions of this agreement, then you may not access the website or use any services. We reserve the right to update, change or replace any part of these Terms & Conditions by posting updates and/or changes to our website. It is your responsibility to check this page periodically for changes. Your continued use of or access to the website following the posting of any changes constitutes acceptance of those changes.



Our store is hosted on CENTAMAN. They provide us with the online e-commerce platform that allows us to sell our products and services to you. By agreeing to these Terms & Conditions, you represent that you are at least the age of majority in your state or province of residence, or that you are the age of majority in your state or province of residence and you have given us your consent to allow any of your minor dependents to use this site. You may not use our products for any illegal or unauthorized purpose nor may you, in the use of the service, violate any laws in your jurisdiction (including but not limited to copyright laws). You must not transmit any worms or viruses or any code of a destructive nature. A breach or violation of any of the Terms & Conditions will result in an immediate termination of your services. We reserve the right to refuse service to anyone for any reason at any time. You understand that your content (not including credit card information), may be transferred unencrypted and involve (a) transmissions over various networks; and (b) changes to conform and adapt to technical requirements of connecting networks or devices. Credit card information is always encrypted during transfer over networks. You agree not to reproduce, duplicate, copy, sell, resell or exploit any portion of the service, use of the service, or access to the service or any contact on the website through which the service is provided, without express written permission by us.



We are not responsible if information made available on this site is not accurate, complete or current. The material on this site is provided for general information only and should not be relied upon or used as the sole basis for making decisions without consulting primary, more accurate, more complete or more timely sources of information. Any reliance on the material on this site is at your own risk. Prices for our products are subject to change without notice. We reserve the right at any time to modify or discontinue the Service (or any part or content thereof) without notice at any time. We shall not be liable to you or to any third-party for any modification, price change, suspension or discontinuance of the Service.



Your submission of personal information through the store is governed by our Privacy Policy. To view our Privacy Policy, click here.



Occasionally there may be information on our site or in the Service that contains typographical errors, inaccuracies or omissions that may relate to product descriptions, pricing, promotions, offers, product shipping charges, transit times and availability. We reserve the right to correct any errors, inaccuracies or omissions, and to change or update information or cancel orders if any information in the Service or on any related website is inaccurate at any time without prior notice (including after you have submitted your order).



Questions about the Terms & Conditions should be sent to us atshop@utaholympiclegacy.com.