These 7 Cities and States Housed All Their Chronically Homeless Veterans
This year, 7 major cities and states have effectively eradicated chronic veteran homelessness by taking advantage of federal funding made available to give American veterans a roof over their head. In addition to these cities and states, other major cities across America are slated to end veteran homelessness by 2016 in accordance with a White House initiative. Here’s a look at the first cities and states that showed everyone else how to get it done:

1. Connecticut

This past August, Connecticut governor Dannel Malloy announced his state was the first in the nation to end veteran homelessness in all cities and counties. The Constitution State achieved its goal by combining solutions and ideas from various government agencies and nonprofits like the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, the Connecticut Department of Housing, the Connecticut Heroes Project, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), the Connecticut Coalition to End Homelessness, and others.

“We are truly a national leader on these issues, because our veterans deserve access to housing, quality health care, education, and career opportunities. It’s our obligation to deliver for them, and that’s just what we’re doing as a state,” Gov. Malloy said.

2. Houston, Texas

America’s 4th-largest city announced an end to veteran homelessness this past June. Houston found homes for an estimated 3,650 veterans living on the streets in conjunction with 35 local agencies and nonprofits. Houston has the nation’s largest population of veterans, with over 300,000 veterans inside city limits.

“Too often those that answered the call of service still find themselves struggling long after leaving the military. Houston is there for our heroes, and just like on the battlefield, we will leave no one behind,” Mayor Annise Parker said in a public statement.

3. Las Cruces, New Mexico

In July of 2015, Las Cruces, a city with a population of just over 100,000 people, became the first city in New Mexico to end veteran homelessness. Throughout Fiscal Year 2014-2015 (July 2014-July 2015), Las Cruces found homes for 298 homeless and near-homeless veterans, through its nine different public housing programs.

“Ending veteran homelessness is important for one simple reason: Veterans fought for our freedom and our way of life, and it is now our turn to fight for them,” said mayor Ken Miyagashima in a public statement.

4. New Orleans, Louisiana

New Orleans was the second city to officially end veteran homelessness in January of 2015. On January 2, the last known homeless veteran in the Big Easy unlocked their door to their new apartment, prompting Mayor Mitch Landrieu to declare victory.

“We owe our Veterans our eternal gratitude for their service and sacrifice to this nation, and making sure they have a place to call home is a small but powerful way we can show our appreciation,” Landrieu said.

New Orleans housed a total of 227 veterans in homes during the course of 2014.

5. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

The City of Brotherly Love announced it had reached “functional zero” veteran homelessness as of Veterans’ Day just last month. Marie Nahikian, Philadelphia’s director of supportive housing, told CBS Philly that the city had found homes for some 1,300 veterans. She expressed hope that Philadelphia could apply the same techniques used to house homeless veterans to end homelessness in general throughout the city in coming years.

“Once you look at how we did it with veterans, it could be applied to any group of homeless people,” Nahikian said.

6. Santa Fe, New Mexico

New Mexico’s capital city ended veteran homelessness this year, due to city cooperation with local nonprofits. Hank Hughes, who is executive director of a coalition of Santa Fe-based nonprofits, said the city met its goal of ending veteran homelessness by meeting directly with veterans’ groups, and setting up a database where the housing needs of those who signed up for shelter at one of the locations ran by nonprofits in the coalition were monitored. Hughes hopes the database can also serve to end all homelessness in Santa Fe in the next few years.

“Using that list, we want to make sure that people don’t fall through the cracks and get ignored,” Hughes told the Albuquerque journal.

7. Virginia

This past Veterans’ Day, Virginia governor Terry McAuliffe announced that his state had functionally ended homelessness for veterans, having provided shelter for 1,432 veterans since October of 2014. Virginia achieved this milestone in coordination with the White House’s Zero: 2016 effort, in which over 300 mayors and six governors pledged to end veteran homelessness by the end of 2016. The home of the Pentagon, Virginia has one of the highest concentrations of military families in the US.

“This is an important victory in our ongoing efforts to make our Commonwealth the best place on earth for veterans to live, work and raise a family. However, we must remain committed to keeping homelessness among veterans, and, all Virginians, rare, brief and non-recurring,” Gov. McAuliffe said.