Kim Kardashian and Kanye West Attend Hillary Clinton Fundraiser – Variety
Hillary Clinton made her third swing through Los Angeles since announcing her presidential bid, to raise money at the Brentwood home of Scooter Braun, manager to Justin Bieber and Ariana Grande, and his wife Yael Cohen.

The sold-out early evening event drew about 250 people, at ticket prices of $2,700 per person, giving her campaign another shot of cash. Early evening arrivals included Kim Kardashian and Kanye West, according to two attendees, along with Kris Jenner, Jeffrey Katzenberg, Sim Farar, Jessica Alba and Cash Warren, Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson, Usher, Jason Collins and Mary Steenburgen, a longtime friend of the Clintons. Also there was Los Angeles District Attorney Jackie Lacey, Rep. Tony Cardenas (D-Calif.) and Rep. Maxine Waters (D-Calif.).

“I got my selfie!!! I really loved hearing her speak & hearing her goals for our country!” Kardashian wrote on Twitter.

In her remarks, Clinton did make reference to the event going on at the same time — the first 2016 GOP presidential debate, where she was a frequent target. She remarked on both the size of the field and her hopes that they will continue debating, according to an attendee.

She also talked about her support of the deal with Iran to limit that country’s nuclear program, and how it projected U.S. leadership in the world, the attendee said. She cited the difficulty in getting the Russians and Chinese to agree to sanctions against the Iranian regime. On Thursday evening, Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) announced that he was opposed to the deal.

Clinton also brought up the need for support of mental health and addiction programs, a topic that she has raised at other L.A. events and on the campaign trail.

Later, she tweeted about the departure of Jon Stewart coming on the same night as the GOP debate, but too late for “The Daily Show” host to weigh in.

She wrote, “Missing Jon Stewart already. #GOPdebate #JonVoyage -H”

The event was held in the exquisitely landscaped backyard of the home that Braun and his wife bought from Stacey Snider for $13.1 million in 2014.

Clinton has enjoyed big support from Hollywood donors, not just in contributions to her official campaign apparatus, but to a SuperPAC, Priorities USA Action, that is supporting her candidacy. About one-third of the $15.7 million that the group raised in the first half of the year came from entertainment industry donors, including Katzenberg, Haim Saban and Steven Spielberg, who each gave $1 million.

Earlier in the day, Clinton held her first Los Angeles public event of her 2016 campaign, stopping by Los Angeles Trade Technical College for a roundtable discussion on home health care.

On Wednesday, a group of Los Angeles donors and activists gathered at a West Hollywood restaurant for a Draft Biden event, a committee set up to encourage Vice President Joseph Biden to enter the race. The prospect of him entering has drawn a mixture of reaction from Democratic donors, with some saying that Clinton has locked up so much support already and others saying that there is a need for a formidable alternative.

“Have they circled up a lot of folks? Yes. All the folks? No,” said one top fundraiser for Democrats who has not yet committed to a candidate. “There’s plenty of money out there.”

Clinton’s event reached capacity well before the event, with organizers turning away donors who wanted to attend.