Welcome to the Vaccine Education Center
Vaccine Education Center

Vaccinate Your Baby is a program of Every Child by Two that provides news and information for parents about immunizations.

Watch 'Vaccines and Your Baby' to get the basic facts about vaccines.

Watch 'Vaccines: Separating Fact from Fear' to find answers to the most commonly asked questions about vaccines.

New Online Video Series Check out this new video series, Talking About Vaccines With Dr. Paull Offit, during which Dr. Offit answers many common questions about vaccines. See all VEC videos »

Welcome to the Vaccine Education Center

The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia's Vaccine Education Center provides complete, up-to-date and reliable information about vaccines to parents and healthcare professionals.

The Vaccine Education Center is a member of the World Health Organization's (WHO) Vaccine Safety Net because our website meets the criteria for credibility and content as defined by the Global Advisory Committee on Vaccine Safety. Learn more about the WHO’s Vaccine Safety Net»

Vaccine snapshot

Vaccines have literally transformed the landscape of medicine over the course of the 20th century. Before vaccines, parents in the United States could expect that every year:

Polio would paralyze 10,000 children.

Rubella (German measles) would cause birth defects and mental retardation in as many as 20,000 newborns.

Measles would infect about 4 million children, killing about 500.

Diphtheria would be one of the most common causes of death in school-aged children.

A bacterium called Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) would cause meningitis in 15,000 children, leaving many with permanent brain damage.

Pertussis (whooping cough) would kill thousands of infants.

Vaccines have reduced and, in some cases, eliminated many diseases that killed or severely disabled people just a few generations before. For most Americans today, vaccines are a routine part of healthcare.

However, the disappearance of many childhood diseases has led some parents to question whether vaccines are still necessary. Further, a growing number of parents are concerned that vaccines may actually cause other diseases. Although unfounded, these concerns have caused some parents to delay vaccines or withhold them altogether from their children.

Vaccine Education Center resources

Parents PACK

The Center has also established the Parents PACK program to develop a dialogue with parents, provide frequent vaccine information, and establish a place for parents to get up-to-date information and answers to questions about vaccines.

Vaccine Update for Healthcare Professionals

The Center offers the Vaccine Update program for healthcare professionals. The program was designed to make it easier for healthcare providers to stay up-to-date on vaccine news, research and developments. The program includes free webinars, monthly e-newsletters and mailings containing sample materials and announcements when new or revised information is available.

*Members of the public interested in materials offered through the Vaccine Update program can view the materials directly through the Vaccine Update website.



Reviewed by: Paul A. Offit, MD

Date: March 2013