Marco Rubio Just Publicly Shamed His Own Constituents For Flocking To Trump Rally
For once, it’s not President Trump making headlines for a Saturday morning tweet – at least not as the sender. Senator Marco Rubio (R-FL) did the honors this time after he fired-off a biblical quote over the popular social media platform this morning targeting the president and his sycophantic minions.

President Trump appeared at a campaign-style rally last night in Pensacola, Florida to stump for accused sexual predator Roy Moore, who’s running in a special election next week in nearby Alabama to fill the senate seat vacated by Attorney General Jeff Sessions.

In addition to the de rigueur attacks on Democratic leaders and the “fake news” media that form the backbone of Trump’s rambling speeches at these events, the president added a new twist: victim-shaming the women who have accused Moore of sexually assaulting them, of which there are 9 in total, two of whom were attacked when they were minors.

The crowd, composed largely of Rubio’s fellow Floridians, ate it all up, cheering and howling every time Trump lobbed one of these verbal molotov cocktails. It was this display that moved the normally mild mannered Senator from Miami to lash out on Twitter and throw Republicans from his own state under the bus:

At the sight of the crowds his heart was moved with pity 4 them b/c they were troubled & abandoned like sheep without a shepherd.Matthew9:36 — Marco Rubio (@marcorubio) December 9, 2017

Add your name to millions demanding Congress take action on the President’s crimes. IMPEACH TRUMP & PENCE!

There certainly is no love lost between Sen. Rubio and President Trump. The two clashed during the Republican primary, with Trump famously nicknaming Rubio “Little Marco.” Once Trump locked-up the Republican nomination, Rubio withheld his support until the very last minute, and he was quick to criticize the candidate whenever his campaign hit the rocks.

As harsh a critic as he was during the campaign, however, Rubio has been a staunch supporter of President Trump’s agenda in the only way that really matters: with his vote in the senate. These tweets and other critiques are amusing, but they do absolutely nothing to oppose the destruction caused by someone Rubio once called a “dangerous con-man.”

If he really holds this low of an opinion of the president and his base supporters, then it would be nice to see that opposition reflected in his voting record.

Add your name to millions demanding Congress take action on the President’s crimes. IMPEACH TRUMP & PENCE!