Will Boehner break the “Hastert Rule” today? The Hastert Rule explained
WASHINGTON–In a 2003 speech, then Speaker Denny Hastert (R-Ill.) discussed his House management guidelines that became known as “The Hastert Rule.” The rule calls for a leader not to send legislation to the House floor for a vote unless it has the support of the majority of the majority. On Wednesday, with just hours left

WASHINGTON–In a 2003 speech, then Speaker Denny Hastert (R-Ill.) discussed his House management guidelines that became known as “The Hastert Rule.” The rule calls for a leader not to send legislation to the House floor for a vote unless it has the support of the majority of the majority. On Wednesday, with just hours left to raise the debt ceiling or risk default, House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio)–who has been holding fast to the Hastert Rule–has to decide whether to break it.

My column on the role the Hastert Rule played in the runup to the partial government shutdown–Wednesday is Day 16–is HERE. Read the 2003 Hastert speech HERE.

Excerpt: Here is the Hastert Rule background and math:

At present, there are 232 Republicans and 200 Democrats, with three vacancies. If the House Democrats stick together — and so far they have — they would just have to pick off a handful of House Republicans.

While there are not many moderate Republicans — and they are drowned out by their Tea Party colleagues — there are enough to get to 217 votes to pass a bill.

But if Boehner went that route, he would violate the informal “Hastert Rule,” which calls for any legislation first mustering the support of the majority of the majority. The reality is that any measure with provisions to win the backing of 116 House Republicans will not be supported by House Democrats.

Hastert first outlined what became known as the “Hastert Rule” on Nov. 12, 2003, during a speech in the Cannon House Office Building at a conference on “The Changing Nature of the Speakership,” where he detailed his governing principles.

“My fifth principle is to please the majority of your majority,” Hastert said.

“The job of speaker is not to expedite legislation that runs counter to the wishes of the majority of his majority,” Hastert said.

Hastert further explained, “on each piece of legislation, I actively seek to bring our party together. I do not feel comfortable scheduling any controversial legislation unless I know we have the votes on our side first.”

I talked with John Feehery, who was Hastert’s communications chief in 2003 and the author of the speech — the man who coined the phrase “the majority of the majority.”

Feehery told me Hastert developed his “majority of the majority” policy as part of the common-sense approach he used to be the longest-serving Republican Speaker in the nation’s history. “A speaker who tends to not please the majority of his majority won’t be the speaker for very long,” Feehery said.

When Hastert was speaker, “he could not trust the Democrats to vote with him on anything, so that is part of the reason why he used that rule. He wanted to make sure he was able to pass things,” Feehery said.

Ron Bonjean, who followed Feehery as Hastert communication chief, said if a speaker passes bills on the strength of votes from the other side of the aisle, “the thought process is you are giving up your ruling authority.”

Boehner has a much tougher challenge than Hastert, a former wrestling coach who was able to foster “much more of a team atmosphere,” Bonjean told me. Boehner has to put up with members who are “in it for their own political posturing.”