Pelosi Denies Knowing Interrogation Techniques Were Used

By Paul Kane

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) today said congressional leaders were never briefed about the use of an enhanced interrogation practice, rejecting GOP claims that leadership was aware of the controversial tactics by late 2002.

Pelosi said the select few lawmakers who were briefed about handling of detainees from the war on terror, were then forbidden from discussing what they had learned with their colleagues. This produced an environment in which the top lawmakers were told of the existence of legal opinions supporting the rationale for waterboarding detainees, but never told that it was actually being used, according to Pelosi.

"Flat out, they never briefed us that this was happening," she said.

In late 2002, Pelosi was the ranking member of the House intelligence committee, while Porter Goss (R-Fla.) was chairman, when they first learned of the general nature of the interrogation techniques that were under consideration by the CIA's top officials. They were part of the so-called "Gang of Four" briefings given to the top members of the intelligence panels in the House and Senate. Pelosi continued receiving highly classified briefings when she became Democratic leader in 2003, as is custom to brief the top Democrat and Republican in each of the two chambers.

Republicans have repeatedly cited these briefings to reject calls from Pelosi and many congressional Democrats to create a "truth commission" to investigate alleged abuses in interrogations. Those calls grew louder after last week's release of the legal memos that the Bush administration used, from the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel, to explain what was allowed and what would break international anti-torture laws.

"All of this information was downloaded to congressional leaders of both parties with no objections being raised," House Minority Leader John Boehner (R-Ohio) told reporters today, specifically citing Pelosi as someone who received the briefings. "Not a word was raised at the time, not one word."

Rep. Peter Hoekstra (R-Mich), the ranking member of the House intelligence panel, argued the same point in an op-ed in today's Wall Street Journal.

Pelosi denied these claims. "We were not -- I repeat -- were not told that waterboarding or any of these other enhanced interrogation methods were used. What they did tell us is that they had . . . the Office of Legal Counsel opinions [and] that they could be used, but not that they would," she said.

She said some officials, such as Goss, who went on to become CIA director, argued the lawmakers should have known the waterboarding would be used because they were told it was a legal practice. But she said they had no way of knowing that for certain, and they were then forbidden from talking about what they had learned so they could not work to outlaw the practice.

She summed up the briefings this way: "This is what they're doing. That's all they do. They don't come in to consult. They come in to notify. They come in to notify. And you can't -- you can't change what they're doing unless you can act as a committee or as a class. You can't change what they're doing."