HCAN Vs. the Excise Tax

Health Care for America Now is running the above ad to pressure the Senate to ditch the excise tax. The back story here, at least according to some observers, is that unions don't like the excise tax but were convinced to hold their fire and let health-care reform clear the Finance Committee. Now they want the provision out of the final legislation, and they're willing to go to war to eliminate it.

I have great respect for HCAN, but in this instance, they're stretching the truth. The ad says the excise tax is "a 40% tax on health-care benefits of middle-class workers." It isn't. It's not even a little like that. It's a 40 percent tax on employer-provided health-care benefits above $21,000 for a family, and $8,000 for an individual. If your family's health-care premiums cost $23,000, then there's a 40 percent tax on $2,000 of your premiums. It's inconceivable that anyone's full health-care policy would be taxed at 40 percent.

Moreover, your family's health-care premiums probably don't cost $23,000. The average employer-provided health-care plan cost $13,375 in 2009. There are some middle-class workers with uncommonly generous health-care plans, but they're not the norm. This isn't as progressive as a tax on millionaires, but it is, in general, progressive. Goldman Sachs traders, for instance, have health-care plans valued around $40,000 a year. Wal-Mart employees don't.

Over on the HCAN site, they're arguing that "The House bill covers more people, is more affordable, and is just as deficit neutral as the Finance bill." The first two clauses are true. The third simply isn't. The House bill is funded through income taxes, which don't grow as quickly as health-care costs. In the second decade, the costs of the plan rapidly outpace the revenues, and the deficit explodes. Conversely, the excise tax is inside the health-care sector, and is designed to grow more quickly than health-care costs. It cuts the deficit in the second 10 years, which makes it quite a bit friendlier to the budget.

The argument against the excise tax is that it cuts the deficit by encouraging employers to shop for cheaper plans. The Joint Committee on Taxes suggests that the tax won't raise money because people will pay it. It will raise money because it will encourage employers to purchase cheaper plans for their employees and divert money they've saved into wages, which are taxable income. That means that a number of very generous plans will become more like middle-range plans. They'll have deductibles if they don't already, tighter networks, tiered drug formularies and so forth. Any plan that's lavish enough to even near the tax is going to remain a very generous plan, but it will become less so on the margin.

Some people, myself included, think that's a good thing. These plans are already hugely subsidized by the employer tax exclusion. If your employer gives you $15,000 in wages, you pay taxes on it. If you get $15,000 in health-care benefits, you don't pay taxes on it. Conversely, if an unemployed worker purchases $15,000 in health-care benefits, that's money he pays taxes on. It's wildly regressive. The excise tax doesn't cancel that out so much as ever so slightly chip away at the edges of it (the first $21,000 of a family's plan would still be untaxed).

If you believe, as I do, that too much money is being moved from wages to the automatic growth in health-care costs, then the excise tax is a useful policy. But folks can disagree on that point. It is not, however, fair to sell it as a straight 40 percent tax on benefits, nor to suggest it isn't in fact superior to income taxes as a deficit-reduction measure. It's both things, but it achieves them by encouraging employers to tighten health-care benefits.