John Boehner: If federal jobs are lost, 'So be it'

By Ed O'Keefe

Updated 6:25 p.m. ET

House Speaker John Boehner dismissed concerns about federal job cuts Tuesday, saying he believes the federal government can't afford to keep so many workers.

The Ohio Republican was asked at his weekly press conference about the prospect of federal job cuts if a House GOP plan to trim $100 billion in government spending ever passes.

"Over the last two years since President Obama has taken office, the federal government has added 200,000 new federal jobs," Boehner said. "And if some of those jobs are lost in this, so be it. We're broke. It's time for us to get serious about how we're spending the nation's money."

The reporter who asked the question noted however that the government might have to pay federal unemployment assistance to any laid-off federal workers, potentially adding more costs to the government's already-thin resources

The Democratic National Committee and liberal groups immediately seized on Boehner's comments as insensitive and counter to the "Where are the jobs?" mantra adopted by congressional Republican candidates during the 2010 midterm elections.

"If this is the attitude of Speaker John Boehner when it comes to saving existing jobs, it's no surprise he's moving forward with draconian spending cuts that will cost even more -- take teachers out of the classroom, scientists out of the labs, and cops off the street," said Jesse Ferguson, a spokesman with the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.

Nailing down the total number of federal jobs created since January 2009 is difficult, as some of Boehner's colleagues can attest. In separate conversations with The Federal Eye last September, two Republican lawmakers -- Eric Cantor (Va.) and Jason Chaffetz (Utah) -- used different numbers to describe federal job creation since January 2009.

Cantor said the government had grown by about 188,000 workers, or 15 percent, since Obama's inauguration. But Chaffetz said the government had added 130,000 new workers -- a total he said didn't include postal workers, temporary Census Bureau workers or the military.

Outside observers suggest the number of new hires is actually higher. John Palguta, vice president for policy at the nonpartisan Partnership for Public Service, said the total number exceeds 200,000.

According to Office of Personnel Management statistics, 82,692 full-time federal workers left the federal government in fiscal 2009 and agencies added 142,687 new hires, for a net gain of 59,995 jobs.

In fiscal 2010, 91,093 full-time feds left the government, while agencies added 138,155 new hires for a net gain of 47,062 new positions.

As the numbers demonstrate, most of the new hires were to replace employees who left the government. And when hires in both fiscal years are combined, it's safe to say the federal government added about 107,057 new positions -- not the 200,000 Boehner claims, Palguta said.

The Partnership -- and Obama's 2012 budget proposal unveiled Monday -- also note that the federal workforce is actually smaller relative to the population of the United States than in previous decades. Most of the growth in recent years has occurred at the departments of Defense, Homeland Security, Justice and Veterans Affairs -- in security or defense-related programs the GOP is unlikely to touch with the budget ax.

Leave your thoughts in the comments section below

RELATED: Boehner's comments revive debate on counting federal workers