Auditors raise doubts about stimulus numbers, but expect data will improve

By Ed O'Keefe

Updated 6:33 p.m. ET

Government auditors raised doubts Thursday about the number of jobs created or saved by the economic stimulus program, but they also cautioned that erroneous mistakes reported in recent weeks signal the benefits of government transparency.



Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board Chairman Earl Devaney

Roughly 10 percent of the recipients of stimulus dollars failed to submit quarterly reports last month, according to a Government Accountability Office report released Thursday.

"I think missing reports may drive the job numbers up, and I think there are enough inaccuracies in here to drive the numbers down," said Earl Devaney, chairman of the board that operates Recovery.gov, the government's stimulus-tracking Web site.

The Obama administration reported last month that the stimulus has directly created or saved 640,000 jobs thus far, but some officials cite independent estimates suggesting it has directly and indirectly created or saved more than 1 million jobs.

The fact that some recipients failed to report spending data last month "is distressing and must be addressed," Devaney said, suggesting that Congress should penalize recipients who fail to report.

"Perhaps an agency could refuse to provide any more funds to a non-compliant recipient," he said.

Some of the stimulus data actually reported needs additional scrutiny, GAO's lead auditor told members of the House oversight committee. Almost 4,000 designated recipients who have not yet received stimulus funding reported creating or saving more than 58,000 jobs, the report said. Another 9,200 recipients reported no job creation, despite receiving a total of $965 million.

As The Eye reported in Thursday's Post, the findings demonstrate the difficulty of counting jobs created by the stimulus. Some recipients may have misstated job numbers. Others may have decided to retain workers or hire new ones, knowing that they will receive stimulus funding in the near future.

But Devaney cautioned that potential mistakes aren't necessarily a bad thing.

"In reality, this data should serve in the long run as evidence of what transparency can achieve," he said. "In the past, this data would have been scrubbed from top to bottom before its release. The agencies would never have released the information until it was near perfect."

"You and the American public are now seeing what agencies have seen internally for years," Devaney said. "And what we are all seeing, at least following this first reporting period, is not particularly perfect. This raw form of unsanitized data may cause embarrassment to some agencies and recipients. My expectation is that any embarrassments will ensure self-correcting behavior and lead to better reporting in the future."

Republicans blasted the jobs figures, referring to the data as "propaganda" and "garbage," while others called the entire stimulus reporting process "disgusting."



Rep. Darrell Issa (R-Calif.)

"The administration continues to misread the economy, misunderstand the nature of economic growth, mislead the American people with faulty jobs claims and miss the steps this country needs to take to get or economy back on track," said Rep. Darrell Issa (R-Calif.). He was particularly critical of data suggesting that most of the job creation has been in the public sector.

"Schoolteachers are important, federal workers are important, but that's really where this has gone, rather than to the economic growth that this country is famous for," Issa said.

The task of defending the jobs numbers fell to Education Deputy Secretary Anthony W. Miller and Transportation Deputy Secretary John D. Porcari.

"There’s no question the Recovery Act is working as intended, putting Americans to work while making long-term investments in our infrastructure," Porcari said.

The administration has struggled to clearly define how to report new or saved jobs since it's difficult to know what role the funding played. Further complicating efforts, state and local governments have used much of the money to pay for temporary, part-time or seasonal work, making it unclear when and how such jobs should be reported.

In a conference call with reporters Thursday evening, White House stimulus adviser Ed DeSeve said the administration agrees with the GAO's recommendations and called the first quarterly reports "an honest effort on behalf of recipients."

DeSeve also defended the transparency of the recovery program, saying, "This has never been done before. You can't name another government program that has done this."

Leave your thoughts in the comments section below.