Friday Senate Line: Depressed Democrats?

Two new Quinnipiac University polls released Thursday in Ohio and Connecticut provided sobering news for Senate Democrats.

In Connecticut, Sen. Chris Dodd (D), whose numbers experienced something of a resurgence over the summer, trailed former Rep. Rob Simmons (R) by double digits in the latest Q poll.

Even against virtual unknowns like former World Wrestling Entertainment CEO Linda McMahon, state Sen. Sam Caliguri and former ambassador Tom Foley, Dodd is in a statistical dead heat -- evidence that Connecticut voters are looking for any alternative to the incumbent.

Need more evidence? Just 40 percent approve of the job Dodd is doing in Congress while just 39 percent say he deserves re-election next fall. Not good. At all.

The data in Ohio was less daunting for Democrats but still dispiriting. Former representative Rob Portman took 39 percent to 36 percent for Lt. Gov. Lee Fisher (D) in the Q poll, a significant reversal from a September survey when the Democrat led by double digits.

Since neither Portman nor Fisher is particularly well known at the moment, the turnaround is almost entirely attributable to a general decline in the Democratic brand in the state as evidenced by the majorities who disapprove of how President Obama is handling the economy and health care. (Gov. Ted Strickland is feeling the effects as well, having slipped into a dead heat with former Republican Rep. John Kasich.)

Both Connecticut and Ohio make the top five in this month's Line -- thanks to the anti-incumbent, anti-Washington sentiment coursing the country at the moment.

As always, the number one ranked contest is the most likely to switch parties in 2010. And, in a new wrinkle, the geniuses at the Post have figured out a way in which you can rank the top ten races on the Line yourself and then see how your choices compare to those of fellow Fixistas. Isn't technology great?

To the Line!

Coming onto the Line: Arkansas

Coming off the Line: Kentucky, Louisiana

10. Illinois (Democratic-controlled): The Democratic primary is shaping up to be a real fight between state Treasurer Lexi Giannoulias, Chicago Urban League President Cheryle Jackson and former Chicago Inspector General David Hoffman. Giannoulias is still the favorite but his path to the nomination is tougher today than it was a month ago. On the Republican side, Rep. Mark Kirk's ham-handed attempt to woo former Alaska governor Sarah Palin's endorsement shows he is worried about his right flank in a primary, although he is still a clear frontrunner for the GOP nomination. (Previous ranking: 9)

9. Pennsylvania (D): Democratic strategists are quick to dismiss polling that shows former representative Pat Toomey (R) competitive against either Sen. Arlen Specter or Rep. Joe Sestak who is challenging the incumbent in next year's primary. And, while it's true that Toomey has taken a series of positions in his past life as head of the Club for Growth that won't sit well with the Pennsylvania electorate, the primary between Specter and Sestak is going to be an absolute bloodbath -- meaning that making predictions about what will happen in its aftermath is dangerous. (Previous ranking: 10)

8. Arkansas (D): Sen. Blanche Lincoln (D) is getting squeezed between the demands of national liberals who want her to sign on to an up or down vote on the public option and the Republican bent of her state, which gave Obama just 39 percent in 2008. It's not a comfortable place to be -- particularly since polling data suggests Lincoln holds unimpressive leads over a series of unknown Republicans led by state Sen. Gilbert Baker. Lincoln, though, is bracing for a tough race with the national wind blowing directly in her face. And, she has demonstrated through four years in the House and more than a decade in the Senate that she knows how to find the sweet spot between the "D" after her name and conservative tendencies of Arkansas. This contest will almost certainly be her most competitive yet. (Previous ranking: N/A)

7. Colorado (D): Two key unanswered questions will determine how competitive this race is next year. First, can former state House speaker Andrew Romanoff raise enough money -- with the national party working to shut down all possible avenues of cash for him -- to ensure that Democratic primary voters know they have an alternative to appointed Sen. Michael Bennet? Second, how much personal money is former state senator Tom Wiens (R) willing to put into his primary campaign against former lieutenant governor Jane Norton (R)? (He has said he will put in $500,000. Double that and it could be a problem for Norton.) A Bennet-Norton matchup concerns Democratic strategists. And, it should. (Previous ranking: 6)

6. Missouri (Republican-controlled): No Senate race will be more affected by the national political atmospherics than this one. Secretary of State Robin Carnahan (D) is the superior candidate but Rep. Roy Blunt (R) is credible enough -- and will raise enough money -- to be in the game. Will Blunt's ties to Washington -- and his role as a former leader within the House GOP -- be the dominant narrative in the campaign? Or will it be Carnahan being forced to explain the policies of her national party on the economy and health care? (Previous ranking: 5)

5. Ohio (R): Portman is the class of this field -- an able, attractive candidate with real star power. But, he also has direct ties to the unpopular economic and trade policies of the Bush administration (he served as U.S. trade representative and head of the Office of Management and Budget) that Democrats are planning to exploit and will hurt him in the eyes of voters. Fisher is clearly vulnerable to a primary challenge from Secretary of State Jennifer Brunner but her repeated failures on the fundraising front suggest she simply doesn't have the tools to put together a real candidacy. Like Missouri, the national mood will play a serious role in this race too. Recent polling has to hearten Republicans on that front. (Previous ranking: 4)

4. New Hampshire (R): The recently announced candidacies of businessmen Bill Binnie (R) and Ovide Lamontagne (R) make former state attorney general Kelly Ayotte's march to the nomination more complicated. Binnie will likely position himself to Ayotte's left while Lamontagne is sure to cast himself as the only real conservative in the field. National Republicans believe Ayotte's early entrance into the race has allowed her to stake out a series of positions that will make it tough for Lamontagne to get to her ideological right. Still, this is a more real primary fight than it was a month ago. Meanwhile, Rep. Paul Hodes has a free run at the Democratic nod. (Previous ranking: 7)

3. Nevada (D): The current anti-incumbent climate in the country has to worry Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid who has built his career on his insider smarts. Reid's early television ads echo the sort of spots Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) ran in 2008; they are purely transactional -- designed to show voters what Reid gets for the state and what him not being in the Senate would mean. Reid's greatest advantage in this race, however, may not be his ability to bring back pork to the state but rather the quality (or lack thereof) of his Republican opponents. Former state party chairwoman Sue Lowden, the establishment pick for the nomination, flubbed a recent interview when she seemed to be joking about the placing of a bomb in Reid's car several decades ago. (Previous ranking: 3)

2. Delaware (D): State Attorney General Beau Biden (D) continues to play coy about whether he will run for his father's old seat and, if so, when he'll announce those plans. But, there seems very little doubt among Democrats that the only relevant question about Beau Biden's Senate plans is "when" not "if." Assuming Biden gets in sometime soon, it will set up an absolutely terrific race against Rep. Mike Castle (R) whose long record of electoral successes in the First State make him a formidable opponent. (Previous ranking: 1)

1. Connecticut (D): When Dodd's numbers tanked last spring, his allies insisted that there was still plenty of time for him to set things right with Connecticut voters. And, over the intervening months, he seemed to get his feet under him -- and his poll numbers improved as well. That's why the Q poll numbers are so troubling for Dodd as they not only show a significant regression for the incumbent but they also come less than one year before he has to face voters. Expect there to be increased pressure from party leaders -- behind the scenes, of course -- for Dodd to step aside in the wake of these poll numbers. If he does back down, state Attorney General Richard Blumenthal (D) would immediately step in and be a strong favorite. If Dodd keeps running, it's getting harder and harder to see how he wins. (Previous ranking: 2)