First Ad Tying Gulf Oil Spill With National Security, Launched by Vets with $1.5 Million Ad Buy

Vet Who Served in Clean-Up With Louisiana National Guard Says In Ad:



“When I signed on with the National Guard, I did it to help protect America from our enemies... Not to clean up an oil company’s mess here in the Gulf of Mexico.”



"If not now, when" is the time for a clean energy plan to be enacted?







WASHINGTON, DC – A massive $1.5 million television and web ad campaign launching this week makes the first connection between the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico and our national security. The ad campaign, sponsored by VoteVets.org, features a veteran who served with the Louisiana National Guard, cleaning up the massive spill, speaking from a polluted shoreline of Louisiana.



A version of the ad can be viewed here: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IOWffhbEn60. The full script and backup is below.



In the ad, Louisiana resident and veteran Evan Wolf makes the point that the necessity of using the Guard to help clean up efforts takes the military away from critical national security missions. Indeed, over 11,000 Guardsmen have been sent to the Gulf to help with the clean up.



In the ad, Wolf says, “When I signed on with the National Guard, I did it to help protect America from our enemies… Not to clean up an oil company’s mess here in the Gulf of Mexico… But America needs a new mission. Because whether it’s deep-drilling oil out here, or spending a billion dollars a day on oil from our enemies overseas, our dependence on oil is threatening our national security.”



"Some folks in Washington say now is not the time for clean American power. I got to ask - if not now, when?" he closes.



The television ad will run on national cable, with versions running in Louisiana, Florida, Maine, Washington, New Jersey, Illinois, and New Hampshire, that call on those states’ Senators to push clean legislation forward. Legislation pending in the Senate would cut America’s foreign oil dependence in half, expand the clean energy manufacturing tax credit by $5 billion and force offshore drilling rigs further offshore.

VoteVets.org is a pro-military organization of Iraq and Afghanistan veterans, dedicated to the destruction of terror networks around the world, with force when necessary. It primarily focuses on education and advocacy on issues of importance to the troops and veterans, and holding politicians accountable for their actions on these issues.



###