House Subcommittee Splits Northlake Mall Area Between LaVista Hills And Tucker
Georgia lawmakers have drawn a new map that potentially puts close to 100,000 DeKalb County residents into two new cities.

The map also splits one of the biggest areas of contention right down the middle: it gives part of the Northlake Mall commercial area to the LaVista Hills and part to Tucker.

Broadcast Version

A house subcommittee approved the map 3-1 with Atlanta Democrat Howard Mosby dissenting.

He thinks decisions on the boundaries of new cities should be worked out locally…and not by the state legislature. “If Tucker and LaVista Hills needs another three years to work this out, I think we should be able to allow them to do that,” said Mosby. “To freeze them into boundaries I think is unfortunate if they can come up with a new agreement.”

This is the second year state lawmakers have had to deal with this particular DeKalb cityhood issue. Cityhood efforts fell apart on the final day of the 2014 Georgia General Assembly session when proponents failed to agree which proposed city would get the Northlake area.

Preparing for the 2015 session, the proposed cities Tucker and LaVista Hills still failed to agree on boundaries, so legislators took over the process.

Lawrenceville Republican Buzz Brockway, who chairs the sub-committee, says the map released today is set in stone. “Our agreement to allow a shortened process means this line is frozen,” said Brockway, referring to the agreement to allow the proposed cities’ bills to move through the legislative process in just one session. Legislation in Georgia customarily moves through a two-year process.

Representatives from both the Tucker and LaVista Hills groups say they accept the new boundaries and plan to move forward. Both groups have a large task they need to complete quickly. Each has to raise money for a new feasibility study to determine whether the cities will still be financially viable with the new boundaries.

Click to download a full resolution PDF of the proposed LaVista Hills and Tucker map.