Blueprint for Prosperity: Governor Scott Walker Signs Over $500 Million in Tax Relief into Law
Cecil – Governor Scott Walker signed Special Session Senate Bill 1 today, at Horsens Homestead Farm. Following the bill signing, Governor Walker took the good news of the Blueprint for Prosperity to the communities of Eagle River and Eau Claire.

This is a great day for the hardworking taxpayers of Wisconsin. Signing this bill means lower property taxes and lower income taxes, in addition to our withholding changes which mean more money to take home in each paycheck. This is a stark contrast to the fiscal house we inherited. Now, instead of billion dollar budget deficits, we have a surplus – and today that money is on its way to the workers, parents, seniors, property owners, veterans, job creators, and others. You deserve to keep as much of your hard-earned money as possible – because after all, it is your money. Thanks to bipartisan support of our Blueprint for Prosperity, we are moving Wisconsin forward.

Special Session Senate Bill 1 – provides $406 million in property tax relief. A typical homeowner will see an actual reduction of more than $100 dollars on their next property tax bill.

Cuts income taxes by $98.6 million; these reductions are targeted toward the lowest income tax bracket. Savings for a typical family of four making $40,000, will be $58. No one will get a bigger savings than that.

In addition to the special session bill, Governor Walker’s Blueprint for Prosperity adjusts withholding for state income taxes by $322.6 million, so you can keep more of your hard-earned paycheck. Beginning in April, a typical family where both parents work will see an extra $58 in their paychecks in 2014.

Special Session Assembly Bill 1 is Act 145.

Governor Walker introduced the Blueprint for Prosperity in January 2014, following the news of a $911 million surplus stemming from higher than projected state revenue and sound fiscal management. The Blueprint for Prosperity provides significant tax relief for Wisconsinites and invests in worker training.

Act 139, which Governor Walker signed last week, increases funding to the Wisconsin Fast Forward program by $35.4 million. This investment provides workforce training grants to technical colleges, grants for collaborative projects among school districts, technical colleges, and businesses, as well as grants to enhance employment opportunities for persons with disabilities.

###