Tennessee General Assembly Legislation
Fiscal Summary

State Revenues - Net Decrease - $112,000 1st Year $68,000 2nd Year

Bill Summary

Present law requires applicants for driver licenses to provide their social security number; however, applicants who do not have, or who state that they were not issued, a social security number may be granted a driver license if the applicants submit an affidavit, under penalty of perjury, affirming that they were not issued a social security number.



This bill would require the above persons to provide documentation that the applicant is a citizen of the United States or documentation issued by the U.S. government establishing the applicant's legal presence in this country.



This bill would specify that the issuance of a driver license or permit to persons who are not United States citizens but who are otherwise legally present in this country is authorized. Such licenses or permits would be valid for the length of the person's stay or for one year if there is no definite end to the authorized period of stay. The license or permit may only be renewed upon presentation of documentation verifying that the person continues to be authorized to be in the country.



For persons who do submit the information required by this bill, the department of safety would issue a certificate of driving instead of a driver license or permit. The certificate would be valid for a period of one year. The certificate must be distinguishable from a driver license and must indicate that it is valid only for driving and not for identification.



ON MAY 10, 2004, THE SENATE ADOPTED AMENDMENTS #1 AND #2 AND PASSED SENATE BILL 3430, AS AMENDED.



AMENDMENT #1 allows the issuance of driver licenses for qualified applicants who are lawful permanent residents and creates different rules for certificates of driving depending upon whether the applicant is in the country legally. For legal aliens, the certificates would be issued for the length of the applicant's stay, but no less than one year and no longer than five years. For illegal aliens, the applicant would have to meet all requirements for licensure other than proving their legal status in the country, including compliance with the financial responsibility laws. Also, for illegal aliens, the certificates would be valid for one year. All certificates of driving would be required to state that they are not valid for identification. This amendment requires the fee for a driving certificate to be the same as that for a Class D driver license instead of prorating the fee.



AMENDMENT #2 removes this bill's requirement that applicants show proof of citizenship or lawful permanent residence status each time they renew a driver license, thereby limiting the times when such proof would be required to an application for initial issuance or reinstatement EXCEPT this amendment requires applicants who received an initial issuance since January 1, 2001 to provide such documentation on their first renewal date. This amendment also clarifies that all of the rules and regulations relevant to driver licenses, other than residency or citizenship requirements, would apply to any person who was issued a certificate of driving. Finally, this amendment authorizes the department of safety to promulgate public necessity rules in order to give this bill effect by July 1, 2004.