Locations
In 2015, Warrior Canine Connection broke ground on a new comprehensive Healing Quarters facility in Boyds, Maryland. Located 30 minutes from Walter Reed National Military Medical Center (WRNMMC), the new site has the potential to increase WCC’s ability to serve thousands more wounded Warriors and their families. The new Healing Quarters will also provide facilities necessary to expand the breeding program, thereby increasing the number of dogs available for new therapeutic service dog training program sites and service dog placement; expand internship opportunities for Veterans who wish to pursue careers in service dog training; provide critical facilities for wounded Warriors receiving service dogs; and allow for the expansion of other Animal Assisted Therapies and forms of integrative medicine, such as Equine Assisted Therapy and therapeutic farming and gardening.

Future Healing Quarters in Boyds, MD

National Intrepid Center of Excellence (NICoE) at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, MD

The National Intrepid Center of Excellence (NICoE) is a Department of Defense institute dedicated to providing cutting-edge evaluation, treatment planning, research and education for Service Members and their families dealing with the complex interactions of mild traumatic brain injury and psychological health conditions. Built with $65 million in private funds raised by the Intrepid Fallen Heroes Fund, the NICoE seeks to be an instrument of hope, healing, discovery and learning for Service Members recovering from TBI and PH conditions. The WCC Service Dog Training Therapy Program has operated at the NICoE since October 2011 and WCC dogs play many roles in supporting Warriors, their families, and staff wellness at NICoE. Learn more.

Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland

Walter Reed National Military Medical Center is among the Nation’s premier medical treatment facilities serving Service Members and their families. Warrior Canine Connection provides its program services to Warriors in the Behavioral Health and Brain Injury Treatment Programs. Warrior Canine Connection dogs also work with Warriors in the WRNMMC Warrior Transition Unit. Learn more.

Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Menlo Park, California

WCC began offering its service dog training therapy program at the Welcome Center, a new interdisciplinary facility on the Menlo Park Campus of the VA Palo Alto Health Care System in April 2013. The 10,000 square foot state-of-the-art Center provides alternative and complementary therapies to meet the diverse and complex needs of our Veterans. Learn More.

Warrior Transition Unit, Fort Belvoir, VA

WCC provides its purpose-bred Golden and Labrador Retrievers to the therapeutic service dog training program, which operates in conjunction with the Occupational Therapy department to provide animal-assisted therapy to recovering Soldiers.

Learn more.