Morning Examiner: Obama shutters Amber Alerts as government shutdown enters second week
Is President Obama so obsessed with making the government shutdown as painful as possible while putting the blame for it on Republicans that he will use missing children to score political points?

So it appears from something that escaped media notice until late Sunday when the Washington Examiner's Ashe Schow posted the news that the Amber Alerts website operated by the Department of Justice had been shut down.

Why? "Due to the lapse in federal funding," according to its website.

Justice Department officials declared only 16 percent of their workforce as non-essential at the outset of the shutdown and they know Congress will ultimately provide funding retroactive to Oct. 1, 2013, when the government is restored to full operation.

So somebody, somewhere in the Obama White House or the Obama Justice Department decided to shut down the Amber Alerts website, despite the system's long and stellar record of helping locate missing children.

That individual's identity will be learned sooner or later, but it happened on Barack Obama's watch and it's difficult to imagine anything else to say about it except "really, Mr. President?"

From Today's Washington Examiner:

Beltway Confidential: Amber Alert system down due to government shutdown.

Editorial: Britain's troubled National Health Service shows what Obamacare has in store for America.

Too Big To Manage: Federal departments and agencies can't account for employees doing union work on 'official time.'

Just Sign Here: Wounded vet blew whistle on out-of-control spending at federal agency, rewarded with pink slip, harassment.

Sean Higgins: Big Labor blocking employees from using right-to-work in states that recently enacted the law.

Hugh Hewitt: Of quarterbacks and singers on the trials of life.

James Jay Carafano: Obama is America's Commander-in-Cheap.

Gregory Kane: Obamacare is a prime example of government tyranny in action.

In Other News:

USA Today: Debt showdown rattles world markets.

The New York Times: Three win joint Nobel Prize in medicine.

The New York Times: Bloomberg to Booker's rescue while Tea Party insurgent Lonegan surges in late New Jersey Senate polls.

The Washington Post: Drug firms paid to attend FDA advisory panel meetings.

The Washington Post: Establishment GOP gathering forces for counter-attack on Tea Party.

New York Post: Downie on why reporters fear Team Obama.

Righty Playbook:

National Review Online: Happy Birthday, income tax!

The Weekly Standard: Boehner in charge.

Washington Free Beacon: Sex lecture on masturbation planned at public university.

Lefty Playbook:

Talking Points Memo: A timeline of budget fights in the Tea Party Congress.

Slate: The coming of the Kagan court.

Huffington Post: No debt deal without concessions from Obama.

CORRECTION: An earlier version of this article stated that the Amber Alerts System had been shut down. That was incorrect. The website was down, but Amber Alerts were still running. We regret the error.