EXCLUSIVE: Travis H. Brown on How Money Walks in or out of Your State
As many Americans breath a sigh of relief now that April 15 has come and gone, many are still burdened with the filing of looming state income taxes. The weight of the state income tax burden has been put into real terms with a new user-friendly, interactive mapping tool called How Money Walks. How Money Walks (also available as a mobile app) exposes the movement patterns of personal income among the states, mapping out the money moving from states with high income tax rates to states with littler or no income tax. Pulling its data solely from the Internal Revenue Service records from 1995-2010, How Money Walks empowers citizens with the comparative knowledge of income migration from county all the way to the state level. In an exclusive interview with creator and author Travis H. Brown, he highlights how How Money Walks is applicable to all Americans: Watchdog Wire: Your project How Money Walks maps the massive movement of $2 trillion in personal income taxes between the states from 1995-2010. How does $2 trillion walk and why did you select personal income tax as a useful metric for this migration?

Travis H. Brown: Personal income is our most mobile resource. Our disposable income, less the price placed upon work in the form of income taxes, feeds all of our potential to survive, consume, invest, and own assets. By making the Internal Revenue Service taxpayer file easy to navigate, the How Money Walks application allows taxpayers to see what has been happening within any community.

WDW: What compelled you to take on this massive integration of information and analysis? Why did you choose the medium of a digital mapping tool? Brown: The short answer is: we ourselves wanted to prove where our friends and families have been moving. Living in Saint Louis, Missouri, we knew that we were losing jobs and income to no-income-tax states such as Texas and Florida. Our company, Pelopidas, LLC (Greek for freedom-fighting), has previously developed patents on advanced ways to parse state & local legislative information. Because of our issue advocacy experience, we also knew a lot about drawing boundaries within and across Google maps for various Congressional Districts. We were pleased to be able to integrate this knowledge into a digital format that allows any smartphone user to apply the data quickly and precisely.

WDW: What state was gained and lost the most capital from people either moving to or leaving the state? What lessons can states learn from these examples?

Brown: Florida is far and away the state gaining the most adjusted gross income – an incredible $86 billion! Start spreading the news – New Yorkers are leaving big time as well. Our analysis shows a loss of $58 billion out of New York. The total swing across our 50 states is over $2 trillion in adjusted gross income – roughly equal to the Gross State Product of California. Taxpayers are fleeing high tax states, like California and Illinois. Taxpayers are flocking into states with lower income tax regimes, like Nevada, Washington, Texas, and Tennessee.

WDW: Why focus on state tax policy rather than federal?

Brown: Tax rate burdens at the federal level are fixed. Unless you leave the country, you are subjected to the same burdens, no matter where you live. However, the relative tax burdens on your personal income can vary greatly depending upon which state you call home. A young woman with a great career ahead of her has a much better lifetime earning potential if she works in Tennessee, instead of Maryland.

WDW: After mapping out the income data across the states, were there any patterns in the incomes that migrated to states with lower or no income tax?

Brown: Yes, a strong correlation is evident with those states with no personal income taxes. This migration evidence is consistent with long-term econometric analysis observed by Dr. Art Laffer over the last forty years. The nine states without a personal income tax gained collectively over $146 billion from 1995 to 2010. Conversely, the nine states with the highest personal income tax rates, or per capita income burdens, lost more than $100 billion. Taxpayers have been moving to places where their work is more likely to be rewarded in every paycheck.

WDW: In your book, you also break down your data by MSA (metropolitan statistical area). What insight do MSAs bring into the movement of money?

Brown: Cities, measured by MSA regions, were formed by citizens for their gains on trade. Large cities that have raised high taxes on these trades are losing a lot of income in several ways. First, cities are encouraging residents to live outside their borders, within their suburbs. Second, some cities, like Los Angeles and Chicago, are losing massive amounts of income to other states. Third, some cities like Austin, Dallas, or Houston are becoming the economic workhorses of their state.

WDW: Based on How Money Walks, is there hope for the taxpayer to still be a decision-maker in her or her own life?

Brown: The How Money Walks book, along with its application, was written precisely to convert personal knowledge into community power. Yes, I believe that hope springs eternal. However, economic freedom must be maintained by each generation.

WDW: Watchdog Wire is a citizen journalism news site that empowers information activists at the state and local level to report on what the establishment media isn’t focusing on. How can How Money Walks be used as a resource for citizen journalists and watchdogs?