Braley's position evolves on Keystone Pipeline
DAVENPORT | Democratic Senate candidate Bruce Braley has a complicated history with the Keystone XL Pipeline.

In 2012, he backed legislation aimed at moving forward on the pipeline that would carry Canadian crude to refineries on the Gulf Coast. He supported it again in a committee vote in April 2013, but a month later voted against the measure.

Those votes have vexed some in Iowa's environmental movement at times. And now, with the Waterloo Democrat trying to win the state's open U.S. Senate seat, his critics on the right are attacking him on the issue.

Just last week, Americans for Prosperity, a conservative advocacy group with ties to the billionaire industrialist Koch brothers, began airing a television ad pointing to the votes and accusing the congressman of having little regard for the jobs they say Keystone would create.

In an interview last week, Braley listed two prominent reasons for opposing Keystone: TransCanada, the company asking for permission to build the pipeline, won't commit to keeping the refined petroleum in the U.S. And he also added the same groups pushing for Keystone are the ones trying to kill renewable energy jobs by opposing such things as the wind energy tax credit.

With 70,000 renewable energy jobs in the state, he says, Keystone itself is a threat to those jobs.

"These jobs are at risk because Big Oil, which is pushing the Keystone Pipeline, wants to destroy their industry," Braley said.

Still, Braley has, at times, been supportive of the Keystone project, and not just with his votes. Some of his statements have closely mirrored what supporters of Keystone have said.

After a vote in the spring of 2012 to extend federal funding for transportation projects, which also included a provision to help expedite construction of the pipeline, Braley issued a statement saying: "the pipeline project is an opportunity to create thousands of jobs in Iowa and the Midwest and reduce our dependence on Middle Eastern oil."

Braley said last week the pipeline project would still create jobs, but he added, "the exact number of jobs created and the length of those jobs would be very hard to quantify."

Critics of the projects have complained for years that job projections for Keystone have been inflated.

Braley also said he now has doubts the Canadian crude would be used in the U.S.

Asked if those concerns also weren't there all along, Braley said, "part of my job is to constantly assess new information and look back at other information to see if some of the promises that were made are actually being fulfilled.”

Asked to specify, his staff cited an April 25, 2013, McClatchy article in which doubts were raised by Keystone critics about whether the oil would stay in the U.S.

A separate Wall Street Journal article on the topic also informed his judgment, staff said.

After Braley voted against Keystone in May 2013, his staff said, the congressman wanted to see the results of a National Academy of Science study that had not been completed yet.

The study, completed last summer, said the type of crude that would be shipped in the pipeline carried no more risk than other types of crude oil. But while backers of the pipeline hailed the results, opponents said the study was too narrow. And Braley said last week it did not change his overall impression of the project.

Republican critics are having none of the idea that new information is driving Braley's decisions.

They argue, instead, it's special interests such as San Francisco billionaire Tom Seyer changing Braley's votes.

Steyer, through his NexGen Climate PAC, has said he will spend millions of dollars on the Iowa Senate race, and it's already pointed to Republican Senate nominee Joni Ernst's doubts about climate science.

"He sold that vote off for what will be millions of dollars in advertising for his campaign," said Dave Kochel, a Republican strategist and prominent supporter of Ernst who also is an adviser to another conservative advocacy group that has aired ads critical of the congressman.

Braley has rejected the idea that politics are driving his votes. Instead, he says, the "best interests of Iowans" determine all his votes.