IAU Announcement: Pluto Reclassified as a Planet! (April Fools 2014)
Ladies and gentlemen, justice has finally been served. The International Astronomical Union (IAU) has just announced that Pluto has been reclassified as a major planet!

As many of you know, in 2006, the IAU made the infamous decision to demote everyone’s favorite planet to a “dwarf planet.” Their reasons were unscientific and contemptuous. Immediately after this 2006 announcement, the public exploded with outrage. There were innumerable campaigns launched that were aimed at ensuring that Pluto was reinstated as a planet. These met with no success.

Pluto was officially classified as a dwarf planet.

Yet, the public at large stood their ground and refused to give up. “When I was your age, Pluto was a planet,” and similar phrases swarmed across the internet. Now, it seems that these efforts have not been in vain.

After years of deliberation, yesterday, the IAU announced in a press release that they have reclassified the icy world, and upgraded Pluto back to it’s proper standing as a planet. “We simply underestimated the public’s attachment to Pluto. We realized our error shortly after the decision came down to demote it,” said Dr. Amelia Kohler, professor at the Institute of Planetary Studies and head of the IAU’s planetary classification and experimental nomenclature task force. “We didn’t think anyone would really care if a little clump of ice and rock on the outskirts of the solar system was reclassified. Clearly, we were wrong.”

In addition to Pluto’s reclassification, Dr. Kohler has also proposed that the IAU creates a new category of planet called a “hyper-planet,” and it has also proposed that Pluto be made an honorary member of this new planetary class. “In all honesty, we feel bad for the way we treated Pluto and, more importantly, all those that cared about it so greatly- the public showed us our error. Hopefully, the new class of planet will be created without a hitch, and Pluto will be added as the first member. It’s only fair.”

The IAU is expected to vote on the creation of the new category on Friday.

*This article was posted for April Fools day, 2014. Hopefully, you enjoyed reading it as much as we enjoyed writing it.*