Bill allowing insurers to raise rates likely to get vetoed by Crist
By Julie Patel May 20, 2010 02:30 PM

Gov. Charlie Crist said he's leaning toward vetoing a property insurance bill that would, among other things, reduce costs for insurers and make it easier for them to raise rates.

The likelihood he'd sign the bill is "not great because of that last part," Crist told the Sun Sentinel editorial board today.

He said he would hear out Insurance Commissioner Kevin McCarty, who supports the measure, because he has "enormous respect" for him.

Insurance companies and Chief Financial Officer Alex Sink have criticized the state's approach -- pushed by Crist -- the past few years of expanding state insurance programs to help lower premiums. They say the approach could leave the state and private insurers in a position of not being able to pay claims if a hurricane like the kind that hits once every 100 years strikes.

"To their great credit, they're very effective advocates," Crist said of insurers. "They play on fear a lot and talk about, 'It's going to be a terrible day.'"

He said if a major hurricane hits, the federal government will help and the state can charge fees to offset deficits in state insurance pools.

"But what the industry wants to do...They want to charge you every single year as though the 1-in-100-year storm hits every year," he said. "The approach that we have taken and in order to be able to reduce your rates is say, 'We won't do that to you unless that happens.' They want to do that to you regardless if it happens because they want more money in their account."

Crist said he would push for a national catastrophe fund for hurricanes and other disasters -- much like the federal flood insurance program -- if he's elected Senator.

Insurance industry represenatives note that regulators are already approving rate increases so the bill won't make much, if any, difference on rates. McCarty's office approved more than 100 statewide average residential property insurance rate hikes since last year and South Florida homeowners say they're already starting to see rates rise -- dramatically in some cases.

Gail Bierworth, in Lighthouse Point, wrote us in March to say her State Farm premium increased by 83 percent, from $3,395 to $6,213.73. She then went back and forth with her insurance agent and managed to keep the premium the same by increasing her deductible by $2,000.

Have you experienced something similar? Like Bierworth, if your insurer notified you that it will increase your premium and you want to let us know, you can email me or call 954-356-4667.

Photo by Sun Sentinel photographer Sarah Dussault. Gov. Charlie Crist speaks to the editorial board and reporters.