Gov. Rick Scott, Seminole Tribe point to Tampa expansion if gaming compact is approved
HOLLYWOOD, Fla. — Gov. Rick Scott and the Seminole Tribe of Florida sought Monday to increase pressure on state lawmakers to approve a gambling deal with a proposed $1.8 billion expansion they said would create thousands of jobs at its Tampa and Hollywood casinos.

Scott and Seminole Chairman James Billie signed the seven-year compact in December, but it has languished in the state Legislature's annual session. Scott, Billie and other tribe officials met Monday at the Seminoles' Hollywood headquarters to make a renewed push for approval with the expansion plan as a sweetener.

"I think this is the biggest compact ever signed in this country," Scott said. "I think it's fair to the state of Florida and it's fair to the Seminoles."

At Seminole Hard Rock Tampa, a second 500-room hotel tower would be built, as well as a new Japanese restaurant, coffee and lobby bars, and five new retail stores.

The existing Hard Rock Cafe in Tampa would be remodeled with a new banquet and meeting facility built to accommodate 1,500 to 2,000 guests. And a helipad would be added for helicopter landings.

Altogether the expansion at its Tampa and Hollywood locations would create more than 4,800 permanent full-time jobs and more than 14,500 construction jobs, the tribe said.

But Seminole Gaming CEO James Allen said the tribe needs the certainty of the proposed compact to move forward, and noted that the tribe had kept its promises under the previous compact, including paying Florida more than $1 billion.

The tribe first indicated last year that it would expand the two casinos if a gambling compact is approved.

The deal signed by Scott would provide Florida $3 billion over seven years in exchange for limits on the tribe's competition and other guarantees, including allowing it to operate table games such as roulette and craps at its seven casinos. The deal also allows for the addition of slot machines at a Palm Beach County dog track, leaves an opening for another casino in Miami-Dade, and would allow existing tracks in that county and in Broward to eventually add blackjack tables.

So far, the compact has not been voted on by any Florida House or Senate committees. Various gambling and anti-gambling interests are likely to suggest changes, which Scott would have to approve for it to become law.

"We need the support of the governor in order to move this. I will tell you, we are optimistic," Allen said.

The governor also heard Monday from several tribal members and casino facility employees who described how the previous compact, approved in 2010, helped them economically and warned of job losses if the new one is not approved, particularly for table games employees. There are about 3,500 such employees now, according to the tribe.

A further complication is a federal lawsuit filed in October by the tribe against the state after a key portion of the previous compact expired. That lawsuit, set for trial in July in Tallahassee, would decide whether the Seminoles can continue to have blackjack tables.

In addition to the Tampa growth, the expansion includes plans for an electric-guitar-shaped, 800-room hotel at the Seminole Hard Rock Hollywood.

Miami Herald staff writer Chabeli Herrera contributed to this report.