Westmoreland Votes to Examine Burdensome, Onerous Regulations That Stifle Economic Growth

Washington, Feb 11 -

WASHINGTON, D.C. – Today, Congressman Westmoreland joined a bipartisan group of his colleagues to pass H.Res. 72, a House resolution directing ten committees to examine regulations, executive and agency orders, and other administrative actions or procedures and determine if they do more harm than good.

“Over the last two years, the federal government has gotten out of control,” stated Westmoreland. “I mean, the government actually regulates how large holes in Swiss cheese can be. That’s just absurd. More government does not mean better government. What it does mean is duplicative and unnecessary federal regulations that do nothing more than hinder economic growth.”

The ten committees charged with the review include the Financial Services Committee Congressman Westmoreland serves on. Chairman Spencer Bachus (AL-06) has announced the committee will begin its focus on the impact of the controversial Dodd-Frank bill signed into law last year. The legislation was a knee-jerk reaction to the problems in the financial industry that contributed to the economic downturn in 2008.

“Changes were necessary to prevent the crisis the financial industry experienced in 2008, but the dramatic over-regulation of private industry like we got in Dodd-Frank was not the change we needed,” stated Westmoreland. “This one bill alone created 300 new federal rules and regulations. And these new rules and regulations will certainly limit access to credit for small businesses and consumers and divert companies’ resources from expanding and creating jobs to complying with these new onerous regulations. I’m looking forward to working with my Financial Services Committee colleagues to successfully root out burdensome and unnecessary federal regulations.”

Because this bill was a House resolution, it does not need to be passed by the Senate or signed by the president to become effective. Committees are expected to begin their investigation as soon as possible.