Wisconsin Department of Transportation WisDOT applies for federal Infrastructure For Rebuilding America Grant
Content_Area1

Grant to fund final phase of the I-94 North-South expansion project

Release date: October 31, 2017

Today, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WisDOT) applied for the U.S. Department of Transportation 2017-18 Infrastructure For Rebuilding America (INFRA) grant. WisDOT is seeking a grant to support the construction of a vital portion of the I-94 North-South expansion project that encompasses Foxconn’s manufacturing development and some of Wisconsin’s other fast-growing employers. The INFRA grant will leverage more than $13 billion in private and public investment making Foxconn the largest single economic development project in the history of Wisconsin and the largest corporate attraction project in United States history, as measured by jobs.

“The I-94 North-South corridor plays a key role in the local and regional economy of southeast Wisconsin,” said Dave Ross, secretary for the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. “With new businesses investing in this region such as Foxconn, Amazon, Uline and Northwestern Mutual, WisDOT is looking to ensure that the transportation of goods and passengers throughout this region meets business and individual needs.”

The I-94 North-South expansion project stretches 36 miles from the city of Milwaukee past the Wisconsin/Illinois state line. Manufacturers and shippers move more than $90 billion in goods to and from businesses in this corridor to major national and international markets. The surrounding economic area in southeast Wisconsin is a major contributor to the state’s manufacturing sector, which is home to the second highest percentage of manufacturing employment among all U.S. states.

WisDOT is seeking an INFRA grant, which would allow for the completion of the I-94 North-South project by 2021, rather than 2032, to support the large-scale development that will have very positive impacts on region and state economies. The final phase is needed to complete the remaining project, improve safety, and to facilitate existing and projected traffic. The completed North-South project will provide safe and efficient travel to help facilitate new job and economic development opportunities for the region.

For more information, contact:

Office of Public Affairs

608-266-3581, opa.exec@dot.wi.gov