Interactive data: Job growth under Scott Walker
Gov. Scott Walker famously promised during his 2010 campaign that he would bring 250,000 new private-sector jobs to Wisconsin by the end of his first term. He fell well short, but we're still keeping track of how the state's job growth compares to that of its neighbors and the nation.

Here are explanations of the industry sectors included:

Total Nonfarm

Sum of 11 industry sectors. Jobs in the farming industry can fluctuate and therefore are excluded.

Total Private

All nonfarm jobs except those in government.

Mining and Logging

Jobs in agriculture, forestry, fishing, hunting, mining, quarrying and oil and gas extraction.

Construction

Jobs in the construction of buildings or engineering products, including highways and utility systems.

Manufacturing

Jobs in the mechanical, physical or chemical transformation of materials, substances or components into new products.

Manufacturing » Durable Goods

A subsector of Manufacturing, jobs that produce goods expected to last more than three years such as cars, furniture and construction materials.

Manufacturing » Non-Durable Goods

A subsector of Manufacturing, jobs that produce goods expected to last three years or less such as food and clothing.

Trade, Transportation and Utilities

Jobs involving the sale of merchandise, transportation of passengers and cargo and utilities service.

Trade, Transportation and Utilities » Wholesale Trade

A subsector of Trade, Transportation and Utilities, jobs that are involved in the intermediate step of the distribution of merchandise, selling to other businesses.

Trade, Transportation and Utilities » Retail Trade

A subsector of Trade, Transportation and Utilities, jobs that are involved in the final step of the distribution of merchandise, selling in small quantities to the general public.

Trade, Transportation and Utilities » Transportation and Utilities

A subsector of Trade, Transportation and Utilities, jobs that are involved in transportation of passengers and cargo or jobs in electric power, natural gas, steam supply, water supply and sewage removal.

Information

Jobs in producing and distributing information and cultural products, providing the means to transmit or distribute these products as well as data or communications, and processing data.

Financial Activities

Jobs involved in financial transactions or the sale, rent or lease of property.

Financial Activities » Real Estate and Rental and Leasing

A subsector of Financial Activities, jobs involved in the sale, rent or lease of real estate or other property.

Professional and Business Services

Jobs that provide services to clients.

Professional and Business Services » Professional, Scientific and Technical Services

A subsector of Professional and Business Services, jobs that specialize in performing professional, scientific or technical services for others.

Professional and Business Services » Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services

A subsector of Professional and Business Services, jobs that support the day-to-day activities of other organizations.

Education and Health Services

Jobs in establishments that provide instruction and training or health care and social assistance.

Education and Health Services » Educational Services

A subsector of Education and Health Services, jobs in establishments that provide instruction and training, either public or private.

Education and Health Services » Health Care and Social Assistance

A subsector of Education and Health Services, jobs in establishments that provide health care and social assistance for individuals.

Leisure and Hospitality

Jobs in providing services to meet cultural, entertainment and recreational interests, lodging or food and beverage for immediate consumption.

Leisure and Hospitality » Arts, Entertainment and Recreation

A subsector of Leisure and Hospitality, jobs in providing services to meet cultural, entertainment and recreational interests.

Leisure and Hospitality » Accommodation and Food Services

A subsector of Leisure and Hospitality, jobs in establishments that provide lodging or food-and-beverage service for immediate consumption.

Other Services

Jobs in areas not covered by other sectors and not in public administration.

Government

Jobs in establishments of federal, state and local governments that manage public programs and have ruling authority.

Government » Federal Government

A subsector of Government, jobs in the executive branch of the federal government.

Government » State Government

A subsector of Government, jobs in state governments.

Government » Local Government

A subsector of Government, jobs in local governments.