Liberal group says Brad Schimel 'trying to have it both ways' on abortion laws : Ct
A liberal advocacy group contends that Brad Schimel, the Republican candidate for attorney general, has voiced conflicting intentions regarding his approach to laws struck down by the courts.

During a visit to the Wisconsin State Journal's editorial board, Schimel said he would defend laws passed by the state Legislature or by voters and would work with the Legislature to ensure the laws on the books matched up with court rulings.

"My default position is always, I’ll defend the law," Schimel told the State Journal. "And then once the court tells us what the answer is, whether it’s constitutional or not, when they interpret it, as the judicial branch does, then we’ll respect their decision. And we may have to go then back ... and work with the Legislature and perhaps recraft the law to make sure that parts that were struck down are removed."

But the liberal One Wisconsin Now says that statement conflicts with a legal document Schimel signed two years ago, supporting a plan to make abortion illegal in Wisconsin in nearly every case.

Schimel is one of several attorneys who signed a legal white paper produced by Wisconsin Right to Life in 2012, indicating agreement "with the content and conclusions" of the paper. The paper argues for keeping the state's criminal abortion ban on the books and enforcing it immediately if Roe v. Wade were to be overturned.

The law, which makes abortion a crime unless two doctors have ruled the woman's life is in danger, predates the Roe decision. As a result of the 1973 U.S. Supreme Court decision, Wisconsin's ban cannot be enforced.

The Wisconsin Right to Life paper concludes that, should the Supreme Court overturn Roe, the most effective way to make abortion illegal in Wisconsin is to keep this statute on the books, rather than passing a personhood amendment. A personhood law would effectively halt all abortions and could also make some forms of birth control illegal.

One Wisconsin Now released the paper last week to draw attention to Schimel's position on abortion and Democrats attacked Schimel for his involvement.

Asked whether Schimel's signature on the white paper conflicts with what he told the editorial board — specifically, that he believes in working with the Legislature to make sure the laws on the books match up with what the courts have decided — campaign manager Johnny Koremenos pointed to a press release the campaign sent last week in response to the Democrats' criticism.

In it, Koremenos said Democratic candidate Susan Happ and her supporters are "desperate," and said Happ's allies are lying.

"An examination of Brad’s record, interviews during this race and statements during debates and public appearances prove that they are lying," Koremenos said in a statement. "Happ's allies have said 'Schimel endorses the enforcement of the 1955 criminal abortion statute.' That is a lie."

The white paper acknowledges that the criminal abortion statute cannot be enforced because of the Roe v. Wade ruling, Koremenos said.

"Brad is on record saying it is the job of the attorney general to enforce Wisconsin laws unless there is a definitive court ruling that deems the law unconstitutional. Such is the case with the 1955 statute," he said.

In an Oct. 24 interview with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, Schimel said, "I respect the law of the land, and the law of the land is Roe v. Wade. That’s all there is to that. I’m pro-life and I make no apologies for that."

One Wisconsin Now research director Jenni Dye said Schimel's statements, juxtaposed with his signature on the paper, indicate that he's playing politics.

"Brad Schimel has been caught in a lie, and he seems to be having trouble deciding who to admit he is lying to," Dye said. "He is on the record as endorsing an extremist approach to abortion, a plan to enforce Wisconsin's criminal abortion statute, even in cases of rape and incest. Now he is also quoted claiming he would work with the Legislature to repeal unconstitutional laws, like this one. Both can't possibly be true. Schimel is trying to have it both ways, but his position is documented in black and white. Instead of taking responsibility for his beliefs, he is trying to hide his extreme position in the days before an election."

According to the Wisconsin Right to Life paper, written in 2012, the pro-life movement sees "the real prospect" that Roe v. Wade could be struck down within seven to 10 years.

Wisconsin is one of about 15 states that never repealed their near-total criminal bans on abortion, deemed unconstitutional under Roe v. Wade.

"Along with several other states, Wisconsin enjoys the enviable position of being able to immediately protect unborn children once Roe is eliminated," the paper reads.

It concludes that the personhood amendment would result in an "uncertain future," and recommends preserving the 1955 statute. The only thing keeping the law from being enforced is the Supreme Court decision, it says.