Tax — no tax — tax
Hernando Today > News



Tax — no tax — tax

It appears as if we, the American people, are under a constant barrage of insidious attempts to take away not only our freedom but also our fortunes, however small they may be.

The president, in numerous speeches, has declared that anyone making less than $250,000 would not be subject to any new taxes. Well, it seems the great prevaricator has once again slipped one passed us — or almost, I should say correctly, for it has not happened yet.

The "O" team's financial wing is recommending a financial transaction tax. The Bill HR-4646 introduced by U.S. Rep. Peter DeFazio, D-Oregon, and Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, proposes to apply a 1 percent tax on all transactions at any financial institution, i.e. banks, credit unions, etc. This means that any deposit one makes or moves around in their account (transfers) will have a 1 percent tax charged against those transactions.

If your paycheck or your Social Security check is a direct deposit, there will be a 1 percent tax on them. Even if you make a cash deposit, there will be a 1 percent tax levied on that transaction. The American people will have to do better when they listen to an Elmer Gantry politician who thinks we have imbibed the Kool-Aid of his rhetoric like many of his mindless supporters.

Our chance will come on Nov. 2 to send a message loud and clear that we oppose all of the freedom-limiting, money-grabbing proposals supported by this administration.

Moving to another hypocritical position taken by the administration is the financing of oil exploration off the coast of Brazil.

Brazil has a state-owned oil company Petrobras that will be the recipient of $2 billion-plus American dollars from the U.S. Export-Import Bank. It seems rather odd that given the financial state of our Treasury Department that the U.S. would commit to this foreign corporate welfare for one of the biggest firms in the hemisphere. There has, according to a Wall Street Journal report, been a letter of preliminary commitment issued. While this is not a new and breaking event, I feel it's noteworthy to remind the American people that while we cannot drill offshore, our government will finance a foreign country to do just that.

The eventual recipient of our largess will be China, as they have allegedly signed agreements to purchase any oil that is taken from the Tupi oil fields; and we paid for it. Another interesting fact to be checked out is that billionaire George Soros, one of Obama's biggest financial supporters, is supposedly one of the biggest shareholders in Petrobras.

When will "we the people" raise our collective voices and demand from our elected representatives in Congress that they start acting in our interest and for the good of the United States of America?

They took an oath to support and defend our Constitution, which they are obviously not doing. Case in point, Sen. Max Baucus, D-Mont., said at a town meeting, captured on video tape, "Do you people expect me to read the bill (ObamaCare) that is so many pages and written in legalese? I leave that for the experts."

Well, Sen. Baucus, then we don't need the likes of you. We can hire our own experts.

Of course, we expect you to read the bill. What kind of half-witted excuse is that?

God save the Republic from fools like him.

Len Tria lives in Spring Hill and is a former Hernando County commissioner.