Florio Perrucci Steinhardt & Fader
Ravinder S. Bhalla is a Partner in the Rochelle Park office at Florio Perrucci Steinhart & Fader, LLC. Ravi is an experienced federal and state court litigator in the areas of local government law, employment law, complex civil litigation, and criminal defense law. Ravi also serves as Chair of the Firm’s Diversity and Inclusion Committee and is a recognized leader in diversity and social justice issues both in New Jersey and nationwide.

Ravi’s experience in local government, public entity and municipal law includes the representation of various municipalities, boards, agencies, counties and related public bodies in a broad range of issues and challenges confronting public employees and officials. He has provided both legal counsel and litigation services to various mayors, council members, governing bodies and municipal and county agencies in the areas of interpretation of the Faulkner Act, public contracting and bidding matters, and the respective rights, obligations and limitations upon certain municipal officials in the execution of their duties. Ravi has also represented municipalities in complex redevelopment and land use matters, employment law and police litigation. As a municipal official himself, serving as a council member and a planning board member in his home town, Ravi brings a unique perspective and keen sensitivity to the need for local government officials to have the benefit of competent, diligent and strong legal counsel.

Ravi’s expertise in complex civil litigation includes the successful handling of a variety of matters in the areas of trademark litigation, energy law, corporate disputes, securities litigation and investigations before the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, and land use and zoning litigation on behalf of private corporations. Ravi’s expertise in employment law includes counseling employees and employers in the area of compliance with federal and state anti-discrimination laws, internal investigations of complaints of workplace discrimination, investigations of Title VII claims and proceedings before the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and litigation brought under federal and state anti-discrimination laws.

During this time, Ravi had tried several cases to verdict in the areas of corporate disputes, complex environmental criminal litigation, and discrimination law, including the successful trial of a corporate executive charged with criminal violations of the New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act. In 2009, Ravi was named a Rising Star by New Jersey Super Lawyers Magazine & New Jersey Monthly.

Ravi began his career in Newark, NJ where he gained trial experience and handled matters in the areas of white-collar criminal defense, complex civil litigation, and cutting-edge civil rights litigation. Ravi earned national recognition in the New York Times for his legal advocacy after suffering a violation of his own constitutional and civil rights during a jail visit to a client. The incident motivated Ravi to lead a successful campaign to reform the federal government’s visitation policies at correctional facilities nationwide. Ravi also earned national recognition for serving as lead counsel in a successful challenge to the New York Police Department’s policies that restricted his client’s religious practice as a Sikh American officer.

Over the years, Ravi has been recognized for his public interest advocacy on behalf of Asian Americans and other minorities, receiving the Thurgood Marshall Award from Muslim Advocates, the Professional Achievement Award from the Asian Pacific American Legal Association of New Jersey, the Community Leadership Award from Asian Americans for Equality, and the Community Service Award from the Sikh American Chamber of Commerce. Ravi currently serves as Co-Chair of the Diversity and Inclusion Committee of the New Jersey Association for Justice’s employment section. Most recently, Ravi was appointed as a Trustee of the Association of the Federal Bar of New Jersey, the premiere federal bar association in the State of New Jersey.

Ravi is a member of the Association of the Federal Bar of New Jersey, the New Jersey Association for Justice, Asian Pacific American Lawyers of New Jersey, and the South Asian Bar Association of New Jersey.

Ravi received his undergraduate B.A. degree from the University of California at Berkeley in Political Psychology, a Masters of Science from the London School of Economics in Public Administration and Public Policy, and a Juris Doctorate degree from the Tulane University School of Law in New Orleans, Louisiana.

Ravi lives in Hoboken, NJ with his wife and two children, where he remains active in the community, serving as a Hoboken City Councilman-at-Large since 2009. Ravi also served as Hoboken’s City Council President from 2011-2012 and in 2015, as Council Vice-President from 2010-2011, and as Chairman of the Hoboken Democratic Party from 2010-2011.