Letters to the Editor
By Staff Reports | Times-Dispatch

Published: October 30, 2010





Haake's Low Turnout Assumption Astounds

Editor, Times-Dispatch: The arrogance of the Chesterfield registrar, Lawrence Haake, is astounding in the midst of midterm elections. Haake, responding to the slow operation of Virginia's election and registration information system (VERIS), an operation of VITA, said that the slow operation of the system would not have an impact because the expected "turnout will not be that great."

Haake implies that a large turnout could adversely affect tabulation of election results. Despite this implication, should not Haake and every election official encourage all registered voters to vote on Tuesday -- maximizing turnout rather than hoping for something lesser, thus minimizing the impact of an inadequate VERIS?

I have long been an advocate of electronic and Internet voting -- provided security and verification measures exist. The ongoing problems with VITA are complex and need to be resolved soon to ensure the smooth and efficient operation of all state agencies. However, election officials should not use VITA/VERIS deficiencies to justify a low voter turnout. With elections just a few days away, registrars should have alternative plans in place should voter turnout exceed expectations.

All voters should vote; their vote will be counted one way or another.

John Trinkle.

Troy.

Times-Dispatch : During a recent appearance on the Jon Stewart show, I was less than clear in a response to a question about the reckless spending that has occurred in Washington during the of the Obama administration's first 20 months. [Editors' note: The statement earned a "pants on fire" rating from PolitiFactVirginia.] I appreciate the opportunity to clarify my remarks.

In attempting to explain the reckless spending spree of President Obama and Speaker Pelosi, I said that those controlling Washington have "taken advantage of a crisis in late 2008 and early 2009 and spent more money than this country has spent in the last 200 years combined." What I meant to say was that the budget submitted by Obama will add more to the debt than the outstanding debt of the previous 43 presidents combined.

The fact is that after assuming office, several of Obama's first actions as president focused on increasing government spending. In addition to the stimulus, which with interest cost taxpayers approximately $1 trillion, the eighth bill that the president signed into law was an enormous omnibus spending bill costing over $400 billion, an increase of $29 billion or 7.7 percent.

I regret the error and any confusion it may have caused, but hope that residents of the commonwealth look at the broader point, which is that federal spending is out of control. America is at a crossroads, and the decisions we make today will determine the type of country that we pass on to our children. Eric Cantor, U.S. House of Representatives, 7th District.

Richmond.



No Food Fights With League in Charge

Editor, Times-Dispatch: It was demeaning to the sponsors of the 7th Congressional District Candidates Forum for Eric Cantor to say that their event would have been "a platform for a food fight." While there is always a risk in holding an event that has not been staged and rehearsed in advance, the League of Women Voters and the Richmond First Club made every effort to promote a civil discussion of the issues at the forum held on Oct. 11, 2010.

The two participating candidates had signed a list of rules for the proceeding that not only forbade whistles and catcalls, but also requested that the audience hold its applause until the end of the program. The Henrico police had been notified that a political gathering was to take place at the Tuckahoe branch of the Henrico Public Library. No campaign literature, much less men in chicken suits, were allowed inside the building. If the event had turned ugly (as some political meetings do), it would have been canceled.

When the forum actually took place, the rules -- read to the audience by the respected moderator Lou Dean -- were accepted and adhered to by the audience. The candidates -- both perfect gentlemen -- concentrated on discussing the issues. The forum -- a civil exchange of ideas which helped the audience understand each candidate's political philosophy and position on specific issues -- fulfilled the sponsors' goals.

It would have been more exciting if the incumbent had been present, but a food fight? Not while the League of Women Voters was in charge. Virginia Cowles,