Latest election controversy brewing over idea to ferret out non-citizen voters : Ct
It’s a program a majority of Wisconsin residents will never use and probably know little about, yet it’s at the center of the latest hot-button, voter-related issue to hit Wisconsin.

Known as the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements program, or SAVE for short, the federal search engine housed under the Department of Homeland Security allows government officials from across the country to search 19 federal databases for foreign citizens who are in the country legally.

That includes those in the country temporarily or those permanently here and on a path to full citizenship but not yet eligible to vote.

Now, under the suggestion of Republican state Sen. Mary Lazich of New Berlin, the SAVE program could be used to try to determine if a person who voted in Wisconsin did so illegally as a non-citizen.

Just how far her proposal will get remains unclear. Lazich will be the chair of the Senate Elections and Urban Affairs Committee when the new session begins in January, giving her ample opportunity to draft and introduce a bill.

Her office did not return a request for comment Wednesday on whether this was her intent.

A spokesman for Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald, R-Juneau, did leave open the possibility of the party supporting Lazich’s proposal, though, saying it will be easier to gauge the plan’s popularity after the Republican caucus meets to draft its legislative agenda.

“We are happy to work with Sen. Lazich’s office to take a look at it,” said Fitzgerald spokesman Tom Evenson. “But at this point it’s too early to speak with any certainty on it.”

Here’s how Lazich’s proposal would work: Those who apply for a driver’s license but are not citizens receive an alien verification number, which is entered into the SAVE program. Names on the state's voter rolls could be checked against the Department of Motor Vehicles' records and those with an alien number could be run through the SAVE program, which could identify persons who are non-citizens who voted illegally.

“It’s a best practice to protect the integrity of every vote,” Lazich told me outside the Government Accountability Board meeting Tuesday, where members were being briefed on a staff-prepared, 29-page report on the potential use of the SAVE program in Wisconsin.

“Initially, the idea is to run the entire statewide voter list against a list of people who have told the DMV they have an alien verification number,” says Reid Magney, a GAB spokesman. “If we find there are any matches, we then sit down at the computer, go to the SAVE program and put in that (person’s) number. That search will then tell you that person’s (citizenship) status or what that person’s status may be.”

In the future, anyone who registers to vote would be checked to see if they have an alien number, Magney says.

Colorado, Florida and five counties in Arizona use the federal SAVE program to verify the citizenship of its voters. Iowa, Georgia, North Carolina and Virginia are instituting the review process; Ohio and Texas are exploring the issue.

Only U.S. citizens can vote, so finding someone’s name in the SAVE program could suggest an illegal vote has been cast. It is a felony to vote illegally or provide false information on a registration form.

However, the SAVE program is far from foolproof. Andrea Kaminski, executive director of the League of Women Voters of Wisconsin, says persons may be wrongly accused of voting illegally simply because they share the same name as a non-citizen.

“It is part of this philosophy that a voter is guilty until proven innocent,” Kaminski says.

A person who has gained full citizenship and voting rights might still be found in the SAVE program because his name has yet to be purged from the system.

The state Department of Motor Vehicles began participating in the SAVE program in 2007. According to a Government Accountability Board report, 86,908 people in Wisconsin with a DMV-issued license or ID card have an alien verification number.

Of those, 9,430 are temporary visitors and 77,478 are permanent residents.

“At the time they were issued a license or ID card, none of those people were eligible to vote because they were not U.S. citizens,” Magney says. “What we do not know is whether any of those people have since become U.S. citizens, which would make them eligible to vote, assuming they were not disqualified for some other reason, such as a felony conviction.”

Because of the potential for incorrectly identifying individuals or not having their updated and accurate citizenship status, the Department of Homeland Security has specific guidelines that need to be followed by states or other agencies that use the SAVE program.

The goal of the guidelines is to verify the person’s identity and citizenship status before accusing anyone of voting illegally.

To date, 1,400 names have been submitted in Colorado to the SAVE program, with 151 names coming back as non-citizens. According to the GAB staff report, an undisclosed number of those cases are in the appeals process and still pending.

In Florida, 2,600 voter names were compared to those in the SAVE program, with 106 coming back as non-citizens. According to the GAB report, an undisclosed number of those have been referred to country clerks across that state and are awaiting a final decision.

In most states where the SAVE program is used, the names of non-citizens are removed from the voter lists and their information sent to prosecutors.

Scot Ross, executive director of the liberal advocacy group One Wisconsin Now, calls Lazich’s “racist” attempt to create a “minority purge list” the latest attack on the right to vote by Wisconsin Republicans.

He also cites the voter ID bill, the proposal to end election day registration, and a partisan attempt to restructure the nonpartisan GAB.

“Government should be protecting and expanding our rights,” Ross says. “The only voter fraud is partisans like Lazich trying to suppress legal voters to achieve her political goals.”

Lazich says Ross’ assertion that she is racist is “a malicious attack that is uncalled for.” She insists her commitment is to “election integrity.”

GAB members were told it would cost $642,000 annually to run the program for five years, in addition to a $544,000 startup cost. The Legislature would need to change state law for the program to be used in Wisconsin.