School Board member Mary Burke says tax hike should not exceed rate of inflation : Ct
The Madison School Board should limit the school property tax hike to the rate of inflation next year, even if that means scaling back a proposed 1.5 percent across-the-board salary increase for school district employees, says member Mary Burke.

”I think in an environment where we’ve seen real wages in Dane County decrease, and a lot of people are on fixed incomes, we have to work as hard as possible to limit any increase to the inflation rate,” Burke said Tuesday in an interview.

School Board members took up the topic of tax increases while discussing the proposed 2013-2014 budget at a special meeting Monday, the day the Department of Public Instruction announced that the Madison School District likely would be hit with an $8.8 million cut in state aid. School district administrators had anticipated a cut of that magnitude in drafting a preliminary budget this spring, but they nevertheless penciled in a 1.5 percent across-the-board salary increase for district employees.

But the 7.4 percent property tax increase calculated for that proposed budget was not popular with taxpayers, Burke said. Emails to board members after news of that possible tax hike ran overwhelmingly against an increase that steep, she said.

School Board members won’t be making any spending decisions until after Superintendent Jennifer Cheatham — who started work in April after the preliminary budget was drafted — delivers her budget proposal on July 15.

But School Board discussions have focused around reducing the proposed salary hike, and cutting back on facility maintenance to pare down the $392 million proposed budget enough to bring the property tax increase to 4 or 5 percent, board President Ed Hughes told me.

The district under state law could increase its levy by as much as $18,385,847 or 9 percent. Keeping the increase to around the rate of inflation would mean an increase of less 2 percent.

“We’re going to do what is best to balance the needs of the schools and the taxpayers,” Hughes said, adding he expects to vote for a salary increase of some size.

The school district’s contract with Madison Teachers Inc. — adopted last fall while a state law restricting public unions’ collecting bargaining powers was in limbo — leaves teacher salaries for next year up to the discretion of the school district.

School Board member Arlene Silveira says that because principal salaries and the teacher salary schedule — on which individual teachers may or may not get increases — have been frozen for four years, the district is at risk of not being competitive in attracting staff. “If we’re losing the ability to attract and retain good people, that is a serious concern,” she said.

But Silveira also is concerned about the long-term effect of delaying maintenance of the district’s aging buildings, she said.

Burke said she thinks teacher pay increases should be negotiated in the context of the teachers contract, and that an across-the-board increase may not put the money were it is needed the most. For example, a recent review of district salaries found that pay for principals and entry level teachers is low compared to other districts, but that Madison salaries in other areas might be higher than in other districts, she said.

Burke also would like to wait until the final state aid numbers come out in October before deciding on salary levels.

Several School Board members interviewed for this story stressed that the 2013-2014 budget will be a transitional one, before a broad re-evaluation of spending planned by Cheatham can be conducted.

Board member TJ Mertz can’t vote on salaries because his wife is a teacher’s aide with the school district, he told me, but he has long been outspoken in his belief in good pay for teachers to ensure the best academic achievement for students.

“As a citizen, I understand our staff needs to be compensated,” he said, adding that teachers have taken losses in take-home pay since they were required to begin making contributions to their pensions in 2011. “If the state won’t invest in our children, it has to come from the property tax,” he said.

Mertz said he would prefer a tax increase steeper than the 4 percent or 5 percent the board as a whole is focusing on. “I firmly believe the most important thing we can do is invest in our students; the question should not be what property tax levy can we afford,” he said.