Just another WordPress weblog
News

A Fond Farewell to Long-time AAAN Leader Gihad Ali

Gihad Ali, second from left, with AAAN youth at Milwaukee’s Arab Fest

“I brought these t-shirts to sell for my student group.” This is the initial sentence Gihad Ali uttered when, in 2002, she walked into the building of the Southwest Youth Collaborative to meet folks from the Arab American Action Network (AAAN) for the first time. She was carrying a box of t-shirts that members of the Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) chapter she co-founded at DePaul University were selling to raise money for their campus activism, and did not ask, but essentially told, the older Arab man at the registration table that she was going to sell them. And even though the event itself was a fundraiser for the AAAN, sell them she did.

The confident teenager entered our realm that night, and when asked about it recently, she said, “I wanted to be back on 63rd Street, the neighborhood I grew up in, one that had and has so much historical significance for my community and others. It was nostalgia that called me back, and the idea that there, in my childhood neighborhood, blocks from where I grew up, was an event called CAFÉ INTIFADA. I loved it.” She ended up staying for eleven years.

Last week, after an extended leave of absence, Gihad announced that she is moving on from the AAAN to become the Youth Programs Director at the Council of Islamic Organizations of Greater Chicago (CIOGC). She has been one of our most important leaders for over a decade, and will be greatly missed, but we are certain that she will continue her incredible work across Chicagoland for many years to come.

A daughter of Palestinian refugees, Gihad grew up in Chicago and the southwest suburbs, and ultimately graduated with a degree in Sociology from DePaul. A week before the event described above, one of our very first spoken word poetry slams, the Café Intifada, she asked then AAAN board member Jeremy Lahoud to be added to the program. Her performance there ultimately catapulted her into the consciousness of political hip-hop aficionados in Chicago and beyond. One of the pieces she presented, “Eye to Eye,” which discusses the struggles of Palestinians under occupation, was later read worldwide, studied in college classrooms, and even used as the central lyrics for the chart-topping “Look Into My Eyes,” written and produced by Outlandish, a multi-award-winning hip-hop trio based in Denmark.

Within months of the Café, Gihad officially joined the AAAN as an AmeriCorps intern, providing homework assistance and tutoring to Arab, Black, and Latino children and youth. Later, she was promoted to senior staff, as the Youth Organizing Program (YOP) Coordinator. Even as the youngest of our staff leadership team, YOP flourished under her tutelage. She brought spoken word poetry, hip-hop instruction, mural making, and graffiti art to the program, through a writing project called Silent Echoes, and was able to cleverly recruit and help develop dozens of young people by juxtaposing these creative components with political education, hard skills organizing training, and analyses of political, social, and economic conditions that Arab, Black, and Latino youth struggle with in Chicagoland.

In 2007, Gihad expanded YOP with the founding of the Alliance of Young Women Activists (AYWA), which joined Arab, Muslim, and other young women in a safe social and political space to challenge sexism, double standards, and patriarchy in our communities and U.S. society at large. A number of AYWA members later became volunteers, staff, and leaders at the AAAN in their own right. One of them, Mariam (name changed to protect anonymity), remembers, “I didn’t know my self-worth, and was ready to hit the streets, seeking friends in the gang life. My mother couldn’t get through to me, but Gihad sat with me day in and day out and helped me realize that I am someone, my own unique self. I never joined that gang, and I have to say it was Gihad that saved me.”

Gihad emceeing concert with Palestinian hip-hop group DAM

As she was building YOP, AYWA, and Silent Echoes, Gihad also gained prominence in the Palestine support and anti-war movements. She was an early member of the Palestine Solidarity Group (PSG), which played a leading role in Chicago’s mass protests in response to Israel’s bombing and invasion of Lebanon in 2006, and of Gaza in 2008-9, 2012, and 2014. With PSG, Gihad coordinated a number of educational delegations of students and other activists to Palestine, and participated in one herself. It was the first trip she ever took to the homeland, a transformative experience that still guides her work today. And as one of the most popular organizers in the community, she was consistently called upon to emcee many of the rallies in support of Palestinian rights and in opposition to U.S. wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. She would mobilize dozens of Arab youth to attend with us, and then transfix crowds with her poetry and provoke them with her speeches.

She later transitioned from PSG to the United States Palestinian Community Network (USPCN), co-founding the Chicago chapter, and co-emceeing, in 2008, the first popular community conference for Palestinians in the U.S. in over a decade. Close to 1,200 people from across the country were introduced to her organizing skills that weekend, as she helped develop the conference program and produced the opening flag ceremony that shook the cultural night’s banquet hall.

As a National Executive Committee member of USPCN, Gihad also led in the organizing of the 2010 popular conference, chaired a number of national gatherings, and supported the Antiwar 23–organizers and activists, including 7 Palestinians, from the Midwest who were subpoenaed to a federal grand jury in 2010 for their Palestine support work. In response to this repression, the 23 exercised their right not to testify, and then Gihad immediately helped re-establish and lead the Coalition to Protect People’s Rights (CPPR), whose work with USPCN, the Committee to Stop FBI Repression (CSFR), and dozens of other organizations was instrumental in staving off arrests and indictments in the case.

As her star continued to rise, YOP eventually developed into the AAAN’s main political formation, which is currently organized under the dynamic leadership of Muhammad Sankari and Nesreen Hasan. As two of dozens of young staff that Gihad has supervised and trained, they are taking the program to new heights, with a law enforcement accountability campaign that will be launched soon. Over the years, YOP has worked to challenge racial profiling in public schools, uphold the civil liberties of Arabs and Muslims, organize countless spoken word events (Café Intifada later became Never Silent Café–listen to partial clips of Gihad’s “I Am Not a Palestinian” here), and produce videos about young Arab and Muslim women’s lives.

In early 2009, the final piece of the YOP puzzle was put into place, when Gihad established the Youth Leadership Team (YLT), a project she considers one of her most fulfilling. Influenced by the Southwest Youth Collaborative’s model of staff organizers partnering very closely with youth leaders in the development of programming, political line, and methodology, Gihad said at the time, “These youth were not picked because they have the best writing skills or performance skills, but rather because they demonstrate leadership potential.”

Aaisha Durr, an African American Muslim member of the first YLT, and producer of this YOP video, worked with close friend and fellow AYWA / YLT member Widad Hussein to complete a provocative short film (which will be released by the AAAN soon) addressing double standards faced by Arab and Muslim young women, and all women. Hussein, who is now a teacher and, along with Durr, was on staff at the AAAN for a number of years, says, “Gihad helped me grow personally and professionally in ways that led me to where I am today. Her constant support and encouragement motivated me to always move forward and do my best.”

Gihad with a number of former colleagues at the AAAN

When the AAAN lost a couple of staff members due to budget cuts in 2010, we made the decision to shift Gihad’s responsibilities, a decision that would not have worked with someone who did not have her zest for learning, commitment to community, and incredibly diverse skills. The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation had awarded a 3-year grant to only eight organizations in the U.S., including the AAAN, and with the funding, Gihad developed, from scratch, a domestic violence prevention project and curriculum for Arab and Muslim youth. Titled “Healthy Relationships,” it serves as a model for Arab organizations across the country, and quickly became one of the most popular components of YOP, allowing Arab youth the opportunity to discuss issues rarely whispered in their homes or anywhere else. Gihad was the primary author of both a social norms survey that was disseminated nationally, and a case study describing the development, implementation, and evaluation of the project.

“Healthy Relationships” led to qualitative advances at the AAAN. Gihad brought knowledge, skills, and experience gained from the work to the rest of the organization, and began to support us in the areas of program and resource development, grant-writing, and evaluation. Much to the disappointment of a number of youth who she had previously organized, and her colleagues in the program, Gihad shifted out of YOP and into organizational development, helping to name (in her colloquial, peasant, Arab-American Arabic) and launch our relocation campaign, Rahhil Beiti (“Move our Home”), which she would want you to generously support. (Learn more by visiting here.)

A proud Palestinian Arab Muslim, Gihad also recognized the importance of alliance-building and solidarity work to the AAAN. Understanding that our community’s future is intertwined with the future of Black, Latino, and other oppressed nationality groups, she became our most prominent spokesperson, presenting at conferences and workshops across Chicago and the U.S., and training many of our youth and staff to do the same. She was one of a handful of Chicagoans called upon to present evidence of racial discrimination to the UN Special Rapporteur on Racism and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) in Geneva in 2008; and participated over the years as one of our representatives in the most important social justice movements in the city, including immigrant rights, anti-racism, mental health, and peace and justice.

One of our proudest moments was being invited to welcome political prisoner Carlos Alberto Torres home to Paseo Boricua (the Puerto Rican strip of Division Street) when he was released in 2010, after serving 29 years in prison for organizing for Puerto Rican independence. Gihad spoke in Spanish (watch from 5:08 to 5:49) on our behalf.

After visiting the AAAN and meeting some of our youth, Ismael Ahmed, the legendary former executive director of ACCESS in Michigan, returned home raving about our work, and encouraged the National Network for Arab American Communities (NNAAC), a project of ACCESS, to invite Gihad to facilitate a youth development discussion at its annual conference. This led directly to the Emerging Leader Award in 2011, one of many well-deserved honors that she earned over the years. She talked about the aforementioned Mariam in her acceptance speech.

In 2006, she received the Southwest Youth Collaborative’s “Can’t Keep Quiet! Won’t Stand Still!” award for “leadership at the junction of social justice, art and community.” In addition, the Chicago Foundation for Women presented Gihad with its prestigious Impact Award in 2013 for her work with AYWA(watch from 6:28 to 8:11); and in 2014, she received the Inspiring Woman Award from the Muslim Women’s Alliance.

Gihad off to a demonstration with Silent Echoes and AYWA members

Gihad inspired a whole generation of working class youth and families in Chicagoland, people who were influenced to give back to their communities and always “fight the good fight.” We would be remiss in not also recognizing a partial list of her mentees and colleagues, respectively, the folks who helped Gihad put the AAAN’s youth development program on the map: Zaineb Abdulla, Tammy Abughnaim, Nader Abusumayah, Suzanne Adely, Inas Affaneh, Yasmeen Affaneh, Khaled Ahmed, Aysha Alakhras, Souhyb Alghouleh, Nuer Alshaikh, Halima Bahri, Samar Damra, Aaisha Durr, Nina Farnia, Rayya Haddad, Nesreen Hasan, Ayah Hassan, Mustafa Hassan, Rasha Hassan, Sharifah Hassan, Shannon Heffernan, Amany Hussein, Widad Hussein, Ahlam Jbara, Zeid Khater, Ramah Kudaimi, Mohammad Mashal, Heba Matari, Eslam Najjar, Rasmea Odeh, Asma Razik, Donia Razik, Arasele Robles, Muhammad Sankari, Rania Shkairat, Nina Shoman-Dajani, Shira Tevah, Priscilla Wathington, and Jenine Wehbeh.

Poet. Writer. Youth Organizer. Activist. Teacher. Analyst. Performer. Progressive. Mother. Leader. Palestinian. Arab. Muslim. Friend. Gihad Ali represents the best of the AAAN, and the best of our community and beyond. We bid her a fond farewell.

Staff, Members, and Board of the Arab American Action Network (AAAN)

____________________________________________________________________________________

Read about Rahhil Beiti, our relocation campaign:

The space that houses the Arab American Action Network (AAAN) has been providing services and advocacy to the Arab and Muslim community of Chicago for over 40 years. And while at one point the 63rd Street area was the heart of the Arab community, our members have been migrating farther and farther southwest for many years. As a result, the fact that the AAAN still does not have a permanent physical presence in the southwest suburbs is a major barrier to our work. So, in order for us to bring our programs and services closer to you once again, we need your support.

Already, we serve a huge number of families in the southwest suburbs, but they are inconvenienced by traveling to our center on 63rd Street. There are a number of programs which we provide–including English as a Second Language (ESL), citizenship and civics instruction, youth organizing, creative writing, and adult women’s organizing–that no other Arab organizations in the southwest suburbs replicate, and we want to bring these programs and services closer to our constituents. And though there may be some duplication of services, our community in the southwest suburbs would be underserved even if there were a dozen Arab and Muslim organizations around, so the AAAN and its work is needed there, and needed sooner rather than later.

Fundraising support would be used for both the planning and implementation of the move: 1) campaign literature for fundraising; 2) real estate agent to seek properties and provide an analysis of the currently available facilities for rent, and negotiate all lease agreements; 3) rental costs for at least two years up front; 4) furniture and technology; and 5) moving costs. We estimate that our total cost will be approximately $99,000.

Objectives for the assistance: Moving to the southwest suburbs will allow our organization to increase its client and organizing base beyond the thousands of families that we currently work with, and again be physically located in the center of the Arab and Muslim community of Chicagoland. Although we are an important organization in the community, it has been increasingly difficult for us to work in coalition with the other forces that represent Arabs and Muslims in the southwest suburbs. This move will allow us to strengthen our close relationships with community institutions we have worked with, and develop new relationships with others.

These old and new partnerships will also support our institutional capacity by helping to establish coalitions around issues that we had been working on alone for many years. For example, when challenging the criminalization of youth of color, specifically Arab and Muslim youth, in Chicago public schools, there were no other Arab or Muslim organizations in Chicago to ally with us. Once in the suburbs, there will be many who support our work by providing resources, staff, and political power. Together with the other Arab and Muslim institutions, we will help build power for our community as a whole.

Photos of students engaged in reading and art activities at the AAAN’s After School Program:

…

… …