AARP on House TriComm Health Care Reform Bill

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

July 14, 2009



Contact

AARP Media Relations

202-434-2560



AARP on House TriComm Health Care Reform Bill



“This bill would make great strides for all of our members and their families.”



WASHINGTON—AARP CEO Barry Rand released the following statement following the introduction of health care reform legislation in the U.S. House of Representatives from Chairmen Charles Rangel, Henry Waxman and George Miller.



“We are pleased by the House TriCommittee’s health care reform bill, which makes important strides towards making sure that every American has access to affordable, quality health care choices.



“Those without access to employer sponsored plans face serious roadblocks that block affordable insurance choices based on their age and health status. Those of our members in Medicare pay close to 30% of their incomes on out-of-pocket expenses and they deserve relief, especially in the prescription drug doughnut hole, where they get no benefit while paying premiums.



“This bill would make great strides for all of our members and their families.



“It would help abolish those insurance market practices that keep people on the outside looking in based only on their age and health status. It recognizes that expanding coverage means little if a person can’t afford it, providing meaningful relief to those with modest incomes and capping out-of-pocket expenses for plans in the Exchange.



“The House TriCommittee bill would also close over time the Medicare prescription drug ‘doughnut hole’—a major concern for our members.



“We look forward to working with Chairmen Rangel, Waxman and Miller, as well as their colleagues in both parties and both chambers of Congress to build on current momentum and enact comprehensive health care reform in 2009.”



For details on AARP’s health reform priorities, visit http://www.healthactionnow.org.



AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan membership organization that helps people 50+ have independence, choice and control in ways that are beneficial and affordable to them and society as a whole. AARP does not endorse candidates for public office or make contributions to either political campaigns or candidates. We produce AARP The Magazine, the definitive voice for 50+ Americans and the world's largest-circulation magazine with over 35.5 million readers; AARP Bulletin, the go-to news source for AARP's 40 million members and Americans 50+; AARP Segunda Juventud, the only bilingual U.S. publication dedicated exclusively to the 50+ Hispanic community; and our website, AARP.org. AARP Foundation is an affiliated charity that provides security, protection, and empowerment to older persons in need with support from thousands of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. We have staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.



30 – 30 – 30