AARP: HELP Committee Bill Marks Critical Step Toward Health Care Reform
July 15, 2009



Contact

AARP Media Relations

202-434-2560



AARP: HELP Committee Bill Marks Critical Step Toward Health Care Reform



WASHINGTON—AARP CEO Barry Rand released this statement following the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee’s passage of the Affordable Health Choices Act:



“Today’s vote brings us one big step closer to comprehensive health care reform that ensures every American has a choice of quality, affordable coverage. We are proud of the committee’s leadership on this issue and their commitment to passing legislation this year, but we remain concerned with some of the bill’s specifics.



“The bill passed today includes several smart provisions that will help Americans get affordable health care. By strictly limiting insurers’ discriminatory practices, the bill ensures Americans can purchase affordable health coverage, regardless of age or health status. It also helps struggling middle-class families by limiting premiums and out-of-pocket expenses, providing true relief from rising health costs.



“The bill’s long-term care provisions will put more people on track to get the health and long-term care services and supports they need throughout their lives and take some of the burden off of struggling Medicaid programs. The bill also takes needed steps to strengthen the health care workforce and prepare it to meet the needs of an aging population, particularly in the critical fields of primary care and nursing.



“However, we remain concerned about the bill’s unreasonable exclusivity period for brand name biologic drugs, which will keep less costly generic versions from the people who need them and result in billions of dollars of profit for the brand name drug industry.



“AARP thanks Chairman Kennedy, Senator Dodd and their colleagues for their strong commitment to health care reform. With their help, America is closer to finally achieving the goal of quality, affordable health care for all.”



AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan membership organization that helps people 50+ have independence, choice and control in ways that are beneficial and affordable to them and society as a whole. AARP does not endorse candidates for public office or make contributions to either political campaigns or candidates. We produce AARP The Magazine, the definitive voice for 50+ Americans and the world's largest-circulation magazine with over 35.5 million readers; AARP Bulletin, the go-to news source for AARP's 40 million members and Americans 50+; AARP Segunda Juventud, the only bilingual U.S. publication dedicated exclusively to the 50+ Hispanic community; and our website, AARP.org. AARP Foundation is an affiliated charity that provides security, protection, and empowerment to older persons in need with support from thousands of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. We have staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.