ABQNews: 1:10pm -- Phoenix Named Kidnap Capital of U.S.
ABC News: Arizona city second in the world after Mexico City in drug cartel-related abductions. 2/13/09 UPDATE: Here's the Los Angeles Times' take on Phoenix becoming the kidnap-for-ransom capital of the United States. Phoenix, Ariz., has become the kidnapping capital of the United States, with more incidents than any other city in the world outside of Mexico City with more than 370 cases reported last year alone, according to an ABC News report. "We're in the eye of the storm," Phoenix Police Chief Andy Anderson told ABC News of the violent crimes and ruthless tactics spurred by Mexican drug cartels that have moved north across the border. "If it doesn't stop here, if we're not able to fix it here and get it turned around, it will go across the nation." Kidnappings and other crimes associated with the Mexican drug cartels are quickly spreading across the border, from Texas to California, and the majority of victims are either illegal aliens or connected to the drug trade, according to the ABC News report, which you can see tonight on World News with Charles Gibson (5:30 p.m. Mountain Time on KOAT-TV Channel 7). Just this week, The Associated Press reported that drug violence currently wracking Mexico is spilling over into the United States as U.S. authorities report a spike in killings, kidnappings and home invasions connected to the murderous cartels. And much of the violence is happening not in towns along the border, which have been bracing for a spread of violence, but in places like Phoenix and Atlanta, the AP said. In Phoenix, 150 miles north of the Mexican border, police have reported a sharp increase in kidnappings and home invasions, with around 350 a year for the past two years, most of which have been committed at the behest of Mexican drug gangs, the AP reported. While the violence is nowhere near the mayhem reported daily from Mexico, Drug Enforcement Administration agents told the AP that they have rarely seen such brutality in the U.S. since the "Miami Vice" years in the 1980s, when Colombian cartels had the corner on the cocaine market in Florida. < Prev Next >