Soaking storms to ease drought across Florida this week

By Faith Eherts, AccuWeather meteorologist June 06, 2017, 12:53:09 PM EDT



With over 70 percent of Florida suffering at least moderate drought conditions, the prolonged wet weather pattern will be welcomed by many.

The warm and humid climate of Florida usually allows for frequent showers and storms, but they haven’t been materializing in full force this season.

“Despite having near-normal rainfall in May, Orlando is still running a major rainfall deficit on the year,” AccuWeather Senior Meteorologist Dan Pydynowski said.

“So far, Orlando has had only 45 percent of their normal rainfall from Jan. 1 through June 3.”

The lack of frequent, heavy rainfall has left the soil and foliage parched under the increasingly high sun angle.

As a result, brush fires have sparked and prospered in parts of Florida and Georgia over the past few months, sometimes prompting evacuations.

Luckily, soaking storms will be a daily occurrence this week.



“Locally heavy rainfall - partially enhanced by leftover tropical moisture from what was once Beatriz - can lead to downpours across the Interstate-4 corridor this week,” Pydynowski said.

Strong winds above the surface, known as wind shear, will prevent the remaining piece of Beatriz from developing into a tropical depression.

While a push of dry air may reach the panhandle on Wednesday, showers and thunderstorms will persist over the peninsula into late week.

RELATED:

Dry weather to return to inundated southern US at midweek

AccuWeather provides critical new summer preparedness information during National Safety Month

US politicians pledge commitment to Paris Agreement following Trump’s announcement

Rainfall totals by the end of this week may average 3-6 inches in some communities.

On Saturday, a few locations between Tampa and Palm City picked up a much-needed 2 to 4 inches of rain.

As was observed in California this past winter, several stormy periods in succession are necessary to completely eradicate drought.

“This opportunity for heavier rainfall over the next few days will not erase the deficit - which is about 8 inches in Orlando - but it can certainly help cut into it,” Pydynowski said.





The heaviest storms could result in localized areas of urban flooding, and residents should be careful to not attempt to traverse flooded roadways.

A few of the strongest storms could produce locally gusty winds and an isolated weak tornado or two capable of producing some tree and property damage, especially along the west coast of Florida. However, the primary threat from the storms will be flooding.

Otherwise, the rainfall will mainly bother beachgoers and start to chip away at the extreme drought conditions over central Florida.

Areas that are drought-free can also anticipate increased rainfall, including Pensacola, Panama City and Miami.

Additional showers and thunderstorms may follow next week as more moisture flows in from the Gulf of Mexico.

Report a Typo