Drivers of 2017 Health Insurance Premium Changes
UNDERLYING GROWTH IN HEALTH CARE COSTS. The increase in costs of medical services and prescription drugs—referred to as medical trend—is based on not only the increase in per-unit costs of services, but also changes in health care utilization and changes in the mix of services. Medical trend is expected to rise slightly faster than in previous years but remain low relative to historical levels. Some uncertaintyremains regarding the causes of the recent low medical trends and whether they will continue. Structural changes to the health care payment and delivery system might be contributing to slower medical spending growth—such as a greater focus on cost-effective care.

CHANGES IN THE RISK POOL COMPOSITION AND INSURER ASSUMPTIONS. The ACA requires that insurers use a single risk pool when developing premiums. Therefore, as in previous years since the ACA’s enactment, premiums for 2017 will reflect insurer expectations of medical spending for enrollees both inside and outside of the marketplace (i.e., exchanges). Health insurance premiums are set at the state level (with regional variations allowed within a state) and are based on state- and insurer-specific experience regarding enrollment volume and composition. Changes in premiums between 2016 and 2017 will reflect expected changes in the risk profiles of the enrollee population, as well as any changes in insurer assumptions based on whether experience to date differs from that expected in assumptions underlying prior premiums.

Although enrollment in the marketplaces has increased somewhat over time, it is uncertain the extent to which the enrollee risk profile has changed as a result. According to the Department of Health and Human Services, marketplace enrollment at the end of the open enrollment period increased from 8.0 million in 2014 to 11.7 million in 2015 and 12.7 million in 2016. 2 Average health costs for a given population in a guaranteed issue environment generally can be viewed as inversely proportional to enrollment as a percentage of the eligible population. Higher individual market participation rates will tend to be associated with lower average costs, and lower participation rates with higher average costs. This is because those previously uninsured individuals with greater health care needs are more likely to enroll and to enroll sooner than those with lesser needs. Higher take-up rates typically reflect a larger share of healthy individuals enrolling. The Kaiser Family Foundation estimates that 2016 enrollment represents 46 percent of the potential enrollment. 3

Premiums for 2017 will reflect insurer expectations for enrollment changes from 2016 to 2017 as well as any adjustments to assumptions if 2016 enrollment differed from expected. Insurers that expected higher enrollment in 2016 than what actually occurred might need to adjust their assumed average costs upward for 2017; those that expected lower-than-actual enrollment might need to adjust their average costs downward. In addition, there will be downward pressure on premiums if insurers expect significantly increased enrollment in the market as a whole in 2017.

Insurers have more information now than they did last year regarding the risk profile of the enrollee population and are using that information to adjust their 2017 assumptions accordingly. Because the ACA risk adjustment program shifts funds among insurers depending on the relative health status of an insurer’s population to that of the entire market, premiums need to reflect not only an insurer’s expected claims, but also any expected risk adjustment receipts or transfers. In other words, premiums should reflect the risk profile of the entire state risk pool, not just the insurer’s expected enrollment. When filing premiums for 2016, insurers had information on their enrollee demographics and health spending in 2014 and 2015, but lacked information regarding the risk profile of the market as a whole. Since that time, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) released information regarding payments and receipts under the risk adjustment, reinsurance, and risk corridor programs for the 2014 plan year, as well as interim risk adjustment information for 2015. These data provide insurers more information regarding how their enrollee risk profiles compared to those of the whole market. Analysis of the risk adjustment data suggests that some insurers may have set premiums low relative to the market-wide risk profile. 4 In addition, the risk corridor results reveal that for many insurers, 2014 premiums were too low relative to actual claims. Some of this understatement was likely due to the implementation of the transitional policy that allowed individuals to keep their prior non-ACA-compliant coverage. Risk profile assumptions for 2017 premiums will reflect these results to the extent that they have not already been factored into prior premium increases.

As mentioned above, subsequent to 2014 premiums being finalized, states were allowed to adopt a transitional policy that allowed non-ACA-compliant plans to be renewed in 2014. The policy was subsequently extended until the end of 2017. A majority of states allowed insurers to renew non-ACA-compliant policies and most, but not all, have allowed the extension through 2017. In states with the transition policy, ACA-compliant plans exhibited less favorable experience because lower-cost individuals were more likely to retain their prior policies. Insurers already knew about the transition policy when developing their 2015 premiums, so any related premium increases likely have already been incorporated. To the extent they have not, or if the impact of the transitional policy is expected to change over time, assumptions for 2017 premiums will be revised accordingly.





HEALTH INSURER FEE. The health insurance provider (HIP) fee was enacted through the ACA. The HIP fee is scheduled to collect $11.3 billion in 2016, and insurers built this cost into their premiums. The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2016 included a moratorium on the collection of the health insurer provider fee in 2017. Insurers will remove the cost of this fee in their 2017 premiums, resulting in a reduction in expected premiums by about 1 to 3 percent, depending on the size of the insurer and their profit/not-for-profit status.

Although more information is now available to insurers regarding their own enrollment and claims experience as well as the market-level experience, some uncertainty remains. The individual market undergoes considerable enrollment turnover as individuals move among different plans within the individual market or among individual market coverage and other coverage (e.g., employer coverage, Medicaid). 5 This turnover limits the ability to use 2014 and 2015 experience data to project risk profiles in 2017. Furthermore, CMS emphasized that the 2015 interim risk adjustment results are preliminary, incomplete, and could change materially when the final risk adjustment process is performed later in the year. In addition, experience for insurers with limited market share in 2015 might not be indicative of future experience as they may be more subject to random fluctuations or selection bias.The health insurance provider (HIP) fee was enacted through the ACA. The HIP fee is scheduled to collect $11.3 billion in 2016, and insurers built this cost into their premiums. The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2016 included a moratorium on the collection of the health insurer provider fee in 2017. Insurers will remove the cost of this fee in their 2017 premiums, resulting in a reduction in expected premiums by about 1 to 3 percent, depending on the size of the insurer and their profit/not-for-profit status.

Costs for prescription drugs continue to increase and are anticipated to again outpace the costs for other medical services. More high-cost specialty drugs are expected to come to market (e.g., new drugs to treat cancer). Some drugs (e.g., Crestor, Benicar, Symbicort) are coming or have recently come off patent and will over time reduce drug costs; however, price decreases aren’t necessarily immediate because generic competition for drugs coming off patent is often limited or slow to be adopted. The impact could be further mitigated if patients are moved by their physicians to newer, higher-cost alternative drugs.The ACA transitional reinsurance program provides payments to plans in the individual health insurance market, with payments declining over the three years of the program, from 2014 to 2016. The year 2017 will be the first year in which there is no reinsurance in the individual market supported by contributions from health plans under the ACA. 1 By offsetting a portion of claims, the reinsurance program lowered premiums, and each year the gradual reduction in reinsurance funding resulted in a corresponding increase in premiums. The final impact of the program on premiums will occur in 2017, when projected claims are expected to increase by 4 to 7 percent due to the reinsurance program ending in 2016.