VICTORY AT THE STATE HOUSE!
Governor Pence Signs Senate Bill 101!

On Thursday, March 26th Governor Mike Pence signed Senate Bill 101 into law!

Senate Bill 101 is the Religious Freedom Restoration Act.

Indiana now becomes the 20th state with a Religious Freedom Restoration Act.

Eric Miller, the Founder and Executive Director of Advance America stated: “It is vitally important to protect religious freedom in Indiana. It’s the right thing to do. It was therefore important to pass Senate Bill 101 in 2015 in order to help protect churches, Christian businesses and individuals from those who want to punish them because of their Biblical beliefs!”

Churches, Christian businesses and individuals deserve protection from those who support homosexual marriages and those who support government recognition and approval of gender identity (men who dress as women). SB 101 will help provide the protection!

Here are just three examples where SB 101 will help:

Christian bakers, florists and photographers should not be punished for refusing to participate in a homosexual marriage!

bakers, florists and photographers should not be punished for in a A Christian business should not be punished for refusing to allow a man to use the women’s restroom!

should be punished for a man to use the women’s restroom! A church should not be punished because they refuse to let the church be used for a homosexual wedding!

Key Legislators Who Led The Effort To Pass SB 101!

Senator Dennis Kruse, Senator Schott Schneider and Senator Brent Steele along with 10 other State Senators authored SB 101.

Representatives Tim Wesco, Jud McMillin, Don Lehe and Milo Smith sponsored SB 101 in the House of Representatives along with 21 other Representatives.

(Click Here) to see how your State Senator voted on February 24th to pass SB 101.

(Click Here) to see how your State Representative voted on March 23rd to pass SB 101.

2015 Legislative Update!

(Click Here) to view a Legislative Update on the 2015 General Assembly. Go to our website often to get updates on legislation impacting your family and your church.

Advance America will continue to lead the effort at the State House to protect churches and families! This will be our 35th Legislative Session serving as your eyes and ears at the State House!

(Click Here) to make a tax deductible contribution to help in the battle to protect families, protect churches and defend traditional values!

Contributions to Advance America are tax deductible for income tax purposes.

Advance America • 101 W Ohio St. Suite 660 • Indianapolis, IN 46204

www.AdvanceAmerica.com • 317-684-3300 • info@advanceamerica.com