Advance Realty
Featured Properties WILLOW14

A seven-story mixed-use building featuring 140 luxury apartments, +/-22,000 square feet of retail and 387 below grade parking spaces. ( WILLOW14A seven-story mixed-use building featuring 140 luxury apartments, +/-22,000 square feet of retail and 387 below grade parking spaces. ( Learn more. ONE GATEWAY CENTER

Various Size Spaces Available from 736 - 11,144 Sq. Ft. ( ONE GATEWAY CENTERVarious Size Spaces Available from 736 - 11,144 Sq. Ft. ( Learn more. ADVANCE AT SOUTHGATE

Located at 445 South Street in Morris Township, NJ. +/- 52,000 SF AVAILABLE ( ADVANCE AT SOUTHGATELocated at 445 South Street in Morris Township, NJ. +/- 52,000 SF AVAILABLE ( Learn more. RIVERBEND DISTRICT

A vibrant, 80 acre mixed-use development located in Harrison, NJ featuring retail, office, hotels and residential units. ( RIVERBEND DISTRICTA vibrant, 80 acre mixed-use development located in Harrison, NJ featuring retail, office, hotels and residential units. ( Learn more. The PARC

A new high-tech ofﬁce/research park under development at the U.S. Army’s Picatinny Arsenal in Morris County, NJ. ( The PARCA new high-tech ofﬁce/research park under development at the U.S. Army’s Picatinny Arsenal in Morris County, NJ. ( Learn more.

Advance Realty Overview

Advance Realty, headquartered in Bedminster, New Jersey, is a privately held fully integrated real estate company. With more than 30 years in business Advance is active in the office, flex, industrial, retail and multifamily sectors throughout the northeast. Advance Realty’s portfolio currently spans 4.5 million square feet of operating properties and a development portfolio consisting of 6 million square feet of commercial project and 6,500 residential units. Advance’s ability to provide cost-effective, strategically planned real estate solutions has propelled the Company’s growth from a local developer to a super-regional development, investment and management company. Today, Advance is one of the most active and respected commercial real estate development, investment and management companies in the New Jersey and Washington, D.C. markets.

Advance Realty is well positioned to experience smart growth in our core markets in the future. The company’s strong capital base, flexibility as a private company and outstanding talent ensure continued success at the forefront of the commercial real estate industry.