Air Force Personnel Center
Home > Services



























The Morale, Welfare, and Recreation (MWR) Program has been recognized as essential for creating and maintaining the morale of military personnel. Services programs have long provided essential food, fitness, lodging, recreation and services for military members.



MWR programs were first introduced during the Revolutionary War. With the establishment of a huge "citizen" army during World War I, the United Service Organizations (Inc.) was founded along with programs like library services, troop canteens, and sports programs. In 1920, the Army Motion Picture Service was set up and was soon to be followed by the founding of service clubs later during World War II.



Services programs also began during the Revolutionary War, with billeting and food facilities serving as fundamental necessities for military troops. Services' roots sprang from the supply and civil engineering career fields and Services branched off as its own entity in 1991.



MWR and Services merged Air Force wide in 1992. On Jan. 1, 1994, the Air Force Morale, Welfare, Recreation, and Services Agency was renamed Air Force Services Agency, reflecting what the agency's programs are all about -- service.









AFPC/SV supports the bases, major commands and Air Staff by providing technical assistance, fielding new initiatives, developing procedures and managing selected central support functions to ensure successful Services programs. The agency's responsibilities include developing and disseminating procedures to implement policy, preparing responses to high-level inquiries, providing technical assistance to the field, and developing new programs that support major command and installation activities. The agency manages Air Force central nonappropriated funds (NAFs) and operates central systems for field support such as banking, investments, purchasing, data flow, insurance benefits programs, and the personnel system for NAF employees.



Supporting Worldwide Operations

277 APF Food Service Operations

88 Lodging Operations

130 Tops in Blue Shows

77 Community Centers

84 Youth Centers

250 Child Development Centers and School-Age Programs

1,800 Family Child Care Homes

153 Fitness Operations

64 Arts and Crafts Centers

68 Auto Hobby Centers

94 Libraries

91 Clubs

86 Bowling Centers

65 Golf Operations

95 Outdoor Recreation Operations

77 Info, Ticket & Travel Programs

50 Leisure Travel Operations

40 Recreational Shooting Operations

World Class Athlete Program The Food Transformation Initiative



The Food Transformation Initiative was developed to change the way the Air Force provides food service to its Airmen and communities. The initiative is designed to be efficient and customer-driven, and will still enable Airmen in the Force Support career field to maintain vital wartime skills and capabilities. Officials at the Air Force Services Agency have selected six bases for transformation in fiscal year 2010. These pilot bases will see changes in their food service operations in the next year. The goal is to provide base dining options that match the community and mission needs throughout the Air Force.



To read the latest news stories on the Food Transformation Initiative, visit: Food transformation continues to see positive results

Services 'cooks up' healthy recipe contest

New era in food service coming to Air Force bases

Air Force chefs serve recipes for success



Inside AFPC

Search

Your Base Services and Programs Your Base Services and Programs



Featured Links Featured Links Customer Service Customer Service

Contact Us Contact Us HQ AFPC/SVK

Sponsorship@us.af.mil



For news and media questions, please contact the Air Force Personnel Center Public Affairs Office by email or call 210-565-2334 or DSN 665-2334.