Louisiana Department of Justice: Attorney General's Office
Jeff Landry became Louisiana Attorney General on January 11, 2016.

One of four children raised in a middle class, St. Martinville family - General Landry grew up through Louisiana’s oil bust - teaching him personally the effects that a bad economy can have on a family, particularly in a small town.

General Landry watched his school teacher mother and architect father work hard and sacrifice even more to ensure their children had the best education possible. Greatly respecting these sacrifices, he joined the Louisiana National Guard while still in high school. Understanding that hard work and determination will prevail over any bad situation - General Landry awoke early each day to work in Louisiana’s sugar cane fields, as his first job out of high school.

General Landry worked his way through college as a police officer and a sheriff’s deputy. He experienced the necessity of protecting our communities and ensuring the law is faithfully executed by our elected officials, the Attorney General’s office, and the courts. As a veteran, General Landry faithfully upheld the oath to protect our civil liberties while keeping our communities safe.

General Landry served as an aide in the Louisiana State Senate, where he learned firsthand that many solutions to our problems can be found from listening to the voices of the people not just from listening to the debate of politicians.

As a young entrepreneur, General Landry and a friend started an oil and gas environmental service company. Recognized for his success in business, he was selected to serve as the Executive Director of the St. Martin Parish Economic Development Authority. As director, General Landry was instrumental in recruiting a Fortune 500 company to the Parish. By leveraging local resources, he helped to create thousands of jobs and to spur the economic energy corridor on Louisiana’s Highway 90.

Understanding the importance of a quality education, General Landry at a later age went back to school - Law School, starting part-time at Southern University then finishing his law degree at Loyola University.

Upon earning his juris doctorate, General Landry returned to Acadiana - where as a business attorney in Lafayette, he spent his days in the legal trenches helping employers create jobs. Utilizing his background in economic development, General Landry helped small and large businesses navigate the complexities of our legal environment. He has argued cases in front of judges in South Louisiana.

In 2010, General Landry was elected to the United States House of Representatives. As one of Louisiana’s Congressmen - General Landry became known as a ferocious advocate of the Constitution, a leader on national energy policy emphasizing increased domestic oil and gas production, an activist for conservative family values, and a promoter of true reductions in wasteful government spending.

General Landry is a veteran of Desert Storm and left the military with the rank of Sergeant. He received the Army Achievement Medal, the Army Commendation Medal, a National Defense Ribbon, an Overseas Training Ribbon and the Louisiana War Cross from his eleven years of service as a member of the Louisiana National Guard.

General Landry earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Environmental and Sustainable Resources with a Minor in Biology from the University of Southwestern Louisiana. He and his wife, Sharon, are raising their son, J.T., in Acadiana.