Illinois governor’s race: Candidates push ag growth
NORMAL, Ill. — The Republican and Democratic gubernatorial candidates traded barbs in separate talks before turning to farm-related issues at the Illinois Agricultural Legislative Roundtable Aug. 22 at Rader Family Farms.

Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner opened by saying this election offers a fundamental, stark choice.

“Higher taxes and more corruption in the Chicago political machine and pushing jobs out which is what (House Speaker Michael) Madigan and my challenger are really part of and really promoting, or are we going to stay in a strong direction of pro jobs, pro growth, pro taxpayer, pro school quality, pro term limits and fair maps, so we can have a government and political process that works for the people,” Rauner said.

“Four years ago, Governor Rauner stood before you at the forum, and he made a whole bunch of promises. He said he would lower property taxes. He said that he would invest heavily in education. He said he would invest in technology in our schools. He said he would bring vocational training back to our high schools. He hasn’t delivered,” said Democratic challenger J.B. Pritzker.

Here are the candidates’ comments on various issues.

Illinois Agriculture

Rauner: The No. 1 place we need to grow is the agriculture sector. We need you guys booming, and I’m all for you. I’ve been an advocate for agriculture my whole life. I’m 100 percent in for you.

Virtually every bill that I’ve had an opportunity to push with you and for you, I’ve pushed for agriculture. Your success is Illinois’ success, and it’s an honor for me to work for you.

Pritzker: There’s enormous opportunity for growth in the industries that all of you represent in ag, if we make the right decisions going forward. That’s why agriculture should never be a partisan issue, not here in our state.

This is about jobs and economic opportunity. It shouldn’t be about rural versus urban or Democrats versus Republicans. This is a nonpartisan set of issues — growing the agricultural economy is critical to our state.

Taxes

Rauner: If anybody tells you that the right policy answer for Illinois is to raise the income tax and put in a big graduated income tax, that’s a disaster. And they’ll say they’ll just tax millionaires.

Baloney, business owners will flood out of this state and you know who’s going to pay the tax tab? The middle class is going to pay the tax tab.

Every state that’s put in a graduated income tax the middle class got socked in the jaw. You can look what they pay in Minnesota, New Jersey, New York or Connecticut. Look at the tax rates in those states — stunningly high.

I’ve got buddies who live in New Jersey. They got high property taxes. They got a really high graduated income tax. Can they balance their budget? No. Can they pay their pensions? No. Can they keep their people? No. It’s us and New Jersey for out-migration.

We can’t tax our way to prosperity. We need to grow. The only answer is cut the taxes, cut the regulations, grow our way out of the challenges and we will have a proud, strong, great state again.

I’d like to freeze local property taxes and then lower property taxes over time by giving you the option to control your communities, counties and cities how you see fit. Get rid of the unfunded mandates from Springfield and the restrictions.

If we do the recommendations of my task force on consolidation and unfunded mandates, we’ll save you $3.5 billion per year. That’s a lot of money for infrastructure, that’s a lot of money for schools, that’s a lot of money for human services.

Pritzker: Property taxes are high across Illinois because of the principle way in which we fund schools. Most other states in the United States have moved away from funding their schools through property taxes.

In Illinois about 25 percent of the funding for schools comes from the state, and the vast majority of the rest of it comes from local property taxes. The average across most states is about half and half.

So, over years the state has essentially pulled itself out of funding schools and left the burden on local property owners. So, we need to change the system, we need to shift and that way we can lower local property taxes.

I want to lower local property taxes and lower income taxes on the vast majority of the people in the state. The very, very wealthiest people in the state, the top 1 percent in the state, pay about 4 to 5 percent total of their income, and the bottom 20 percent of taxpayers pay about 13-plus percent because property taxes are so regressive and sales taxes by their very nature regressive.

I just want to make it a little bit fairer and make sure we can lower local property taxes because if there’s one thing that is driving some people out of the state it is property taxes. That’s why a fair tax system works better than a flat tax system.

Estate Tax

Rauner: Our estate tax should be eliminated. I’ve recommended that every year that I’ve been governor. I can’t tell you how many people I know — small business owners — who come to me and say, “The income tax is middle of the road, it’s not great, but it’s not terrible, it’s not our worst tax. I can afford to live in Illinois. I can’t afford to die in Illinois. And when I get older I’m leaving. I’m going to make sure my business and my assets are as far away from Illinois as I can get them away.”

That’s a problem. All we’re doing is hurting ourselves. We’re chasing our tails down. We’re not collecting that much on that tax, and we’re hurting the rest of the economy and deteriorating our tax base because we put in a tax that’s not competitive with other states.

Pritzker: This issue is hugely important because family farms built this state. So many of you are family farms and want to be able to hand them down to your children and let them farm and grandchildren. That is the principle by which I would approach this issue.

We’ve got to make sure that we are not forcing people of the business of farming, a family business where you can keep your kids close to home, where you can engage the community.

Family businesses and family farms are enormous job-creators for the state, and that’s what family farms are, they’re small businesses. That would be my approach would be really involving taxes, especially the estate tax.

Biofuel Tax Incentives

Rauner: I want to eliminate as much tax as I can. On E15, I’d like to work with you to figure out a good strategy to grow E15 and grow ethanol and talk about the right policy on that.

Let’s work on it together and come up with a policy we can actually implement with the General Assembly and get it done.

Pritzker: I’m 100 percent in favor of us incentivizing E15, making sure that we bring back our tax incentives. This is hugely important not only to our ag industry, but to our environment. So, to me this is a critical part of our future. It’s something that we’ll work on when I get elected.

Transportation

Rauner: In my second term, I want to add over one-half million jobs in this state. I want us to be one of the fastest growing states in America. If we do that and we shrink the government spending, we can have a balanced budget, we can have money for our schools and we can have money for our infrastructure because we’ve got to put a lot more money into our roads and bridges.

The transportation network is the foundation of our prosperity. We’re the transportation hub of America, the transportation hub of the world, and we need to invest more in infrastructure.

Pritzker: We can’t grow the industry unless we improve infrastructure in this state. Bruce Rauner promised four years ago that he was going to invest in infrastructure. He didn’t do it.

Roads and ports are how you get your products from farm to market, but we haven’t had a major capital bill since 2009. Our roads get a “D” rating from the American Society of Civil Engineers.

River traffic and flood control on the Illinois River is managed by eight locks and dams which farmers rely on to get crops to market. These assets are badly outdated with aging infrastructure and backlog of differed maintenance.