Body Mass Index, Playing Position, Race, and the Cardiovascular Mortality of Retired Professional Football Players
Jump to Section Methods Results Discussion References

A cohort of 3,439 NFL players was constructed from a 1990 NFL pension fund database and included all pension-vested players (≥5 pension-credited playing seasons) from the 1959 through 1988 seasons. The pension fund database includes each player's name, Social Security number, date of birth, and year of each credited season. Player race was collected because of known racial differences in United States mortality. Race was determined based on players' self-identification using standard racial categories on a response form accompanying a letter introducing the study sent to players' last known address. For nonrespondents (48%) race was assigned using available pictures in yearly media guides.1x1Baron, S. and Rinsky, R. Health Hazard Evaluation Report, National Football League Players Mortality Study (Report No. HETA 88-085) . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Atlanta, GA;

Google ScholarSee all References Position played and height and weight during the last season played were assigned using data reported annually by the NFL teams and compiled in a commercial publication.7x7Neft, D., Cohen, R., and Korch, R. The Sports Encyclopedia: Pro Football. St. Martin's Press, New York;

Google ScholarSee all References BMI (weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared) was categorized using standard cutpoints: normal (18.5 to <25 kg/m2), overweight (25 to <30 kg/m2), and obese (≥30 kg/m2).8x8US Department of Health and Human Services and US Department of Agriculture. Dietary Guideline for Americans. 6th Ed. US Government Printing Office, Washington DC;

Google ScholarSee all References Player position was categorized based on physiologic studies of college and professional players demonstrating differences in size, body composition, strength, and endurance: category I (defensive back, punter, kicker, quarterback, and wide receiver), category II (fullback, halfback, linebacker, running back, and tight end), and category III (linemen).9x9Pincivero, D.M. and Bompa, T.O. A physiological review of American football. Sports Med. ; 23: 247–260

Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (37) | Google ScholarSee all References, 10x10Kraemer, W.J., Torine, J.C., Silvestre, R., French, D.N., Ratamess, N.A., Spiering, B.A., Hatfield, D.L., Vingren, J.L., and Volek, J.S. Body size and composition of National Football League players. J Strength Cond Res. ; 19: 485–489

PubMed | Google ScholarSee all References Because of our interest in linemen, we performed additional analyses on the 2 major subgroups, offensive and defensive linemen.

Vital status was ascertained from multiple sources: NFL pension fund death records, Social Security Administration Death Master File, and Internal Revenue Service records. Players were matched to the National Death Index from 1979, when the National Death Index began, through the study end date, December 31, 2007. The National Death Index provided underlying causes of death coded to the revision of the International Classification of Diseases in effect at the time of death. When death information was not provided by the National Death Index, hardcopy death certificates were obtained from state vital statistics offices and were coded by a certified nosologist.

NFL player mortality was compared to the general United States population using the NIOSH life-table analysis system.11x11Schubauer-Berigan, M.K., Hein, M.J., Raudabaugh, W.M., Ruder, A.M., Silver, S.R., Spaeth, S., Steenland, K., Petersen, M.R., and Waters, K.M. Update of the NIOSH life table analysis system: a person-years analysis program for the windows computing environment. Am J Ind Med. ; 54: 915–924

Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (51) | Google ScholarSee all References Because all cohort members had a minimum of 5 credited seasons, a risk begin date was determined as the approximate date at the end of the fifth credited season (assigned as February 1). Each cohort member accumulated person-years at risk for each year of life from the risk begin date until the date of death or the study end date, whichever came first. To calculate the expected number of deaths, person-years at risk were stratified into 5-year intervals by age and calendar time and then multiplied by the appropriate United States race- and cause-specific mortality rates for men in 119 cause-of-death categories. For each cause of death the expected numbers of deaths were summed across the strata and the ratio of observed to expected number of deaths was expressed as the standardized mortality ratio (SMR). Ninety-five percent confidence intervals (CIs) were obtained using exact methods when the observed number of deaths was ≤10 or approximate methods when the observed number of deaths was >10. SMRs were also calculated by position category and for the offensive and defensive linemen subgroups.

Internal analyses compared mortality across player position categories. Because stratified SMRs are generally not comparable, directly standardized rate ratios and 95% CIs for each position category relative to category I were obtained using the life-table analysis system.11x11Schubauer-Berigan, M.K., Hein, M.J., Raudabaugh, W.M., Ruder, A.M., Silver, S.R., Spaeth, S., Steenland, K., Petersen, M.R., and Waters, K.M. Update of the NIOSH life table analysis system: a person-years analysis program for the windows computing environment. Am J Ind Med. ; 54: 915–924

Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (51) | Google ScholarSee all References We also used Cox proportional hazards regression models to evaluate the association of position category and BMI with CVD mortality (International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision codes I00 through I78). Attained age was used as the time scale; consequently, age was controlled for in the models. BMI was treated as a categorical variable using standard cutpoints but additional models treating BMI as a continuous variable were evaluated. In addition to position category and BMI, other covariates included race (white/Hispanic, African-American/all other races), era of play (play ended before vs in 1980 [median] or later), and time since last played (<10 vs ≥10 years). We also controlled for the calendar year of follow up (by decades) because recent studies have found that age-adjusted CVD mortality has been decreasing over time.12x12Ford, E.S., Ajani, U.A., Croft, J.B., Critchley, J.A., Labarthe, D.R., Kottke, T.E., Giles, W.H., and Capewell, S. Explaining the decrease in U.S. deaths from coronary disease, 1980–2000. N Engl J Med. ; 356: 2388–2398

Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (1767) | Google ScholarSee all References Because BMI and position category are strongly associated, in our models we first examined the independent effect of BMI on CVD mortality. Additional models examined the added effect of position category on CVD mortality while adjusting for the role of BMI.

The proportional hazards assumption for BMI was tested using a time-dependent interaction term between age (<55 vs ≥55 years) and BMI category. To examine the impact of possible racial misclassification we conducted additional stratified analyses comparing findings for players with self-reported versus observationally assigned race. All regression modeling used the SAS 9.2 procedure PHREG (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina). A 2-sided p value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. The study protocol was approved by the NIOSH institutional review board.