Michelle Nunn, Sam Nunn visit Albany as part of campaign tour | VIDEO
U.S. Senate candidate Michelle Nunn and her father, former U.S. Senator Sam Nunn, made an appearance at the Second Harvest of South Georgia warehouse in Albany as part of the younger Nunn's "What Washington Can Learn From Georgia: Strong Bases, Strong Communities" tour.

Video U.S. Senate candidate Michelle Nunn visits Albany

ALBANY — A Senate candidate and her father, who once held that Senate seat, was in Albany earlier this week as part of a statewide tour to join volunteers and veterans at a food bank warehouse as a means to bring to the forefront community service as well as the impact of military bases in Georgia.

Michelle Nunn, the Democratic nominee, was joined by her father, former U.S. Sen. Sam Nunn, at the Second Harvest of South Georgia food bank warehouse in East Albany during her “What Washington Can Learn From Georgia: Strong Bases, Strong Communities” statewide tour. During the stop in Albany, a group of volunteers, who also included U.S. Rep. Sanford Bishop, D-Albany, were helping to pack boxes for the food bank’s mobile food pantry, along with the Nunns.

While in the area, the Michelle Nunn said that meetings with stakeholders took place during the visit for discussions regarding Marine Corps Logistics Base-Albany and its impact. The overall purpose of her tours, the Nunn campaign has said, is to highlight collaboration and getting things done.

“We have had great conversations with sectors of leaders to ensure there is a strong community embracement of military bases,” she said, adding viters should “send someone to Washington that will stand up for these folks.”

The campaign tour has included visits to Columbus, Warner Robins and Valdosta, all of which are homes to military installations. Michelle Nunn, who indicated she would have interest in serving on the Armed Services Committee if elected, said during her stop in Albany that she has taken from these stops a re-enforcement of what she already knows regarding the significance of the military’s presence in Georgia, both in terms of economic and community impact.

“Whether it’s cyber security or logistics, there is important work done here,” she said.

Sam Nunn, who represented Georgia in the U.S. Senate 1972-97, said that participating in the tour with his daughter has brought back fond memories of times he spent at military bases in the state while he was in office, and of the community spirit attached to those installations.

He also said that his daughter is one who wants to work with people on both sides of the aisle and has pledged to work with any president. Talking about solving problems is what makes her stand out on the campaign trail, he said.

“From my experience with the Senate, I don’t think there is a single major problem that can be resolved without Democrats and Republicans (working together),” he said. “We need to elect both Democrats and Republicans who will work together.”

In this tour, Sam Nunn said he has observed the achievements met by members of a community working together — which, in the case of the Albany visit, allowed for food to be more easily distributed to those in the area who need something to put on the table.

Extending helping hands “is what makes this country work,” he said.

Michelle Nunn is running against Republican nominee David Perdue and Libertarian Amanda Swafford for the Senate seat being vacated in January by U.S. Sen. Saxby Chambliss, R-Moultrie. They will face each other in the general election on Nov. 4.