Asked about impeaching President Obama, the response from U.S. Rep. Mo Brooks might surprise you
HUNTSVILLE, Alabama – It's no secret that U.S. Rep. Mo Brooks is not a fan of President Obama.

In a speech Tuesday to the Republican Women of Huntsville, Brooks said the president has "emasculated" the United States with his policies.

So when a member of the audience asked Brooks why impeachment proceedings had not begun against Obama, Brooks said he did not believe such action was warranted from a legal standpoint.

The question – which drew applause from the audience before Brooks even began to answer – centered on the premise that Obama was guilty of "murder" because of the deaths of four U.S. diplomats, including Ambassador Christopher Stevens, in Benghazi.

The issue has been a lightning rod of criticism by Republicans against Obama and Hillary Clinton, who was secretary of state at the time of the 2012 attack on the U.S. embassy in the Libyan city.

"There is no evidence that I'm aware of that Barack Obama himself intended to kill our ambassador and those three officials," said Brooks, dismissing the suggestion of a murder charge. "Now, did he make a lot of bad decisions that resulted in their deaths? Unquestionably. And those bad judgments were enhanced by then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton when the folks in Benghazi are asking for additional security and being denied.

"It's also a failure to heed all of the attacks that had been launched both on American personnel in Libya and the embassies of other counties in Libya."

Still, Brooks said, "murder is too strong a term to describe what the president did."

Under the U.S. Constitution, charges against a sitting president must be brought by the House of Representatives and the Senate serves as the trial jury. While the House is controlled by Republicans, the Senate is controlled by Democrats.

"Perjuring Bill Clinton – who unquestionably, undeniably committed a felony, and he's supposed to be our chief law enforcement officer -- and here he is undermining the judicial system by committing a felony under oath," Brooks said. "And the Democrats, under no circumstances, would not vote to convict him of the acts that he did.

"Contrast that with the Republicans and Richard Nixon. When Richard Nixon engaged in obstruction of justice, we did what was right for our country and he was impeached in the House and then the Senators who were Republicans said, Mr. President, I know you are a member of our party but you did wrong. And there are consequences for doing wrong and we're going to vote to convict. Do you want to resign first?"

Nixon, of course, became the only sitting president to resign office in 1974 following the Watergate scandal.

"But the other party is so partisan; they are so blinded by their desire for power that they refuse to be honest judges and jurors in the United States Senate," Brooks said of Democrats. "And so it's impossible to get the vote – assuming you had the evidence constituting treason, bribery, high crimes and misdemeanors.

"Having said all that, there is some talk amongst some individual members in the House of Representatives about whether or not the president's conduct rises to those levels. We're going to see how that plays out. But I'm an attorney. I've been a prosecutor before. I don't believe in prosecuting somebody unless we have the evidence that is compelling, that proves guilt."