Vote on bill to repeal Common Core standards postponed but not before key change made
A state Senate committee today postponed a vote on whether to repeal the controversial Common Core education standards.

But before the Senate Education Policy Committee adjourned the leader of the Senate, Del Marsh, who has been a strong supporter of Common Core, convinced the committee to adopt an amendment to the repeal bill that would ultimately leave it up to individual school systems whether to adopt the standards or not.

Committee chairman, Sen. Dick Brewbaker, R-Montgomery, adjourned the meeting after Marsh's amendment was approved and after the sponsor of the repeal bill, Sen. Rusty Glover, R-Mobile, was unable to attend the meeting.

Marsh, a member of the committee, said he continues to hope that the committee will not move Glover's bill to the full Senate with a favorable recommendation the Senate approve it. But Marsh said if in fact the bill does come out of committee he wants to try to prevent a sweeping Senate action overturning the education standards for all systems.

The state Board of Education approved the Common Core standards in 2010. Since that time conservative groups and the Tea Party have worked to reverse the decision. Marsh to date has successfully stymied those efforts.

"I have not had a single school superintendent or school board member on the local level tell me to opt out or get out of Common Core," said Marsh, who added that the decision should rest with the state school board, which has already voted to adopt the standards.

Marsh agreed that his amendment to leave the final say up to school superintendents and school boards would likely preserve the standards, at least for some students, should the Legislature repeal the standards.

Asked if he was frustrated by the continued effort to repeal the standards, Marsh said he was.

"There is a very vocal group who are anti-common core that feel like it's intrusion of the federal government. I don't see it," said Marsh. "But those are the people who are down here year after year and I think it's the reason we are being faced with this in committee today."

Marsh said the Legislature is facing what he called serious issues - projected budget deficits, prison reforms and others - and that common core is not one of those issues.

"This is one (common core) that I don't think this body really wants to deal with yet it keeps coming up and taking up time. Hopefully we addressed it for the last time today but if it keeps coming up I will vote against it," said Marsh.

Brewbaker, the committee's chairman, said he supports repeal of the standards.

"Alabama (education) achievement is going in the wrong direction," said Brewbaker. "Of course if you asked education they say that's just a J curve. But when does a J curve become a downturn? I don't think these standards move us in the right direction. I think when you have more and more states getting out every year and the reason they give is because their student achievement is going the wrong way. That's exactly what is happening here but the program is still very popular and I don't claim to understand it."