One of Roy Moore's accusers worked as interpreter for Hillary Clinton campaign
One of the women who said Senate candidate Roy Moore pursued her while she was in high school worked for Hillary Clinton's campaign as a sign language interpreter, according to videos and documents posted online.

Deborah Wesson Gibson, owner of the interpreting company Signs of Excellence, provided services for Clinton during her 2016 campaign, as well as working with former Democratic Vice President Joe Biden during other events. Photos posted to her company's social media site show her providing sign language services for Sen. Patrick Murphy and Sen. Bill Nelson, both Florida Democrats.

Gibson's company has offices in Florida and Alabama, providing sign language interpretation to businesses, politicians, governments and more.

Gibson did not respond to texts or email messages seeking a comment. The voice mail box for her phone is full. She told AL.com yesterday she stood by her comments in the Washington Post interview.

In a 2016 interview with Florida's WLRN, Gibson outlined the challenges that come with providing interpretation at a political rally.

"One of the things that she (Hillary Clinton) does," Gibson said, "Is that she'll say, 'You know what? If standing up for equal pay is playing the woman's card, then DEAL ME IN!'"

"And you might normally interpret that say something like, 'Include me," says Gibson. "But because that's one of the things that she says, we literally sign, "Deal me in," like it was cards that you were dealing. We want to capture and hold that euphemism and let the deaf person have access to that as well. So they can be party of the frenzy".

Photos showing Gibson with Clinton and Biden began circulating on social media shortly after the Moore piece was published. Clinton's campaign expenditures do not list payments to Gibson or Signs of Excellence, however, and neither she nor her company responded to questions if Gibson donated her services.

She is not listed as a donor to Jones, though she has shared one of his campaign fliers on Facebook.

Gibson told the Washington Post she was 17 in 1981 when Moore, then a 34-year-old assistant district attorney in Etowah County, spoke to her high school civics class and asked her on a date shortly after. Two other women said Moore pursued them when they were in their teens while another, Leigh Corfman, said she had a sexual encounter with Moore when she was 14 and he was 32.

Gibson told The Post she and Moore dated for two or three months but only shared kisses. She said her mother told her she'd be the "luckiest girl in the world" to date Moore.

"He was a hometown boy made good," Gibson said. "West Point and so forth."

Looking back, however, said said she's glad "nothing bad happened."

"As a mother of daughters, I realize that our age difference at that time made our dating inappropriate."

Moore denies claims

Moore has denied the claims, saying the allegations were manufactured by his Democratic opponents.

The Post said Corfman was a Republican who voted for Clinton's opponent Donald Trump in 2016. The political affiliation of the other two women isn't known but none are listed as having donated to or worked for Moore's Democratic opponent, Doug Jones, or his rivals in the Republican primary, the Post reported.

On Facebook, Gibson shared a flier for a campaign rally for Moore's opponent, Doug Jones and an October visit on his behalf by Biden. On Oct. 15, Gibson shared a story about Moore and his comments that the massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School occurred because Americans had "forgotten God's law."

"God is love, not divisive bigotry, racism, hate and intolerance of those different than us," she wrote under comments on the story.