Departments
History:

Prior to the outbreak of World War II, foreign assistance was not a prime concern of the United States, whose isolationist tendencies prevented policymakers from involving themselves with the status of economic conditions in other countries. But after WWII ended, and U.S. officials saw how ravaged Western Europe was in the wake of the six-year conflict, American foreign policy began to shift dramatically on the issue of foreign aid. Concerned over the threat the Soviet Union posed in exploiting war-torn economies by promoting its socialist message, American officials decided to spearhead several important measures designed to rebuild and develop foreign economies that maintained the capitalist model.

First, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) were officially created on December 27, 1945, by leaders of the U.S. and Western Europe. These two permanent organizations were set up to provide foreign loans to countries seeking assistance in developing their economies. A more short-term, emergency plan launched by the United States in April 1948 was the Economic Cooperation Act, otherwise known as the Marshall Plan (named after George C. Marshall, commander of the U.S. military during WWII). The goal of the Marshall Plan was to stabilize Europe’s economies to prevent Soviet-backed socialist movements from taking hold in key countries like France, Great Britain, and then West Germany.

Although the Marshall Plan ended on June 30, 1951, U.S. officials were still afraid that foreign governments might fall under the rule of Communism. Motivated by this worry, Congress authorized new programs designed to unite military and economic programs with technical assistance. On October 31, 1951, the first Mutual Security Act was adopted, creating the Mutual Security Agency.

In 1953, the Foreign Operations Administration was established as an independent government agency outside the Department of State to consolidate economic and technical assistance on a worldwide basis. Its responsibilities were merged into the State Department’s new International Cooperation Administration (ICA) one year later. The ICA administered aid for economic, political and social development purposes. But as part of the State Department, ICA’s functions were subject to the Cold War policy aims of the department.

Unhappy with the first Mutual Security Act, Congress adopted another in 1954, which blended development assistance, security assistance, a discretionary contingency fund, and guarantees for private investments into one program. Congress then approved yet another Mutual Security Act, in 1957, which lead to the creation of the Development Loan Fund (DLF). This new fund became the lending arm of the ICA. The DLF’s primary function was to extend loans that the Export-Import Bank and other donors were not interested in or prepared to underwrite, namely those repayable in local currencies. The DLF financed everything other than technical assistance but was most noteworthy for financing capital projects.

By 1960, public support for foreign assistance programs had dwindled, thanks in part to the novel, The Ugly American, by William J. Lederer and Eugene Burdick, which described America’s arrogance, incompetence and corruption in Southeast Asia, and how the United States was losing the struggle against Communism.

Foreign aid became a campaign topic in the 1960 presidential race between Richard Nixon and John F. Kennedy. After Kennedy was elected, his administration made reorganization of American foreign assistance programs a top priority. Kennedy was by no means motivated purely by altruism. The President was just as interested in stemming the threat from Communism as were Nixon and Eisenhower, and he saw foreign aid as an important tool to achieve this aim.

On September 4, 1961, Congress passed the Foreign Assistance Act (pdf), which reorganized foreign assistance programs into military and non-military divisions. The act mandated the creation of an agency to administer economic assistance programs, and on November 3, 1961, President Kennedy established the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) as an independent federal entity not under the authority of the State Department.

The USAID became the first foreign assistance organization whose primary emphasis was on long-range economic and social development assistance efforts. The agency unified already existing American aid efforts, combining the economic and technical assistance operations of the International Cooperation Agency, the loan activities of the Development Loan Fund, the local currency functions of the Export-Import Bank, and the agricultural surplus distribution activities of the Food for Peace program of the Department of Agriculture.

Under the agency, development assistance consisted primarily of two programs: (1) a Development Loan Fund whose primary purpose was to foster plans and programs to “develop economic resources” and increase capital infrastructure; and (2) a Development Grant Fund to focus on “assisting the development of human resources through such means as programs of technical cooperation and development” in less developed countries.

Three other significant economic assistance programs were: A guaranty program (now the Overseas Private Investment Corporation) to provide protection assuring United States business against certain risks of doing business overseas; a “supporting assistance” program (now the Economic Support Fund program) to support or promote economic or political stability; and an appropriated contingency fund.

USAID focused on long-term country-by-country planning and a commitment of resources on a multi-year, programmed basis. The new focus of development was to achieve economic growth and political stability in the developing world to combat both Communism and the threat of instability arising from poverty.

One of the first programs undertaken by USAID was the Alliance for Progress. Set up in the fall of 1960 by the Act of Bogota and confirmed by the Charter of Punta del Este (Uruguay) in early 1961, the alliance was a hemisphere-wide commitment of funds and effort to develop the nations of the Americas. The alliance became the basis for USAID’s programs in Latin America throughout the 1960s.

In Asia, USAID efforts were aimed at countering the spread of Communism, particularly the influence of the People’s Republic of China. This quickly ballooned into a large program of assistance based on counter-insurgency and economic development in Vietnam, which lasted until the withdrawal of American troops in 1975. In Africa, the agency focused on such initiatives as the “education” of the leadership of the newly independent countries and meeting other economic and social imperatives.

In the 1970s, the USAID struggled to hold onto its funding and support from Congress, which had grown weary of foreign assistance programs in the wake of the Vietnam War. In 1971, the Senate rejected a foreign assistance bill authorizing funds for fiscal years 1972 and 1973. The defeat of the 1971 bill represented the first time that either house of Congress had rejected a foreign aid authorization since before the Marshall Plan. Many lawmakers felt foreign aid programs were too concerned with short-term military considerations and that the aid was a giveaway producing few foreign policy results for the United States.

Attempts to reform the foreign assistance program were led by the House Committee on Foreign Affairs. Assistance for the poorest sectors of developing nations (“basic human needs”) became the central thrust of the reform. To extend assistance directly to the recipient nation’s population, Congress replaced the old categories of technical assistance grants and development loans with new functional categories aimed at specific problems such as agriculture, family planning, and education. The aim of bilateral development aid was to concentrate on sharing American technical expertise and commodities to meet development problems, rather than relying on large-scale transfers of money and capital goods or financing of infrastructure.

Senator Hubert Humphrey (D-Minnesota) introduced legislation in 1978 to reorganize the foreign assistance management structure. In the Humphrey bill, an International Development Cooperation Agency (IDCA) would coordinate foreign assistance activities as they related to bilateral programs administered by the USAID, multilateral programs of international lending institutions then under the purview of the Department of the Treasury, voluntary contributions to United Nations agencies then administered by the Department of State and food programs then administered by the USAID. An International Development Institute would be established within the IDCA to address, among other things, private and voluntary organizations and with one of the institute’s constituent parts being the Peace Corps.

The Humphrey bill was not enacted into law. Bureaucratic obstacles within the Executive branch and in Congress operated to limit the statutory impact of the bill to changes in the policy statements contained in the Foreign Assistance Act and less sweeping administrative changes. The IDCA, however, was established by Executive Order in September 1979 by President Jimmy Carter. For a brief time, the IDCA assumed some of the powers held by the Secretary of State in dictating how economic foreign assistance was administered. But when President Ronald Reagan was elected, it became essentially defunct, as the administration provided no staff for the agency, and it faded quickly from the scene. Those administrative powers given to the IDCA returned to the Secretary of State.

Beginning in late 1988, the House Committee on Foreign Affairs (HFAC) began an examination of the foreign assistance program and in particular the continued relevance of the Foreign Assistance Act. At the same time, numerous outside interest groups also began a similar review. The product of the HFAC review was the Hamilton-Gilman Task Force Report of 1989, which restated many of the same themes that President Kennedy had raised almost 30 years earlier. The report’s major recommendation was to repeal the Foreign Assistance Act and start fresh with an act that was more focused than current law.

The legislation that was drafted by the committee had as its major economic assistance themes economic growth, poverty alleviation, environmental sustainability and promotion of political pluralism. The bill also attempted to be more results-oriented in its approach by streamlining congressional notification procedures and encouraging a more active role for program evaluation. The draft legislation was vetted informally with the Bush White House, which, although leery about the ultimate outcome, did not discourage the process from continuing. But the committee’s leadership was unable to sell the bill to lawmakers, who watered down the legislation until it was little more than a collection of pork-barrel items and certification requirements.

In 1991, the administration of President George H. W. Bush submitted to Congress its own attempt at rewriting the Foreign Assistance Act. Some members of Congress balked at the proposal, which would have increased the Executive branch’s power over foreign aid spending, and the plan never went anywhere.

The House Foreign Affairs Committee attempted a compromise by combining elements of its 1989 plan with the Bush administration’s 1991 proposal. But again, stumbling blocks kept a rewrite of the Foreign Assistance Act from being passed. President Bill Clinton took his own shot at revamping federal legislation governing foreign assistance by introducing the Peace, Prosperity, and Democracy Act (PPDA) of 1994, which would have implemented a radical new account structure for foreign assistance programs. The bill never made it out of a House committee and died quietly.

Instead of submitting a plan to rewrite the Foreign Assistance Act, President George W. Bush used his executive authority to drastically alter USAID’s autonomy. On January 19, 2006, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice announced fundamental changes to the agency, arguing that, “the current structure of US foreign assistance risks incoherent policies and ineffective programs and perhaps even wasted resources.” Rice said that existing foreign assistance programs were too fragmented to plan coherent policy or align such spending with foreign policy goals, especially the goal of preventing failed states such as Afghanistan was prior to U.S. intervention.

To remedy these problems, the top official in charge of the USAID was moved to a position within the State Department. This effectively ended the agency’s longstanding separation from the State Department by making the administrator of the agency hold the dual title of Director of Foreign Assistance, a position with a status level of Deputy Secretary of State. Critics of the Bush administration saw the move as an attempt to give the President even greater control over how foreign assistance is doled out and help shape policy aims geared toward thwarting overseas terrorism.

Rice named Randall Tobias, a former pharmaceutical and telecommunications executive who was serving as President Bush’s AIDS czar, to serve as the new director of foreign assistance for both the State Department and USAID—a move that left foreign aid advocates further shaking their heads. Tobias was given authority over planning, implementing, and overseeing all foreign assistance spending by the department and the USAID—about 80% of all such U.S. spending, which totaled $19 billion in 18 separate programs. Tobias, however, didn’t last long in this new position after he was implicated in a prostitution scandal (see Controversies).

In 2007, the USAID launched the Development Leadership Initiative, designed to double the number of Foreign Service Officers by 2012, bringing their rank to 2,000.

In July 2009, under the incoming Obama administration, the State Department launched the first Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review (QDDR), a study to be done every four years that analyzes the blueprint for the USAID and State Department diplomatic and development efforts abroad, and initiates reforms needed to increase USAID’s ability to meet development goals.

That year the Senate passed a “Sense of the Senate” requesting the strengthening of USAID and the expeditious nomination of an Administrator to serve as the chief advocate for U.S. development capacity in national security deliberations. The USAID Administrator position remained vacant for almost the entire first year of the Obama presidency, and in July Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called the appointment process “a nightmare” and “frustrating beyond words.” Alonzo Fulgham had been serving as Acting Administrator, but in November, with only a week left for him to legally remain in that position, Dr. Rajiv Shah was nominated as Administrator. He was easily confirmed and sworn in on January 7, 2010. With the USAID under fire for various controversies, Dr. Shah spearheaded an effort to bring overdue reforms to the embattled agency.

In June 2010, the USAID launched a new division called the Bureau for Policy, Planning and Learning (pdf), which is independent of the State Department and whose purpose is to evaluate which crises—from refugee situations to natural disasters and civil unrest— most urgently require the agency's help. Then in November 2010, the agency created the Bureau of Food Security, designed to manage President Barack Obama’s Feed the Future initiative (pdf), USAID’s program to develop the agricultural sectors of various developing countries. It also set up the USAID Forward initiative, which defined a specific action plan to achieve the broader policy goals defined in the QDDR, and to achieve a series of reforms within the agency.

In July 2010, the USAID formed the Development Innovation Ventures (DIV) Fund, for which it received 104 proposals and awarded 13 grants; among the projects were plans for building an affordable fuel-cell powered bicycle, improving rural solar access, and developing a new monitoring platform to reduce election fraud. Also in July, the agency and the State Department kicked off the Foreign Assistance Dashboard, an online means for the public to view State and USAID budget and appropriations data from FY 2006 to FY 2011.

On September 22, 2010, President Obama signed Presidential Policy Determination (PPD) on Global Development, a classified document detailing the planned rebuilding of the USAID as “the U.S. Government’s lead development agency.” In December, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton released the new QDDR, which addressed the bolstering of USAID Foreign Service staffing and planned transfer of health sector assistance back to the USAID from the State Department.