All Things Anderson
Anderson Cooper anchored a special two hour edition of AC360 on Saturday that took a look at Texas on the day after Hurricane Ike. Here's the intro for the broadcast:



Reports were filed by Gary Tuchman in Galveston. This is his interview with a very fortunate couple who decided to ride out the storm and luckily lived to regret their decision:

Rob Marciano also reported from Galveston Island: Chad Myers updated us on the storm from CNN's Atlanta Weather Center: Ted Rollins, reporting on the latest news about the train accident outside of Los Angeles: Ali Velshi, reporting from Baytown on damage to the oil refineries and the impact on gas prices: Rusty Dornin talked with AC in Bridgetown about the rescues she witnessed throughout the day: Rick Sanchez was with the Coast Guard rescue team at Ellington Field: Jeanne Meserve reported on the damage in downtown Houston: Sean Callebs reported by broadband from Kemah: Josh Levs reported from Atlanta on the history of train accidents in the US: Retired General Russel Honore gave an overview of the storms aftermath: No one enjoys the necessity of special coverage because it almost always follows the occurrence of a catastrophic event. But among the loss and the tragedy there were also a few lighter moments.Anderson came across a dog while he was standing in the waste deep water. Unlike the dogs that he saw in the wake of Katrina this one was apparently not lost, just accompanying his owner on a rescue mission.

Anderson seems a little obsessed with not embarrassing himself and the video landing on YouTube. I, for one, wish he would have taken those extra two steps!

Rats and snakes and alligators? Oh my!

All content, unless otherwise cited, is © All Things Anderson and may not be used without consent of the blog administrator. All Things Anderson is a blog dedicated to CNN's AC360 and its host Anderson Cooper.

So there you have it,a brief overview of the two hour special. Enjoy the rest of your weekend and I hope to see you back here soon. ~Phebe