Living History: Hillary Rodham Clinton: 9780743222259: Amazon.com: Books
Hillary Rodham Clinton states in her Author's Note, at the beginning of "Living History," that she is writing a personal memoir, not a comprehensive history. If you want to relax and dig in for a fascinating, insightful read, then it is important to accept her statement/disclaimer. Do not expect more from the book than a well written memoir. Hillary was, after all, the First Lady, and this is her unique, nontraditional take on her time in that position. I do hope that someday, when Senator Clinton retires from politics and gains more of a historical perspective, she will take on the task of authoring a comprehensive analysis of the Clinton Administration. That is a book I will really look forward to reading.

Senator Clinton, a woman of my generation, writes with intelligence, wit, sensitivity and lots of savvy, about the experiences in her life that made her the woman she was on January 20, 1993, when she moved to 1600 Pennsylvania Ave. It is important to understand who she was then, the product of an amazing time in history, especially for American woman, in order to appreciate just how unique she was as she began her White House years. As a woman - wife, mother, professional and a daughter of the '60s - Hillary came to the White House with the education, potential, goals (her husband's and her own), and ambitions that were totally unlike those of any First Lady before her. We catch a glimpse of the young woman who was the first student to speak at a Wellesley graduation - and who received kudos to boot. I appreciate and admire that particular early accomplishment and how hard she must have worked, scholastically and with student government, to be invited by her peers to speak. How many young women...or men...did any of us know in 1969 who could have delivered such an address to such an exacting audience? The accuracy with which she describes the issues and conflicts of the time, i.e., Vietnam, civil rights, political activism, the Equal Rights Amendment, brings back the period with all its upheaval, innocence and idealism. Hillary was a political activist, working within the system for changes that would benefit a majority of Americans, even in high school. She entered Yale Law School, when female matriculation was still a rare occurrence. During her early career she focused on children's advocacy, reform for migrant workers, education, and healthcare. In her twenties, Hillary was already a person with strong convictions, making and living history.

I enjoyed her account of her courtship with Bill, and do give him credit that he had the sense to stick with her and not select the Miss America figure that his Mom seemed to expect. From the get go, this was a couple that did well together. They were very attracted to each other, yes...and more importantly, their minds meshed.

Her account of the Health (insurance) Task Force, which she headed is disappointing. As Chairperson, she received a major appointment in President Clinton's administration, and I did expect a meatier description of the job, her duties, pitfalls, successes and failures...and, of course, the results.

Her anecdotes of foreign travel, especially the conference in China, and her take on the heads of state who came to the White House during her time as official hostess, make for interesting reading.

Many have faulted Senator Clinton for forgiving her husband, and working to rebuild their marriage and relationship. Her reasons for sticking with Bill are very moving and make perfect sense to me.

When the former First Lady was interviewed on the Today Show, years ago, and talked about the "vast right-wing conspiracy," many called her paranoid and naive. Now, though she admits that "conspiracy" was not the most appropriate word, she sticks to her guns. She believes that there is a powerful and moneyed right-wing element in our country who wants to impose their political agenda on America. They spend their money, not by publicly debating issues of national importance, but by spreading scandal and destroying personal and professional reputations, at times using little more than rumor for their reality base. Although the "politics of personal destruction" had been employed long before the Clintons came on the scene, the radical conservative movement took these politics to a new high...or perhaps low is the better word... during the Clinton administration. The result was millions of US tax dollars spent trying to prove that the Clintons were guilty of illegal activities. None of the accusations proved true. Many years and investigations later, I believe that the country, and probably the Clintons, are still exhausted by all the needless vitriol.

I accept that both Hillary and Bill Clinton are super controversial figures. Yes, folks tend to either love them or hate them. Both are talented, intelligent, human beings, who sought public office to serve their country. In a democracy one does not have to agree with their political or personal philosophies. Just vote no...or yes, as the case may be.

Finally, I have read commentaries that state this memoir is lacking, because Senator Clinton did not add lurid details to her book or discuss events that have already been written about and discussed, ad nauseum. Baloney!! If you are interested in the White House Years during the Clinton Administration from the First Lady's point of view, a woman who redefined the position of presidential spouse, then you will enjoy "Living History." I did.