Donald Trump Men's Two Button Side Vent Striped Suit, Navy, 42 Short at Amazon Men’s Clothing store:
English words can't express how much I love this Mexican-made beauty, so allow me to describe to you what has become my usual evening routine:

I'm generally pretty tired when I get home from my roofing job in the abandoned tract-slums of Coral Gables, but I find that if I pound six or seven cans of Natty Ice in the back of the pickup I can forget most of the day's indignities. Having one leg shorter than the other can make life difficult at times, but it's a distinct advantage as a roofer (as long as I maintain a clockwise pattern around the roof), and it turns out that the pants for this suit have one short leg too! It's the left leg, which is the opposite of what I need, but I just wear the pants backwards and it's fine.

As soon as I step out of my Reeboks and cut-offs, I slip into this bad boy and my evening ritual has begun. I tie my canary-yellow Donald Trump tie around my neck (no shirt - I like how the jacket's faux satin liner feels against my bacon skin) and I snug it up as tight as I can get it (just enough to breathe, not enough to swallow). Then I crank out a good set of push ups to get the blood pumping and check my appearance periodically in mirror. I'm looking for a nice cherry-red complexion and the general bloat that develops when you don't allow any blood to return to your heart - the kind of complexion that says "my blood pressure is 330/210". Then the firings begin!

I usually fire the dog first. He's a Mexican hairless (rapist, drug addict), so he's the first to go. Then I move on to the children (get a job!) and finally my wife. When everyone is gone, I collapse into a drunken, sobbing heap on the linoleum, only to be woken by the gentle nudges of the lonely Roomba and the realization that it's time to go back to work (gotta put in those hours for Jeb!).

In short, I don't know what I'd do without my Mexican Trump Suit. Who wants to deal with an angry, drunken, racist roofer? Not anyone that I know. But when I put on my Trump suit I get the respect I deserve. And if you don't like it? Guess what? You're fired!