Trump: The Art of the Deal: Donald J. Trump, Tony Schwartz: 9780345479174: Amazon.com: Books
From the Impresario of NBC's hit show The Apprentice

TRUMP ON TRUMP: "I like thinking big. I always have. To me it's very simple: if you're going to be thinking anyway, you might as well think big."

And here's how he does it: the art of the deal.

Beginning with a week in Trump's high-stakes life, Trump: The Art of the Deal gives us Trump in action. We see just how he operates day to day—how he runs his business and how he runs his life—as he chats with friends and family, clashes with enemies, efficiently buys up Atlantic City's top casinos, changes the face of the New York City skyline . . . and plans the tallest building in the world.

TRUMP ON TRUMP: "I play it very loose. I don't carry a briefcase. I try not to schedule too many meetings. I leave my door open. . . . I prefer to come to work each day and just see what develops."



Even a maverick plays by rules, and here Trump formulates his own eleven guidelines for success. He isolates the common elements in his greatest deals; he shatters myths ("You don't necessarily need the best location. What you need is the best deal"); he names names, spells out the zeros, and fully reveals the deal-maker's art: from the abandoned property that became the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center to the seedy hotel that became the Grand Hyatt; from the race to rebuild Central Park's Wollman Skating Rink to the byzantine saga of the property that became Trump Tower. And throughout, Trump talks—really talks—about how he does it.

TRUMP ON TRUMP: "I always go into a deal anticipating the worst. If you plan for the worst—if you can live with the worst—the good will always take care of itself."

Donald Trump is blunt, brash, surprisingly old-fashioned in spots—and always, always an original. Trump: The Art of the Deal is an unguarded look at the mind of a brilliant entrepreneur and an unprecedented education in the art of the deal. It's the most streetwise business book there is—and a sizzling read for anyone interested in money and success.

From the Hardcover edition.