America's Missing: Broadcast Emergency Response
AMBER Alert

AMBER Alert: Years of Progress in Recovering Abducted Children

Today, the AMBER Alert system is being used in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Indian country, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and 30 other countries. As of April 2019, a total of 957 children had been successfully recovered through the AMBER Alert system.

New Publication: AMBER Alert Best Practices, Second Edition

AMBER Alert Best Practices, Second Edition, published by the Office of Justice Programs' Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, provides updated guidelines to help states and regional offices recover abducted children through America's Missing: Broadcast Emergency Response (AMBER) Alerts. Originally published in 2012, the 2019 second edition of the guide provides a "what works" approach based on input of those who lead and oversee AMBER Alerts as part of larger missing persons and child protection programs at the state and regional levels.

AMBER Alerts will link to photos of missing children under FCC upgrades.

On September 29, 2016, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) approved improvements to Wireless Emergency Alerts (WEA), a system that delivers critical warnings and information to wireless phone users. The FCC updates are intended to enhance the information state and local authorities are able to send into communities. The changes include requiring wireless providers to support inclusion of embedded phone numbers and URLs in all WEA alerts, including allowing users to link to pictures and phone numbers in AMBER Alert urgent child-abduction bulletins. The new FCC rules are planned to be implemented within the next 30 months.

Did you receive an AMBER Alert on your phone? Learn more about the Wireless Emergency Alert program.

As of January 1, 2013, AMBER Alerts™ are being automatically sent through the http://www.missingkids.org/gethelpnow.

Any questions or concerns on the AMBER Alert message received on your phone should be directed to the National Center for Missing & Exploited Children (NCMEC), who manages the secondary distribution of AMBER Alerts.

Contact: NCMEC, 1-800-THE-LOST (1-800-843-5678).

For more information on the AMBER Alert Program, view the Frequently Asked Questions.

The AMBER Alert™ Program is a voluntary partnership between law-enforcement agencies, broadcasters, transportation agencies, and the wireless industry, to activate an urgent bulletin in the most serious child-abduction cases. The goal of an AMBER Alert is to instantly galvanize the entire community to assist in the search for and the safe recovery of the child.

The information and statements contained on this official Department of Justice AMBER Alert website shall not be used for the purposes of advertising, nor to imply the endorsement or recommendation of the United States Government. Use of the AMBER Alert™ logo is subject to the Department of Justice legal policies and disclaimers regarding the use of DOJ seals and logos.



Reference herein (including any document posted hereon or linked hereto) to any specific AMBER or AMBER-related commercial products, processes, or services by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government.