Assessing Florida’s Medicaid Reform
Over the past decade, Georgetown University researchers have studied Florida’s Medicaid program with funding from the Jessie Ball DuPont Fund, the Winter Park Health Foundation and other Florida-based funding partners. Our studies have looked into Florida’s Medicaid pilot waiver launched in 2006, the current Medicaid waiver launched in 2013 and the debate in Florida over accepting broader Medicaid coverage offered by the Affordable Care Act.

Joan Alker, M.Phil., Co-Principal Investigator

Jack Hoadley, Ph.D., Co-Principal Investigator

Laura Summer, MPH, Investigator

Children’s Health Coverage in Florida: Fewer Uninsured But Challenges Lie Ahead

This educational brief was commissioned by Florida Philanthropic Network and its Florida Health Funders member affinity group, which represents grantmakers who share an interest in supporting health issues, organizations and needs in Florida. The brief was made possible through the generous support of the Winter Park Health Foundation and the Jessie Ball duPont Fund.

February 2014: Presentation on Florida’s Medicaid Choice

December 2013

Six Florida-based organizations - AARP Florida, Alleghany Franciscan Ministries, the Health Foundation of South Florida, the Jessie Ball duPont Fund, the Quantum Foundation, and the Winter Park Health Foundation - asked Laura Summer, researcher at the Health Policy Institute at Georgetown University, to analyze Florida's Medicaid Long-Term Care Managed Care program and to provide guidance for stakeholders regarding activities to promote quality.

October 2013: Medicaid Managed Care in Florida

The Jessie Ball duPont Fund and the Winter Park Health Foundation asked researchers at the Health Policy Institute at Georgetown University to analyze the federal waiver approved in June 2013.

November 2012: Implications of the Supreme Court Decision for Florida’s Medicaid Program

The Jessie Ball duPont Fund and the Winter Park Health Foundation asked researchers at the Health Policy Institute at Georgetown University to analyze the implications of the ACA's Supreme Court decision on Florida's Medicaid program.

January 2012: Florida’s Medicaid waiver and Long-Term Care

The Jessie Ball duPont Fund and the Winter Park Health Foundation asked Laura Summer, researcher at the Health Policy Institute at Georgetown University, to analyze Florida's Medicaid waiver and long-term care.

December 2011: Medicaid Reform in Florida

The Jessie Ball duPont Fund and the Winter Park Health Foundation asked researchers at the Health Policy Institute at Georgetown University to analyze Florida's new plans for Medicaid reform.

April 2011: Medicaid Reform in Florida

The Jessie Ball duPont Fund asked researchers at the Health Policy Institute at Georgetown University to examine two key components of Florida's medicaid reform debate:

What can be said about the impact of the Medicaid managed care pilot on beneficiaries in the affected counties? What lessons have been learned during the last five years that should inform public policy decisions in Tallahassee?

October 2008: Conference: Looking Back, Looking Ahead: Medicaid Reform In Florida

2006-2008: Assessing Florida’s Medicaid Reform Pilot Waiver

Briefing 7: Florida's Experience with Medicaid Reform: What has been learned in the first two years?"

(October 15, 2008)

Briefing 6: The Enhanced Benefits Rewards Program: Is it changing the way Medicaid beneficiaries approach their health?

(July 24, 2008)

Briefing 5: Florida's Medicaid Reform Pilot Programs: Challenges with Mental Health Services

(May 22, 2008)

Briefing 4: Medicaid Pilots at One Year: How Is the New Medicaid Marketplace Faring?

(December 6, 2007)

Briefing 3: Uncertain Access to Needed Drugs: Florida's Medicaid Reform Creates Challenges for Patients

(July 27, 2007)

Briefing 2: Waving Cautionary Flags: Initial Reactions from Doctors and Patients to Florida's Medicaid Changes

(May 8, 2007)

Briefing 1: Medicaid Changes: What will they mean for Broward and Duval counties, and beyond?

(September 2006)

January 2006: Measuring the Impact of Florida’s Medicaid Waiver on Children

What will Florida's "Medicaid Choice" Waiver Proposal Mean for Children? (Updated Jan 4, 2006), Center for Children and Families, Georgetown University

2004- 2006: Proposals for Florida’s Medicaid Reform Pilot Waiver