Americans for Prosperity
Please try our search or one of these below

AFP Launches New $3 Million TV Ad Targeting ObamaCare “Tricia’s Story” starts today in six states; highlights negative impact of ObamaCare Arlington, VA – Americans for Prosperity, the nation’s leading free-market advocacy group, has released its latest installment in a series of ads targeting ObamaCare. Told from the perspective of Tricia, an AFP activist and two-time cancer survivor, the ad casts doubt on whether [...]

Americans For Prosperity Launches New Efforts Against ObamaCare With “Exempt Me Too” Arlington, VA – Today Americans for Prosperity, the nation’s foremost free-market, grassroots advocate, announced the unveiling of a new website and petition called Exempt Me Too. The site highlights how many of the administration’s political allies and other special interests have received exemptions from ObamaCare, while pointing out a number of other groups that have [...]

Disappointing Jobs Report Another Reason To Delay ObamaCare Arlington, VA- Today, Americans for Prosperity the nation’s largest free-market grassroots organization, responded to the latest BLS jobs report with the following statement. “Millions of Americans still desperately searching for work are feeling the pain of the still-weak economic recovery, while hundreds of thousands leave the workforce entirely. With ObamaCare enrollment starting next month, millions [...]

New Ad Highlights Union Distress Over ObamaCare Six figure radio ad buy uses words of union icon Jimmy Hoffa Arlington, VA – Today Americans for Prosperity, the nation’s foremost free market grassroots advocate, announced the launch of a six-figure radio ad buy in four states: Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Alaska. The ad highlights serious concerns expressed by union leaders like James Hoffa [...]

AFP Continues ObamaCare Ad Effort with New Launch Six figure radio ad buy highlights ongoing doubt and concerns about ObamaCare Arlington, VA – Today Americans for Prosperity, the nation’s foremost free market grassroots advocate, announced the launch of a six-figure radio ad buy in six states urging individuals to question whether ObamaCare will provide them with the best quality healthcare. “This ad is [...]

AFP Responds to Obama Housing Finance Policy Corker-Warner approach is flawed; will repeat the cycle of market distortion Arlington, VA – Americans for Prosperity (AFP), the nation’s premier free market grassroots advocacy organization, released the following comments in response to President Obama’s statement on housing finance policy: Americans for Prosperity Director of Policy James Valvo: “It’s good to see that the President [...]

AFP Sponsors Message From Union Bosses Full page newspaper ad in Washington Post quotes union leadership Arlington, VA – Today Americans for Prosperity, the nation’s largest grassroots advocate for economic freedom, printed a full page ad in the Washington Post highlighting quotes from over a half dozen major unions leaders urging reforms and expressing serious concerns and questions about the negative [...]

AFP Launches New Ad Effort Aimed at ObamaCare Family doctor asks questions about the impact to her patients and practice Arlington, VA – Today Americans for Prosperity, the nation’s largest grassroots advocate for economic freedom, announced the launch of the 2nd ad in an effort that highlights the negative consequences of President Obama’s healthcare law. The ad is part of a larger educational [...]

Delaying the Obama Care Mandate Earlier this month, the House approved postponing the harmful health insurance mandates in the President Obama’s health care law for one year. These mandates should be repealed entirely because they will have such onerous effects on American individuals and businesses, but delaying them is a strong step in the right direction and it signals waning [...]