Here we go again: AG nominee Loretta Lynch wants to free blacks from the 'Prison of Racism'
As a young girl Lynch heard stories that her grandfather, a pastor, hid people in trouble and helped them flee to the north to escape punishments under the Jim Crow laws of the time.

If confirmed, it looks as if Barack Obama's nominee for Attorney General, Loretta Lynch, will be carrying out Eric Holder's politics of racial vengeance. Based on her family history, social justice statements and close ties to black activists, Lynch will deploy law enforcement resources based on race and political ideology, not on the rule of law.

I realized the power the law had over your life and how important it was that the people who wield that power look at each situation with a sense of fairness and evenhandedness.

Lynch's father, Reverend Lorenzo Lynch, a Baptist minister, opened his church in the early 1960's to students organizing lunch counter sit-ins at Woolworth in Greensboro, N.C. where she grew up. According to Lynch, her father carried her to those meetings, “riding on his shoulders.”

After graduating from Harvard Law, Lynch worked on Bill Clinton's 1992 presidential campaign. CORRECTION: The Loretta Lynch who worked on the Clinton campaign is a different person.

From 1994 to 1998, Lynch was a partner in Connecticut-based Ujamaa Investment Group. According to David Horowitz's Discover the Networks site, “Ujamaa” is a Swahili term signifying a commitment to the practice of “shared wealth” and a repudiation of economic inequality."

In her first stint as U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of New York in 2000, Lynch made a name for herself in the highly publicized civil rights case against a white New York police officer charged with brutally assaulting a Haitian immigrant.

After leaving that post in 2001 Lynch worked for a New York law firm until 2010, when Obama appointed her to the same position she held under Clinton.

In 2011, at a meeting in Moscow at the Higher School of Economics(HSE) with Assistant Attorney General Lanny Breuer, (known for lying to Congress about his role in Fast and Furious), U.S. Attorney Lynch told the international attendees American police officers are basically corrupt.

From HSE:

There are two spheres where my office is the most active...These are investigating crimes committed by police officers, especially those related to human rights violation, and investigating politicians involved in bribery and embezzlement. Such investigations, Ms. Lynch admitted, are especially hard to carry out, since the formal principle of equality before the law is perverted here. Policemen often act according to the principle of corporate solidarity, protecting their colleagues, and politicians try to use their connections and influence in order to avoid responsibility.

In August 2014, in a closed door meeting, Lynch met with the family of Eric Garner, a black man who died after an altercation with a white officer. The Rev. Al Sharpton also attended the closed door meeting and said Lynch assured the family that her office was monitoring a pending state investigation.

Lynch has a close relationship with Eric Holder and in a speech at the Martin Luther King Center in Long Beach, New York last year she vowed to continue his work at the Department of Justice and fight those in the "deep south" who want to take away blacks' voting rights and reverse the progress of the last 50 years

Then she asks the young people in the audience, "What is it that makes you feel oppressed?" "Is it the prison of racism?"

Last week the American people roundly rejected Obama's divisive 'post-racial' racism and gave the Republicans one more chance to stand up for us. Will they say "No" to another Ivy League radical determined to undermine our rule of law by stirring up trouble between blacks and whites? Senator Lindsey Graham has already stated Lynch is a “solid choice” by the President. Graham’s remark begs the question, “When is enough enough for these guys?”