Ann Coulter - May 27, 2015 - RAMOS CAN STAY, BUT MATT LAUER HAS TO GO
I finally found a Mexican willing to do a job no American will do! I have an explosive book on the No. 1 issue in the country coming out next week, I've already written 10 New York Times best-sellers (I'd be on a postage stamp if I were a liberal) but I can't get an interview on ABC, NBC or CBS.Only Mexican-born Jorge Ramos would interview me on his Fusion network. Yay, Jorge!After a spellbinding interview, Ramos ended by asking this excellent question -- which I had suggested myself for all authors, most of whom write very boring books, harming the marketability of my own books: "Is there anything in your book that isn't already generally known?"My soon-to-be-released book, "Adios, America! The Left's Plan to Turn Our Country into a Third World Hellhole," is jam-packed with facts you didn't already know. Don't even think of using it as a coaster, like those other books.These are just a few:-- Teddy Kennedy's 1965 Immigration Act was expressly designed to change the demographics of our country to be poorer and more inclined to vote Democratic.-- It worked! Post-1970 immigrants vote 8-2 for the Democrats.-- Citing this dramatic shift in the Democratic Party's fortunes, Democratic consultant Patrick Reddy called the 1965 Immigration Act "the Kennedy family's greatest gift to the Democratic Party."-- Immigrants admitted before 1970 made more money, bought more houses and were more educated than Americans. The post-Kennedy immigrants are astronomically less-educated, poorer and more likely to be on welfare than the native population.-- With no welfare state to support them, about a third of pre-1965 Act immigrants returned to the places they came from. British and Jewish immigrants were the least likely to go home -- less than 10 percent did.-- Although America is admitting more immigrants, they are coming from fewer countries than they did before 1970. On liberals' own terms, the country is becoming less "diverse," but a lot poorer and a whole lot more Latin.

-- America has already taken in one-fourth of Mexico's entire population.-- In 1970, there were almost no Nigerian immigrants in the United States. Our country is now home to more Nigerians than any country in the world except Nigeria.-- America takes more immigrants from Nigeria than from England.-- The government refuses to tell us how many prisoners in the United States are immigrants. That information is not available anywhere. But the ancillary facts suggest that the number is astronomical.-- There are more foreign inmates in New York state prisons from Mexico than from the entire continent of Europe.-- Hispanics are less likely to be in the military than either whites or blacks, and a majority of Hispanic troops are women. On the other hand, Hispanics are overrepresented in U.S. Prisons.-- In Denmark, actual Danes come in tenth in criminals' nationality, after Moroccans, Lebanese, Yugoslavians, Somalis, Iranians, Pakistanis, Turks, Iraqis and Vietnamese.-- At least 15 percent of all births in Peru and Argentina are to girls between the ages of 10 and 15. In the U.S., only 2 percent of births are to girls that young, and those are mostly Hispanics, who are seven times more likely to give birth at that age than white girls are.-- Sex with girls as young as 12 years old is legal in 31 of the 32 states of Mexico.-- In all of Western Europe, the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Israel combined, there have been eight reported births to girlsSeven of the eight were impregnated by immigrants.-- In some areas of America, law enforcement authorities have given up on prosecuting statutory rape cases against Mexican men in their 30s who impregnate 12- and 13-year-old girls, after repeatedly encountering parents who view their little girls' pregnancies as a "blessing."-- The same North Carolina newspapers that gave flood-the-zone coverage to a rape that never happened at a Duke lacrosse party completely ignore real rapes happening right under their noses, being committed against children by immigrants providing cheap labor to the state's farming and meat-packing industries.-- Since 2004, Mexicans have beheaded at least a half-dozen people in the United States.-- Mexican drug cartels -- not ISIS -- pioneered the practice of posting videotaped beheadings online.-- An alleged "ISIS" beheading video making the rounds in 2014 was actually a Mexican beheading video from 2010.-- Post-1970 immigrants have re-introduced slavery to America. Indian immigrant Lakireddy Bali Reddy, for example, used the H1-B visa program, allegedly for "high-tech workers,"-- The above story was missed by the San Francisco Chronicle. It was broken by a high school journalism class.-- The ACLU took Reddy's side.-- We're still letting in Hmong immigrants as a reward for their help with the ill-fated Vietnam War, which ended 40 years ago.-- Between 2000 and 2005, nearly 100 Hmong men were charged with rape or forced prostitution of girls in Minneapolis-St Paul, according to the Minneapolis Star Tribune. The vast majority of the victims were 15 years old or younger. A quarter of the victims were not Hmong.-- Proponents of the 1965 immigration bill swore up and down that it would not alter this country's demographic mix. As it turned out, Kennedy's immigration law has brought about the greatest demographic shift of any nation in world history.-- In 1980, Reagan won the biggest electoral landslide in history against an incumbent president, Jimmy Carter. Without the last 40 years of immigration, in 2012, Mitt Romney would have won a bigger landslide than Reagan did. He got more of the "Reagan coalition" than Reagan did.-- If Romney had won 71 percent of the Hispanic vote, he still would have lost. If he'd gotten just 4 percent more of the white vote, he would have won.In bookstores next Monday, June 1.COPYRIGHT 2015 ANN COULTERDISTRIBUTED BY UNIVERSAL UCLICK