Changing the Face of Power
Who We Are

In 2002, due to crafty Republican redistricting, the Texas House lost five Democratic women and our numbers stayed stagnant in the Texas Senate. Today, only 17 out of 181 Texas legislators are Democratic women. And in Texas history, only 132 women have ever served compared to approximately 6,000 men.

Annie's List was started in 2003 to combat this alarming trend and already we have seen major successes. We are a diverse coalition of political professionals, non-profit executives, policy experts, former candidates and elected officials, major donors, attorneys and more - all dedicated to changing the face of power in Texas politics (thereby combating the assault on issues of most importance to women and their families) by recruiting, training and supporting women candidates across the state.

Annie's List Purpose

Target legislative and down-ballot statewide races

Recruit, train and support progressive women to run for office

and support progressive women to run for office Train and place professional campaign staff on targeted races

Raise early money so that women become viable contenders

Engage and activate women voters on behalf of endorsed candidates

Read more

The Board

As the true power of Annie’s List lies with the thousands of women around Texas that support our work and our progressive Democratic women candidates, we have a Board of Directors to reflect them. In early 2006, we elected all new members, women who are leaders in their communities around the state, to guide our fast growing organization through what may be the most important election cycles of our lifetime.

Robbie Ausley Austin

Board Chair Amber Anderson Mostyn Houston

Vice Chair Janis Pinnelli Austin Treasurer Patsy Woods Martin Austin



Patricia Miller Dallas Becky Bruder Dallas Colleen Casey San Antonio Lupita Gutierrez San Antonio Lisa Kraus Dallas Nancy S. Diehl San Antonio Hon. Sylvia Garcia

Houston



Amy Fikes Dallas



The Staff

Since our 2003 inception Annie’s List has grown tremendously. Six full-time staff members are now on board to advance the mission of Annie’s List everyday. We have assembled an impressive group of folks with a wide variety of backgrounds and experiences.

Robert E. Jones Executive Director

Megan Rodman

Development Director Genevieve Van Cleve Deputy Political Director

Mitra Salasel Communications Coordinator

Lindsay Burris Administration & Compliance

Amy Garza

Finance Assistant



Board Emeritus



We are proud to announce the Annie's List Board of Director Emeritus. We have been tremendously lucky to have the support of these woman when they served on our Board and will continue to solicit their advice and wisdom.

Cecilia Boone Dallas Naomi Aberly Dallas



Dorothy Mackey Luriè, PhD Houston Ellen Susman Houston

Kate Campbell Spring Branch

Dana Hurt Austin Rosie Mendoza Austin Sonia Falcon McAllen Alice London Austin Patricia Fagadau

Dallas Lynette Maddocks Gatlin San Antonio