Associated Oregon Industries
Article by: J.L. Wilson - September 10, 2010

But workers' comp state agency will request higher fees from employersOregon's workers' compensation system will add another chapter to its success story in 2011. The Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services (DCBS) announced yesterday that employer "pure premium" rates will decline again in 2011 - this time by 1.8 percent.Oregon's "pure premium" rate has not increased since 1990. Oregon businesses have saved $18.2 billion since the landmark 1990 Mahonia Hall workers' comp reforms. In the last five years alone, Oregon employers have seen rate reductions of 13 percent - a savings of $146 million.The "pure premium" rate is the base rate that employers pay their insurance company for workers' comp coverage. On average, Oregon employers will see a reduction of 1.8 percent in their base rate for 2011. Some employers may see greater reductions, and some employers may see rate increases depending on their specific circumstances. Specific cost changes depend on an employer's industry, claims experience, or other factors.In addition to Oregon's landmark workers' comp reforms that were negotiated by AOI and other business and labor groups, Oregon's workers' comp rates continue to fall due to ever-declining workplace injury and illness rates. Injury and illness rates have declined nearly 25 percent since 2004 and an astounding 58 percent since 1989. Oregon's return-to-work program and medical cost containment have also contributed significantly to falling workers' comp costs.Yesterday's announcement did pose a challenge to Oregon employers. The Oregon DCBS announced that it will seek an increase in the assessment that it charges employers for administration of the workers' comp system and workplace safety programs. Currently, DCBS adds a 4.6 percent assessment to workers' comp premiums to pay for these services. DCBS is proposing to increase this assessment to 6.4 percent – an increase of 39 percent. The DCBS designed the increase so that it would not result in a net increase in employer workers' comp costs for 2011.The proposed increase gives employers a chance to weigh in.This is a difficult issue for many employers. On one hand, the Department has managed Oregon's workers' comp system very competently and efficiently and has treated Oregon employers fairly. The Department has made appropriate cutbacks during the economic recession, shedding nearly 15 percent of staff. But on the other hand, Oregon employers are clearly being asked to foot the bill for increased PERS costs and new pay raises for union employees. The proposed assessment increase will not add new employees or programs for the department.The DCBS will hold a public hearing on the proposed rate increase on Tuesday, September 21, 2010.