Awards: Sustainable Community & Environment : County Manager : Arlington, Virginia
Platinum "Green" Community

The Virginia Association of Counties (VACo) awarded Arlington it's fourth "Go Green Virginia" award, which recognizes environmental policies and practice actions that reduce carbon emissions and save money. Arlington earned the highest certification of Platinum. (Dec. 2012)

Top "Green Fleet"

Arlington County is ranked no. 7 in the nation for Government Green Fleets, according to Green Fleet Magazine. Several factors played a role in Arlington's Top 10 recognition, including the County's Green Fleet policy to guide vehicle acquisition, significant use of alternative fuels including bio-diesel and CNG, a fleet of 166 hybrid and two electric vehicles, the CNG fueled ART bus fleet, the Community Energy Plan for its focus on emissions, energy use and transportation strategies, and more. (Oct. 2012)

Arlington & Alexandria ELC Wins State Award for Advocacy

The Arlington & Alexandria Extension Leadership Council (ELC) won the state award for program excellence and leadership in advocacy -- the top office recognized out of the 107 unit offices of the Virginia Cooperative Extension. The ELC supports local programs in horticulture, youth development, nutrition, personal finance, and consumer education (April 2012).

Arlington Conservationist of the Year

The Northern Virginia Conservation Trust recognized Toby Smith for his efforts to create the 18-acre Long Bridge Park, from its former industrial use. Mr. Smith chaired the Long Bridge Park Design Advisory Committee. (2012)

Top Preservationist Honors

U.S. Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar named Arlington's Michael Leventhal with the annual Secretary of the Interior Historic Preservation Award (Certified Local Government category), recognizing his outstanding contributions to the preservation of historic places and artifacts. He has "effectively leveraged funds made available from the Virginia Department of Historic Resources ... to identify, evaluate, and recognize more than 10,000 historic properties as part of 24 National Register historic district nominations. During his tenure, he has assisted more than 150 property owners in successful federal and/or state rehabilitation tax credit projects. The ultimate benefit from this work has been the private investment of more than $60 million in rehabilitation projects, resulting in the creation of an estimated 2,200 jobs." (May 2011)

Mary Hynes Named 2011 Environmental Steward

The National Organization to Insure a Sound-Controlled Environment (NOISE) named Arlington County Vice-Chair Mary Hynes its 2011 Environmental Steward. NOISE is "America's community voice on aviation noise issues." (March 2011)

Recycling Efforts Recognized

The National Association of Counties (NACo) recognized Arlington with two 2010 Achievement Awards; one for Enhanced Residential Curbside Recycling and the other for Quincy Park Interpretive Recycling Center.

Arlington’s Reed-Westover Project Receives Gold LEED Certification

The new Reed-Westover Facility, a joint project between Arlington Public Schools and Arlington County Government, has been awarded Gold Certification in the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED®) program by the US Green Building Council (USGBC), for sustainable design and energy-saving measures.

Arlington Named Tree City USA for 14th year

For the 14th year in a row, Arlington has been named a “Tree City USA” by the National Arbor Day Foundation. (2010)

Arlington #1 Virginia "Green Community"

Arlington tied for first place (in our population category) in the Virginia Municipal League's Green Government Challenge, designed to encourage implementation of specific environmental policies and practical actions that reduce the carbon emissions generated by both the local government and the broader community. (2010)

Frontline Names Arlington "Showcase for Smart Growth"

As part of its series on the health of the Chesapeake Bay, "Poisoned Waters," PBS' Frontline hailed Arlington as a "Showcase for Smart Growth." View segment #13: "Here's Arlington's strategy, what's key to it -- and why it's clicked. Now, even Tyson's Corner is thinking about remaking itself." (2009)

Long Bridge Park Honored for "Smart Conservation"

Long Bridge Park (formerly known as the “North Tract”) has been named a Regional Conservation Priority by the Washington Smart Growth Alliance Conservation Recognition Jury. Arlington County plans to convert a county-owned brownfield site that formerly was home to a concrete company and junk yard into a new state of the art aquatics, health and fitness facility and park on the north end of Crystal City. The Alliance honors initiatives that exemplify “smart conservation,” furthering its objectives of protecting environmental assets and enhancing our region’s quality of life. (2008) Learn more>>>

Arlington Public Art Project Recognized at National Conference

The temporary public art project, CO2LED, was recognized at the annual national Americans for the Arts conference in Philadelphia as part of the Year in Review, a juried compendium of the most innovative and exemplary public art projects in the United States. CO2LED was designed and fabricated by Jack Sanders, Robert Gay, and Butch Anthony. The work was on view Summer 2007. It promoted the use of alternative energy sources and responded to Arlington’s environmental initiative, FreshAIRE. Over 600 solar-powered light-emitting diodes, secured to rods of varying heights, illuminated a traffic island in Rosslyn.

EPA Climate Protection Award to John Morrill

Arlington County Energy Manager John Morrill is a recipient of the federal Environmental Protection Agency’s 2008 Climate Protection Award. The prestigious award recognizes exceptional leadership, outstanding innovation, personal dedication, and technical achievement in climate protection. At a Kennedy Center ceremony, the EPA recognized Morrill as “a driving force” behind Arlington County’s Fresh AIRE (Arlington Initiative to Reduce Emissions) campaign. The initiative has set a goal of cutting greenhouse gas emissions produced by County buildings and operations 10 percent from 2000 to 2012. The EPA also noted Morrill’s role as a “thoughtful, responsive resource for other local, regional and federal governments establishing their own programs” to lower production of greenhouse gases. (2008)

Washingtonian recognizes Joan Kelsch

Joan Kelsch, Arlington County Environmental Planner, is featured as one of six "Green Award Winners" in the May 2008 issue of Washingtonian magazine. The Green Awards celebrate Washingtonians who preserve and protect our environment through education, by promoting green building, and by teaching the importance of living green. Ms. Kelsch works with local developers and regional groups to promote green building. (2008)

Ms. Kelsch also received an award from the Washington Academy of Sciences on May 6, for “Merit and Distinction in the Environmental Sciences.” (2008)

Arlington Wins National Change-A-Light Contest

Arlington County was recognized by the National Association of Counties (NACo) and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as the winner (medium population category) in the national campaign to encourage residents to pledge to replace one or more incandescent bulbs in their homes with compact fluorescent light bulbs that have earned the government's ENERGY STAR label. (2008)

Arlington's Four Mile Run Restoration Master Plan

The Virginia Chapter of the American Planning Association recognized the Four Mile Run Restoration Master Plan with its 2007 Outstanding Plan Award. The Master Plan is a joint project with City of Alexandria.

Arlington Wins Regional Awards

Arlington and its regional partners received two Regional Partnership awards at the Northern Virginia Regional Commission’s 60th anniversary celebration on Dec. 7, 2007. The awards honor partnerships or coalitions which make important contributions to regional cooperation and collaboration that improve regional services, programs and activities. Arlington was recognized for the Clean Water Partners Stormwater Education Campaign and the Four Mile Run Restoration Project.

Steven L. Carr, Director of Innovation at the Arlington Public Library, has earned the designation of Accredited Professional as part of the U.S. Green Building Council’s LEED® program. LEED® stands for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design and is a consensus-based program that promotes environmental, social and economic prosperity in the built environment. (2007)

Green Roofs for Healthy Cities named Arlington as one of the "Top 10 Green Roof Cities in North America." This organization surveys the square footage of vegetated roof surfaces of its member companies. Read more. (2006)

In March 2006, the National Association of Counties (NACo) honored Arlington County as a national leader in creating sustainable communities. Arlington County, Rosslyn Renaissance, Inc., Clarendon Alliance, and the Ballston/Virginia Square Partnership were recognized for their Rosslyn-Ballston Metro Corridor initiative. Read more.

The National Capital Section of the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) selected Arlington County's Green Building Program as a recipient for their 2006 Outstanding Civil Engineering Project award.

The James River Green Building Council awarded Arlington the first annual Green Building Leadership Award for Government in November 2005. Arlington won the award for its transit-based planning, adoption of the LEED green building rating system for public facilities, and use of LEED® as an incentive and a guideline for private developers to build environmentally responsible buildings. Arlington's Langston-Brown School and Community Center, completed in 2003, is the first LEED Silver building in Virginia. The County also installed one of the first vegetated "green" roofs in northern Virginia.

The Virginia Sustainable Building Network (VSBN) honored Arlington with a Green Innovation Award for the Most Sustainable Community Program for 2005. Arlington was selected because of the County vision of sustainability and our programs focused on community sustainability, including green buildings, WalkArlington, bike trails, transit programs (ART bus, etc.), car sharing, land use planning, watershed protection, alternative fueled vehicle fleet, etc.

Reston's National Wildlife Federation has designated Arlington County a Community Wildlife Habitat.