Effects of Marijuana Smoking on the Lung
These have been examined in both experimental animal and human studies.

Animal exposure studies have shown histopathologic alterations in the airways and lung parenchyma after chronic exposure to various amounts of marijuana smoke ( 11 – 14 ). On the other hand, exposure of rats to various amounts of marijuana smoke for up to 1 year did not reveal any morphologic or physiological evidence of emphysema, in contrast to emphysematous changes that developed in similar animals exposed to comparable amounts of tobacco smoke ( 15 ).

Human Studies

Most human studies have compared the effects of smoking marijuana with those of smoking tobacco. Because the quantity of tobacco smoked by most regular tobacco cigarette smokers (usually approximately 20 cigarettes per day or more) generally exceeds the quantity of marijuana smoked by most regular users of marijuana (usually less than a few joints per day), it is a plausible concept that differences in the effects of regular tobacco versus regular marijuana smoking on the lung could be attributable, at least in part, to differences in the quantity of the two substances smoked, rather than to qualitative or quantitative differences in the composition of the contents of the two plant substances. On the other hand, the amount of exposure of the lung to the smoke components from each type of plant substance is determined not only by the number of cigarettes (or joints) smoked but also by differences in smoking topography for the two substances. For example, it has been shown that regular marijuana smokers take larger puffs, inhale the smoke more deeply into their lungs, and hold their breath approximately four times longer compared with regular tobacco cigarette smokers (16). These differences in smoking technique are responsible for an approximately fourfold increase in the amount of tar deposited in the lower respiratory tract from the smoke of marijuana compared with the smoke generated from the same quantity of tobacco, thus potentially amplifying the impact of smoking a given amount of marijuana compared with the same quantity of tobacco (16).

Effects on chronic respiratory symptoms. Several studies (Table 1) have compared responses to respiratory symptom questionnaires in samples of regular marijuana smokers with responses in age-matched nonsmokers of marijuana, controlling for concomitant tobacco smoking. One study examined a convenience sample from Los Angeles County of 144 habitual (near-daily for ≥5 yr) smokers of marijuana alone (MS), 135 habitual smokers of both marijuana and tobacco (MTS), 79 regular tobacco-only smokers (TS), and 97 nonsmokers of any substance (NS) (mean ages, 31.6–37.0 yr) (17). In the smokers of marijuana alone, tobacco alone, or marijuana plus tobacco, the prevalence of chronic cough (18–24%), sputum production (20–26%), wheeze for at least 3 weeks/year (25–37%), and at least two prolonged episodes of acute bronchitis during the previous 3 years (10–14%) were significantly higher than in the nonsmokers (P < 0.05), but no differences in the prevalence of cough, sputum, or wheeze were noted between smokers of marijuana only, tobacco only, and combined smokers of both marijuana and tobacco. Analogous findings were reported by Bloom and colleagues (18) in a stratified random sample of residents of Tucson, Arizona (mean age, 27–29 yr) comprising 38 marijuana-only smokers, 209 tobacco-only smokers, 56 smokers of both marijuana and tobacco, and 502 nonsmokers, with the exception that chronic cough and sputum were less frequent in the marijuana-only smokers (32 and 26%, respectively) than in the tobacco-only smokers (54 and 43%, respectively) and the effects of combined smoking of marijuana and tobacco on cough and sputum appeared to be additive (68 and 63%, respectively). These differences from the Los Angeles study results might be attributed to the fact that the marijuana-only smokers in the Tucson sample smoked marijuana less frequently than their Los Angeles counterparts. A 2-year follow-up study of 452 daily marijuana-only smokers and 450 nonsmokers among Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program participants revealed a small but significant increase in outpatient visits for respiratory illnesses among the marijuana smokers (relative risk [RR], 1.19; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.01–1.41) (19), consistent with the finding among the daily marijuana-only smokers in the Los Angeles study of a significant increase in acute bronchitic episodes. Table 1. Effects of regular use of marijuana alone on chronic respiratory symptoms and lung function in comparison with nonsmoking control subjects Symptoms Increased prevalence of chronic cough or sputum (17, 18, 20–22), wheezing (17, 18, 20–22), and shortness of breath (20) Increased incidence of acute bronchitic episodes (17) or clinic visits for acute respiratory illness (19) Lung Function No difference in FEV 1 or FVC (17, 20, 21) Increase in FVC (23, 27, 29) Increase in FEV 1 (23) Decrease in FEV 1 /FVC (18, 20) No difference in single-breath nitrogen washout measures (17, 25) No differences in FRC, TLC, or RV (17, 21) Increases in FRC, TLC, and RV (27) Increase in Raw and decrease in SGaw (17, 25, 27) No difference in D l CO (17, 21, 27) Respiratory symptoms were also assessed in 943 adults, 21 years of age, from a birth cohort of subjects born in Dunedin, New Zealand, of whom 9.7% were cannabis-dependent (20). After controlling for tobacco use, early morning sputum production, wheezing apart from colds, nocturnal awakenings with chest tightness, and exercise-induced shortness of breath were increased among the cannabis-dependent subjects by 144% (P < 0.01), 61%, 65%, and 72% (all P < 0.05), respectively, compared with nonsmokers (20). In another New Zealand study that examined a random population-based sample (supplemented by a convenience sample) of adult residents of Wellington, New Zealand, comprising 75 marijuana-only smokers, 92 tobacco-only smokers, 91 smokers of both marijuana and tobacco, and 81 nonsmokers (mean ages, 41–46 yr) (21), odds ratios (95% CI) for the association of cough with marijuana smoking and tobacco smoking were 1.5 (1.1–1.7) and 1.9 (1.4–2.6), respectively, and of chronic sputum production were 2.0 (1.4–2.7) and 1.6 (1.2–2.2), respectively, without evidence of any additive effects of marijuana and tobacco, consistent with the findings in the Los Angeles study. Respiratory effects of marijuana have also been reported for self-reported marijuana-smoking participants in the U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III) (22). Odds ratios (ORs) (95% CI) for respiratory symptoms in the 414 marijuana users versus 4,789 nonsmokers (controlling for sex, age, current asthma, and concomitant tobacco use) were 2.17 (1.1–4.26) for chronic cough, 1.89 (1.35–2.66) for chronic sputum, and 2.98 (2.05–4.34) for wheeze. By comparison, the ORs (95% CI) among tobacco-only smokers for chronic cough, sputum production, and wheeze versus nonsmokers were 5.02 (3.58–7.04), 3.71 (2.45–5.62), and 3.39 (2.54–4.53). In a survey of a random sample of 878 older adults (≥40 yr) residing in Vancouver, Canada, as part of the Burden of Obstructive Lung Diseases (BOLD) study, the OR for chronic respiratory symptoms was not increased among the 49% of respondents who reported ever using marijuana alone (23). However, concurrent use of marijuana and tobacco was associated with a higher OR for respiratory symptoms (OR, 2.59; 95% CI, 1.58–3.62) than was smoking tobacco alone (OR, 1.50; 95% CI, 1.05–2.14), consistent with a possible synergistic interaction between marijuana and tobacco. Taken together, the weight of evidence points to a significant association of marijuana use with symptoms of chronic bronchitis that may be comparable to or less than that of tobacco smoking alone, possibly dependent on the frequency and quantity of marijuana smoked. Evidence is mixed regarding the possibility of additive or synergistic effects of combined smoking of marijuana and tobacco on chronic respiratory symptoms. However, cessation of marijuana smoking by marijuana-only smokers has been associated with resolution of preexisting symptoms of chronic bronchitis (24).

Effects on lung function. Lung function has been assessed in several studies (Table 1) conducted in either convenience or population-based samples of smokers and nonsmokers of marijuana. In the Los Angeles cohort study (17), no differences were noted between the 135 marijuana-only smokers and 99 nonsmokers in spirometric measures, indices derived from single-breath nitrogen washout or the single-breath diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (Dl CO ); however, airway resistance (Raw) was slightly (26%) but significantly elevated in the marijuana-only smokers compared with both the nonsmokers and tobacco-only smokers (P < 0.05); similar findings had been noted in an earlier study of 50 habitual marijuana-only smokers compared with matched control subjects from a population-based cohort in the same geographic area (25). Longitudinal assessment of the age-related decline in FEV 1 over 8 years in 65% of the Los Angeles subjects who volunteered to undergo follow-up studies revealed no significant difference between the marijuana-only smokers (30.8 ml/yr) and the nonsmokers (25.3 ml/yr), whereas tobacco-only smokers showed a significantly higher rate of decline (56.5 ml/yr) (26). In the Tucson study, the ratio of FEV 1 to FVC was significantly lower in marijuana-only smokers (0.90) than in nonsmokers (0.98) (P < 0.05). Consistent findings were reported in the Dunedin, New Zealand, birth-cohort study in which a significantly higher proportion of cannabis-dependent subjects than nonsmokers at age 21 years had an FEV 1 /FVC ratio less than 0.80 (20). On the other hand, in the Wellington, New Zealand, study, no significant differences were noted in spirometry, lung volumes or Dl CO in marijuana-only smokers compared with nonsmokers (20). Moreover, in an extended follow-up of the Dunedin birth cohort, at age 32 years (n = 841–919), no association was found between marijuana use (after adjustment for the concomitant use of tobacco) and lung function (spirometry, lung volumes, and Dl CO ), except for increases in FVC, total lung capacity (TLC), functional residual capacity (FRC), residual volume (RV), and Raw and a decrease in specific airway conductance (SGaw) (27); longitudinal analysis of spirometry performed in this cohort since age 18 years revealed that marijuana smoking was associated with a significant increase in FVC without any significant change in FEV 1 . The authors concluded that the isolated decrease in FEV 1 /FVC ratio previously reported among marijuana-only smokers versus nonsmokers at age 21 years from the same birth cohort (20) may have been a spurious finding attributable to an increase in FVC. Significant increases in both FVC (P < 0.001) and FEV 1 (P < 0.05) have also been noted in marijuana smokers compared with those with no history of marijuana use in the Vancouver BOLD study (23). The mechanism of the observed increase in FVC is not clear but might be related to “stretching” the lung from the repeated deep inhalations characteristic of marijuana-smoking topography (16), analogous to the elevated vital capacity noted in elite athletes (28). In an observational study of a cohort of 5,115 current and former smokers and nonsmokers of tobacco or marijuana in four U.S. cities monitored for more than 20 years with serial measurements of lung function, no significant association was found between decrements in FEV 1 and intensity of current marijuana smoking or cumulative lifetime exposure to marijuana (joint-years), although a significant association was noted between joint-years and an increase in FVC (29). Using cubic spline analysis the authors found a nonlinear association between heavy lifetime exposures (>20 joint-years) and lower levels of FEV 1 ; however, the latter findings need to be interpreted cautiously because less than 1% of the observations were made in subjects with more than 20 joint-years of use. In summary, most cross-sectional, as well as longitudinal, studies have failed to find a significant association between marijuana use (in the absence of, or controlling for, concomitant tobacco use) and measures of airflow obstruction. Moreover, no additive adverse effects of marijuana when smoked along with tobacco have been reported. These findings argue against the concept that smoking marijuana, by itself, is a risk factor for the development of COPD.

Effects on lung structure, including emphysema. Thoracic high-resolution computed tomography scans (slices of 1 mm in thickness at 1-cm intervals) were performed in 75 marijuana-only smokers, 91 smokers of both marijuana and tobacco, 92 tobacco-only smokers, and 81 nonsmokers participating in the Wellington, New Zealand, study (21). The proportion of marijuana-only smokers with a relative area of lung occupied by attenuation values lower than –950 Hounsfield units as a percentage of total lung area (RA950) in an apical slice was significantly higher in marijuana-only smokers (7.3%) than nonsmokers (6.1%). However, the proportion with low attenuation averaged over three apical slices in marijuana-only smokers (6.7%) was comparable to that in nonsmokers (6.3%). Moreover, no significant increase was observed in the proportion of marijuana-only smokers with macroscopic emphysema (1.3%) compared with that of nonsmokers (0%); in contrast, macroscopic emphysema was noted in 18.5% of tobacco-only smokers and 16.5% of smokers of both marijuana and tobacco. These findings provide further evidence against the notion that marijuana is a risk factor for the development of emphysema, although the low-attenuation findings at the apices could be clinically relevant regarding potential risks for barotrauma and bullous lung disease (see below).

Effects on bronchial pathology. Few investigational bronchoscopic studies have been conducted in otherwise healthy smokers of marijuana and control subjects. Videobronchoscopy was performed in 40 healthy young smokers of marijuana or tobacco (10 each for marijuana-only smokers, tobacco-only smokers, smokers of both marijuana and tobacco, and nonsmokers), 20–49 years of age, participating in the Los Angeles cohort study (30); the videotapes were scored by an independent observer for three components of the bronchitis index (erythema, edema, mucous secretions) (31) on a scale of 0 to 3, 3 representing the most abnormal finding. The bronchitis index score was significantly higher for the marijuana-only smokers (8.2 ± 5.4 SD) than for the nonsmokers (4.4 ± 1.6 SD) (P < 0.05) and comparable to the bronchitis index score for the tobacco-only smokers (8.0 ± 2.5 SD). Pronounced edema that narrowed lobar and segmental airways was often noted in the marijuana-only smokers (30), possibly accounting for the increase in airway resistance observed in physiological studies of marijuana-only smokers (16, 24, 26). Endobronchial biopsies at five different sites revealed vascular proliferation in 70% of marijuana-only smokers versus 0% of nonsmokers and 56% of tobacco-only smokers, submucosal edema in 75% of marijuana-only smokers versus 20% of nonsmokers and 88% of tobacco-only smokers, and goblet cell hyperplasia in 60% of marijuana-only smokers versus 20% of nonsmokers and 89% of tobacco-only smokers (P < 0.05 for all comparisons with nonsmokers). These findings indicate that regular smoking of marijuana by young adults is associated with significant airway inflammation/injury that is similar to that observed in tobacco smokers. Endobronchial biopsies performed in 40 marijuana-only smokers, 44 smokers of both marijuana and tobacco, 31 tobacco-only smokers, and 53 nonsmokers participating in the University of California (Los Angeles, CA) cohort study revealed a significantly higher percentage of histopathologic alterations in marijuana-only smokers compared with nonsmokers (P < 0.05) and a similar percentage compared with tobacco-only smokers: reserve cell hyperplasia (73% marijuana-only smokers, 12% nonsmokers, 75% tobacco-only smokers); goblet cell hyperplasia (68% marijuana-only smokers, 29% nonsmokers and 77% tobacco-only smokers); squamous cell metaplasia (33% marijuana-only smokers, 6% nonsmokers, 31% tobacco-only smokers); cellular disorganization (58% marijuana-only smokers, 33% nonsmokers, 53% tobacco-only smokers); and increased nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio (40% marijuana-only smokers, 6% nonsmokers and 30% tobacco-only smokers) (32). The increased frequency of goblet cell hyperplasia (leading to increased mucus production) and of reserve cell hyperplasia and squamous metaplasia with the associated loss of cilia in the marijuana-only smokers would be expected to diminish their capacity to clear the airways of the excess mucus, consistent with their increased prevalence of symptoms of chronic bronchitis.