Grits for Breakfast Shines Spotlight on Texas Justice
Grits for Breakfast is an award-winning blog that examines the state of criminal justice in Texas, run and largely written by Austinite and former journalist Scott Henson. While attending the University of Texas, Henson worked at The Daily Texan, and co-founded – with Tom Philpott, now a food and ag blogger for Mother Jones – Polemicist, an independent investigative publication that covered UT. After leaving college Henson worked as an associate editor for the Texas Observer before turning his investigative skills to opposition and defensive research for political candidates in nearly 70 local office, judicial and state representative campaigns from 1991 to 2004. His growing interest in criminal justice led him in 1997 to create the Austin Police Department Hall of Shame website, and the following year Henson co-founded a local political action committee, the Sunshine Project for Police Accountability, which successfully campaigned for Austin's current Police Monitor and Oversight Board. From 2000 to 2006, he was director of the Police Accountability Project at the ACLU of Texas, and since 2008 has done public policy work for the Innocence Project of Texas.

Henson started Grits in 2004 as an independent blog that offers news, views and analysis on Texas criminal justice matters as a personal pursuit as much for any public goals. Nonetheless, his concise, knowledgeable, in-depth and sometimes counter-to-prevailing wisdom posts have earned the blog such kudos from professional journalists as "a protein-laden dose of big thinking on criminal justice reform" from Texas Tribune editor-in-chief/publisher Evan Smith, and "the best coverage of criminal justice in the entire state" from Pamela Colloff at Texas Monthly. For anyone interested in the subject, Grits for Breakfast is where the rubber meets the road on pretty much anything and everything related to criminal justice in the Lone Star State.

Scott Henson follows his nose for news on Grits for Breakfast Credit: Photo by jonl via Flickr

How did you shift from journalism to blogging?

Scott Henson: Right after I left UT, the Houston Post and the Dallas Times-Herald went under, and hundreds of very experienced journalists were dumped on the Texas market. And for years after that, no young people were hired because basically you could find someone with 20 years of newspaper experience out of a job. I got out of school at exactly the wrong time to find a journalism job if you wanted to stay in Texas. So I basically began using the same set of investigative journalism skills working for political campaigns. And for about 13 to 14 years performed opposition and defensive research for political candidates. Did that for quite a while and made pretty good money at it. I also did similar work – often "follow the money" work – for attorneys in the 1990s.

AP: What prompted your interest in criminal justice?

SH: The criminal justice work really began as what I spent most of my volunteer time on. There was a major civil rights incident in 1995 referred to locally as the Valentine's Day Police Riot over here [on the East Side] on Cedar Ave. where 68 cops descended on a junior high kid's Valentine's Day party. [Partygoers and neighboring residents were maced, hit with nightsticks and arrested. The U.S. Justice Department later investigated the Austin Police Department's actions in the incident.]

I knew the family that happened to very well. The next day it became one of those culture war moments that was drawing national media attention. And the family were not folks who were prepared for that, so they asked my wife and I to help them with their media response and dealing with the city. So that was the first incident where I started to work on criminal justice stuff, and began to realize that there were not many advocates at all addressing those topics and a real vacuum of leadership of people pushing for reform efforts.

So I had been exposed to this pretty horrific episode of local police brutality and had gone through the exercise of interviewing everyone who had been involved in that Cedar Ave. incident and it opened my eyes. And I guess you could say that the local police department responded to that in ways that I thought were false and disingenuous that also opened my eyes. I just thought that there was a vacuum, and in some ways it was, I guess, less passion than calculation: This is an area where, hey, there's no one doing anything on this and it's huge. It was a challenge.

AP: What were the statewide issues within how criminal justice was pursued at the time that concerned you?

SH: That was the period when Ann Richards ran against George W. Bush bragging that she was going to triple the size of the prison system, and we ended up more than tripling it. We now release almost twice as many people from prison every year as were in prison en toto when Ann Richards took office. The prison system was at the beginning of this massive growth stage from the laws that had just been passed when they rewrote the Texas Penal Code in 1993. And from the massive expansion of Texas prisons that Ann Richards had authored – in cahoots with some Democrats, the most prominent of which had a concrete company that sold all the concrete that built the new prisons – I could just see that it was an area where there was terrible public policy, where there was corruption, and where no good government types were focused at the time, certainly as far as I could see. So in many ways it was a calculation.

I'd say that it's also a case that I'm not a huge people person and never been one to follow the crowds. I follow my nose in more the journalistic tradition. So once I realized that the dynamic on criminal justice was fascinating to me, that a problem this big could be so ignored, and there could be this bipartisan consensus on positions that I thought were just foolhardy, that was how I got into all this.

AP: How did you begin writing on the Web about criminal justice?

Henson's first Web venture was his Austin Police Hall of Shame site Credit: Photo by Frank Swift via Flickr

In 1997 I learned HTML and started a website: The Austin Police Department Hall of Shame. Every month under open records I would get all of the new disciplinary actions against APD officers and post the text online of what they had done. As you can imagine that made me immensely popular with the local police union. A lot of my work evolved from there to where I started following stuff statewide and not just in Austin, not doing the same level of open records work but tracking what was being published in the media. So it was a proto-blog by that point.

The blogging – both the original Austin Police Department Hall of Shame website and then later Grits – grew out of a frustration with just very poor media coverage on the topics I cared about. I felt like almost every story I would read there would be more unsaid than actually said; all the important points were often just absent. It was a way to have some additional analysis out there and a way for me to organize my own thoughts and information. And I would also say – and this is antithetical to the way people think about blogs – especially at the beginning, I didn't really expect anyone to read this stuff, it was much more for me than it was for readers. To the extent that I had a target audience at all, it was very very small: Basically local decision makers and local journalists who cover these issues to give them access to background.

It was almost like Sherlock Holmes' clip file. I used to have six four-drawer filing cabinets in my office filled with paper. I would keep every scrap of paper I found interesting. Well, today I have one cabinet. Instead, the blog is how I do that. I pull the money quotes, put a headline and a date so I can footnote it later if it's taken offline. And it's a way for me to organize that stuff for the benefit of my own work as much as it is for outside readers. Other people find it useful and I'm glad for that, but its primary purpose was a way for me to organize my work on all these advocacy issues.

AP: Why is the blog called Grits for Breakfast?

SH: It's such a heavy subject that I wanted the name to be lighter. It needed an air of humor to it. You can hear that I've got this hick accent. And Grits just seemed like this appropriate nom de plume and breakfast is something you have every day and every morning. And I do most of my writing in the morning, and it seemed like an appropriate allusion.

AP: What are the key issues in criminal justice in Texas today?

SH: I just think in general both state and local, the criminal justice system is taking over our budgets. At the city council level, they spend a ridiculous amount of money on public safety compared to, say, 20 years ago. At the state government level it's becoming more and more expensive with this ballooning system.

One of the problems with the death penalty and using it so often is that the appellate system is so incredibly expensive. Another big issue that's a cutting-edge issue here in the 21st Century is the effect of technology on privacy and the retraction of the Fourth Amendment with all the new technology that tracks us everywhere. I'm right now trying to shop a bill at the Legislature that would actually require a warrant for GPS tracking of someone's cell phone or electronic device, and the Dallas Morning News did a nice front page story on that effort. There are all sorts of applications of that. A lot of them are federal, but local law enforcement uses all those same tools.

11 felonies committed with an oyster can land you in court Credit: Photo by devils rancher via Flickr

The Fort Worth Police Department recently purchased a device that essentially acts as a fake cell phone tower and can suck in all of the phone calls and looks at who is talking to who. They say that we're gonna get a warrant before we ever use this. But our law doesn't necessarily require them to. It's great they say they will. But the law hasn't kept up with the technology. That's one of the things we will be talking about for the next two decades.

In Texas, if they put a physical tracking device on your car, they actually have to get a court order. Well no one does that anymore. With a judge never hearing about it, using a subpoena, they can get your location data from your cell phone company. So that requirement for judicial oversight has become moot.

AP: The Innocence Project has gotten attention for helping some wrongfully-convicted persons who were facing the death penalty get their convictions reversed. What are your thoughts on capital punishment?

SH: I am not an abolitionist. I think the death penalty is justified in some circumstances. A good example is: Say you have a prisoner who is already serving a life sentence, and he kills another prisoner. Does he just get a freebie? Is that really justice? No. I think any absolutist position on these culture war questions just leads to absurd stances.

The final Texas death row in Huntsville Credit: Photo by J. Stephen Conn via Flickr

You can say the same thing for those who want to maximize the use of the death penalty, who think: If you kill someone you should just die. Even juries don't agree with that a lot of the time. For years until very recently when the Legislation disallowed it, juries could give probation for murder and often did. Because sometimes, frankly, the victim needed killing. You would see situations where an abused wife kills a battering spouse. Who's gonna say that her use of force was unjustified? Well, you can charge her with murder and you can theoretically say that every motive deserves the death penalty, but situations are complex, life is complex, people are complex. It's just not a cut-and-dried thing.

At the same time I think that the death penalty is overused. I think that we've expanded the types of situations in which it can be applied too broadly in Texas. And I don't think we have enough safeguards to make sure innocent people aren't executed. But in the larger scheme of things, far more people die under the Department of Criminal Justice from crappy healthcare in our prisons than from executions. But you don't see movements or marches on that issue even though it's killing more people.

I just think that all diverts people from the issues that matter. For example, we had I believe nine new death sentences last year. Well, there's 153,000 people in Texas prisons. The issues for all those people are obscured because so much attention is focused on this narrow issue of death penalty cases.

AP: What are some overall changes in and solutions to how we pursue criminal justice in America, Texas and Austin that you see as important?

SH: I think we've just criminalized far too much of public life. I think we have somewhere in the range of 2,500 or so felonies on the books in Texas. There are 11 different felonies you can commit with an oyster. This expansion of law enforcement, especially as we've contracted civil law – tort reform means you can't really sue for damages anymore, but harms still occur – has resulted in this push to criminalize to fill that gap in civil society. That trend has to reverse before the over-incarceration of prisons and the diminishing of the Fourth Amendment can be solved. All those issues are a function of using law enforcement for things it was never designed for: social control as opposed to simply tracking criminals, theft, rape, murder, things we all actually think of as crimes. Today we've criminalized things that wouldn't have been crimes in our grandparents' generation. Criminal law should not be used to dictate social trends. When it's used that way it's ripe for abuse.

AP: You also have a personal blog, Huevos Rancheros. What's the relationship between the two?

SH: I don't update the personal blog very often. I write compulsively. So when I write something and I look up and say, that's not something that should go on Grits, I'll flip over and stick it on the other.