Collection of student data raises questions
About the education data system Although it received less than a third of the funds it requested for the project, the Arizona Department of Education is moving forward to streamline and centralize the state’s student-data system. The state Legislature allocated $7 million this year for a program to replace a piecemeal system of data and coding that officials use to track everything from standardized-test scores to students who receive federally funded meals. The funds also are being used to develop pilot programs in 11 Arizona school districts and charter schools: Balsz Elementary, Deer Valley Unified, Eloy Elementary, Kingman Unified, Nogales Unified, Paradise Valley Unified, Phoenix Elementary, Tolleson Elementary, Vail, the Arizona State School for the Deaf and Blind and AmeriSchools. The program helps the districts instantly connect with student data that is housed in state Education Department databases. Teachers can access student data through “dashboards” in their classrooms and find out immediately if their students are gifted, need remedial work in certain areas or have had attendance problems. Department officials hope that as many as 200 school districts will connect to the new system in the next two years.

The Republic | azcentral.com Sun Aug 25, 2013 11:29 AM

Rose Fletcher, a Mesa mother of two, agrees that schools need to keep track of some basic information about her children — their grades, standardized-test scores and attendance from year to year.

“I also understand that the state needs to compare schools’ test-score data,” she said. “I don’t mind that.”

But mirroring the concerns of a growing number of parents, Fletcher worries schools are collecting too much data about her kids, ages 7 and 9. She and others worry about identity theft as well as invasion of their families’ privacy.

“I got a letter from my 7-year-old’s school asking whether I am Hispanic and what is the primary language I speak at home,” she said. “That bothers me. Why are they so concerned about the culture I practice in my home? My demographics, race or background should not determine my children’s future.”

She wonders if she will be asked next about her family’s politics or religion.

Another Mesa mom, Brenda Martin, is concerned about the security of the data that schools collect about her sons, who are in junior and senior high school.

“I don’t think they need to know all of the things that they ask,” she said.

Information-technology officials at the Arizona Department of Education say student information is as safe as it has ever been — and will get even safer as they continue to develop a more streamlined and centralized data system in the next few years.

In addition, Arizona has a Data Governance Commission that permits state officials to collect only student information that directly relates to education.

Still, many parents have confronted State Superintendent of Public Instruction John Huppenthal with fears that his department will either sell their kids’ data or use its new computer system to pry into their finances, politics, religion — even gun ownership.

Because of the questions Huppenthal is regularly asked, the state Education Department developed a five-point fact sheet for him to share when he speaks publicly.

“Will the system track a family’s political affiliations or firearms ownership? Absolutely not,” Huppenthal’s fact sheet states. “The system is intended to do three major things: provide teachers data so they can better instruct their students, simplify the administration of the school system and reduce the burden of required reports.”

In June, about 90 parents from around central Arizona met with Huppenthal about the new Arizona Common Core Standards. Many challenged him with questions about whether the state will collect more personal data from families as the new academic standards and the centralized data system are rolled out.

Reports about data

News reports about weaknesses in the current data system, as well as commentary by conservative figures like Glenn Beck, have raised the suspicions of many parents.

Beck, for instance, recently told a National Public Radio interviewer that he believes the federal government is developing a national education data system to support testing the new Common Core standards.

He said it “calls for massive amounts of personal data on students, including health-care histories, income information, religious affiliation, blood types, ... how are your parents voting.”

Not factual, state officials say.

“People are afraid we want to collect information about politics and firearms — but we are only collecting the data we have always collected,” said Chris Kotterman, the state Education Department’s deputy associate superintendent for policy development and government relations.

Kotterman and other Education Department officials confirmed that they do, and most likely will continue to, collect information about students’ gender and racial background, languages spoken at home and whether their families have incomes low enough to qualify for free or reduced-cost lunches.

That information is used by state and federal education officials to determine whether all students are being properly served by school districts. Officials also sometimes use demographic data to make sure standardized test questions are fair.

“But the data is collected and looked at in the aggregate,” Kotterman said. “We don’t include individual student names in the reports.”

How information is used

Kelly McManus, government-affairs director for the advocacy group Stand for Children Arizona, said she has observed “a tremendous amount of misinformation and fear-mongering around (student) data right now.”

She has developed a fact sheet similar to Huppenthal’s that she uses to dispel myths. “The primary type of data that is being collected is academic in nature,” she said.

“As a former teacher, it was so important for me to know where my students were academically, who had a history of absenteeism and who I needed to be prepared to provide additional supports to. I think people who are concerned should talk to their school and find out what is really being collected. There are state and federal laws protecting individual student data,” McManus added.

Kotterman suggested parents keep in mind that the laws regulating the privacy of student data are similar to those that make medical records private.

“We can’t sell your student’s data,” he said. “We can’t give it away.”