Scottsdale reaps economic benefits from bowl games
The Fiesta Bowl's three college football bowl games this winter had an estimated economic impact of $354.6 million and Scottsdale cashed in on a healthy amount of that as the prime host of the teams and fans.

An Arizona State University study released Monday showed visitors spent $84 million on lodging during the BCS National Championship Game and Insight and Fiesta bowls in late December and early January.

Football fans attending those games, played in Tempe and Glendale, also spent $104 million on dining and drinking, $7.9 million on golf and $20.9 million on other entertainment.

Those expenditures are spread around the Valley and state but Scottsdale and Paradise Valley received a big share of visitor dollars because their hotels hosted five of the six teams and many of the fan events were in downtown Scottsdale, said ASU professor Michael Mokwa, who led the study's research team.

"The spending is diffused and goes well beyond the Glendale area and includes Scottsdale in a big way," he said. "If you think about it Scottsdale is the hub of the entire week" leading up to the title game.

The economic infusion from visiting football fans set records for the BCS title game and the Insight Bowl. But the Fiesta Bowl's attendance slipped and the overall economic impact was off 11.7 percent from 2006-07, the last time the Fiesta Bowl hosted three college football games.

The Fiesta Bowl's impact of $47.6 million fell 59 percent from four years ago. Oklahoma vs. Connecticut was not considered an attractive matchup and it showed at the gate. Attendance slipped to 67,232, down 8 percent from the Boise State vs. Oklahoma game of 2006-07.

The Insight Bowl, which hosted Missouri and Iowa, contributed far more to the state's economy than the Fiesta Bowl.

The study from the W.P. Carey School of Business at ASU estimated the Insight Bowl's economic impact at $84.6 million, up 36 percent from the 2006-07 bowl season. The game set an Insight Bowl attendance record of 53,453.

Although the Fiesta Bowl had a larger crowd, only about 42 percent of the fans were visitors whose spending is a key economic driver, compared with 60 percent of Insight attendees.

Mokwa said the overall decline in economic infusion from the three games was largely due to diminished fan interest in the Fiesta Bowl. Fan spending patterns were similar to those observed four years ago when the economy was robust, he said.

Auburn and Oregon fans filled Valley hotels and the University of Phoenix Stadium for the BCS title game.

That game attracted a stadium record crowd of 78,603 fans and added $188 million to the economy, up 9.6 percent from 2006-07.

Scottsdale and Paradise Valley hotels filled 77.8 percent of their rooms over the four days surrounding the Jan. 10 game, according to Smith Travel Research. That was 4.6 points higher than occupancy in the rest of the Valley.

The Scottsdale Convention and Visitors Bureau has a 20-year agreement to host Fiesta Bowl teams.

Attendees at all three bowl games spent an average of just over three days in the Valley. Spending varied from $349 per visitor to the BCS title game to $313 for the Insight Bowl and $291 for the Fiesta Bowl.

Much of that spending is for airfare, dining and drinking, and lodging.

The Fiesta Bowl estimates its events have contributed more than $1 billion to Arizona's economy in the past five years.