Vets rally in Phoenix to decry VA care, seek reforms
CLOSE Rep. David Schweikert at the rally that comes in the wake of last week's disclosures that dozens of VA hospital patients in Arizona may have died while awaiting medical care.

One of the signs brought to the VA Accountability Rally at Steele Indian School Park, Wednesday, April 16, 2014. Veterans and their families are angry over recent reports of negligence and ineptitude at Veterans Administration hospitals around the country, especially Phoenix. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic) Story Highlights A rally to protest VA health care problems draws nearly 150 veterans to Phoenix park.

Rep. David Schweikert and others call on Congress to adopt reforms to deal with VA mismanagement.

The VA budget has nearly tripled since 2001 and it is treating fewer vets, yet problems persist.

Roughly 150 veterans and their supporters rallied at Steele Indian School Park Wednesday to call attention to deep flaws in the Phoenix VA Health Care System and to seek congressional reform.

The rally, attended by Rep. David Schweikert, R-Ariz., was organized by Concerned Veterans for America in the wake of last week's disclosures by current and former Department of Veterans Affairs employees and a congressional committee that dozens of VA hospital patients in Arizona may have died while awaiting medical care.

Related: Deaths at Phoenix VA hospital may be tied to delayed care

Schweikert urged those in the audience Wednesday to press for legislation that would hold VA administrators accountable by making it easier to fire those who are incompetent.

"Management needs to know, when they screw up, they lie to us, they misrepresent the numbers, they don't get transferred to another facility, they get transferred to the unemployment line," Schweikert said.

Last week, Rep. Jeff Miller, R-Fla., chairman of the House Committee on Veterans Affairs, said the panel's investigators have concluded as many as 40 Arizona veteran deaths could be related to VA delays in providing them medical care. He said investigators also have evidence that the Phoenix system keeps two sets of records to conceal prolonged patient waits for doctor appointments and treatment.

Schweikert said that estimate of the number of veterans who died awaiting care may be short of the actual number.

"Be prepared to see a very different number when the investigation is over," Schweikert added. "This is about truth telling."

Miller's committee and the Inspector General for the VA are investigating not only the deaths, but allegations of falsified record keeping and medical reporting.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Sean Johnson, Wounded Warrior liaison for Rep. Paul Gosar, R-Ariz., read a statement from the congressman to those at the rally. In it, Gosar said he was "appalled" at the negligence and mistreatment of veteerans by the VA.

"Many of these veterans just give up," Gosar said in the statement. "They feel abandoned by the country they fought for ... it's heartbreaking."

Lee Huff, constituent services representative for Rep. Matt Salmon, R-Ariz., read a letter from Salmon expressing outrage at the "unaccountable bureaucracy."

"The way the Department of Veterans Affairs conducts their business is deplorable and must change today," Salmon said in a speech read by his aide.

Former Chandler City Councilman, Martin Sepulveda, himself a veteran, said there are many veterans in remote parts of Arizona who could not be present Wednesday but should be represented at the rally. He urged veterans to speak out about their problems with the VA.

Sometimes rambunctious veterans, many decked out in military paraphernalia, filled the crowd, occasionally interrupting speakers to demand answers.

"Fire em?" demanded one vet when a speaker referred to VA administrators. "Hell, put them in jail."

Others referred to the absence of Arizona's U.S. senators at the rally, chanting, "Where's John McCain? Where's Jeff Flake?"

The offices of McCain and Flake announced as the rally was underway that they would hold a news conference in Phoenix Friday to discuss the reports of VA mismanagement and neglect.

Dan Caldwell, issues and legislative campaign manager for Concerned Veterans for America, stressed the importance of action over words.

"I know there's a lot of anger," Caldwell said. "There are a lot of people upset at how they've been treated at the VA ... This is a symptom of a disease down there. And the disease is a lack of accountability."

Caldwell and others emphasized that there are many good employees at the VA. But he added, "They're not being served well by their managers."

Cruz Salinas, in the red hat, a U.S. Marine Corps combat veteran who served in Vietnam, angrily questions Rep. David Schweikert at the VA Accountability Rally at Steele Indian School Park, Wednesday, April 16, 2014. Veterans and their families are angry over recent reports of negligence and ineptitude at Veterans Administration hospitals around the country, especially Phoenix. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

Since 2001, Caldwell said, the VA budget has nearly tripled and added 100,000 employees, but it is serving fewer veterans than ever because of the onslaught of deaths of World War II veterans.

"The backlog has grown, wait times have grown and there are more preventable deaths ... this is not a resource issue," Caldwell said.

Two pieces of federal legislation — one each in the House and Senate — propose to provide more flexibility to the VA to fire administrators who are incompetent, negligent or bad actors.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/Qek6pK