FBI releases Jared Loughner records 5 years after Tucson shooting
CLOSE Newly released FBI records provide details on the 2011 deadly Tucson shooting where six people were killed. WIBBITZ

Redacted files depict a swarming investigation that began within minutes of the shooting, with law-enforcement officers sometimes chasing leads from crank callers and social-media users.

Records released by the FBI provide insights and details -- but no startling new revelations -- about the investigation into Rep. Gabrielle Giffords' shooting along with 18 others in 2011. Here, law-enforcement officers quarantine the shopping center where the shootings took place near Tucson. (Photo: Laura Segall/Getty Images) Story Highlights The FBI this month released 1,750 pages of investigative files to The Arizona Republic

Materials mostly replicate info previously divulged in court or by investigative agencies

Republic received only a fraction of the case records

Five years after a deranged gunman shot Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords and 18 others at a southern Arizona shopping center, records released by the FBI provide insights and details about the case, but no startling new revelations.

The heavily redacted files depict a swarming investigation that began within minutes of the shooting, as federal agents and law officers in Pima County tried to figure out whether the captured gunman, Jared Lee Loughner, had acted alone.

Agents were inundated with legitimate leads while also fielding tips from misguided citizens and political zealots who blamed the shooting on militias, Satanic cults, right-wingers, radio hosts and others.

Amid the early turmoil, FBI leaders issued an alert to agents nationwide for information on the Tucson case, simultaneously warning that copycats might be inspired to carry out similar crimes.

Investigators also were sidetracked chasing leads from crank callers and social media users, some of whom issued threats in the heat of angst or anger. One anonymous post declared, "You want a civil war, you got it," then named specific political commentators as prospective assassination targets. A caller to the FBI claimed Giffords was attacked for abusing federal power, then added, "People are going to drop like flies."

The 22-year-old Loughner opened fire Jan. 8, 2011, during a Congress on Your Corner event hosted by Giffords outside a Tucson-area supermarket. Six people were killed, including U.S. District Judge John Roll, before the gunman was wrestled to the ground. Giffords and 12 others were wounded.

Detailed probe digs into Loughner's past

The FBI this month released about 1,750 pages of investigative files to The Arizona Republic in response to a Freedom of Information Act request.

Agents tracked down Loughner's former friends, classmates and associates from Bangor, Maine, to Spokane, Wash. They served search warrants and subpoenas to gather evidence from his home, schools, workplaces, phones and computers. They pursued tangential tips and subjected evidence to a plethora of forensic tests.

Among the items were a bullet fragment found in one victim's pants pocket, Giffords' red beaded necklace and six folding chairs from the crime scene that were analyzed to determine whether bullet holes were produced by Loughner's Glock pistol.

The probe was so detailed that agents performed a frame-by-frame review of security video showing the crime, then requested an American sign-language interpreter's analysis because they thought Loughner might have been communicating while he waited in line. (Loughner took a sign language class in 2007.)

Jared Loughner (Photo: Pima County Sheriff's Department)

Early on, investigators realized Loughner was more likely a demented young man acting alone than a terrorist or member of any conspiracy.

His internet postings, including bizarre YouTube videos, suggested a mental breakdown. Friends described him as a weird guy with "alternate realities" and "dream worlds." Personal papers revealed an obsession with Giffords that may have dated to when Loughner confronted her during a visit to his high school, asking, "If words could not be understood, then what does government mean?"

Agents pursued tips that Loughner had undergone mental-health treatment. While those leads were not substantiated, records released this month amplify the suspect's behavior at job sites where he was fired, and in confrontations at Pima Community College leading to his expulsion.

In one instance, witnesses told agents, Loughner staged a classroom protest after failing an assignment. When campus police arrived, he claimed a First Amendment right to free thoughts — and a right to a passing grade when he put those thoughts in schoolwork. In another incident, witnesses told agents Loughner disrupted a poetry discussion by blurting, "We should have dynamite attached to babies."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The FBI documents contain equally troubling accounts from neighbors. One told agents Loughner would sometimes wear a bandanna "like a gangster (and) ride his bike up and down the street while screaming very loudly ... 'I'm coming to get you.' "

Much information yet to be released

The FBI materials mostly replicate information previously divulged in court, by the Pima County Sheriff's Department, and in an earlier FBI release to the Los Angeles Times. The Republic sought the entire Loughner file, but received only a fraction of the case records. Still missing are agent reports, diagrams, videos and other materials.

The 1,750 pages include a sobering evidence list that links items from the crime scene with shooting victims:

"One black white and pink blouse with dried blood ... Gunshot wounds to the right and left arm and upper back.."

"One (1) black coat stained with blood ... gunshot to lower left back."

"Blue jean coat stained with blood ... Gunshot wounds to left temple, left thigh, left groin, right flank..."

The records also reflect tip-line calls received while agents were trying to identify an unknown person who incorrectly was considered a possible accomplice to Loughner.

One Valley woman claimed the "UNSUB" — unknown subject — was her ex-husband. Another advised that her former company helped plan the Tucson shootings using color-coded phone calls of blue, red and green to determine the number of victims. A former law officer said the UNSUB was an Indiana militia leader. Another caller said an outfit known as "Global Mafia Terrorism" targeted Giffords, as well as Michael Jackson and Pope John Paul II.

Finally, the FBI records add to previously known incidents such as Loughner's dismissal as a volunteer for Pima County Animal Control. Agents were told that job ended when Loughner took puppies into an area that was under quarantine due to contagious animals. "Loughner didn't seem to understand why he needed to keep dogs away from the area. He was asked to stop walking dogs as a result, and he never returned …"

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/2dB5qRq