Experts: ISIS more likely to enter U.S. by plane than via Southwest border
CLOSE

Fighters from Islamic State group sit on their tank during a parade in Raqqa, Syria. (Photo: Associated Press)

WASHINGTON – Islamic State terrorists who want to enter the United States are much more likely to try to fly on a commercial airline than sneak across the Southwest border, homeland security officials told a House panel Wednesday.

"More than a decade after the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, terrorists continue to focus on commercial aviation as their primary target of interest," said Troy Miller, acting assistant commissioner for U.S. Customs and Border Protection.

RELATED: Obama says he has authority for militant campaign

The number of people that federal officials have encountered at the Southwest border who are on the terrorist watch list is "minimal" compared to how many are trying to enter on commercial planes, said John P. Wagner, assistant commissioner in the Office of Field Operations at Customs and Border Protection.

"You're talking 10s (encountered at the border) versus thousands (in commercial aviation)," Wagner told members of the House Homeland Security Subcommittee on Border and Maritime Security.

The federal government has had no credible information that terrorist groups are trying to enter the United States across the U.S.-Mexico border, said Jenny Lasley, deputy undersecretary for analysis in the Office of Intelligence and Analysis at the Department of Homeland Security.

"It is something, we are always looking for, but to date we have not seen credible evidence of that," Lasley said.

The federal officials were responding to questions that arose from comments by some Republican members of the subcommittee that Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) extremists could enter the United States by slipping across the Southwest border.

"We know that terrorist networks have used our porous Southern border and broken immigration system to enter the United States," Rep. Lou Barletta, R-Pa., said.

He said he is concerned the federal government is taking the unaccompanied Central American children who have been crossing the border into Texas in recent months and "dispersing them across the United States without states knowing who they are."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, D-Texas, jumped on that comment, asking what evidence Barletta has that those children pose any kind of terrorist threat.

"Do you have documentation that unaccompanied children, age 2, 4 and 6, are in fact known terrorists that are being spread throughout the nation?" she said.

Barletta said he didn't have any documentation.

"Shouldn't we consider it a threat that we don't know anything about these individuals that are being sent around the United States?" Barletta said.

Rep. Beto O'Rourke, D-Texas, said he was assured by DHS officials in August that the Southwest border has never been exploited by terrorists. The officials at Wednesday's hearing confirmed that again at O'Rourke's request.

"That doesn't mean we shouldn't be vigilant," O'Rourke said. "But we should only traffic in the facts and data and not raise these kinds of fears and anxieties when there are not facts to support them."

Rep. Jeff Duncan, R-S.C., was not reassured.

"Wake up, America," he said. "With a porous Southern border, we have no idea who is in our country."

The border debate erupted despite the fact that the focus of the hearing was supposed to be on the threat posed by ISIS terrorists who have Western passports and can fly to the United States from European nations without needing a visa.

The border issue also came up at a separate hearing of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee on cybersecurity and "evolving threats to the homeland."

Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., questioned a DHS official about ISIS plans to cross the Southwest border.

"There have been Twitter, social media exchanges among ISIL adherents across the globe speaking about that as a possibility," said Francis Taylor, undersecretary for intelligence and analysis at DHS. "I'm satisfied we have the intelligence and the capability on our border that would prevent that activity."

McCain said Arizonans remain deeply concerned.

"The fact is there are thousands of people who are coming across our border who are undetected and not identified, and for you to sit there and tell me that we have the capability or now have the proper protections of our Southwest border, particularly in light of the urgings over Facebook and Twitter of people to come across our Southwestern border, is a great concern to the citizens of my state," McCain said.

Taylor said he takes that concern seriously.

"The security at the Southwestern border is of great concern to the department and I certainly understand the concerns of the citizens of your state," he said. "If I gave you the impression I thought the border security was what it needed to be to protect against all the risks coming across the state, that's not what I meant to say."

Contact Erin Kelly at ekelly@gannett.com

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1tyy4jx