Sen. Jeff Flake: President Donald Trump's refugee action 'unacceptable'

CLOSE

Sen. Jeff Flake on Saturday denounced as "unacceptable" President Donald Trump and his administration's attempt to detain and deport refugees and even green-card holders stuck at airports following Trump's Friday directive restricting refugees and legal immigration from Syria and six other Muslim-majority countries.

Sen. Jeff Flake, R-Ariz., is critical of President Donald Trump's executive order restricting refugees from certain countries. (Photo: David Kadlubowski/The Republic)

Writing on the website Medium.com, Flake, an Arizona Republican who is up for re-election in 2018, seemed to agree with Trump that the issue is a national security priority but suggested Trump's executive order was too broad in its effort to counter terrorism.

"President Trump and his administration are right to be concerned about national security, but it’s unacceptable when even legal permanent residents are being detained or turned away at airports and ports of entry," wrote Flake, who sits on the Senate Foreign Relations and Judiciary committees. "Enhancing long term national security requires that we have a clear-eyed view of radical Islamic terrorism without ascribing radical Islamic terrorist views to all Muslims."

Most GOP Capitol Hill lawmakers so far have stayed quiet about Trump's executive order, but Sen. Ben Sasse, R-Neb., issued a statement similar to Flake's earlier in the day.

"There are two ways to lose our generational battle against jihadism by losing touch with reality. The first is to keep pretending that jihadi terrorism has no connection to Islam or to certain countries. That’s been a disaster," Sasse said in the written statement. "And here's the second way to fail: If we send a signal to the Middle East that the U.S. sees all Muslims as jihadis, the terrorist recruiters win by telling kids that America is banning Muslims and that this is America versus one religion. Both approaches are wrong, and both will make us less safe. Our generational fight against jihadism requires wisdom."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

A federal judge on Saturday issued an emergency stay that temporarily blocked the Trump administration's attempt to deport the affected travelers with proper visas who were stuck at airports.

Nowicki is The Arizona Republic's national political reporter. Follow him on Twitter at @dannowicki and on his official Facebook page.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/2jDDBJN