Poll suggests majority of Maricopa County voters view Sheriff Joe Arpaio unfavorably
CLOSE As Sheriff Joe Arpaio runs for re-election, a new poll finds that 57 percent of Maricopa County respondents had an unfavorable opinion of America's Toughest Sheriff.

Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio visits GOP headquarters to watch primary election returns with the Arizona Republican Party on Aug. 30. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

A majority of Maricopa County registered voters surveyed in The Arizona Republic/Morrison/Cronkite News poll view Sheriff Joe Arpaio unfavorably, potentially spelling trouble for his re-election bid.

Arpaio's unpopularity appears stronger in Maricopa County, where voters will decide his fate, than in the rest of Arizona.

The poll found 57 percent of Maricopa County respondents had an unfavorable opinion of Arpaio, compared to 54 percent statewide. The poll, conducted Aug. 17-31, is the first released publicly that has surveyed registered voters since a federal judge referred Arpaio and top aides to the Department of Justice for possible criminal charges in a racial-profiling case.

Arpaio campaign spokesman Chad Willems disputed the poll results.

"We don't have a lot of faith in this latest survey," Willems said in a written statement. "The results of the primary election where Sheriff Arpaio earned a full two-thirds of the vote in a four-way primary stand in stark contrast to these findings. The most recent public opinion surveys, as well as our own internal polling numbers, show Sheriff Arpaio with not only high approval ratings among all likely voters, but also beating his Democrat opponent handily."

But polls made public in recent months have not demonstrated high approval ratings for Arpaio. They have found him in a tight race with his Democratic opponent, Paul Penzone, a former Phoenix police sergeant.

The sheriff's approval rating has dropped since 2012 when he faced Penzone and won, Penzone spokeswoman Stacy Pearson said, citing internal campaign polling from that time.

"This is going to be the toughest election of the sheriff's career," Pearson said.

The latest poll also shows Arpaio is less popular among women and college-educated voters, and extremely unpopular with Democrats, Hispanics and young people.

For Penzone to prevail, he must win over independents, more than half of whom said in the latest poll that they view Arpaio negatively, and at least some Republicans. A small group of Republicans polled — about 8.5 percent — said they were undecided.

Arpaio's favorability numbers may look negative now, but they won't necessarily stay that way, said Constantin Querard, a Republican strategist.

Querard suggested the sheriff could improve his polling by going on the attack against Penzone and by focusing on his perceived successes during 23 years in office, Querard said.

"I hope part of what he does is not necessarily do the campaign in such a way it increases Penzone's unfavorables, but that he brags about the good work that he's done," Querard said.

The poll interviewed 468 respondents in Maricopa County and 784 respondents statewide. The county-only portion of the poll has a margin of error of plus or minus 4.8 percentage points. The statewide portion has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.5 percentage points.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

POLL RESULTS: Presidential race | Arizona Senate race | Voter views of Ducey | Voter views of Arpaio | Marijuana legalization | $12 minimum wage | Views of immigration, border wall | Complete results and methodology

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/2c6jaPO