Ben Carson calls for more militarized U.S.-Mexico border
Dr. Ben Carson, the neurosurgeon running for the Republican presidential nomination toured smuggler routes in Pinal County on Wednesday. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic) Story Highlights Carson toured the Arizona-Mexico border in a law-enforcement helicopter Wednesday

During the tour, Carson vowed to use “every means possible” to reduce border crossings to “very few”

He plans to deny citizenship to babies born to undocumented mothers who come to U.S. to give birth

Carson would crack down on companies hiring undocumented immigrants and deport families together

NACO — On a tour of the Arizona-Mexico border Wednesday, GOP hopeful Ben Carson called for greater militarization of the region, including possibly deploying U.S. troops and ordering drone strikes on smuggler hideouts.

The former neurosurgeon met with county sheriffs and flew over trafficking routes and cartel bunkers in a law-enforcement helicopter. During the tour, Carson said he would use “every means possible” to reduce the number of border crossings to “very few.”

“This is easy, but we don’t have the will to do it,” Carson said, following a briefing by Pinal County Sheriff Paul Babeu, whose jurisdiction is miles north of the border but includes trafficking routes. “Some of these caves that are out there, one drone strike and, poof, they’re gone. And they’re easy to find. … Let this become a military issue instead of a bureaucrats issue.”

Carson also visited with Cochise County Sheriff Mark Dannels, whose deputies patrol close to the border, and about a dozen ranchers who have, for years, called for more border security.

Carson dismissed the idea that with such a buildup the area could become a war zone. Rather, he said, the region isn’t secure, creating the potential for terrorists to cross and undocumented immigrants with violent criminal pasts to be released by immigration officials.

“We’re not being protected very well,” Carson said.

His immigration plan calls for a crackdown on companies that employ undocumented immigrants, deportation of undocumented families together and denial of citizenship to babies born to undocumented mothers who come to the United States to give birth. For all others born in the U.S., Carson said he would keep in place the 14th Amendment’s promise of birthright citizenship, which was enacted by Republicans after the Civil War to give freed African-American slaves the rights of other Americans.

Carson, however, was unclear on the logistics of some of his proposals and offered plans for others that could be impractical. On regulating birthright citizenship, he said the government would require all mothers to show proof of citizenship at hospitals before giving birth.

He said he would offer legal residence and employment to the millions of undocumented immigrants already living in the United States through a guest-worker program if they did not have serious criminal records, registered with the government and paid back taxes and fees. They could apply for citizenship only if they went “to the back of the line.”

Ducking into the Silver Saddle Steakhouse in Tucson for lunch, Carson didn’t approach diners to engage in retail politicking. But after he finished a plate of fajitas, patrons approached to shake his hand.

“I appreciate your pragmatic approach. It’s so refreshing to hear,” Craig White, 56, said.

“We were just talking about you,” Beverley Hester, 54, said.

The couple said they were on their first date, and had hesitantly broached politics before learning they both were Carson supporters. Seeing the candidate in the restaurant was a thrill, they said, and, glancing at each other, agreed they’d go on a second date soon.

In Bisbee, a few minutes’ drive to the nearest port entry from Mexico, Carson met with rural Arizona leaders and nearly a dozen ranchers. In the group were family members of Robert Krentz, the rancher whose death at the hands of a suspected undocumented immigrant in 2010 spurred pressure for tighter border security.

Jack Ladd, a rancher who has lived on the border for 65 years, said the group hoped Carson would go to the White House and make changes, including stationing agents closer to the border.

“We’re hoping you can get there and that you have an idea of what the problems are,” he said. “Somebody has to straighten it out. And good luck to you.”

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Ladd led the group along a dirt road bordering his ranch where a dry wash runs perpendicular to the rust-colored border fence. At that location, the barrier is about four feet off the ground, allowing anyone through who can climb past a few barbed wires, provided the wash isn’t running.

Carson marveled at the inefficiency that has frustrated members of the group.

“We’re all pissed off, quite frankly, excuse my language,” Babeu said. “These people here have been lied to by leaders in our own government. You get people elected, and they turn around and do just the opposite or nothing at all.”

CLOSE Pediatric neurosurgeon Ben Carson is joining the 2016 presidential race, but his lack of political experience could work against him.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1NG2HOB