Trump will need local police to help carry out deportation orders. Will they comply?
While some local officials and agencies around the country are eager to help the federal government identify and deport undocumented immigrants who commit crimes, others have reservations.

Undocumented immigrants wait to be loaded onto an Immigration and Customs Enforcement charter jet in October 2015 in Mesa. President Donald Trump's executive order calls for deporting undocumented immigrants convicted of any crime. (Photo: Getty Images)

President Donald Trump wants to greatly expand deportations.

In a reversal from former President Barack Obama, whose immigration policy narrowed deportations mainly to immigrants convicted of serious crimes, Trump plans to cast a far wider net. But to do so, Trump is going to need a lot of help from local police.

That may not be so easy.

While some elected officials and local police officials are eager to take on a bigger role helping the federal government identify and deport undocumented immigrants who commit crimes, others have reservations out of concern that working with federal immigration authorities could erode trust in immigrant communities and divert limited resources from investigating local crimes.

Broader set of deportation priorities

President Donald Trump holds up an executive order for immigration actions on Jan. 25, 2017, at the Department of Homeland Security in Washington, D.C. (Photo: AP)

The executive order Trump signed on Jan. 25 calls for deporting undocumented immigrants convicted of any crime, not just serious crimes. It also calls for deporting those charged, not just convicted of crimes.

That is a far broader set of deportation priorities than the narrower priorities Obama adopted after deportations hit record levels during the first years of his presidency, peaking in fiscal year 2013. That year, the U.S. deported 434,000 immigrants, prompting Obama to back off deportations after immigrant advocates, his usual allies, branded him "Deporter in Chief."

In his executive order, Trump called for the federal Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency to revive two controversial federal programs, the 287(g) program, which Obama curtailed, and the Secure Communities program, which Obama scrapped altogether.

MORE: AZ police agencies show little appetite for immigration order | Border cities unprepared for mass deportations

The programs, which Obama inherited, essentially are intended to create a large-scale deportation force by joining with the hundreds of thousands of law-enforcement officers in cities and towns throughout the country who are most likely to come into contact with undocumented immigrants.

The 287(g) program was originally composed of two models:

The task-force model deputized local police on the street to help federal immigration authorities find, arrest and deport undocumented immigrants while carrying out their normal functions investigating other crimes.

The jail model trained officers who work in jails to identify undocumented immigrants charged with crimes.

Obama killed the task-force model but kept the jail model. Trump's executive order suggests he is bringing back both models of the 287(g) program, which is named for the section of immigration law that created it.

Although the 287(g) program is voluntary, Trump's administration could encourage participation by offering incentives, said Randy Capps, director of research for U.S. programs at the Migration Policy Institute, a nonpartisan research group. "They could provide extra funding to support it. That would be the most likely way," he said.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The Secure Communities program, piloted under former President George W. Bush's administration, is more far-reaching than the 287(g) program.

It allows ICE to identify undocumented immigrants booked into local jails without much effort by local police. Under the program, anytime local police book someone into jail, their fingerprints are automatically run through U.S. Department of Homeland Security databases on top of the usual FBI criminal background checks. ICE then asks local police to hold deportable immigrants identified through the checks for up to 48 hours before releasing them.

RELATED: Trump deportation plan brings both relief, worry

The program had already been expanded to every city and county in the country before Obama killed it in 2014, and replaced it with a more narrow program that targeted undocumented immigrants convicted of serious crimes.

Secure Communities is widely credited with fueling the record deportations that took place in the early years of Obama's administration because it cast such a wide net. "This became a national, one-size-fits-all, top-down kind of approach," Capps said.

Secure Communities, however, was heavily criticized, after data showed a majority of those caught and deported through the program had committed low-level crimes or no crimes, contrary to Obama's claim that the main goal was to deport immigrants convicted of serious crimes.

Eager to work with immigration authorities

Some local law-enforcement agencies are eager to work more closely with federal immigration authorities now that Trump has revived the 287(g) program and resurrected the Secure Communities program.

"I think there is tremendous interest right now in cooperating with the federal government under this administration in order to reduce the risk for our citizens from criminal aliens," said A.J. "Andy" Louderback, the sheriff of Jackson County, on the Texas Gulf Coast between Houston and Corpus Christi.

“There are plenty of illegal aliens in every county that commit crimes, and yet if you don't know their immigration status and you don't know their immigration record, and you can't access it, then you are releasing those folks right back into your community.” Jackson County, Texas, Sheriff A.J. "Andy" Louderback

In December, ICE approved his application to join the 287(g) program to train officers in the Jackson County jail to identify undocumented immigrants.

Fourteen other sheriff's departments in Texas have also applied for the jail version of the program, said Louderback, who is also legislative director of the Sheriffs Association of Texas.

There are currently 37 law-enforcement agencies in 16 states with active 287(g) agreements, according to ICE.

Lauderback said 287(g) is an "outstanding program" because it allows law-enforcement agencies to identify criminal immigrants in their jails who should be deported rather than released.

"There are plenty of illegal aliens in every county that commit crimes, and yet if you don't know their immigration status and you don't know their immigration record, and you can't access it, then you are releasing those folks right back into your community," he said.

In January, two days before Trump took office, the sheriffs of two Massachusetts counties south of Boston, Bristol and Plymouth, signed 287(g) agreements to help federal immigration authorities identify and deport undocumented immigrants booked into their jails, the Boston Globe reported.

Jessica Vaughan, director of policy studies at the Center for Immigration Studies, which advocates for expansion of immigration-enforcement programs such as 287(g), expects dozens more law-enforcement agencies around the country to follow suit, including agencies that had such agreements with ICE in the past and agencies that want to join for the first time.

Partnering with local police to help enforce federal immigration laws is a "very effective tool" at finding and removing immigrants who pose a public-safety threat, Vaughan said.

RELATED: How many Mexicans actually cross the border illegally?

Trump's plan "has to rely on local police getting involved because ICE agents do not patrol the streets looking for deportable aliens," Vaughan said. "ICE has had the tools to do that for many years, and clearly this order is intended to direct ICE to start using those tools and resurrecting some of the tools that were downplayed or prohibited under the Obama administration."

Concerns over increased enforcement role

CLOSE The two executive orders contain multiple provisions, including the creation of 15,000 new jobs. Video provided by Newsy Newslook

Trump's executive immigration order is already facing resistance from elected officials and some law-enforcement agencies. They are concerned that their taking a bigger role in enforcing federal immigration laws drains resources for fighting local crime, and undermines community trust by making undocumented crime victims less likely to cooperate with the police out of fear they could be turned over to federal immigration authorities.

“I can tell you that Phoenix will absolutely not enter into any agreements that attempt to turn our police officers into a mass deportation force.” Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton

"I can tell you that Phoenix will absolutely not enter into any agreements that attempt to turn our police officers into a mass deportation force," Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton said. "It makes no sense to discourage crime victims or witnesses from coming forward and to take the focus of our officers away from community policing.”

Citizens have filed a petition asking for the Phoenix City Council to restrict cooperation between Phoenix police and federal immigration authorities and declare Phoenix a sanctuary city. The City Council is scheduled to review the petition on Feb. 15.

In 2009, the Department of Homeland Security revoked part of a 287(g) agreement with Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio that allowed deputies to double as immigration agents following community complaints that they were violating the civil rights of Latinos by targeting them looking for undocumented immigrants.

In 2011, DHS yanked the agreement entirely after a Justice Department report accused the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office of violating civil rights and discriminating against Latino residents and inmates. Later, a federal judge explicitly banned the agency from enforcing federal immigration law.

RELATED: Phoenix to consider 'sanctuary city' petition

Mark Casey, a spokesman for Maricopa County Sheriff Paul Penzone, who defeated Arpaio in November, declined to comment directly on Trump's executive order calling for more assistance from local police in finding and deporting criminals.

“As Sheriff Penzone has said many, many times in the past few weeks, he will do his sworn duty. If anyone is a threat to public safety, the Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office will prevent them from doing harm," Casey said.

"This agency has a poor reputation for dealing with people lawfully and humanely, and Sheriff Penzone is committed to correcting that behavior while keeping Maricopa County safe," Casey added.

Several big cities' mayors, including in San Francisco and Chicago, have already vowed to defy Trump's executive order, which in addition to ramping up the 287(g) and Secure Communities programs, cracks down on jurisdictions that have adopted so-called "sanctuary" policies that limit cooperation with federal immigration authorities to prevent some undocumented immigrants from being turned over to ICE. Trump's order threatens to cut federal funding to about 400 cities and counties that have adopted sanctuary policies.

It’s unclear how the White House would attract new law-enforcement partners. Though if it threatens to pull federal funding from so-called “sanctuary cities” — municipalities that refuse to enforce federal immigration law — one legal expert said the administration may run into legal hurdles.

“I don’t want President Trump to tell us how to keep our community safe when we have been one of the safest cities in the nation for well over a decade.” El Paso County, Texas, Judge Veronica Escobar

The federal government is permitted to use its funding as a carrot but not a stick, said Paul Bender, an Arizona State University professor who teaches about U.S. and Arizona constitutional law.

Under the 10th Amendment, Bender said, the federal government is limited in its power to regulate city and state policies. Pulling funding, he said, can be considered regulation.

In 2013, California passed the Trust Act limiting cooperation between state and local law-enforcement agencies in that state and federal immigration authorities.

In Texas, Gov. Greg Abbott cut all state funding to Travis County, which includes the city of Austin, to punish Travis County Sheriff Sally Hernandez's new policy reducing cooperation with federal immigration authorities, according to the Houston Chronicle. The policy refuses to turn over certain undocumented immigrants from the jail.

Abbott is helping fast-track legislation intended to block cities and counties in that state from adopting sanctuary policies.

In El Paso County, Texas, Judge Veronica Escobar said one of the key reasons El Paso, which is across the border from Juarez, Mexico, is repeatedly named among the safest cities in the country is that residents trust law enforcement. Policies that force local law enforcement to enforce immigration laws will erode that trust, Escobar said.

“That would spell disaster for our community,” Escobar said.

RELATED: Phoenix activists to immigrants: 'You're not alone'

Escobar added, “I don’t want President Trump to tell us how to keep our community safe when we have been one of the safest cities in the nation for well over a decade. I would not trust him to know what would keep us safe.”

Republic reporters Megan Cassidy, Yihyun Jeong and Rafael Carranza and Gustavo Solis of the Palm Springs Desert Sun and Zahira Torres of the El Paso Times contributed to this article.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/2jZgeZ1