BATS
Summertime! …and the livin’ is easy….

But we know that’s not true. We know that the perception of educators having summers off is just a myth, let alone the thought that we have a paid summer vacation! Here at BATs we are still here educating, motivating, activating, organizing, and mobilizing. We know that our members are busy working summer jobs, preparing curriculum and lessons for the new school year, and joining us at different events such as the NEA Representative Assembly and AFT Teach Conference. But please remember to plan activities and time for the sustenance of your soul. This is a long battle and we cannot afford dropout or burnout!

The full circle nature of this work has led us to taking some time to revisit our mission to reaffirm our beliefs in what BATs stand for.

Badass Teacher Association Mission

We, the members of the Badass Teachers Association, reject profit-driven education reform and through our advocacy demand:

Student driven policies and systems that are equitably funded to meet the needs of the students and schools

Elimination of high stakes standardized testing, arbitrary cut scores and value-added accountability systems used to evaluate children, educators and their schools

Balanced evaluations designed to grow professional practice

Protection of balanced, student-centered curriculum which includes, but is not limited to, performing and Fine Arts, Physical Education, Library, Foreign Languages, Career and Technical Education, and Recess

Developmentally sound best practices and programs which augment the experiences of students with special needs and those learning the English language

Educator-designed policies, standards and curricula that are supported by peer-reviewed research, as well as input from experienced classroom experts

Academic freedom for educators and students, thus ensuring the best possible learning and teaching environment

Excellent public education for all students, regardless of economic status, race, nationality, gender, religion, or sexual orientation

School cultures rooted in equitable practices that honor the culture and history of all students and strive to heal and transform past and current oppressive systems

Safe, clean, well-maintained professional workplace environments, free from bullying and harassment of students and educators

Collective bargaining rights and due process

Legislation that unequivocally directs accountability and transparency for charter schools

Democratically elected school boards that solicit and openly work to include the input of the entire community they serve

The work that we do has been a volunteer-led, unpaid initiative but some of it does come at a cost. In order to get our message out and our representatives present in spaces where our BAT voices will be heard, maintain our messaging platforms with different tools, and give away amazing BAT swag, we need your help. We are holding a monthly donor drive where we will be sending books from some of our amazing BAT authors to members that sign up to be one of our monthly donors. Stay tuned for details!