Krav Maga Training
Krav Maga Program

Krav Maga-literally "contact combat" is a noncompetitive martial art and eclectic self-defense system developed in Israel that involves striking techniques, wrestling and grappling. Krav Maga is known for its focus on real-world situations and extremely efficient counter-attacks. It was derived from street-fighting skills developed by Imi Lichtenfeld, who made use of his training as a boxer and wrestler, as a means of defending the Jewish quarter against fascist groups in Bratislava in the mid-to-late 1930s. In the late 1940s, following his immigration to Israel, he began to provide lessons on combat training to what was to become the Israeli Defense Forces, who went on to develop the system that became known as Krav Maga. It has since been refined for civilian, police and military applications.

Krav Maga has a philosophy emphasizing threat neutralization, simultaneous defensive and offensive maneuvers, and aggression. Krav Maga is used by Israeli Defense Forces, both regular and special forces, and several closely related variations have been developed and adopted by law enforcement and intelligence organizations, Mossad and Shin Bet. There are several organizations teaching variations of Krav Maga internationally.

The Baltimore County Police Training Section has been training in Krav Maga since 2000. Recruits have the honor and privilege to learn from one of the best in the world, Lead Instructor Jon Pascal. Beginning in 2012, this program is now offered as a specialized school. The Krav Maga Seminar is for all officers, whether new to the style and would like to learn easy but highly effective self defense techniques, or trained in Krav Maga as a recruit and would like to refine those skills.

Class Schedule

Krav Maga Seminar

Dates to be announced.

Advanced Krav Maga Seminar

Dates to be announced.

Contact

Contact Officer Dennis Chesgreen for scheduling at 410-887-5497 or by email at dchesgreen@baltimorecountymd.gov

Revised January 7, 2016