Recession: How is that defined?
In general usage, the word recession connotes a marked slippage in economic activity. While gross domestic product (GDP) is the broadest measure of economic activity, the often-cited identification of a recession with two consecutive quarters of negative GDP growth is not an official designation. The designation of a recession is the province of a committee of experts at the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), a private non-profit research organization that focuses on understanding the U.S. economy. The NBER recession is a monthly concept that takes account of a number of monthly indicators—such as employment, personal income, and industrial production—as well as quarterly GDP growth. Therefore, while negative GDP growth and recessions closely track each other, the consideration by the NBER of the monthly indicators, especially employment, means that the identification of a recession with two consecutive quarters of negative GDP growth does not always hold. For information on recession, or business-cycle, dating, see: http://www.nber.org/cycles/jan08bcdc_memo.html.

Please allow us some time | It could take up to two(2) business days for our Subject Matter Experts to follow up with an appropriate answer to your question(s). Your patience is very much appreciated.

Double check that email address! | We won't be able to contact you if it is incorrect.

Need Help?

Using the FAQ database

All FAQs are displayed when first visiting the page. They are ordered by most recent or recently updated and can be filtered by keyword search term, by category, and by manually selecting the page number buttons. To view any FAQ, click on the title to open the answer. Submitting a question is done by selecting the “Ask a question” tab along the top of the FAQ.

Selecting an FAQ

Clicking on the title of the FAQ will bring up the answer to the FAQ. Navigating back to the list of FAQs is done by selecting the tab “Back to FAQs”. A tab to ask a question specifically about this FAQ can be found at the top of the answer. Also, the FAQ id and date this FAQ was created or last modified is shown in the upper right hand corner.

Searching the FAQs

Enter a keyword search term and click the Search button to narrow FAQ selections. To return to all FAQs, click the Clear button or clear the keyword search field and click the Search button.

Filtering FAQs by category

Chose the category to filter by and click Apply button. This will display only the FAQs related to an assigned category. To return to all FAQs click the Clear button next to the search by keyword field or select ALL from the drop down menu and click Apply button.