TransCanada pipeline to Nederland to move 700K barrels of oil this year









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-5', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 5', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});







window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-9', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 9', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});











Photo: CHRON, Staff Image 1 of / 9 Caption Close Image 1 of 9 A crewmen directs a pipe for TransCanada's Keystone XL project as it's lowered into the ground in Wood County, Wednesday, Oct. 24, 2012, in Winnsboro. (Cody Duty / Houston Chronicle) A crewmen directs a pipe for TransCanada's Keystone XL project as it's lowered into the ground in Wood County, Wednesday, Oct. 24, 2012, in Winnsboro. (Cody Duty / Houston Chronicle) Photo: CHRON, Staff Image 2 of 9 In this Thursday, March 22, 2012 file photo, President Barack Obama speaks at the TransCanada Pipe Yard in Cushing, Okla. The president says that the proposed Keystone XL pipeline project from Canada to Texas should only be approved if it doesn't worsen carbon pollution. Obama says allowing the oil pipeline to be built requires a finding that doing so is in the nation's interest. He says that means determining that the pipeline does not contribute and "significantly exacerbate" emissions. (AP Photo/LM Otero, File) less In this Thursday, March 22, 2012 file photo, President Barack Obama speaks at the TransCanada Pipe Yard in Cushing, Okla. The president says that the proposed Keystone XL pipeline project from Canada to Texas ... more Photo: AP, STF Image 3 of 9 Members of the Tar Sands Blockade protest in front of a building containing an office for the company Keystone XL, in the 2700 block of Post Oak Blvd., Monday, Jan. 7, 2013, in Houston. The group is protesting the company for their involvement with TransCanada and the building of the Keystone XL Pipeline. The group says that the pipeline running from Canada to Texas contains toxic chemicals. (Cody Duty / Houston Chronicle) less Members of the Tar Sands Blockade protest in front of a building containing an office for the company Keystone XL, in the 2700 block of Post Oak Blvd., Monday, Jan. 7, 2013, in Houston. The group is protesting ... more Photo: Chron, Staff Image 4 of 9 Michael Bishop, right, receives cheers and other expressions of support from XL Pipeline opponents as he makes his way to the Nacogdoches County Courthouse in Nacogdoches, Texas, on Thursday, Dec. 13, 2012, for an emergency hearing. TransCanada is building part of an oil pipeline designed to carry tar sands oil from Canada to the Gulf Coast. The property rights dispute is the latest legal battle to plague a project that has encountered numerous obstacles nationwide. Texas landowner Michael Bishop obtained a temporary restraining order from Sinz last Friday, arguing that TransCanada lied to Texans when it said it would be using the Keystone XL pipeline to transport crude oil. (AP Photo/The Daily Sentinel, Andrew D. Brosig) MANDATORY CREDIT less Michael Bishop, right, receives cheers and other expressions of support from XL Pipeline opponents as he makes his way to the Nacogdoches County Courthouse in Nacogdoches, Texas, on Thursday, Dec. 13, 2012, for ... more Photo: AP, MBR Image 5 of 9 Image 6 of 9 Crew work on construction of the TransCanada Keystone XL Pipeline near County Road 363 and County Road 357, east of Winona, Texas, Monday, Dec. 3, 2012.(AP Photo/The Tyler Morning Telegraph, Sarah A. Miller) Crew work on construction of the TransCanada Keystone XL Pipeline near County Road 363 and County Road 357, east of Winona, Texas, Monday, Dec. 3, 2012.(AP Photo/The Tyler Morning Telegraph, Sarah A. Miller) Photo: AP, MBR Image 7 of 9 Contractors and workers met with TransCanada employees Tuesday night at the Holiday Inn to discuss the future building of the Gulf Coast Project. The project consists of a 485-mile section of the Keystone Pipeline XL that stretches from Cushing, Okla. to Nederland. Photo taken Tuesday, May 29, 2012 Guiseppe Barranco/The Enterprise less Contractors and workers met with TransCanada employees Tuesday night at the Holiday Inn to discuss the future building of the Gulf Coast Project. The project consists of a 485-mile section of the Keystone ... more Photo: Guiseppe Barranco, STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER Image 8 of 9 Eddy Radillo of Yantis, sings and holds a Texas flag and a sign opposing the Transcanada Keystone Pipeline in this, Feb. 17, 2012 file photo taken outside of the Lamar County Courthouse in Paris, Texas. Texas landowners are vowing to fight on despite a Lamar County judge's ruling that TransCanada can run a pipeline across private property to bring crude oil to Gulf Coast refineries. (AP Photo/The Paris News, Sam Craft, File) MANDATORY CREDIT less Eddy Radillo of Yantis, sings and holds a Texas flag and a sign opposing the Transcanada Keystone Pipeline in this, Feb. 17, 2012 file photo taken outside of the Lamar County Courthouse in Paris, Texas. Texas ... more Photo: AP, MBR Image 9 of 9 TransCanada pipeline to Nederland to move 700K barrels of oil this year 1 / 9 Back to Gallery

The northern leg of TransCanada's Keystone XL pipeline may be mired in controversy, but the southern portion of the project is almost complete, company officials said Friday.

Dubbed the Gulf Coast Pipeline, that southern leg is on track to begin carrying up to 700,000 barrels of oil per day from Cushing, Okla., to Nederland by the end of the year. Eventually, TransCanada expects to be able to ramp up capacity to 830,000 barrels per day.

"The Gulf Coast Pipeline is over 80 percent complete," said Grady Semmens, a TransCanada Corp. spokesman. He said the company still has to tie the pipeline in to existing infrastructure and complete some pump stations. Inspections will follow.

He said testing is under way and that the commissioning process, which must be complete before the pipeline begins commercial service, will begin soon.

Environmental activists and some Texas landowners opposed to the pipeline have attempted to thwart construction, by camping in trees, locking themselves to equipment and demonstrating in the path of working machinery.

Unlike the 485-mile southern portion of the project, which crosses no international boundaries, the northern leg of Keystone XL would run from Canada and is subject to State Department approval. That requires a finding that the project is in the national interest.

President Barack Obama last week said the project's fate hinges on its carbon footprint and vowed that it will win approval only if it "does not significantly exacerbate the problem of carbon pollution."

The State Department is reviewing public comments submitted in response to its March finding that the Keystone XL pipeline is unlikely to cause major changes in the development of Canadian oil sands crude that it would transport across the border.

Environmentalists say that Keystone XL could contribute to climate change by expanding the marketplace for Canada's oil sands crude. Because the bitumen in Canada's oil sands is harvested through mining and energy-intensive steam-assisted techniques, it may have a higher carbon footprint than conventional crude.

Some critics also fear spills and leaks that could release hard-to-clean diluted bitumen along the pipeline's path.

TransCanada officials contend that Keystone XL and the Gulf Coast pipeline will be the safest ever built. The company has pledged it will conduct extra testing, maintenance and inspections of the pipelines, beyond federal requirements.

In late May and early June, the company dug up portions of just-laid pipe in Texas and replaced the segments, after internal integrity testing revealed some dents and other problems. Landowners critical of the project documented the work with photographs showing some unearthed pipelines labeled "dent" and stakes in the ground marking anomalies.

TransCanada said the work was consistent with its pledge to federal pipeline regulators to "address anomalies," including relatively minor issues that normally might not require replacements at this stage. According to TransCanada, the company is "obligated to inspect the pipeline and address anomalies that previous pipelines only had to report, but not necessarily act upon."

Jennifer.dlouhy@chron.com

Twitter.com/jendlouhyhc