Take a look at the Jefferson County Morgue, and the woman who "reads" the bodies

A new company came in and took over operations of the Jefferson County morgue facility next to the Jefferson County jail, that was overseen by Dr. Tommy Brown for many years. Now, the new forensic pathologist is Dr. Lisa Funte who arrived in March 2012. She talks about her history and her job outside the morgue building Wednesday May 16, 2012. Dave Ryan/The Enterprise less A new company came in and took over operations of the Jefferson County morgue facility next to the Jefferson County jail, that was overseen by Dr. Tommy Brown for many years. Now, the new forensic pathologist ... more Image 1 of / 10 Caption Close Take a look at the Jefferson County Morgue, and the woman who "reads" the bodies 1 / 10 Back to Gallery

Whoever said dead men don't tell tales wasn't a forensic pathologist.

Dr. Lisa Funte knows each body that arrives at the morgue has a story to tell - a story that might be very different from the accounts witnesses have given to detectives.

Her job is to observe the details.

"I don't care what story the body comes with," Funte said. "I have to read the story ... and if it doesn't fit, ask why doesn't it?"

Funte recently took over Jefferson County Morgue operations from Dr. Tommy Brown, who resigned earlier this year.

She is one of only about 400 board-certified forensic pathologists in the country.

Funte, who has been a forensic pathologist for the past 11 years, said the job is considerably different from the depictions of it on television shows like "CSI" (or "Quincy, M.E.," for the older set).

"In real life, it's much more glamorous," she joked, going on to explain that "on TV, they take the jobs of four to five different people and roll them into one - that job doesn't exist in real life."

Another misconception is that DNA and toxicology tests can be done on site, in a matter of hours.

Unfortunately, toxicology can take weeks and DNA can take months to come back, depending on the lab used and its workload.

Funte doesn't interview suspects or chase bad guys.

Her part is to do the autopsy, which she completes with the help of technicians.

The process itself varies little, although each body is different and comes to the morgue through vastly different circumstances - violent deaths, wrecks, suicides and even natural deaths when the person is not under a doctor's care.

Through observation of the body from the outside to inside, along with sending bodily fluids for toxicology analysis, the pathologist determines the most likely cause of death.

Lungs that are not "fluffy and airy" but heavy and sodden indicate pneumonia; attributes of the fluids in the eyes can indicate things like dehydration or diabetes.

Other organs like the heart, brain, liver and kidneys have their tales to tell as well.

Beyond the blood and guts of the procedure, protocol is an important aspect of her work.

Each step of the process is photographed and documented.

Her role isn't over once she's completed the autopsy, turning the paperwork and photos over to the investigator.

If the death is a criminal case that goes to trial, she will be expected to take the stand to explain her findings - but it will a while before her first cases get that far.

"I won't see a courtroom here for about a year," she said. In most criminal cases that have occurred here in the past year or so, Brown presided over the autopsies. He still will be called to testify in those cases.

Meanwhile, Funte will continue to fly back to Shelby County, Tenn., where she last worked, as her cases there go to trial. Between that and providing autopsies in 16 East Texas counties, Funte expects to stay busy.

"Have scalpel, will travel," she joked.

Funte's career path was hardly a straight shot.

A high school guidance counselor steered her toward engineering, but after completing an associate degree in that major, she realized it bored her. She switched to math, which was even worse.

Funte reassessed her situation, and realized she was most interested in science.

That led her into the study of biology at Iowa State University.

After a brief stint of teaching high school, she reassessed again, and went back to Iowa State and earned a doctoral degree with a double major in neuroscience and zoology and genetics.

The desire to make a living without working two jobs then took her to medical school.

An intense aversion to working with insurance companies discouraged her from a medical practice and from there, it was either radiology or forensic pathology.

The hours were better in forensic pathology, so that was that.

It turned out to be the right choice.

Finally, after racking up several degrees and working in several different fields (when she worked at a library, she was known as Conan the Librarian for the zeal with which she collected overdue fines), she had found her niche.

From the moment she observed her first autopsy, "It just seemed to click," she said in an interview Wednesday at the morgue.

"I was sold from the first moment."

SCMoore@BeaumontEnterprise.com Twitter.com/Daily_Tiger