8 Colleges Where Students Attend For Free
As education becomes a high priority on many people’s lists and a determination factor for higher paying jobs, the one setback that can prevent anyone from obtaining a higher education is the cost of attending college. However, tuition-free colleges are appearing more recently and becoming a new trend in the education industry. With free colleges and topnotch education, it’s the perfect combination and opportunity for many who are seeking a better life through higher education. From these top eight free tuition colleges, prospective students can obtain a debt-free education.



8. College of the Ozarks

With Christian values, dedication to responsibilities, and financial assistance, College of the Ozarks is one of the best regional colleges in the Midwest. From accounting to culinary arts, College of the Ozarks offers a wide array of rigorous, bachelor’s degree programs for different fields of study.

College of the Ozarks provides free tuition for the 1,400 students that attend each year. Funded by generous donations, College of the Ozarks is able to offer students with a full ride to their rigorous program. However, students must work at least 15 hours every week and two 40-hour workweeks through their campus jobs to be eligible for the free tuition at College of the Ozarks.

7. Deep Springs College

Deep Springs College is a school located at California’s High Desert and is a cattle ranch and alfalfa farm. This male-only school offers a two-year education in liberal arts. With about 15 students admitted each year, Deep Springs College is an intimate institution that provides high quality education.

Every attendee at Deep Springs College receives a full financial reward, which is about $50,000 annually, plus free room and board; however, the trade off is that students must work at least 20 hours on the ranch at Deep Springs College.

6. Alice Lloyd College

Located in Pippa Passes, KY, Alice Lloyd College is recognized, private school that specializes in the liberal arts. This four-year college presents a wide variety of programs to obtain a bachelor’s degree in science, arts and other specialties. With several minors, such as accounting and social science, students at Alice Lloyd College can further their education.

With a normal tuition of $7,000, Alice Lloyd College offers free tuition to a certain group of students. Students must work at least 10 hours per week to obtain free tuition at Alice Lloyd College. If students would also like the perks of free room and board, they must work at least 15 hours a week to receive free tuition and boarding. From 550 jobs, Alice Lloyd College gives selected students with more work experience and personal preferences these jobs to allow them to attain free tuition.

5. Berea College

Founded by abolitionists and reformers in the 1800s, Berea College is a diverse and cultural learning institution that stand strong in their faith based school. With a better opportunity for higher and stress-free learning, Berea College provides students with their Labor Program to obtain free tuition.

A necessary amount of at least 10 hours of work per week is required from students to receive free tuition at Berea College. From over 140 departments, students can decide which area they’d like to work in for extra pay and free tuition. Berea College is able to provide students with full tuition coverage up to $24,500 each year along with a $4,000 Labor Grant. Ranging from $3.80 to $6.25, Berea College presents a certain hourly rate depending on the job so that students can learn the values of being in the workforce and gain extra cash for room, school books, and boarding. From a very large endowment, Berea College makes it possible for students to receive free tuition and higher education at their school.

4. Curtis Institute of Music

As one of the most eminent performance arts schools in the U.S. next to Juliard, Curtis Institute of Music presents a hands-on approach to learning and provides students with a concert loaded schedule every year. At Curtis Institute of Music, only 165 students enroll each year to this prestigious school. The intimate setting of Curtis Institute of Music allows each student to have one-on-one training with esteemed, musical professionals. With a handful of students attending annually, Curtis Institute of Music gives their talented students a full tuition. From donations and endowment revenues, Curtis Institute of Music is able to award their students with a stress-free gift of a lifetime.

3. Barclay College



As a Christian centered environment, Barclay College prepares students for a life of serving and leading the Christian life style. Offering degree programs from Youth Ministry to Christian Elementary Education, Barclay College dedicates their learning institution to Christian values and beliefs.

With a full scholarship rewarded to every admitted student, Barclay College presents a free, high quality education in any Christian related fields. However, to receive the free tuition, students must live on the Barclay College campus.

2. United States Service Academies

United States service academies (Military Academy, Naval Academy, Coast Guard Academy, Merchant Marine Academy, and US Air Force Academy) all offer top notch educations with selective admissions. The catch of course is that you have a guaranteed job awaiting you following graduation – service time in a branch of the United State military. All five academies have brutal selection processes, with only 8-15% of applicants being selected. Minimum terms of duty are usually five years active and three years reserve.

1. Webb Institute

Webb Institute is a highly accredited school that specializes in marine engineering and naval constructions. With around 80 undergraduates each year, Webb Institute has a job placement of 100 percent for their graduated students. Webb Institute is the only marine engineering and naval architecture school that offers a full, four-year scholarship for their students, which is possible due to generous donations from numerous sources.

As the trend of free tuition becomes popular among noted colleges every year, education is now an obtainable opportunity and a dream come true for many academically driven people.

More BCR Features: