Bill O'Reilly: Is the Libyan situation another Watergate?
Watch the latest video at FoxNews.com By Bill O'Reilly Today on Capitol Hill, Senate Intelligence Committee began hearings about the murder of the Ambassador to Libya and three other Americans in Benghazi on 9/11. As you may know, the Obama administration will not define exactly what happened. And the press has been largely negligent in pursuing the story. Well, now the testimony is under oath, so it's serious. There are two ways this thing could go. First, into a Watergate-type spectacle with cover-ups and bogus statements to the American people. Or second it could be a big nothing, a human error which spiraled out of control. The problem is compounded by the President's refusal to define anything. He continues to say there is an investigation, so he can't even give us basic facts like "When were you told, Mr. President, about the attack in Benghazi?" An answer to that question cannot possibly impact any investigation; nevertheless, Mr. Obama refuses to provide it. That has raised all kinds of conspiracy theories and now you have the Petraeus situation added to the mix. At a press conference today, a reporter from the McClatchy News Service asked Senator John McCain if the fact that General Petraeus' mistress had kept secret documents in her possession, was it more serious than the entire Libyan debacle? (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) SEN. JOHN MCCAIN (R), ARIZONA: Well, I say with great respect, that's one of the dumbest questions I've ever heard. Ok? There's four dead Americans, there's four dead Americans. Not a socialite. Not a socialite. I'm answering your question. Ok? Do you want me to answer your question or do you want to interrupt? Which do you want? REPORTER: Continue sir. MCCAIN: Ok. There is four dead Americans. (END VIDEO CLIP) O'REILLY: Senator McCain obviously feels very strongly that there is government malfeasance involved in the Libyan chaos. But that has yet to be proved. However, the Senate is doing the right thing by holding hearings trying to get the information out to we the people. I mean, look at it this way, back in 1972, Richard Nixon denied he had anything to do with a low level political break in. If the press had not been aggressive, Nixon would have gotten away with it. And certainly the break in at the Watergate Hotel was not nearly as important as failing to define a terrorist attack that killed four Americans. President Obama made a mistake in not getting ahead of the story. He should have given us the facts weeks ago. He chose not to. And the press let him get away it. But now the heat is coming down as it should. And that's "The Memo." - You can catch Bill O'Reilly's "Talking Points Memo" weeknights at 8 and 11 p.m. ET on the Fox News Channel and any time on foxnews.com/oreilly. Send your comments to: oreilly@foxnews.com. Transcript Show Name: O'Reilly Factor