Bill White for Texas
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

Friday, May 28, 2010

Bill White: a strong supporter of the military

Candidate learned value of service from father, disabled WWII veteran

HOUSTON -- Bill White for Texas campaign spokesperson Katy Bacon issued the following statement in regards to a discredited, disgusting attack from Rick Perry:

"Yet again Rick Perry is twisting the truth, and frankly it's disgusting that he's using veterans as a political prop on Memorial Day weekend. Bill White has always unequivocally supported the right of men and women in uniform to vote in all elections."

"Bill White grew up the son of a disabled WWII veteran who went to college on the GI Bill. Bill's father taught him the importance of service and Bill White has a deep respect for those who serve our country."

Under the law, military voters must have some connection with the place where they vote. The article cited in the Rick Perry attack contained an error that was corrected over 10 years ago. A controversy in Val Verde involved election of a County Commissioner who was later found out to be a member of the Klu Klux Klan. He eventually declined to take office.

At the time, Bill White stated his support for military voters' right to vote in local elections and described his support by saying, "Military voters have every right to vote where their children are enrolled in school. Military personnel should be allowed to cast ballots in local elections that determine city or county taxes, police and fire protection, etc."

Bill White has always been a strong supporter of voting rights and as a high school student went door to door to register voters.

The same attack, used by a desperate opponent, was discredited during the Houston mayor's race in 2003. You can see information from the Houston Chronicle and the response ad below.

"Bill White has been an effective advocate for military families. As mayor he started a special Returning Veterans Initiative that gives returning veterans the welcome they deserve with coordinated social services, reductions in red tape, and employment opportunities," Bacon said. "He's also been an advocate for building the military and keeping more military forces in Texas to ensure national security."

Contact:

Katy Bacon

press@billwhitefortexas.com

713.613.5326

Excerpt, Houston Chronicle

"THE RACE FOR CITY HALL 2003: Sanchez launches first TV ad attacking White"

October 25, 2003

Roemer said the allegation that White wants to keep soldiers from voting, which the Sanchez campaign has used in previous print advertising, is based on White's actions during the 1990s as chairman of the state Democratic Party.



White complained then that 800 mail-in ballots cast by military members and their dependents gave two Republicans narrow victories over Hispanic incumbents in the Democratic stronghold of Val Verde County, which includes Laughlin Air Force Base in Del Rio.



One of the Republicans elected later declined a seat on Commissioners Court after admitting that he had been a Ku Klux Klan leader.



White wrote at the time that many military personnel claim Texas as their residency because the state doesn't have an income tax. Because many soldiers vote in Texas even though they haven't lived here in 10 years, they aren't up on local issues, he said.



He argued that soldiers should vote in the local elections where they expect to live after leaving the service.



"Military voters have every right to vote where their children are enrolled in school," he wrote. "Military personnel should be allowed to cast ballots in local elections that determine city or county taxes, police and fire protection, etc."