ExxonMobil Chemical, SABIC select Texas site for major petrochemical project
Enlarge Design of a proposed plastics plant from Gulf Coast Growth Ventures, a joint venture… more

ExxonMobil Chemical Co. and Saudi Basic Industries Corp., known as SABIC, announced April 19 they officially selected a site in San Patricio County, Texas, for a potential multibillion-dollar petrochemical project.

The state offered Texas Enterprise Fund grants of $1.35 million to SABIC US Projects LLC and $5 million to Exxon, according to a press release from Gov. Greg Abbott. Last month, the project also was awarded tax abatements in San Patricio County, which is near Corpus Christi and Port Aransas. Exxon and SABIC now will apply for air and wastewater permits from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and will make their final decisions on the investments after those permits are granted.

Enlarge Design of a proposed plastics plant from Gulf Coast Growth Ventures, a joint venture… more

The proposed project reportedly would cost about $10 billion. It would include an ethane steam cracker that each year could produce 1.8 million tons of ethylene, one of the key ingredients for a variety of products, including polyester, anti-freeze, plastic bottles and food packaging.

The project would “capture competitive feedstock (and) capitalize on the growing global demand for ethylene-based products,” SABIC Vice Chairman and CEO Yousef Abdullah Al-Benyan said in the companies' press release.

“We are focused on geographic diversification to supply new markets,” he noted.

The multiyear construction process is expected to create 11,000 construction jobs, and the finished complex would create another 600 full-time jobs and eventually an estimated 3,500 indirect jobs. The project is expected to generate more than $22 billion in economic output during construction and more than $50 million during the first six years of operations. It’s part of Exxon’s 10-year, $20 billion Growing the Gulf initiative.

Neil Chapman, president of ExxonMobil Chemical, called the site selection a significant milestone for the community and the state of Texas.

“We wish to thank local and state officials who have been instrumental in the site selection process, as well as everyone in the community who attended meetings to learn more about the project and provided us with constructive feedback,” Chapman said. “We will continue listening to local residents and businesses and look forward to continuing to work together.”