Under the radar: Obama signed executive order allowing illegals to serve in US military
While the country was focused on the resignation of Eric Holder, who many consider to be the most questionable attorney general America has ever employed, President Barack Obama was busy behind the scenes wrapping up an executive order that will allow illegal immigrants to serve in the United States military.

The president revised the Department of Defense policy that once prohibited illegal immigrants from joining the ranks of the armed forces, to now welcome them to serve for a country in which they are not legal, Military Times reported.

According to the report:

The new rules will expand an existing program allowing recruiters to target foreign nationals with high-demand skills, mostly rare foreign language expertise or specialized health care training.

For the first time, the program — known as Military Accessions Vital to National Interest, or MAVNI — will be open to immigrants without a proper visa if they came to the U.S. with their parents before age 16. More specifically, they must be approved under a 2012 Obama administration policy known as Deferred Action for Child Arrivals, or DACA.

This decision was made despite the president’s previous vow to postpone any action on amnesty that would allow millions of immigrants to remain in the U.S.

“The new DoD policy may be the first phase of a broader governmentwide effort to ease pressure on immigrants and create new paths to citizenship,” the report stated.

Pro-amnesty group America’s Voice, championed the president’s move, saying, “this foray into executive action is a fig leaf that pretends to help Dreamers but will, in fact, help virtually no one,” Breitbart reported.

The Obama Administration is certainly not making any conservative friends when it comes to illegal immigration. With every executive order on the issue, America’s borders seem to become progressively more insecure, while any movement on amnesty order has been intentionally delayed until after the midterm elections.