McCain blasted for undermining Trump; calls Australian Ambassador to express ‘unwavering support’
Despite conflicting reports on a recent phone call between President Donald Trump and the Prime Minister of Australia, Arizona Senator John McCain felt the need to go around the White House and call the Australian Ambassador to offer his “unwavering support.”

Senator McCan (R-AZ), who prides himself for constantly attacking and bucking his own party, released a statement that called for the U.S.A. to reaffirm its support of Australia’s leadership in the wake of reports that Trump was short tempered with Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull in a recent phone call.

Starbucks can hire all the refugees it wants, its competition vowed to hire 10 thousand veterans

“Australia is one of America’s oldest friends and staunchest allies,” McCain’s statement reads. “In that spirit, I called Australia’s Ambassador to the United States this morning to express my unwavering support for the U.S.-Australia alliance.”

In short, Australia is one of America’s oldest friends and staunchest allies. We are united by ties of family and friendship, mutual interests and common values, and shared sacrifice in wartime In that spirit, I called Australia’s Ambassador to the United States this morning to express my unwavering support for the U.S.-Australia alliance. I asked Ambassador Hockey to convey to the people of Australia that their American brothers and sisters value our historic alliance, honor the sacrifice of the Australians who have served and are serving by our side, and remain committed to the safer, freer, and better world that Australia does far more than its fair share to protect and promote.

McCain’s decision to insert himself into international diplomacy came after it was reported by several hostile media outlets that President Trump was dismissive of the Aussie PM during a recent phone call. Trump was reportedly upset over the refugee deal that Obama had made with Australia wherein the U.S. would take a large number of Middle Eastern “refugees” off Australia refused off its hands.

But both the U.S. and the Australian leadership have denied reports of any acrimony during their phone conversation. Turnbull himself has fully denied reports that President Trump hung up on him in the middle of the conversation.

With the whole discussion centered on the U.S. taking in more unwanted “refugees” one has to wonder why McCain is putting Australia’s needs first over America’s. One also has to wonder why western nations who took in refugees are trying to export them at the same time?

Many are getting tired of John McCain’s attacks on Trump. McCain’s move is just another example of his efforts to undermine the president as far as many are concerned.

If you thought Lady Gaga wouldn’t politicize the Super Bowl halftime show, you were sadly mistaken

Every single day @SenJohnMcCain is undermining @realDonaldTrump. It's getting old, and Senator McCain seems bitter and jealous. Graham also! https://t.co/goE6M8Qlre — Sean Hannity (@seanhannity) February 3, 2017

John McCain loves reminding me why I hate politicians!

Somebody tell these 3 #TrumpWins4USA

Stop making fools of yourselves & help #MAGA pic.twitter.com/xFCLW6nSn6 — ❤️MAGA????Mama❤️ (@tteegar) February 2, 2017

John McCain is a TRAITOR https://t.co/Nlwkfcox7E — MT Gilbert (@tponews) February 3, 2017

Who the HELL is John McCain to go against Trump? He needs sanctioning by the Senate. He isn't even Majority Leader! pic.twitter.com/n6AcuBPpsB — John T Dolan (@JohnTDolan) February 2, 2017

Ok… Can someone inform @SenJohnMcCain that he is NOT the President and that the people trusted TRUMP… to handle our foreign affairs?!!! — Keep'n It Real! (@JOMainEvent) February 2, 2017

Retweet if you think John McCain is a Disgrace ! https://t.co/Msl8QJDT9z — JohnTrump fan (@JohnTrumpFanKJV) February 2, 2017

Even CNN realizes that McCain is constantly going out of his way to attack Trump while ignoring everything Democrats are doing.

John McCain is basking in the role of Donald Trump's tormentor https://t.co/bBchKxeRum pic.twitter.com/lRrWVMutVt — CNN Politics (@CNNPolitics) February 3, 2017