BKA Police crime statistics
Police Crime Statistics

Simple and serious crimes, including punishable offences, as well as suspects investigated by (criminal) police are recorded in the PCS on the basis of the PCS catalogue of offences. The statistics contain only those offences which have come to police attention, been processed by the police and, before compilation begins, passed to the public prosecutor's office.

Not included are further administrative offences, politically motivated crime (offences against state security), traffic offences (however including sects. 315, 315b PC and sect. 22a German Road Traffic Act, which are not regarded as traffic offences pursuant to the guidelines) as well as violations of Länder criminal laws (with the exception of: data protection laws and assemblies and processions acts of the Länder). Offences not covered by the remit of the police (such as financial and revenue offences) or those directly reported to and handled exclusively by the public prosecutor's office are not contained in the PCS either.

The Police Crime Statistics of Germany (PCS) are compiled on the basis of the individual data sets at the “Länder” Criminal Police Offices (LKÄ) and at the Bundeskriminalamt (BKA, Federal Criminal Police Office).

Starting in the year 2002 the BKA annually publishes a report (English version) which contains information about criminal offences, suspects, victims and further data on cases of the reported year.

In addition to the PCS Report 2014, the BKA publishes further information on the PCS, as listed further down on this page. The BKA will continue to publish a variety of data concerning the PCS of the following years on the BKA homepage (www.bka.de).

Notice

Data (in whole or in part) may only be cited by stating the BKA as the source (PCS Bundeskriminalamt, year under review, release).

The data license for Germany shall apply – designation – release 2.0

> https://www.govdata.de/dl-de/by-2-0

Further information about the PCS of the Federal Republic of Germany you will find on the BKA homepage (www.bka.de).

Police Crime Statistics 2014