BlogCentral
JPost.com » BlogCentral » The Presidential Blog » The Road to the White House » The Iranian threat (Part I)

About 'The Road to The White House'



Question #2

How would you grapple with Iran's nuclear drive? Contributors: (read it all or click on name to read post) Senator Barack Obama of Illinois (D)

Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York (D)

Former Mayor Rudy Giuliani of New York (R)

Senator Joe Biden of Delaware (D)

Senator John McCain of Arizona (R)

Former Governor Mitt Romney of Massachusetts (R)

Former Senator John Edwards of North Carolina (D)

Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas (R)

Governor Bill Richardson of New Mexico (D) Barack Obama: When I traveled to Israel last year, I met with Israelis across the political spectrum and heard the diversity of views for which Israel is famous. But on one issue, there was consensus: a deep concern about the threat posed by an Iran armed with nuclear weapons. Israelis are right to be concerned. A nuclear weapon in the hands of this radical theocracy could have dire consequences: a nuclear arms race drawing in Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey; pressure on other nations to accommodate Iranian demands; emboldened terrorist groups acting under an Iranian nuclear umbrella; and, perhaps, the proliferation of nuclear technology to other states and terrorist groups. For Israelis, the threat is even more pronounced in light of Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's denial of the Holocaust and chilling call for Israel to be "wiped from the map." Israel does not have the luxury of treating these threats as mere rhetoric. Neither should the United States. Unfortunately, recent findings by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) suggest that Iran has made considerable progress - more than had been realized - toward mastering the technology required to build nuclear weapons. So the need to address this threat is urgent. In facing such a threat, no President of the United States should take any option, including the military option, off the table. But at this stage, our first line of offense must be a sustained, aggressive, coordinated diplomatic effort to make clear to Iran the costs of its current path. The current strategy of ignoring Iran and issuing threats through intermediaries has not worked. I would engage Iran in direct, bilateral discussions - much as we negotiated with the Soviet Union throughout the Cold War. In these discussions, we should make clear to Iran that its continued pursuit of nuclear weapons will lead to greater isolation, and increased economic pressure. At the same time, we must communicate directly with the Iranian people, who are not as radical as their government, letting them know the opportunities for cooperation that exist if their government ends its current destructive policies. Our diplomatic offensive must include stronger multilateral actions as well. The UN Security Council has sanctioned Iran twice in the past year, but it is time to ratchet up the pressure. We must push Iran's trading partners in Europe and energy suppliers in the Gulf states to use additional economic leverage against Iran, and we must demand that the Russians and Chinese focus on the serious threat to their interests posed by a nuclear Iran. We need to build this pressure over the coming weeks and months, not months and years. And we can do more on our own. I am pushing Congress to pass my bill that makes it easier for state and local governments to divest their pension funds of companies that invest in Iran's energy sector, providing the revenue Iran uses to pursue nuclear weapons and sponsor terrorism. Divestment is a useful tool to bring additional economic pressure to bear on Iran. Finally, showing Iran we are serious means maintaining close diplomatic and military relationships with our allies in the region. In Israel's case, that means providing our full military assistance package and continuing our cooperation with Israel in the development of the missile defense technology that Israel needs to defend itself. Hillary Clinton: Iran poses a threat to our allies and our interests in the region and beyond, including the United States. The Iranian president has held a conference denying the Holocaust and has issued a series of bellicose statements calling for Israel to be wiped off the map. His statements are even more disturbing and urgent when viewed in the context of the regime's quest to acquire nuclear weapons. The Iranian regime also uses its influence and resources in the region to support terrorist elements. Hizbullah's attack against Israel last summer, using Iranian weapons, clearly demonstrates Iran's malevolent influence even beyond its borders. In light of this threat to our security, US policy must be clear and unequivocal: We cannot permit Iran to build or acquire nuclear weapons; no option can be taken off the table. We must continue to put pressure on Iran through economic sanctions. I recently joined Sen. Frank Lautenberg in sponsoring a measure to strengthen existing sanction provisions in the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, which prohibits American companies from conducting business with nations that sponsor terrorism. Some American companies have exploited a loophole in the law by creating foreign subsidiaries to do business with rogue nations like Iran. Our legislation would close the loophole. Among other options that should be pursued is a process of direct engagement with Iran, as recommended by many, including the Iraq Study Group. During the Cold War, we spoke to the Soviet Union while thousands of missiles were pointed at our cities. That was a smart strategy used by Republican and Democratic Presidents, which worked to the benefit of our national security, even though it was often a difficult one. I am encouraged that the Administration is now engaging in talks with Iran but hope that they will include the nuclear issue among the items that they raise with the Iranians. As we face the refusal of Iran to suspend their nuclear ambitions, we need to deliver a strong message that we will not stand by and tolerate this behavior. We should be able to deliver that message forcefully through direct talks. Rudy Giuliani: (Editor's note: Remarks were said on Tuesday during a GOP debate in New Hampshire when asked about the possibility of using tactical nuclear weapons to prevent Iran from going nuclear): Part of the premise of talking to Iran has to be that they have to know very clearly that it is unacceptable to the United States that they have nuclear power. I think it could be done with conventional weapons, but you can't rule out anything and you shouldn't take any option off the table. And during the debate the other night, the Democrats seemed to be back in the 1990s. They don't seem to have gotten beyond the Cold War. Iran is a threat, a nuclear threat, not just because they can deliver a nuclear warhead with missiles. They're a nuclear threat because they are the biggest state sponsor of terrorism and they can hand nuclear materials to terrorists. And we just saw it just last week in New York, an attempt by Islamic terrorists to attack JFK airport; three weeks ago, an attempt to attack Fort Dix. These are real problems. This war is not a bumper sticker. This war is a real war. Joe Biden: Iran with the bomb could spark an arms race in the Middle East, with Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Syria joining in. Given the fault lines - between Sunni and Shia, Israelis and Palestinians, Persians and Arabs, Turks and Kurds, fundamentalists and moderates - that's the last thing we need. And it's the last thing Israel needs. No President should take any option off the table, including force. But we have time: Iran is years away from having a bomb and a missile to deliver it. We need to use the time wisely. We have to keep our eyes on the prize: preventing Iran from getting the bomb. This administration spent five years obsessed with the idea of getting rid of the Iranian regime. None of us like the regime, but think about the logic: We want you to renounce the bomb - and by the way, when you do we're still going to try to take you down. The result: Iran accelerated its efforts to get the bomb and it is much closer now than it was when President Bush took office. We need a policy that isolates Iran, not America and tips the balance in Iran against pursuing nuclear weapons. That means keeping our allies, Russia and China on the same page as we ratchet up economic and diplomatic pressure on the government to stop pursuing nuclear weapons. At the same time, there are growing fissures within the ruling elite - we need to exploit them. Above all, we have to recognize that our biggest allies in this effort are the Iranian people. They're open to America. They don't like a regime that denies them basic political and social rights and that can't deal with corruption, unemployment and inflation. The Iranian people need to know it is their government, not the US that is choosing confrontation over cooperation. So we should tone down the rhetoric and talk. It's amazing how little faith this administration has in America's ideas and ideals. Force must be the last option because it's a bad option. First, with our forces bogged down in Iraq, our threat to use force doesn't look very credible. Second, we can set back Iran's program but not stop it. Using force would lead to retaliation by Iran, including against our troops in Iraq. It would cause the Iranian people to rally behind Ahmadinejad and the extremists. Third, even a "limited" strike would be perceived as something much bigger by the Iranians and could spark a real war. The only thing worse than a poorly planned intentional war is an unplanned unintentional war. John McCain: The world's chief state sponsor of international terrorism, Iran defines itself by hostility to Israel and the United States. It is simply tragic that millennia of proud Persian history have culminated in a government today that cannot be counted among those of the world's civilized nations. When the president of Iran calls for Israel to be wiped off of the map, or asks for a world without Zionism, or suggests that Israel's Jewish population return to Europe, or calls the Holocaust a myth, it is clear that we are dealing with an evil man and a very dangerous regime. Teheran's continued pursuit of nuclear weapons clearly poses an unacceptable risk. Protected by a nuclear arsenal, Iran would feel unconstrained to sponsor terrorist attacks against any perceived enemy. Its flouting of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty would render that agreement obsolete, and could induce Turkey, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and others to reassess their defense posture. Moderate Gulf states would have to accommodate the new reality, and the world would live, indefinitely, with the possibility that Teheran might pass nuclear materials or weapons to one of its allied terrorist networks. Coupled with its ballistic missile arsenal, an Iranian nuclear capability would pose an immediate and existential threat to the State of Israel.

UN Security Council action is required to impose progressively tougher political and economic sanctions. Should the Security Council continue to drag its feet, the US must lead a group of like-minded countries in imposing multilateral sanctions outside the UN framework. The opposition of Russia and China to effective sanctions on Iran - and on issues ranging from Myanmar to Darfur to North Korea - is why I proposed the creation of a league of Democracies in which Israel would be welcomed. When democracies are united in addressing threats like Iran, we cannot afford to allow autocracies to thwart action. There are many ways to increase pressure on Iran. Financial sanctions have had an initial effect. Iran's need to import refined gasoline, to cite one example, suggests an important vulnerability. And countries such as China and Malaysia, which have signed deals to develop Iranian gas fields, and Russia, which provides weapons systems to Teheran, should know that Iran would be a critical element in American's bilateral relations with each nation. In the meantime, the US should immediately investigate whether any of these deals violate the terms of last year's Iran Freedom Support Act. The US should also privatize the sanctions effort by launching a divestment campaign. By persuading individuals, pension funds, and financial institutions to divest from companies doing business with Iran, we can isolate and delegitimize a hostile government. We will also, as we did with the South Africa divestment campaign, increase the debate inside the country about whether the present course serves the interests of the Iranian people or merely those of a misguided elite. Americans and all proponents of freedom need to reassure the millions of Iranians who aspire to self-determination that we support their longing for freedom and democracy. There is much more we can and should do to translate such support into concrete action. Every option must remain on the table. Military action isn't our preference. It remains, as it always must, the last option. We have some way to go diplomatically before we need to contemplate other measures. But it is a simple observation of reality that there is only one thing worse than a military solution, and that is a nuclear-armed Iran. The regime must understand that it cannot win a showdown with the world. Mitt Romney: Iran is an intolerant, repressive regime that is developing nuclear weapons, supports terrorism and is located right near much of the world's oil and natural gas. I believe that radical Islamic jihadists and the spread of weapons of mass destruction represent the greatest threat to the world since the fall of the Soviet Union and, before that, Nazi Germany. That threat would take on an entirely new dimension if Iran were allowed to develop nuclear weapons. In January, I discussed the threat of Iran at the Herzliya Conference. Since then, Iran has done little to change its dangerous course. It has continued to operate its nuclear program in defiance of the United Nations Security Council. It has issued a new banknote that features a red nuclear symbol superimposed on the map of Iran. On April 9th, Iran marked a new national holiday - "Nuclear Day." Recently the press reported Iranian President Ahmadinejad's statement that the countdown to Israel's destruction had begun. Clearly, this is a regime that is unrelenting in its pursuit of nuclear weapons and a threat to the world To aggressively combat Iran's nuclear ambitions and exploit the regime's vulnerabilities, I have outlined a five-pronged strategy: First, we should tighten economic sanctions. Denying Iran access to the international banking system is crucial. The US and Europe should ensure that Iran finds it very difficult to obtain credit and make purchases in foreign currencies. In addition, I have called for strategic divestment among state pension funds from companies that support the Iranian regime's dangerous actions. Second, we should isolate Iran diplomatically. Of course, we keep communication channels open. Yet until there are indications that high level engagement would do anything other than reward bad behavior, America should not engage Iran in direct, bilateral negotiations over their nuclear weapons program that legitimize Iran's defiance of the world. As part of this effort, Iran's President Ahmadinejad should be indicted under the terms of the Genocide Convention for incitement to genocide. Third, Arab states must join this effort to prevent a nuclear Iran. These states should support Iraq's government; turn down the temperature of the Arab-Israeli conflict; stop the financial and weapons flows to Hamas and Hizbullah; and tell the Palestinians to drop their terror campaign and recognize Israel's right to exist. Fourth, we must make it clear to the Iranian people that while nuclear capabilities may be a source of pride, it can also be a source of peril. The military option must remain on the table. The regime should know that if nuclear material from their nation falls into the hands of terrorists and is used, it would provoke a devastating response from the civilized world. Fifth, our strategy must be integrated into a broader approach to the Muslim world. We must work with moderate Muslim communities and leaders to build a lasting Partnership for Prosperity and Progress - a global effort which would support progressive Muslim communities and leaders in every nation where radical Islam is battling modernity and moderation. This Partnership for Prosperity should help provide the tools and funding necessary for moderates to win the debate in their own societies. In the final analysis, only Muslims will be able to permanently defeat radical Islam. But we can and should support this effort. John Edwards: The situation in Iran has only gotten worse under this Administration's approach. Recently, Iran's hardliners rejected the UN's second resolution imposing new sanctions on Iran. Then, Ahmadinejad went ahead and announced his country had started enriching uranium on an industrial scale. Clearly, we need a new direction. The situation is deadly serious, but there is a path forward. We need to continue to contain Iran through measures that will force the nation, over time, to finally understand the world community will not allow it to possess nuclear weapons. You should never tie the hands of an American president or take any option off the table, but instead of focusing on military action, we should focus on the many steps in front of us that have not been used. Every major ally agrees a nuclear Iran is unacceptable, and both China and Russia recently voted with the UN Security Council to impose sanctions on Iran. We should continue to work with all these parties to help us put a system of carrots and sticks in place. We first need to be negotiating directly with Iran. Communication will give us more information and more control. At the height of the Soviet Union, we still talked with the Kremlin, and we talked with China at the height of tensions. It's good that the Administration has just begun to talk with Iran, but in many ways these short talks are too little, too late. We need a fundamental re-engagement of the country. For carrots, we should make nuclear fuel available to Iran and control the cycle, but allow Iran to use the fuel for any civilian purpose. Second, we need to offer an economic package. The Iranian economy is already struggling, and this would be very attractive to the people. And, for sticks, we need to threaten much more serious economic sanctions if Iran continues its nuclear operations. We also need to take steps to isolate Ahmadinejad, so that the moderates and those within the country who want to see Iran succeed economically, can take advantage of it. Sam Brownback: Ahmadinejad and the mullahs match genocidal rhetoric with proud defiance of international objections to their nuclear program. Their acquisition of nuclear weapons would constitute a threat to the security of the United States and the free world. This dangerous situation requires that all options remain on the table, demonstrating a credible and unwavering commitment to an Iran free of nuclear weapons. The regime should understand the consequences of intransigence. We should speak directly to Iran and make our objections to its behavior clear. We should not negotiate with the regime, however, until it stops enriching uranium and supporting terrorism. Our strong words should support strong actions. I propose a three-pronged solution to the Iranian nuclear crisis: squeeze the regime economically, undermine it politically, and expose it morally.

First, economic sanctions: We can and must de-fund the regime's ability to build and sustain a nuclear program. As president, I would enforce all sanctions authorized in the Iran Sanctions Act, including against Russian, European, and Chinese corporations and financial institutions that invest in the Iranian oil and gas sectors. I would also call for additional sanctions and penalties included in the Iran Counter-Proliferation Act, of which I am a cosponsor. I also believe we should encourage individuals, corporations and other countries to divest from Iran. Second, political pressure: We must overhaul our public diplomacy efforts in Iran and challenge the regime's cynical manipulation of the nuclear issue. The Iranian people should hear that we support their desire for progress and better technology and stand with them in opposing the regime's drive for nuclear weapons. This will require US broadcasts that beam fewer hours of Britney Spears music and spend more time reporting on the regime's corruption and ineffectiveness. The Iranian people want democracy and we should give them the tools they need to reform their country from within. Third, human rights: Any regime that relies on secret police, censorship, imprisonment, and torture to maintain its grip on power ought not be trusted to maintain a "peaceful, civilian nuclear program." The Iran Human Rights Act of 2007 ( S.1534), which I introduced earlier this month, outlines ways to leverage human rights and undermine the regime's credibility inside Iran and among the community of free nations. Bill Richardson: Iran must not acquire nuclear weapons. But preventing Iran from going nuclear will require strong diplomacy backed by credible power and clarity of purpose. It also will take realism: above all, we must understand that no nation has ever been forced to renounce nukes, but that many have been persuaded to do so with a combination of carrots and sticks. We need to approach the Iranian nuclear problem with both fierce determination and with open eyes. The key is to make them see that they will be better off and more secure without nukes than with them. If we unite the world behind the right carrots and sticks, and provide the Iranians with face-saving ways to step back from the nuclear brink, we will prevail. As we know from the Cold War, deterrence is above all a matter of clarity and credibility. We need to be absolutely clear that a nuclear Iran is unacceptable, and we need to be absolutely credible when we say what we will do about it if the Iranians continue to disregard the will of the international community. The clear message must be this: develop nukes and you will face devastating global sanctions which will damage your economy and weaken you politically; desist from developing nukes and you will receive meaningful rewards, including robust security guarantees (above all from the United States), diplomatic recognition, better access to international credit and investment, guaranteed supplies of nuclear fuel from abroad, and an end to trade sanctions. This sort of engagement, with a stick in one hand and a carrot in the other, is how we got Libya to renounce nukes, and this is how we must approach Iran. For this message to be credible, the United States needs the solid support of the Europeans, China, and Russia in support of UN Security Council resolutions. If all these parties join us in sanctions, they will work. If they do not join us, they will not work. Russia is the key, because of its substantial economic interests in Iran, such as the Bushehr nuclear reactor. Preventing Iran from going nuclear is inevitably linked to the power struggle between hardliners like President Amadenejad, on the one hand, and pragmatists and moderates in the Iranian leadership, on the other. If we can keep Russia on board, the moderates and pragmatists will be strengthened. They will be further strengthened if we make sure that Iran can save face as it renounces nuclear enrichment. This is possible: Iran insists that it only wants nuclear energy, not weapons. Accordingly, a solution that guarantees them secure supplies of enriched uranium, to be monitored by the IAEA, may become politically palatable. COMMENTS 91. Iran, not Persia, does not know the difference between a Jew and a Greek!

In History Persia lost to the Greeks.

They were slaughtered by Genghis Khan and now we have the Eye reign of spectrum not just the brown, red, shades.

This era is out of step with the big ice and the Torah does not mention the ancient except as Noah and water flood.

Mankind should have a pleasant character in this warm period as the Solar cycles are being found with modern science.

All this anger is a bad omen for the next 500yr. and budget survival and good spectrum of numbers while keeping the 10c is possible but the human mind is not applying itself properly.

Dr MIBarton, Oxford, Aug 11 10:08AM 90. I did my research by playing videos on YouTube; of Mitt Romney and other candidates. I like what Mr. Romney stands for; excellent resume; has a good family; I believe Mr.Romney is the best man for job.

H. Abrams, USA, Aug 9 5:08AM 89. The Bible commands us to pray for the peace of Jerusalem (Psalm 122:6), to speak out for Zion�s sake (Isaiah 62:1) to be watchmen on the walls of Jerusalem (Isaiah 62:6) and to bless the Jewish people (Genesis 12:3). These and so many other verses of the Bible have one overriding message � as Christians we have a Biblical obligation to defend Israel and the Jewish people in their time of need.



The Leaders of the US have become cowards. We (US) say we will not negoitate with terrorist yet yet bowed down to Arrafat and allowed him and his terrorist group to be recognized as a "ligetimate voice" in the UN. We lacked the backbone then as well as now to make the tough choices and stop terrorist at all costs.



The US should align all our resources with Israel to destroy the uranium plants in all the Middle Eastern Countries that are sworn to do whatever it takes to destroy Israel.



All through history every so often some idiot comes up with an idea, "hey let's wipe ut the Jews" ... IT NEVER WORKS and IT NEVER WILL Because they are GOD's CHOSEN PEOPLE !!!



We MUST align oursevles with the goals and protection of Israel or we become against God as a nation and will suffer destruction and horrors which make 911 look like kindergarden !



WAKE UP AMERICA !!!





Leslie Fox, US, Jun 19 8:06PM 88. The third world war is in progress, Fundamentilist Christians and Muslims recognize it and so do orthedox jews. The secular world does not see the hand of god in all of this and does not comprehend. Only the conservative religious half of the USA is mentally ready for this conflict the blue portion of the country is living in the state of Denial which will limit our effectiveness to come to the aid of our natural allies in the middle east. As I interpret scriptures Isreal will not have to defend itself the god of Abraham with his son the messiah Jesus will.

Jim Missouri, usa, Jun 19 12:06AM 87. Does anyone read their bibles? God speaks on the coming war with Iran. Read Revelation and the Book of Daniel for more insight on what is going on in today's world. God will protect Israel.

Sidney Stokes, Detroit, MI, Jun 18 3:06PM 86. Iranian government is biting more than it can chew. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad should bear in mind that Israel is ready to defend herself against the threats from Iran and that his (Ahmadinejad) evil plans and purposes against the Jewish nation will have cataclysmic effect on him and his Iranian people. Israel has come to stay nothing, nobody will wipe it out of the map. I hail Obama's concern.



Kelvin Odii, Southeastern Nigeria, Jun 16 2:06PM 85. Hey Steve i agree with you to a sertain point but you have to understand that we are not just dealing with two different countries with different ideas.We are dealing with a psycopath who wants to kill every one who doesnt except his way of living and religion!!!

yaacov, jerusalem, Jun 15 3:06AM 84. Perhaps the earth is an interesting place right about now. What if the devil has flying saucer using angels who DO NOT want people to have faith in Yahushua (spelling?), who DO NOT want people to learn about nephilim, and who DO want people to think they are Elohim or benevolent man making aliens or both?

Jacob, Alpharetta?, Jun 14 10:06PM 83. For over 70 years, there was a cold war with the Soviet Union, and no war, although both sides developed nukes. I think if we step back and as Americans ask 'what is our interest in a confrontation with Iran, the answer has to be there isn't one. We would be simply fighting a war on behalf of the Saudis, who hate the Iranians brand of Islam. The only beneficiaries are the oil cartels and those who would profit from other's miseries. The US attacked the wrong country in 2003, 15 of the 19 hijackers on 9/11 were from Saudi Arabia, not from Iraq. None of the current crop of Democrat/Republican candidates have the guts to stand up against the war machine currently in progress. may the gods protect us and our children forgive us.

Steve, Bucks Cty., PA, USA, Jun 14 1:06AM 82. The US persidantial candidates all sense the urgency of stopping Iran before getting the nuclear bomb. All committed themselves not to scale down the diplomatic and economic pressure and off the table any option including the miltary one to stop Iran. That is fantastic. But I will see the real courage with McCain and Giuliani and I will pray to my God for thier success in thier presdantial campaign and be the US president. Because they have the gut in stopping those with the idea of terorist appeasing US and Eroupean polticians and protect US interest and its allies Israel other middle east free world including Ethiopia. Let God be with you in fighting this Iran madman Amedinjahd.

Abesha, UK, Jun 12 10:06PM 81. On the issue of war and peace, Dennis Kucinich on the left and Ron Paul on the right are the only candidates with America's best interest in mind. The rest have been bought and paid for by something or someone other than the American electorate.

Sabine, California, Jun 12 10:06PM 80. I would like to start off with our lovely Democrats (liberals) of America who just don't get it. Hillary and Obama at least try to make it seem like they actually have a plan. Don't get me wrong; their whole idea of having harsh talks with "iran" threatening to boycott them if they don't stop their attempts to enrich uranium and build nuclear weapons is just insane! Do you actually think that they will stop their attempts because of some pathetic threat by America? In their eyes, they won't have to worry about America and Israel threatening them because once they acquire nuclear weapons they can blow both Israel and America off the face of the map. But I do give them credit for trying to sound like they really care and that they have some amazing plan to stop "iran" from acquiring nukes. On the other hand, what on earth are Richardson and Edwards thinking!? They don't even try to make it seem like they have some way of stoping this psychopath from acquiring nukes! Come on!!! Also, what do they think we are dealing with over here, a seven year old child!? They must be insane, saying that if "iran" stops trying to build nukes, we will give you a prize!!! Why on earth should we award them with security and money for not trying to start "World War Three"!?! Once again Richardson and Edwards have come up with a brilliant plan: let's give them ("iran") nuclear fuel, "BUT" we will control the manner and ways for what they use it for. It's like saying I will give a small child a sharp knife to run around with but I won't allow him to do anything dangerous with it! Edwards, Richardson, whose side are you really on!?! My loving Democrats of America, get your priorities straight and stop fooling yourselves into thinking that our current situation that we are dealing with is no big deal and that a few pep talks and a candy will make "iran" stop their attempts to enrich uranium and make everything all better!!!

I understand that the right thing to do for everybody (especially politicians) is to approach a problem by talking first and then if we see that talking is not working and the problem is a big threat to us, we must solve our problem through the MILITARY. I was very impressed by what Giuliani and McCain had to say for themselves. When they both speak about dealing with "iran" through speaking with them and through threats, they understand that you must always approach things peacefully at first and give it a try, but unlike the democrats, Giuliani and McCain both actually understand the seriousness of the dilemma that we are currently dealing with. I truly have trust that they would do the right thing if they are forced to and Join Israel in the war against terrorism and stop "iran" from aquiring nuclear power and destroy our world's terrorists and Islamic Jihadists to keep our world a safe place!!! For that, I would trully feel safe having one of them as my President!!!



Thank you,



Yaacov

yaacov, Jerusalem, Jun 12 3:06PM 79. they all remind me of american parents of the 90's. "go sit on your bench! your getting a time out!!" "i said, go, your getting a time out!!!". "(screaming) i said, your on time out, how many times do i have to say it!!!!" all it would take is a few good swats and the little brat would become more humble. it's time for a leader who will stand up and say "we're going to bomb them back to the stone age if they don't listen up, and mean it, then do it.

maryjane bowers, california, Jun 11 3:06AM 78. Truly frightening comments, here!

Who the hell do you think you are [for the most part]? -- meddling in US affairs the way you do.

Loosen the drawstring, ease up; don't buy into the war-mongering. Iran is as much a victim as Iraq, as were the Phillipines, Indonesia, Latin Ameria .... Halliburton and Wall Street are literally itching to "rebuild"

yet another country the US will have devastated.

For the sake of humanity, grow up, get real, and cease playing into the propaganda promulgated by financial elites.



Peace is possible. It's up to us, Americans, Israelis, Iranians, to defy our governments' adherence to the war industry.



War is not in any civilian's interest.



Peace.

Dana, Paris, Jun 10 10:06PM 77. Truly frightening comments, here!

Who the hell do you think you are [for the most part]? -- meddling in US affairs the way you do.

Loosen the drawstring, ease up; don't buy into the war-mongering. Iran is as much a victim as Iraq, as were the Phillipines, Indonesia, Latin Ameria .... Halliburton and Wall Street are literally itching to "rebuild"

yet another country the US will have devastated.

For the sake of humanity, grow up, get real, and cease playing into the propaganda promulgated by financial elites.



Peace is possible. It's up to us, Americans, Israelis, Iranians, to defy our governments' adherence to the war industry.



War is not in any civilian's interest.



Peace.

Dana, Paris, Jun 10 9:06PM 76. Newt??? ARE YOU CRAZY?? I'm from Newt's home state and let me tell you there were cheers when he was forced to resigned in disgrace from his leadership position & the US House of Representatives. Don't buy into the Fox hype. He'd be one of the worst things to happen since Small Pox. Fred Thompson is a joke, a one term Senator who's an Actor. Who'd be Thompson's VP candidate Ron White? No Ron White has to much character to be on that ticket. Wake up please!

Shawn, GA, Jun 10 5:06PM 75. Israel and Iran are certainly natural allies, at least the old Persia would have been a natural ally to Israel. 3 righteous kings in ancient Persia sent the captive Israelites back to the land to rebuild the Temple, returning them all the articles stolen from the first Temple by Nebuchadnezar (even the gold Menorah). They also contributed their own money - why? Because they KNEW the G-d of Israel, and they KNEW that He was G-d. Those things are still important between the two nations, at least in the eyes of G-d. Iranian people are suffering from the special hatred that the Adversary has towards Persia for its role in helping the Jews so long ago. But now, because of pride, it is hard for the two sides to see how they could work together for their mutual benefit.

#54 is correct in his judgement, and #53 shows the results of resentment of Israel's pride, which is sometimes offensive. #47 should know that Israel has not hijacked our country but the

G-d of Israel is our G-d. Despite the moral rot that has been prevelant lately in our society, our country is still pretty fundamentally Bible believing. That is our greatest treasure. We are going to stand with Israel as long as we have any sense left in our nation. Concerning Israel's sometimes offensive pride, I would like to say that Israel is Chosen of G-d, but for what? To be a light to the nations! When she loses sight of that and becomes prideful of her special stature before G-d, that is when she almost always ends up with lots of problems. I won't even go into the problem of the rejection of Yeshua, except to say that the Jews who have accepted Yeshua have truly become lights to the Gentiles, teaching us many of the errors that are in the Church, such as idol worship, and celebrating Pagan festivals instead of those ordained by G-d Himself.

Now that I've made EVERYBODY mad, I will sign off. Thank You

DcSA, USA, Jun 10 4:06PM 74. Bill Richardson and John Edwards seem least war mongering. The rest can not be trusted to try and prevent war. The only candidate that is opposed to war is Dennis Kucinich. He doesn't even make it to your list, how pathetic!



Without justice, fair play, war will prevail. Until we end capitalism the world will suffer from injustice and war. We humans can do better.



I beg of YOU to change the way the world thinks and is governed.

Lewis Beyman, New York, NY, Jun 10 4:06PM 73. To# 73. Sorry for typo. At least I can speak 3 languages. I am not sure if you can.

kia, Tehran, Jun 10 3:06PM 72. Kia (47), you're absolutely right: you can't "[sic] right an article in a newspaper in [sic] america and criticize [sic] israel foreign policy without being labeled as antisemitic and without being boycotted and blackmailed by [sic] jews." You could write one though. On second thought, somebody else could, but not you. You can't even spell "write." How do you expect to be published in a newspaper? Heck, how do you expect anybody on this blog to take you seriously?

Baruch, Jerusalem, Jun 10 12:06PM 71. Newt??? ARE YOU CRAZY?? I'm from Newt's home state and let me tell you there were cheers when he was forced to resigned in disgrace from his leadership position & the US House of Representatives. Don't buy into the Fox hype. He'd be one of the worst things to happen since Small Pox. Fred Thompson is a joke, a one term Senator who's an Actor. Who'd be Thompson's VP candidate Ron White? No Ron White has to much character to be on that ticket. Wake up please!

Shawn, GA, Jun 10 4:06AM 70. The time for Diplomacy ended some time ago. The Iranians have had their chance. Do we want to wake up tomorrow with a nuclear Iran? This isnt about politics - its about survival!!! If the iran regime does indeed want the bomb - give them 20!

Chris, New Zealand, Jun 10 3:06AM 69. Newt??? ARE YOU CRAZY?? I'm from Newt's home state and let me tell you there were cheers when he was forced to resigned in disgrace from his leadership position & the US House of Representatives. Don't buy into the Fox hype. He'd be one of the worst things to happen since Small Pox. Fred Thompson is a joke, a one term Senator who's an Actor. Who'd be Thompson's VP candidate Ron White? No Ron White has to much character to be on that ticket. Wake up please!

Shawn, GA, Jun 10 2:06AM 68. To number 47, as a non-Jewish American citizen I will respond that the reason why we want our politiciana to be "accountable to Israelis" is because we as a populace support democratic societies who support freedom of thought, religion and rights of women and thus we support Israel and its right to not only exist but to flourish and we are willing to stand up and defend the nation of Israel as it is under a very real threat of Nuclear attack carried out by an illogical and anti-Semitic regime.

Tim Talbott, Denver, CO, Jun 10 1:06AM 67. to#66. You keep saying that comment over and over. If you really care about freedom of speach and women's righ, please stop supporting Saudis. I doubt if you really care about freedom of speech in middle east. Besides, Israel might be a half democratic nation but when it comes to neighbouring countries, its violent and very aggressive. Furthermore, if today america is so democratic can you right an article in a newspaper in america and criticize israel foreign policy without being labeled as antisemitic and without being boycotted and blackmailed by jews? Your democratic values are under threat by jewish community in america. Israel has always had excuses to impose its agenda on others. It seems they enjoy from state of victimhood.

kia, Tehran, Jun 9 11:06PM 66. No one has the guts to say: show them the Fat Boy and Iran will be quiet forever. But political corectness has it.....

bozo the politician, US, Jun 9 9:06PM 65. To number 47, as a non-Jewish American citizen I will respond that the reason why we want our politiciana to be "accountable to Israelis" is because we as a populace support democratic societies who support freedom of thought, religion and rights of women and thus we support Israel and its right to not only exist but to flourish and we are willing to stand up and defend the nation of Israel as it is under a very real threat of Nuclear attack carried out by an illogical and anti-Semitic regime.

Tim Talbott, Denver, CO, Jun 9 7:06PM 64. I support Israel, but it angers me that the jews in Israel and the USA are so interested about the next president of the USA. The USA is not part of Israel. WE the USA are a Christian country. Jesus Christ is our Lord and Savior. Not jewish Israel.

Paul, USA, Jun 9 6:06PM 63. Mitt Romney is looking pretty good. With all the fronts iran has helped create against Israel with Hez, hamas,syria an pals thats pretty serious. it pretty much covers all fronts. I think something is going to have to happen soon. and I dont think its going to be more useless talking to liars and mad men.

Kim, Fl, USA, Jun 9 5:06PM 62. First of all I am not a regime worker or ahmadi nejad supporter. Secondly, if you have lived in North America among jews u would soon realise how racist and fanatic jews are, exactely the same way that muslim fanatics are. third, let me give u an advice: flattery gets u nowhere. jewish problem with iranians is not political. its racial. even if u apease them they still see u as enemy. so stop boot licking and if u hate islamic regime find a different way to express it and u don need to come here, doing flattery of jews. These people only care about their own tribe. they think they are chosen people and dont give a damn about rest of the world even their allies.

kia to so called real irani #54, iran, Jun 9 2:06PM 61. I love Mccains Remarks about League of Democracies excluding China and Russia, but I'm sorry Mccain is a weak candidate. It needs to be an ex-governor or Rudy, and the Republicans seem to be very nimby wimby on their support for Giuliani because he doesnt care if gay people have a civil union. I'm not gay it doesnt bother me I dont know why so many Christians in this country get so bent out of shape out of issues that dont pertain to our security, either from terrorists, economically, from the enviroment, and otherwise!



Josh, California, Jun 9 11:06AM 60. no. 47, you ask why American candidates ought to be accountable to Israelis. Firstly America has, as far as I know always taken a pro-Israel stance considering Israel an ally. Secondly, the reason this has been previously is because hisorically America was a largly Chrisianized nation which means Americans, for the most part recognized God would not bless our land if we did not honor the fact the LORD loves Israel and will keep His promise to Israel. Thirdly, although our government has become largely seculy, many American citizens still continue to be theists and to believe in the scriptural view of Israel.

Catherine Stachowiak, Fillmore, CA, USA, Jun 9 10:06AM 59. Governor Bill Richardson, unlike the other candidates, has spent years negotiating with governments on these very issues. He needs no "on-the-job training" on this or any other aspect of the presidency. He is absolutely the most qualified candidate running. A solid, rational, proven, experienced professional. And, ulike the other Democrats, he can actually win a national election.

Barry J White, Miami, Florida, Jun 9 9:06AM 58. Senator McCain's correct. What the UN needs is some good old competition in the form of a United Democratic Nations.

Stevo, Tel Aviv, Jun 9 8:06AM 57. Most of the candidates talk about sanctions and cooperation with Russia and China. If Russia, China and N Korea don't support Iran's effort to obtain nuclear weapons, this threat goes away. Not one of these candidates want to hold these nations accountable.

I would be happy if just one of them said, "If Israel is attacked with a nuclear weapon, the US will respond as if it were a direct attack against the US, holding Russia, China and N Korea responsible"

Paul David Swinford, USA/Israel West, Jun 9 7:06AM 56. I recently met a young Israeli here in Thailand. HE had been in Israeli military intelligence, so he obviously knows a lot about what is going on.He said that the Israeli government is manipulating its people with fear, and that after 60 years of Zionism, Israelis are as feaful as ever and that Israel as a haven for the Jews has failed. But he did express concern about Iran.



So i asked him, "how many countries has Israel invaded in 50 years and how many countries has Iran, specifically, invaded?



The answer of course is NONE. Iran has not invaded any country, and it is well known that Israeli agents have caused at least as much trouble --far far more --in its neighbors' countries than Iran has caused Israel.



So please put this war mongering rhetoric away. Israel has been ruled by highly aggressive arrogant governments for a long time. That is why it can't have peace with the Arabs, --because it really doesn't want peace.



Shalom.

Subhuti, Thailand, Jun 9 7:06AM 55. Why worry? It's obvious that whoever the power elite in Israel are they will either choose and/or control whoever is the next U.S. President. What is really needed is a plague to wipe this whole parasitic infection called humanity off the face of the earth; without harming any other life form, of course.

Comandante Null, Atlanta, Ga. USA, Jun 9 7:06AM 54. To number 47, as a non-Jewish American citizen I will respond that the reason why we want our politiciana to be "accountable to Israelis" is because we as a populace support democratic societies who support freedom of thought, religion and rights of women and thus we support Israel and its right to not only exist but to flourish and we are willing to stand up and defend the nation of Israel as it is under a very real threat of Nuclear attack carried out by an illogical and anti-Semitic regime.

Tim Talbott, Denver, CO, Jun 9 6:06AM 53. To #47 and 53: I would like to speak some words to this Mullah regime workers: can you please answer me the most wanted questions by the Iranian people: why on earth is Israel a problem for Iran? has Israel ever done any harm to Iran or wasn't it arab countries which are against us for 100s of years (didn't Palestinians cheer as Saddam attacked us?); why is Israel or the US responsible for the following in Iran: no human rights and no rights for women, many political prisoners, high unemployment, high inflation, severe poverty, many drug addicts, no freedom of speech and no democracy, ...?? isn't the damn Ayatollah and the rest of the gang responsible for all these problems?? why do you care at all about Palestinans and Lebanese, send them millions of $ while Iranians are suffering in your own country? why have you lost the Caspean Sea to Russia your best friends and care about where some foreigners (Arabs) live? these are just some questions the Iranian people want to have answered! why shouldn't we Iranians want ties with Israel, a historical ally of Iran! you do not speak for the people and do not represent us! if you think you do then allow free elections or a referendum over the regime with UN monitoring!!!

Real_Irani, IRAN_Tehran, Jun 9 5:06AM 52. 4 years ago not even a single muslim could belive that one day a muslim country can make this much fear in Israil nation... now in 2007 most of muslim world belives if america dont help Israil, Iran actually can destroy Israil in less than a year, and my friends it has nothing to do with the a-mad-man(ahmadinejad)or Iran nkes or armies, this happening becuse Israel has the most useless government in the world! in last 4 years ur government waste its time only by beging the States and making one of the most powerfull armies in the world to bunch of losers! u want to solve ur problem with hezbz, hemas, syria etc... deal with Iran either by attacking or making peace with Iran but do it urself

Amir, Tehran, Iran, Jun 9 4:06AM 51. To number 47, as a non-Jewish American citizen I will respond that the reason why we want our politiciana to be "accountable to Israelis" is because we as a populace support democratic societies who support freedom of thought, religion and rights of women and thus we support Israel and its right to not only exist but to flourish and we are willing to stand up and defend the nation of Israel as it is under a very real threat of Nuclear attack carried out by an illogical and anti-Semitic regime.

Tim Talbott, Denver, CO, Jun 9 3:06AM 50. To number 47, as a non-Jewish American citizen I will respond that the reason why we want our politiciana to be "accountable to Israelis" is because we as a populace support democratic societies who support freedom of thought, religion and rights of women and thus we support Israel and its right to not only exist but to flourish and we are willing to stand up and defend the nation of Israel as it is under a very real threat of Nuclear attack carried out by an illogical and anti-Semitic regime.

Tim Talbott, Denver, CO, Jun 9 3:06AM 49. I think what richardson said that he would be willing to live with a nuclear energy iran under IAEA supervision is unacceptable.

Adam Winston, USA, Jun 8 9:06PM 48. Obama is the man! i think he is a really a breath of fresh air

Jack, Sydney, Jun 8 9:06PM 47. #47 - there are 10 million Jews in America and many want to know what candidates think about matters they think are important. what's the problem???

Norm, Boston, Jun 8 9:06PM 46. Can somebody explain this to me? why is that american candidates for presidency shoud be accountable to israelis? Is this country hijacked by jews? Or because american people are mercenaries of israelis and american army is nothing but a toolbox for israelis interests?

kia, iran, Jun 8 7:06PM 45. Edwards does not believe in a war on terror. Look at his press release three

weeks ago. He don't get it.

Jerome Tew, USA, Jun 8 6:06PM 44. The Israelis have dealt with similar threats before, why ask the Americans now?

David mwangi, Nakuru Kenya, Jun 8 12:06PM 43. Always the same mistakes in history. Politicians and a large number of opinionmakers have the Chaimberlain-syndrom. After 'serious' negotiations with Herr Hitler he showed a worthless document, saying: we have peace for our time. Learn from history: a holocaust and a world war later we saw the devastation of human lifes and societies by Hitler's regime. The look-alike regime of Iran, lunatic Achmedinejad and these ayatollas, is even worse and has the same goal: wipe Israel out of the map. The majority of that great Iranian people is taken hostage since a long time by this fanatic religious minority. Well-meant negotiations and the power of words from politicians have their tragic limits: you can't negotiate with the devil.

Ab Gerbenson, Leeuwarden, Netherlands, Jun 8 12:06PM 42. Giuliani all the way!

Moshe Cohen, NY, Jun 8 12:06PM 41. I think this is a very important feature and will trun into a must-read for American Jews or those who support israel and want to get a clear message of the candidates' policies regarding israel and the Jews.

Rachel Myers, Melbourne, Jun 8 12:06PM 40. Iran only wants nuclear energy. the nuke rhetoric is just for show, don't u get it?

Salim, London, Jun 8 11:06AM 39. The candidate who would say clearly that he would use force against Iran if diplomacy fails is the one to get my voice.

Miriam, Chicago, Jun 8 11:06AM 38. TO SUM IT UP:

OBAMA will use diplomacy and economic sanctions and will provide Israel with a full military assistance package and cooperation in the development of missile defense technology.



CLINTON will pressure Iran through economic sanctions and direct talks.



GIULIANI thinks it could be done with conventional weapons, but will not rule out other options.



BIDEN believes Iran is years away from having a bomb and using force will lead to retaliation and war.



McCAIN believes that if the UN Security Council does not impose tougher sanctions, the US and like-minded countries should, and a military solution is preferable to a nuclear-armed Iran.



ROMNEY will tighten economic sanctions including denying Iran access to the international banks. He will will not engage in direct talks that legitimize and reward Iran for bad behavior. He would indict Ahmadinejad for incitement to genocide. He would encourage Arab states to support Iraq's government, stop the financial and weapons flows to Hamas and Hizbullah, and tell the Palestinians to drop their terror campaign and recognize Israel's right to exist. He will make it clear to the Iranian people that if nuclear material from their nation is used, they will receive a devastating response.



EDWARDS will negotiate directly with Iran, provide Iran with nuclear fuel for civilian purposes and offer them an economic package to help Iran's economy.



BROWNBACK will squeeze Iran economically, undermine it politically, and expose it morally through economic sanctions, political pressure, and (Brownback's) Iran Human Rights Act of 2007.



RICHARDSON will support a carrot and stick approach similar to what was successfully used with Libya. He would help Iran save face by guaranteeing them secure supplies of enriched uranium, to be monitored by the IAEA.

Ruth I., Los Angeles, Jun 7 11:06PM 37. To #33, you are grossly mistaken if you believe most Americans hate "Israeli butt kissers." I'm sure there is no logical reason behind your animosity towards jews. Your commentary is absolutely shameful.

Matt Southerland, Dallas, TX, Jun 7 11:06PM 36. If we can't stop recent countries, such as N. Korea, Pakistan and India from getting the nuclear technology, what makes us think the US government is going to be able to do anything to stop Iran? We need to actively step up our plan of attack. Talk is cheap!

D. Winograd, St. Louis, Missouri, Jun 7 10:06PM 35. #10: unecessary war with Iran?! are you nuts?! it doesnt get more necessary than this.

Chris, LA, Jun 7 10:06PM 34. Why do Jews vote Democrat? bush was very good to israel and so too will be mccain or giuliani. Dems won't care about Iran as much

Larry , London, Jun 7 10:06PM 33. You need to ask the candidates: Will you move the embassy to Jerusalem?

Joe Cohen, San Franciso, Jun 7 10:06PM 32. Here Here Sam Samuels. It sickens me to death that these so called US citizens have to tell the Israelis what they will do for them if they are elected(selected) President of the USA. With jews in charge of both parties we are the most hated country on earth today. Jeez I wonder why jews are hated. Only Ron Paul has any common sense at all. The rest are nothing but Israeli butt kissers and are hated by most Americans.

jim, USA, Jun 7 9:06PM 31. The democrats will do nothing with Iran, they will focus on domestic issues so we need McCain or Giuliani in the white hosue

Naomi Weinberger, NJ, Jun 7 9:06PM 30. Interesting what Richardson said - that he would live in peace with a nuclear iran for energy, but not a nuclear weapon iran?

Natalie, Tel Aviv, Jun 7 9:06PM 29. I like Giuliani and his tactical nukes idea though McCain and the non-UN is also smart

Nissim, NY, Jun 7 9:06PM 28. First every one has to insist strongly that his country'll stop to buy oil from Iran.

Every one has to remeber what happen before the Second WW with Hitler and Chamberlain. IRAN'll adquire the know how to build a bomb and later one to use against Israel and other Occident countries.

Sooner or late Iran'll star a war.

So why to wait ? If Israel woudn't start the Six day war (40 years ago )

the arabs'd wiped it from the map

David Gubin, Amazonas Brazil, Jun 7 6:06PM 27. Obama: "we must communicate directly with the Iranian people, who are not as radical as their government, letting them know the opportunities for cooperation that exist if their government ends its current destructive policies": you think we don't know this!! Obama knows nothing about Iran: We are being tortured and killed! we have understood that the revolution was the biggest mistake and never again will religion play any role in the Persian politics. A democrat president would mean: talking with a regime that doesn't understand anything; it would mean good bye to human rights and still threat to Israel! Please Israel: your politicians should be the ones talking directly to the Iranian people! that is what is missing!!

Persian, IRAN, Jun 7 6:06PM 26. Ahmadinejad will not stop short of carrying out his threats to destory Israel unless someone stands up and stops him. We need to unite and let this tyrant know that the world will not stand by and allow a Nuclear Holocaust! support the movement at www.nonucleariran.com



Tim Talbott, Denver, CO, Jun 7 6:06PM 25. A nuclear Iran woula be a destare for all free peoples of the world, what ever it takes, no matter what!

Denzil McCray, Douclass Kansas, Jun 7 6:06PM 24. Only Giuliani and MacCain understand the threat clearly - that Iran's intent in acquiring nuclear weapons is to USE nuclear weapons. The others frame Iran's acquiring nuclear weapons as it it were no different then the Soviet Union - bent on intimidation and threats in order to project its agenda. This is disasterously bad judgement. Neither Clinton or Obama "get it". Iran received bomb designs from Pakistan along with enrichment technology; they have no need to test, they will use one on Tel Aviv as soon as they have one, and say so.

Dr. L. Brnd, San Diego, USA, Jun 7 5:06PM 23. Rudy is the man. He cleaned up a city which beforehand, everyone said was impossible. He showed increible leadership during th eworst collective moment of this country's history. And he will stand up for our allies and stnad in the face of our enemies without worrying about political reprecussions. He told the Saudis where to go and where to stick their 10 million when they tried to blame the US for 911.I feel safer for the US and Israel with Rudy at the helm.

Bruce, White Plains, NY, Jun 7 5:06PM 22. ahmadinejad is mad, sanctions wont stop him, fighting him is the only answer, dont count on the coward europeans, soon one european country will have a jihadist president they way they allow them to say and do what they want in their country in the name of being tolerant!

laz, namibia, Jun 7 4:06PM 21. The idea of the League of Democracies is in the air. Sooner or later it is going to be created. Only two candidates' positions are strong enough: McCain's and Guiliani's.



I wish the election would be held today. Everything is clear about the candidates.









Jacob, US, NJ, Jun 7 4:06PM 20. Only ignorant idiots can compare Iran to the Soviet Union (SU). Iran must be compared to Nazi Germany and the world must remember that while European government were talking to Hitler, Hitler was building a huge military capacity. If somebody from western political establishments thinks that talking to the SU resulted in the SU collapse, this individual is profoundly stupid. Collapse of the SU started in 1953 with Stalin�s death, when a new generation of soviet politicians came to power, who were much more liberal that Stalin. Similar happened to Yugoslavia after Tito's death. Western politicians have zero credit in collapse of the SU or Yugoslavia. They even incapable to push Sudan government to comply with UN resolutions. Iran is an islamofascism state and the world must have deal with Iran based on our experience with Hitler, which means immediate and unconditional attacks on all Iranian military and nuclear installations using all available military means including various nuclear capabilities.

Mark Bernadiner, Texas, USA, Jun 7 4:06PM 19. Rudy Giuliani I think made the most sensible statements regarding stopping Iran's nuclear ambitions cold. In a manner that addresses the time frame involved he stated that force if necessary would not be any barrier for him. Whatever is necessary to do the job of destroying their nuclear sites would be used including tactical nuclear weapons.?

Zionist, Florida, Jun 7 4:06PM 18. The Bible predicts an Iranian attack (Ez.38 & 39)on Israel along with Russia and few other nations. It is dangerous to allow Iran to develop nuclear weapons.Iranians lie when they say their nuclear program is for peaceful purposes.

Alexander, India, Jun 7 4:06PM 17. While it may be difficult to find the best answer, it is easy to find the worst. John Edwards is either ignorant or in denial of the truth. His response was vague and his initial reaction was to criticize the current administration. I fear he would be disastrous for the US and Israel.

Matt Southerland, Dallas, TX, Jun 7 3:06PM 16. Whoever becomes President should appoint Mr. Peanut to negotiate with Mr. Ahmadinejad - after all, he did such a bang-up job with him in 1980.

Mark Litvack, Montreal, Canada, Jun 7 3:06PM 15. in these difficult and ambiguous times, we must introduce the component of truth, for the sake of clarity, here it is.

military action to stop Iran from becomming nuclear is not the worst option, a nuclear Iran is.

doron Horowitz, Toronto, Jun 7 2:06PM 14. Yes, you will avoid Iran to have nukes like you did with North Korea.

Let me laugh.

You are a group of cowards and Israel must take care of itself.

Angel, Buenos aires, Jun 7 2:06PM 13. In reading the answers the powers to be gave I can see that they do not have CLUE. In order to undetstand the mindset of the leaders in Iran they must face the truth. Iran has been at war with the Western world since 1979. They have used their oil money to support terrorism to over throw all western countries to spread their ideal of Islam and control the world. The truth may hurt as thousands get killed, but, it will set you free. The liberals of this world will not accept the fact that Islamic leaders want to see the west under their influence and control, but, they will be the first ones beheaded.

Gene Guffey, Germany, Jun 7 2:06PM 12. I'm waiting for Fred Thompson and Newt Gingrich before I decide about the best President and the best politics to beat Ahmadinedjad.

Norman Cone, Longwood, FL (USA), Jun 7 2:06PM 11. sen. john mcCain has the best idea with a league of democracies how useles the united nations have proved to be over the years ...

rudi giuliani is still probably israels greatest friend and ally and either would prove to be an asset for israel in the white house iran and the lunatic ahmadinajad must not be allowed to contine on their apocalyptic endgame and them and their terrorist freinds in hezbollah, hamas, islamic jihad and in the assad regime must be wiped out before they can cause a second holocaust to the jewish nation.

Daniel yefet, Dalston london england, Jun 7 2:06PM 10. It is sickening to see how virtually all the major US presidential candidates have to genuflect to Israel and its apologists in the US if they are to make any headway. Once again, we're being led into an unecessary war with Iran. Pat Buchanan saw it all, way back in '03:



Wrote Pat: "We charge that a cabal of polemicists and public officials seek to ensnare our country in a series of wars that are not in America's interests. We charge them with colluding with Israel to ignite those wars and destroy the Oslo Accords. We charge them with deliberately damaging U.S. relations with every state in the Arab world that defies Israel or supports the Palestinian people's right to a homeland of their own. We charge that they have alienated friends and allies all over the Islamic and Western world through their arrogance, hubris, and bellicosity."



- Pat Buchanan, The American Conservative, March 2003

Sam Samuels, Perth, Western Australia, Jun 7 1:06PM 9. I strongly believe IRAN must NEVER be allowed to acquire NUCLEAR WEAPONS as this is CERTAIN to fall into ROGUE states or TERRORIST groups with the STRONG possibility of the Iranians using them as a FIRST strike against the State of Israel.

The world MUST try to UPGRADE the sanctions to TRY to FORCE (I personally think NO SANCTIONS will ever work with the current Iranian regime) THE SANCTIONS SHOULD AND MUST INCLUDE NO OIL EXPORTS FROM IRAN, and hopefully there will be an IRANIAN revolution OTHERWISE the WORLD must be PREPARED to go ALL THE WAY including MILITARY to stop the Iranians acquiring NUCLEAR weapons.

A MILITARY ACTION against the Iranians REGARDLESS OF COST to infrastructure or HUMAN loss MUST BE BETTER than a NUCLEAR IRAN.

Thank you for reading my comments.



Shemesh Abraham, London, Jun 7 1:06PM 8. It is great to see that people that are going to head the United States have not changed their minds and hopefully we will see peace in our times, with a nuclear Iran that just won't happen. the need to attack Iran and hurt it badly is a top priority as who will then fund the terrorist if Iran can't? I am under the impression that terrorism would loose its foundation, and then we can go back to the good ol' days. G-d Bless America and Israel and its supporters as we it is going to get worse before it gets better.

Chops, Cape Town, South Africa, Jun 7 1:06PM 7. Just deal with Iran millitarily now before its too late when you cant bomb their nulcear plants because of the secondary explosions of this plants. Otherwise if you don't Iran now then you are calling for Israel's distruction.

Gaddiel Mwawasi, Kenya, Jun 7 1:06PM 6. I think that we should place a blockade on the Iranians in the Persian Gulf and deny them thier oil export revenues. Why continue this tiring ladder of further sanctions and diplomacy? Let them then figure out how they will fund terrorist organizations, Syria or thier fledgeling nuclear program.

Bartley Kulp, Safed, Israel, Jun 7 1:06PM 5. am proud to have served in the U.S, armed service in WW 2 born AMERCAN.

no fooling around we have to protect our friend ISRAEL; they no questions asked are a true alie !!!!!!!

norman bergrin, ISRAEL, Jun 7 1:06PM 4. Giuliani is a friend of freedom protected by vigilance and power. Iranians extremists would be comforted by a soft tone from Washington. Presidential candidates who are appeasers, if elected, would expedite days of destruction for Israel as well as Europe and the USA. We need stregth to survive in this world...we need Giuliani.

Mike, Concord, NH, Jun 7 1:06PM 3. I absolutly disagree, Mr. Weissman.

Another REP-government in the US would lead the middle east into total paranoidal. The Dems can handle Iran also as good as needed. Nevertheless Israel has to strike these madman's nuclear facilities, Olmert is a lame duck and should be replaced... its like 40 years ago and Olmert is Eshkol - At least he will see the true, but maybe this time it will be too late.

Geri Steingold, UK, Jun 7 1:06PM 2. I like Mitt Romney - let Iran know that if ANYONE Nukes ANYONE, we'll Nuke Iran.

Ron Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Jun 7 1:06PM 1. As usual, Sen. John McCainn has the most profound understanding and the best solutions. The idea of a League of Demoracies is brilliant (even if it will be difficult to construct). The UN is totally useless (look at Rwanda, Bosnya, Darfur, Chechnya, Tibet - the lot!) - Mr. Edwards displays a stunning naivete, bordering on recklessness. Mr. Obama and Mrs. Clinton are mediocre here, while Romney and Giuliani are almost good! So: what are Jews thinking supporting the Dems?

Vladimir Weissman, Copenhagen, Denmark, Jun 7 12:06PM Welcome to Blog Central If you have any comments on a particular blog piece, or suggestions to improve our Blogs site please email us. We are always interested in running compelling guest bloggers on this site. If you would like to run a blog on Jpost.com or recommend a guest blogger, please

contact us. Please read our Reader Submissions Posting Policy Hot Blogs Aliyah

Avi Perry

Balagan

Blogs of Zion

Fire with Fire

From Hollywood to Holy Land

From Jerusalem with Love

Go Golan

In the land of milk and honey

Israelity

Israellycool

Israel Stories

Isrealli

It's Jerry Time!

Jdaters Anonymous

Jewlicious

Jerusalem Diaries

Jerusalem Wanderings

Jewschool

JRants.com

Laszlo on the Frontier

Levantine

My views on the Middle East...

My Urban Kvetch

New! New Zionist

Oleh Girl

On the Contrary

On the face

Point of No Return

Solid Gold Dancing in the Holy Land This Normal Life

Treppenwitz

We are always interested in running compelling guest bloggers on this site. If you would like to run a blog on Jpost.com or recommend a guest blogger, please

contact us.