Current Population Survey (CPS)
The Current Population Survey (CPS) is a monthly survey of households conducted by the Bureau of Census for the Bureau of Labor Statistics. It provides a comprehensive body of data on the labor force, employment, unemployment, persons not in the labor force, hours of work, earnings, and other demographic and labor force characteristics.

NEW Data on electronically mediated employment

The unemployment rate for veterans who served on active duty in the U.S. Armed Forces at any time since September 2001--a group referred to as Gulf War-era II veterans--declined to 3.8 percent in 2018. | |

In May 2017, 3.8 percent of workers held contingent jobs. The survey also identified alternative employment arrangements: independent contractors (6.9 percent), on-call workers (1.7 percent), temporary help agency workers (0.9 percent), and workers provided by contract firms (0.6 percent). | |

Total nonfarm payroll employment increased by 263,000 in April, and the unemployment rate declined to 3.6 percent. Notable job gains occurred in professional and business services, construction, health care, and social assistance. | | | |

Contact the Current Population Survey (CPS)

State, city, and county labor force data

Labor force information for Census regions and divisions, states, counties, metropolitan areas, and many cities are available separately from the Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) program. Contact LAUS by e-mail or call (202) 691-6392.

National labor force data

CPS economists are available to assist you Monday through Friday (8:30 A.M. - 4:30 P.M. Eastern Time), excluding federal holidays.

Contact us by e-mail

Contact us by phone: (202) 691-6378

To enable us to better serve all of our customers, please do not submit e-mail questions and then call for the same information.

For assistance with these special topics:

Written inquiries may be directed to:

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

Division of Labor Force Statistics

Suite 4675

2 Massachusetts Avenue, NE

Washington, DC 20212-0001

The Bureau of Labor Statistics does not provide information about unemployment insurance (UI)

The Bureau of Labor Statistics does not provide information about income and poverty