Industries at a Glance: Gasoline Stations: NAICS 447
Gasoline Stations: NAICS 447

About the Gasoline Stations subsector

The gasoline stations subsector is part of the retail trade sector.

Industries in the Gasoline Stations subsector retail automotive fuels (e.g., gasoline, diesel fuel, gasohol) and automotive oils or retail these products in combination with convenience store items. These establishments have specialized equipment for the storage and dispensing of automotive fuels. North American Industry Classification System

The gasoline stations subsector consists of a single industry group, Gasoline Stations: NAICS 4471. Workforce Statistics

This section provides information relating to employment in gasoline stations. These data are obtained from employer or establishment surveys. The following tables present an overview of the industry including the number of jobs, data for occupations common to the industry, and projections of occupational employment change.

Employment

(Source: Current Employment Statistics)

Employment by Occupation

(Source: Occupational Employment Statistics)

Projections

For projected (future) employment estimates, see the National Employment Matrix, which includes employment estimates by industry and occupation for gasoline stations.

(Source: Office of Occupational Statistics and Employment Projections)

Earnings and Hours

This section presents data on employee earnings and weekly hours. The latest industry averages of hourly earnings and weekly hours are shown. In addition, recent hourly and annual earnings are shown for occupations commonly found in gasoline stations.

Earnings and Hours of All Employees

(Source: Current Employment Statistics)

Earnings and Hours of Production and Nonsupervisory Employees

(Source: Current Employment Statistics)

Earnings by Occupation

(Source: Occupational Employment Statistics)

Work-related Fatalities, Injuries, and Illnesses

This section presents data for the industry on the number of workplace fatalities and the rates of workplace injuries and illnesses per 100 full-time workers in gasoline stations. An injury or illness is considered to be work-related if an event or exposure in the work environment either caused or contributed to the resulting condition or significantly aggravated a pre-existing condition.

Data series 2013 2014 2015 2016 Fatalities Number of fatalities 34 29 39 44 Blank cells indicate no data reported or data that do not meet publication criteria.



(Source: Injuries, Illnesses, and Fatalities)

Prices

This section provides industry-specific pricing information. The producer price index measures the percentage change in prices that domestic producers receive for goods and services. The prices included in the producer price index are from the first commercial transaction.

Data series Back

data Nov.

2017 Dec.

2017 Jan.

2018 Feb.

2018 Producer price index 115.9 105.8 106.6 114.7 Percent change from previous month -2.9% -8.7% 0.8% 7.6%

(Source: Producer Price Indexes)

Workplace Trends

This section presents data on the number of establishments in gasoline stations. Also included in this section is information on productivity, presented as the rate of change in output per hour of workers in the industry.

Establishments

(Source: Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages)

Productivity

(Source: Productivity and Costs)