May 2016 OES Metropolitan and Nonmetropolitan Area Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates
May 2016 Metropolitan and Nonmetropolitan Area Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates

Providence-Warwick, RI-MA

For metropolitan and nonmetropolitan area definitions used by the OES survey, see the Metropolitan and nonmetropolitan area definitions page.

These estimates are calculated with data collected from employers in all industry sectors in Providence-Warwick, RI-MA, a metropolitan statistical area that includes parts of Rhode Island and Massachusetts.

Additional information, including the hourly and annual 10th, 25th, 75th, and 90th percentile wages and the employment percent relative standard error, is available in the downloadable XLS file.

Links to OES estimates for other areas and States

Major Occupational Groups in Providence-Warwick, RI-MA (Note--clicking a link will scroll the page to the occupational group):

To sort this table by a different column, click on the column header

About May 2016 National, State, Metropolitan, and Nonmetropolitan Area Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates

(1) Estimates for detailed occupations do not sum to the totals because the totals include occupations not shown separately. Estimates do not include self-employed workers.

(2) Annual wages have been calculated by multiplying the hourly mean wage by a "year-round, full-time" hours figure of 2,080 hours; for those occupations where there is not an hourly wage published, the annual wage has been directly calculated from the reported survey data.

(3) The relative standard error (RSE) is a measure of the reliability of a survey statistic. The smaller the relative standard error, the more precise the estimate.

(4) Wages for some occupations that do not generally work year-round, full time, are reported either as hourly wages or annual salaries depending on how they are typically paid.

(5) This wage is equal to or greater than $100.00 per hour or $208,000 per year.

(8) Estimates not released.

(9) The location quotient is the ratio of the area concentration of occupational employment to the national average concentration. A location quotient greater than one indicates the occupation has a higher share of employment than average, and a location quotient less than one indicates the occupation is less prevalent in the area than average.

Rhode Island's metropolitan and nonmetropolitan area estimates:

May 2016 National Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates

May 2016 State Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates

May 2016 Metropolitan and Nonmetropolitan Area Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates

May 2016 National Industry-Specific Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates

May 2016 Occupation Profiles

Technical notes