Table A-5. Employment status of the civilian population 18 years and over by veteran status, period of service, and sex, not seasonally adjusted
To see the last 10 years of data, select one or more series from the table below, then scroll down to click the "Retrieve data" button.



You can choose other years, reformat your returned information, or create differences using the "More formatting options" link that will be shown with the retrieved information.



(Note: Annual average information is stored only with the "Not seasonally adjusted" series. Be sure to check the box at the top of the output page to include annual averages with the retrieved information.) HOUSEHOLD DATA Table A-5. Employment status of the civilian population 18 years and over by veteran status, period of service, and sex, not seasonally adjusted

[Numbers in thousands]



Employment status, veteran status, and period of service Total Men Women VETERANS, 18 years and over Civilian noninstitutional population Civilian labor force Participation rate Employed Employment-population ratio Unemployed Unemployment rate Not in labor force Gulf War-era II veterans Civilian noninstitutional population Civilian labor force Participation rate Employed Employment-population ratio Unemployed Unemployment rate Not in labor force Gulf War-era I veterans Civilian noninstitutional population Civilian labor force Participation rate Employed Employment-population ratio Unemployed Unemployment rate Not in labor force World War II, Korean War, and Vietnam-era veterans Civilian noninstitutional population Civilian labor force Participation rate Employed Employment-population ratio Unemployed Unemployment rate Not in labor force Veterans of other service periods Civilian noninstitutional population Civilian labor force Participation rate Employed Employment-population ratio Unemployed Unemployment rate Not in labor force NONVETERANS, 18 years and over Civilian noninstitutional population Civilian labor force Participation rate Employed Employment-population ratio Unemployed Unemployment rate Not in labor force NOTE: Veterans served on active duty in the U.S. Armed Forces and were not on active duty at the time of the survey. Nonveterans never served on active duty in the U.S. Armed Forces. Veterans could have served anywhere in the world during these periods of service: Gulf War era II (September 2001–present), Gulf War era I (August 1990–August 2001), Vietnam era (August 1964–April 1975), Korean War (July 1950–January 1955), World War II (December 1941–December 1946), and other service periods (all other time periods). Veterans who served in more than one wartime period are classified only in the most recent one. Veterans who served during one of the selected wartime periods and another period are classified only in the wartime period. Beginning with data for January 2013, estimates for veterans incorporate population controls derived from the updated Department of Veterans Affairs' population model. Beginning with data for January 2014, estimates for veterans incorporate updated weighting procedures.

Recommend this page using: LinkedIn