Daniel Kahikina Akaka, U.S. Senator of Hawaii: Native Hawaiian Federal Recognition
Native Hawaiian Federal Recognition

Extending parity in federal recognition



"I am proud to have elevated the cause of federal recognition to the national level. Federal recognition would simply put the state of Hawaii on equal footing with the rest of the country in the treatment of its indigenous peoples. The people of Hawaii have waited for far too long for an opportunity to participate in a government-to-government relationship similar to that already extended to this nation's other indigenous people."



Priorities



While Congress has traditionally treated Native Hawaiians in a manner similar to American Indians and Alaska Natives, the federal policy of self-governance and self-determination has not yet been formally extended to Native Hawaiians. Senator Akaka has worked tirelessly to bring parity in the United States' treatment of its indigenous peoples - American Indians, Alaska Natives, and Native Hawaiians.



Senator Akaka remains steadfast in his efforts to protect the rights of Native Hawaiians, and will continue to work to bring parity to Native Hawaiians. On March 30, 2011, Senator Akaka reintroduced S. 675, the Native Hawaiian Government Reorganization Act of 2011. That same day, Congresswoman Mazie Hirono introduced H.R. 1250 as companion legislation in the House of Representatives.



On April 7, 2011, S. 675 was ordered to be reported out of the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, favorably and without amendment.











Resources



Click here for the text of the Native Hawaiian Government Reorganization Act of 2011, as introduced on March 30, 2011: LINK



Click here for the the text of the Senator's press release on the Native Hawaiian Government Reorganization Act of 2011: LINK



Click here for a one-page document outlining the Native Hawaiian Government Reorganization Act of 2011: LINK



Click here for the Library of Congress THOMAS summary of S. 675: LINK





Background and History



In 1893, the Kingdom of Hawaii led by Queen Liliuokalani was illegally overthrown with the assistance of agents of the U.S. and U.S. military force. The overthrow resulted in the disenfranchisement of generations of Native Hawaiians from their government, culture, land, and way of life.



With the enactment of P.L. 103-150 in 1993, commonly known as the Apology Resolution, the U.S. formally apologized to the Native Hawaiians for its participation in the overthrow and formally committed itself to a process of reconciliation.



Senator Akaka has worked to ensure that the people of Hawaii are able to come together to finally address issues stemming from the overthrow and engage in meaningful reconciliation. He has pursued legislation that would provide a structured process to do so and allow the indigenous people of Hawaii to have a government-to-government relationship with the U.S., similar to those that the nation's other indigenous people currently enjoy.



Misconceptions of federal recognition. In his efforts to extend federal recognition to Native Hawaiians, Senator Akaka has been consistent in his intent. Extending federal recognition to the Native Hawaiian people:



DOES NOT allow Hawaii to secede from the United States;

DOES NOT allow private lands to be taken;

DOES NOT authorize gaming in Hawaii; and

DOES NOT create a reservation in Hawaii.