Joe Biden Just CONFIRMED That He Is Running For President In 2020 And It Has America Applauding!
Continuing the months of high speculation, former Vice President Joe Biden in a new interview informed longtime policy aides that a White House campaign in 2020 is a definite possibility, The Associated Press reported Sunday.

Biden hosted a meeting with several top aides at his office near Capitol Hill to work on his new diplomacy center. During the meeting, he explained to those in attendance — including his former chief of staff, his former national security adviser and a former State Department official that he had not yet decided about 2020.

He relied to his longtime aides that he would be interested in them joining his campaign if he did decide to make a run for the White House, The Associated Press reported.

A spokesperson for Biden refused to offer a comment to any media outlets.

Biden, 75, is currently considered a strong Democratic presidential nominee if he runs. He has already suggested in public several time that he is considering a campaign, but has not made a final decision.

He mulled over a presidential campaign back in 2016, but decided against it following his son’s death.

Recent polling shows Biden leading over President Trump in a hypothetical 2020 match-up.

In the year since he left office, Biden has grown to be a more vocal critic of Trump and his administration.

Representative Adam Schiff stepped forth this Sunday to claim that the recent charges currently against Russian nationals present clear evidence of collusion during the 2016 U.S. election, but don’t clear the Trump campaign of their alleged collusion with Moscow.

“No, of course not, but this is a president who claims vindication anytime someone sneezes,” Schiff said on CNN’s “State of the Union.”

“It ought to put to rest for anyone, including the president, who continues to call this a witch hunt, that the evidence is now overwhelming and unequivocal, and we need to move to protect ourselves from Russian interference in elections that are coming up,” he added.

COMMENT BELOW

LET US KNOW WHAT YOU THINK