Trump Shaking With Rage After Rachel Maddow Confirms All The ‘Golden Shower’ Rumors
A bombshell new book released today, Russian Roulette: The Inside Story of Putin’s War on America and the Election of Donald Trump by investigative journalists David Corn and Michael Isikoff, reports on Donald Trump’s 2013 trip to Moscow.

And according to Rachel Maddow, it may highlight the ways the Kremlin used sexual acts the future president witnessed or engaged in as leverage against him.

The most inflammatory detail of the Steele Dossier is the allegation that in 2013, Trump hired Russian prostitutes to urinate on a bed that then-President Barack Obama had previously slept on.

On Monday’s show, Maddow noted that although Corn and Isikoff’s book asks more questions than it answers on the alleged incident that gave the dossier its notorious nickname (“the pee-pee dossier”), the book has lots of new detail about that particular allegation—including confirmation that Trump did in fact book the Ritz-Carlton “presidential” suite where Obama once stayed.

Along with getting “very specific” about the timeframe during which the incident would have taken place on Trump’s night in Moscow, the book’s authors quote Christopher Steele, the former British spy who wrote the dossier, as lacking confidence in the “golden showers kompromat tape allegation.”

In excerpts of the book that were published earlier this month by Mother Jones, Isikoff and Corn describe an incident at a “raunchy” Moscow nightclub called “The Act.” Trump, along with a British publicist and Russian singer who also attended the infamous Trump Tower meeting in 2016, “were photographed in the lobby by a local paparazzi,” and upon hearing the future president may attend, the club’s managers “arranged to have plenty of Diet Coke on hand” for him:

The owners had also discussed whether they should prepare a special performance for the developer—perhaps a dominatrix who would tie him up onstage or a little-person transvestite Trump impersonator—but nixed the idea.

As we reported last week, among the club’s regular acts—this was specifically cited by the judge who shut down the club shortly afterward—was one called “Hot for Teacher,” in which naked college girls simulate urinating on a professor. In another act, two women disrobe, and one stands over the other and simulates urinating while the other catches the urine in two wine glasses. There’s no word on whether Trump was treated to this particular stage act.

Photos of Trump at the club later surfaced following the publication of the excerpt:

He cannot deny being at the club that night Keith Schiller is right behind him the club was shut down in October of the same year for reasons related to the performances and other issues. pic.twitter.com/8DOwZ9l9UF — KeithLeBlanc (@KeithLeBlanc63) March 8, 2018

Watch:

What do YOU think?

*Please let us know in the comments section below!*