SANCHEZ DEAD WRONG ON GUN INDUSTRY PROTECTIONS
WASHINGTON - Rep. Loretta Sanchez (D-CA) recently tried to defend her 2005 vote for special gun industry protections in an op-ed that miscasts the legislation that continues to protect unlawful commerce and robs gun violence victims of their right to a day in court."Loretta Sanchez is dead wrong," said Dan Gross, President of the Brady Campaign. "I find it excruciatingly frustrating that she claimed to have 'fully analyzed unintended consequences' of the law and saw fit to support it nonetheless. Because of the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act, victims with legitimate cases, like Hector Adames , are shut out of the justice system. The irony of Sanchez's defense is that the car companies and hammer manufacturers she invokes actually CAN be sued and victims at least have the opportunity to seek justice. Gun violence victims are often denied even the opportunity to make their case because of the protections Sanchez helped pass."The choice between a victim's right to justice and the possibility of inconveniencing the multibillion dollar gun industry is not a 'tough decision', nor is it 'complicated'. Loretta Sanchez is standing on the wrong side of this issue. If she's serious about standing up for gun violence victims, Rep. Sanchez can sign on to co-sponsor H.R. 4399, the bill to repeal PLCAA, right now. But she cannot defend her vote by parroting the gun lobby's misleading talking points and she cannot sweep this problem under the rug by laying claim to decade-old ratings."In January 2016, the Brady Campaign joined bill sponsors Representative Adam Schiff (D-CA), Senator Richard Blumenthal (D-CT), and Senator Chris Murphy (D-CT) to introduce legislation (H.R. 4399 and S. 2469) to end special gun industry protection and restore justice to victims of gun violence. The Equal Access to Justice for Victims of Gun Violence Act, coauthored by the Brady Campaign, would repeal the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act.The Brady Campaign, along with Newtown Action Alliance and others, recently delivered more than 31,000 signatures from Californians to Sanchez's office, calling on her to co-sponsor the repeal of PLCAA.