Brady Campaign Announces Endorsement of Gov. Andrew Cuomo for Re-Election
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

MEDIA CONTACT:

Max Samis, Press Secretary

msamis@bradymail.org

(o) 202-370-8128

(c) 202-681-2528

Brady Campaign Announces Endorsement of Gov. Andrew Cuomo for Re-Election

Gun safety organization hails Cuomo’s proven leadership, including passage of SAFE Act

Washington, D.C., July 20, 2018 – Today, the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence announced their endorsement of Governor Andrew Cuomo for re-election in the state of New York. The renowned organization praised Gov. Cuomo’s proven leadership on gun safety, including passing the SAFE Act in the wake of Sandy Hook, removing firearms from domestic abusers, launching a multi-state coalition to combat gun violence, and funding the SNUG and Gun Violence Elimination Programs. Gov. Cuomo is the latest endorsement in an ongoing list of Brady-backed candidates.

Gov. Cuomo will continue to fight to pass the nation-leading extreme risk protection order law, which would ban individuals determined by a court likely to engage in conduct that would pose serious harm to themselves or others from purchasing, possessing, or attempting to purchase a firearm in New York.

Avery Gardiner, co-president of the Brady Campaign, stated: “The Brady Campaign is proud to endorse Governor Cuomo -- a national champion in the fight for gun safety -- for re-election. When it comes to the issue of gun safety, you are literally talking about life and death, and at a time when Washington is cowtowing to the NRA, this nation needs proven and experienced leaders like Andrew Cuomo. The work Governor Cuomo has done to reduce gun related deaths in New York is a model the rest of the nation should follow. Governor Cuomo has led the nation in the fight for gun control -- not with words, but with actions. Governor Cuomo has taken on the NRA and passed life-saving laws while most politicians offered nothing more than thoughts and prayers. Gov. Cuomo understands the issues and has created effective policies by banning high capacity magazines, running background checks on private gun sales and keeping guns out of the hands of domestic abusers and convicted felons. As we continue to push for stronger gun safety laws in the states and at the federal level, we’re proud to support one of the nation's most effective leader in this fight, Governor Andrew Cuomo.”

"While the NRA maintains control over ultra-conservative Republicans in Washington, New York refuses to stand idly by," said Governor Cuomo. “In 2013, New York passed the toughest and smartest gun laws in the nation and we did what Washington is still trying to do five years later. Enough is enough. This isn’t about politics it’s about people. New York is going to continue to lead the way and strengthen our gun safety laws to make this the safest state – period. I’m honored to receive the Brady Organization’s endorsement and look forward to working together to keep New York’s children and families safe.”

This election cycle, the Brady Campaign is focused on working with and supporting candidates throughout the country who are committed to preventing gun violence. A heavy focus is on whether candidates support Brady’s three-point plan, including expanding Brady background checks, banning assault weapons and high-capacity magazines, and passing extreme risk laws.

A resurgent Brady PAC is supporting candidates who commit to making gun violence prevention a top priority and is working to replace candidates who refuse to prioritize the safety of the American public. Brady is doing so through the candidate endorsement process and holding candidates accountable to their questionnaire answers. Brady PAC will target races across the country in support of such candidates, especially in those races targeting candidates who put gun industry profits before the safety of their constituents.

Brady is also focusing heavily on voter registration, particularly of young voters through its student initiative, Team ENOUGH. In addition to its recently-released Congressional report cards on gun safety issues, the student-led group will be holding voter registration events throughout the summer and will work to educate and mobilize high school and university students from now until November. The group is also inviting students across the country to form their own Team ENOUGH groups and host nonpartisan candidate forums.

Last November’s elections in Virginia and New Jersey, where multiple Brady-backed candidates won on a clear platform of gun safety, demonstrated that voters are engaging on the issue and are rejecting those supported by the NRA. And with recent polling showing that half of Americans want gun safety to be Congress’s top priority, it’s clear that this issue will be a leading one throughout the 2018 campaign.

Further endorsements will be announced in the weeks and months to come.

###

The mission of the Brady organization and its Million Mom March is to create a safer America by cutting gun deaths in half by 2025. For more insight on gun violence prevention, follow us on Facebook and Twitter @BradyBuzz.

About Us: The Brady Campaign and Center, united with the Million Mom March, is a national network of over 90 grassroots chapter affiliates mobilized to prevent gun violence at the community level. The network has played a vital role in expanding Brady background checks in the six states that have passed legislation since the shooting in Newtown, Connecticut and produced one of the largest national protests of gun violence in U.S. history - The Million Mom March, Mother's Day 2000.