Brady Campaign Statement on Passage of Gun Legislation in New York
Jan 15, 2013

Washington, DC – The President of the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence today called the passage of major gun-related legislation in New York, “an historic moment that will save lives.”

“Governor Cuomo and the lawmakers in Albany have today shown tremendous leadership on the critical issue of gun violence. By making this a priority, the Governor has not only saved lives, but will hopefully inspire leaders in Washington also to take swift action,” said Dan Gross, President of the Brady Campaign. “The comprehensive package passed today in New York represents the kind of solutions that need to be implemented on the federal level. Many of these solutions, including universal background checks, have tremendous support from Americans across the country and across the political spectrum, including among gun owners and NRA members. The policies will have an immediate and widespread impact on gun violence, and when coupled with public health and safety education programs, will finally begin to address in a real way the epidemic of gun deaths in America. We thank Governor Cuomo for his bold leadership to prevent gun violence and for creating a model for the nation.”

The Brady Campaign has been working with the Vice President’s Task Force on Guns and has submitted a set of comprehensive recommendations.

A poll released yesterday by the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press shows that the American people are overwhelmingly supportive of major changes to our gun laws. The poll showed that about 85% of those surveyed supported background checks for private gun sales and sales at gun shows. The poll also showed that four out of five Americans favor laws that would prevent the mentally ill from buying weapons.

###

The Brady Campaign is the nation's largest citizens' lobby to prevent gun violence. We represent the voice of the overwhelming majority of Americans who are tired of living with the constant tragedy of gun violence and are in favor of strong laws and policies that will save lives. We are the light that exposes politicians who are putting the American people at risk, empowering the American people to hold them accountable for decisions and actions that undermine public safety.

We are driven by the focused vision of a nation where all Americans are safe at home, at work, at school, and in our communities.

Dan Gross is the President of the Brady Campaign and the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence. A photo and more information about Dan Gross is available here.

For more insight on gun violence prevention, like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter.