Hilary Clinton Snubs the Gold Star Mothers?
All That Glitters... Date Added: Oct. 17, 2001

Last Updated: June 22, 2007 This chain letter has been around since late 2001 when Hilary Clinton made the career change from First Lady to the U.S. Senator from New York. It never really went away, but gained renewed popularity in the spring of 2007, as Mrs. Clinton looks to be a front-runner for the Democratic candidate for President in 2008. The chain is based on real events, but is packed with misinformation and supposition. Gold Star Mothers is an organization made up of women whose sons were killed in military combat during service in the United States armed forces. Recently a delegation of New York Gold Star Mothers made a trip to Washington, DC to discuss various concerns with their elected representatives. According to NewsMax.com there was only one politician in D.C. who refused to meet with these ladies. Can you guess which politician that might be? Was it New York Senator Charles Schumer? Nope, even he met with them. Try again. Do you know anyone serving in the Senate who has never showed anything but contempt for our military? Do you happen to know the name of any politician in Washington who's husband once wrote of his loathing of the military? Now you're getting warm! You got it! None other than the Queen herself, The Hildebeast, Hillary Clinton. She refused repeated requests to meet with the Gold Star Mothers. Now --- please don't tell me you're surprised. This woman wants to be president of the United States --- and there is a huge percentage of the voters who are anxious to help her achieve that dream. Please pass this on! Representatives from the New York chapter of Gold Star Mothers did visit Senator Clinton's office in May, 2001. However, that's pretty much where the truth in this one ends. The Gold Star group dropped by the Senator's office unannounced, and she was out of the office at the time. Charles Schumer was the only other Senator they visited in that outing, and he did meet with them. NewsMax reported the misinformation above in a couple of different articles in late 2001, and never printed a correction or retraction. However, The national president of American Gold Star Mothers made a public statement at the time that her office regrets the misunderstanding and would like the rumors to stop spreading as quickly as possible. Help them out and break this chain! References: TruthOrFiction.com