McCain-led delegation due tomorrow

The Foreign Office has said that Pakistan is open for talks on purchase of F-16 fighter jets with United States, as a four-member high level US delegation led by Senator John McCain is due to arrive on July 02 (Saturday). "The visit of Senator John McCain will take place shortly... and matters relating to defence co-operation are expected to be discussed during the visit," Foreign Office spokesperson Nafees Zakaria told his weekly media briefing but did not confirm the date of the visit.



However, sources maintained that Senator McCain will lead a four-member US delegation on Saturday to hold talks with Pakistan's civil and military leadership. To be accompanied by Republican house member Ric Davis, Senator Lindsey Graham and Senator Joe Donnelly, the high powered US delegation will hold talks with Adviser to the Prime Minister on Foreign Affairs Sartaj Aziz on regional situation and issues of mutual interest. The US delegation will also meet Army Chief Raheel Sharif at the GHQ to discuss various issues related to defence co-operation between the two countries, the sources added.



On the issue of F-16, Nafees Zakaria said: "In diplomacy, we never say doors are closed... don't just look at Pakistan-US relations through the prism of this sale [F-16s]; the relationship is much broader". He pointed out that the initial stage was the decision to give F-16s to Pakistan that was taken in favour of Pakistan. The second issue was about financial arrangements and this is where we had some issues with the US side, he said, adding the purpose of the sale was to help Pakistan in its counter-terrorism efforts. "Terrorism is not just Pakistan's problem but a global issue, which requires a co-operative approach," he said, adding the purpose was to enhance Pakistan's precision strike capability.



To a question about talks with India, he said Pakistan is open to dialogue with India for the resolution of all outstanding issues. He emphasised that people-to-people contacts between the two countries are imperative to improve the existing atmosphere. Similarly, he said Pakistan always encourages people to people contacts and religious tourism between the two countries.



Commenting on the recent statement by Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the spokesperson said that the people of Pakistan take great pride in the armed forces and revere them for their services to the country with the ultimate sacrifices. "No amount of efforts can create a wedge between the civil and military leadership of Pakistan. Armed Forces of Pakistan fully support the democratic process," he added. About any update on the information sought on the Mumbai attacks, he said that Foreign Secretary Aizaz Ahmad Chaudhry had written to his Indian counterpart regarding evidence required for an early conclusion of the Mumbai trials. "The response from the Indian side is still awaited," he added.



Regarding the QCG process to restore peace in Afghanistan, he said all members of the QCG have continued to reiterate that they are committed to the process. He said that Pakistan is serious and sincere about peace and stability in Afghanistan. "We will be ready to assist the QCG process whenever the Afghan government is ready," he said.



Declining to comment on Afghan government's intention, he said that it is clear that for peace and stability in Afghanistan, the Afghan government as well as all Afghan factions need to be engaged in serious peace negotiation. To another question about Pakistan's quest for joining the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), he said the country's principled position is that the question on NSG membership must be dealt with in a single, uniform, non-discriminatory and criteria-based approach, which is essential for maintaining strategic stability in South Asia.



He maintained that NSG participating countries acknowledged the merits of adopting the criteria-based approach rather than a country-specific exemption. "This stance resonated Pakistan's position," he said, adding Pakistan firmly believes that it has credentials and merit to become member of NSG. Therefore, we will continue our efforts to seek NSG membership, he added.



He further said that in its recent meeting in Seoul, the NSG members did not deliberate on applications of the non-NPT members, including Pakistan and India; rather they discussed how to deal with the request of non-NPT countries. Asked whether Pakistan is willing to join the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), he said the decision to apply for membership of multilateral export control regimes is taken through consultations among all stakeholders. "We will continue our engagement with MTCR and consider appropriate timing for our MTCR application," he said.



"We do not view the question of timing of our MTCR application to be linked to another country's application. MTCR is a voluntary regime and Pakistan voluntarily follows all guidelines of the MTCR regime," he added. To another query, he said that Pakistan envoys have been called together for a meeting next month to discuss the rapidly changing scenario of international politics. The 'envoy conference' will also be used to devise a comprehensive strategy to deal with the future developments.