'Turn 'Em All In': Feinstein Said She Wanted All Guns Banned
One of the lines that many progressives and TV talking heads are reiterating is that no one really wants to take away Americans’ guns. Senator Dianne Feinstein apparently missed that directive. She admitted as far back as 1995 that she does, indeed, wish to take everyone’s guns away from them.

In a 1995 broadcast of CBS’ 60 Minutes, Feinstein admitted she would love to have instituted an “outright ban” on all guns.

Feinstein was the driving force to the failed (and now lapsed) 1994 “assault weapons” ban, and it was upon her success at getting the law passed that she made her admission.

If I could’ve gotten 51 votes in the Senate of the United States for an outright ban, picking up every one of them — Mr. and Mrs. America turn ’em all in — I would have done it. I could not do that. The votes weren’t here.

This is not the way many lefties are trying to sell their latest attempts at violating the 2nd Amendment, of course. Led by President Obama, the latest tactic is to claim that no one really wants to take away guns and that any claim to the opposite is just “fearmongering.”

In 2008, President Obama went out of his way to tell the nation that he “believes” in the Second Amendment.

I, I, just want to be absolutely clear, all right? So I don’t want any misunderstanding, when, when y’all go home and you’re talkin’ to your buddies, and they say, “Aww, he wants to take my gun away.” You’ve heard it here; I’m on television, so everybody knows it. I believe in the Second Amendment. I believe in peoples’ lawful right to bear arms. I will not take your shotgun away. I will not take your rifle away. I won’t take your handgun away… But I am not going to take your guns away. So if you want to find an excuse not to vote for me, don’t use that one because it just ain’t true. It ain’t true.

U.S. Congressman Raul Grijalva (D, Ariz.) mirrored this tactic: “I think the majority of the American people want us to have a rational discussion that protects their fundamental rights and the Second Amendment, but also protects the public safety. I don’t that’s a contradiction,” Grijalva said in July.

This talking point is echoed by many in the media. During his “townhall” event on CNN a few weeks ago, Piers Morgan made the claim that he believes in the U.S. Constitution and doesn’t support taking all guns from every American, despite his constant refrain that guns need to be banned.

U.S. News writer Susan Milligan agreed, saying in November that there is “no evidence” that any one wants to take away American’s firearms.

The sentiment is also deployed by small, local papers, like that of the Albany Herald, who’s Carlton Fletcher scoffed at the notion that anyone wants to take away guns.

“Despite what the latest ultra-right-wing posts assure you is happening even now as you’re reading this, President Obama and the United Nations are not putting the finishing touches on their nefarious plot to ‘take away our guns,'” Fletcher wrote in September.

Vice Magazine also recently engaged in this subterfuge. “Basically no one wants to take anyone’s gun away, at least not in America,” wrote Associate Editor Harry Cheadle in June.

Even the extremist, left-wing media-watching group, Media Matters, proclaimed any thought that progressives want to take guns away is nothing but “fearmongering.”

Senator Feinstein, though, is far more direct. This attempt to hide the left’s true motives is not a tactic that she bothers with. Feinstein is quite open: Her goal, like that of the rest of the left in America, is to undermine the Second Amendment and take away all Americans’ right to own firearms of any kind.