ICU Mobile
Young couple and their baby, saved by ICU Mobile

Why We Go…the ICU Mobile Mission

ICU Mobile is a non-profit ministry of love and grace deploying and supporting a fleet of mobile pregnancy centers so that every woman experiencing an unplanned pregnancy may have a free opportunity to see her unborn child and hear the Gospel in a non-judgmental, non-political and non-coercive environment.

It is hard to find anyone who will not agree – life is precious. Yet we live in a world that has devalued human life to the point that many never experience a Birth Day let alone their first birthday.

Since 1973, in the United States alone, over 53 million babies had no chance at life. Worldwide, approximately 42 million babies every year never have a Birth Day. Globally, one in five pregnancies will end in an abortion.1

These are not mere statistics, they are human lives.

ICU Mobile (pronounced “I See you”) is the pioneer and leader of mobile pregnancy center ministry. We are a fleet of mobile ultrasound vehicles that GO to women to meet them where they are in cities and towns, both urban and rural, across the United States and around the world.

Throughout our fleet of mobile pregnancy center vehicles, 86.9% of abortion minded women choose life after seeing their baby on an ultrasound. We make ultrasound mobile and GO to abortion minded women in order to widen the influence of this life saving tool. It is one of the most innovative and successful ways to show abortion-minded women the life within.

The ICU Mobile Fleet for Little Feet™ serves thousands of women considering abortion.

We continue to build and expand our fleet and our mission is simple: reveal life at the crossroads of decision. Our approach is equally simple: reveal truth via ultrasound at a time when a woman is in the decision making process. It is our mission to provide women experiencing an unplanned pregnancy the free opportunity to confirm her pregnancy via a limited obstetrical ultrasound; enabling her to see her unborn child in order to make an informed life-affirming decision and hear the good news of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Statistics show that more than 70% of women considering an abortion who see their baby on an ultrasound choose life. That is an amazing success rate. Yet, 86.9% of women considering an abortion who see their baby aboard an ICU Mobile choose life. That is God using our ministry with great effectiveness.

Since 2003, the Lord has used our fleet of mobile pregnancy centers to reach thousands of women, save thousands of babies and bring thousands to faith in Jesus Christ.

The ICU Mobile Fleet for Little Feet™ is made up of passionate and dedicated people brought together by a common goal to serve women in the name of Christ. As the very first mobile pregnancy center ministry, our extensive experience has refined our approach and defined a series of best practices to reach out to women who are confused, scared and unsure in the face of an unplanned pregnancy.

Revealing life, the life knit together in the womb and eternal life through Jesus, we see hearts and minds change every day.

Sure, the free ultrasound draws women to an ICU Mobile, but it is our love and compassion while revealing life at the crossroads of decision that give women hope for a better future.

But the why behind ICU Mobile will always be Jesus Christ…God. Because of the unfair trade Christ made for us (our sin for his righteousness), we follow His command to GO (Matthew 28:19a).

Effectiveness 2010 In 2010, our fleet met with 1,389 women and provided them with an ultrasound image to confirm pregnancy. 613 were abortion minded or abortion vulnerable. 533 (86.9%) made a decision for life. 1,176 people heard the good news of Jesus, and were asked if they wanted to follow Christ. 506 (43%) made a first time decision for Christ as their Savior. On average, 59 babies are saved and 56 people accept the gift of eternal life per mobile every year. These numbers are amazing for sure but think of what can be accomplished if we can deploy more mobiles. 12 more mobiles would mean 708 more babies saved and 672 new decisions for Christ every year. 24 more mobiles would mean 1416 more babies saved and 1344 new decision for Christ every year. Together, we can do that!

GO with us…to see how love and grace provide hope and a future to women who often see neither.

GO with us…as we reveal life at the crossroads of decision.

GO with us…and prayerfully consider how you can get involved.

Get Involved Now

¹All abortion numbers are derived from pro-abortion sources courtesy of The Alan Guttmacher Institute of the World Health Organization (1996-2008 study) and Planned Parenthood’s Family Planning Perspectives.