Shooting prompts closing of UTB-TSC; international bridges
Reports of multiple shootouts across the border in Matamoros prompted UTB-TSC officials to shut down the Fort Brown campus late Friday afternoon.



Classes have been canceled for today, and all Homecoming activities scheduled for today were moved from the campus for safety issues.



A campus-wide bulletin sent out Friday afternoon to all at the University of Texas at Brownsville and Texas Southmost College alerted the campus community of gunfire occurring across the border.



Violence broke out in Matamoros, leaving at least 47 people dead and causing the temporary closure of all three bridges between Brownsville and Mexico. By early evening, the bridges had reopened.



The fighting reportedly involved members of the Gulf Cartel, the Zetas and Mexican federal police and the military.



The gunfire was heard by UTB-TSC officials, who were at the men’s and women’s soccer finals of the Red River Athletic Conference Tournament at the campus.



“At first we were not sure if they were fireworks,” said Ronnie Zamora, sports information director for UTB-TSC. “But you could smell the smoke of the gunfire.”

His assistant, Cynthia Hernandez, a junior at UTB-TSC, said she was terrified when she heard the noise.



“I was shocked that this could happen so close to campus,” said Hernandez. "I don’t think the other (out-of-state) teams realized how close we were to the border, what we are dealing with down here.”



Hilda Silva, vice president for student affairs, said she believed the situation had been handled quickly and properly.



“As soon as something like this happens, the campus police, Brownsville PD, everybody comes together to decide what needs to happen to keep our students safe,” Silva said.



The first bulletin sent out about 5 p.m. alerted the campus community to stay indoors. About 30 minutes later, all classes were canceled, and faculty, staff and students were asked to leave the campus immediately.



Campus security officers Friday evening were going through the campus checking buildings to make sure they had been cleared and locked.



The soccer games were temporarily suspended and moved to the Brownsville Sports Park on Merryman Road. Today’s matches will also be held at the Sports Park.



This morning’s coffee with the president was cancelled, officials said. The Golden Scorpion Reunion will be held at Lola’s Bistro on Palm Boulevard. The Distinguished Alumnus Award event has been postponed until further notice.



A shooting in September in Matamoros prompted UTB-TSC authorities to warn students living in campus dormitories to stay in their rooms. That gunfire, which left at least two dozen dead, also could be heard on this side of the border.