District attorney implements new program
Some say it could give image of preferential treatment

By FERNANDO DEL VALLE

Valley Morning Star

December 27, 2005 A new program that gives District Attorney Armando Villalobos the discretion to select its cases helps defendants keep their offenses off their records.

The office launched its pretrial diversion program to give eligible defendants a chance to avoid criminal records that could ruin their careers, Villalobos said.

So far, high-profile cases have included attorney Alberto Pullen, charged with firing a pistol at the edge of a golf course, and former Rio Hondo Constable Josaphat Hoss Lozano, who faced charges of official oppression.

Each case is reviewed on an individual basis, Villalobos said.

The program is modeled after those that many Texas counties have offered after the Legislature enacted a law in 1989.

Its not a cookie-cutter program, Villalobos said.

But some judges warned pretrial diversion programs could give district attorneys discretion that could lead to the appearance of preferential treatment.

It raises questions in the publics mind because its basically the prosecutor doing things unfettered, said state District Judge Menton Murray of the 103rd court.

Under the law, the district attorney can place a defendant into a pretrial diversion program if the case has not been filed in court, Villalobos said. If the case has been filed, then a judge will determine whether the defendant is placed in the program, he said.

A list of criteria helps determine whether a defendant is eligible for the program that Villalobos described as a form of probation.

At their discretion, district attorneys can sidestep criteria to offer the program to defendants, Villalobos said.

Those that dont meet (criteria), we review it (and) we determine whether to make an exception to the criteria, Villalobos said.

If defendants violate the terms of the probation agreement, charges are filed, Villalobos said.

The program does not offer preferential treatment to the politically connected, Villalobos said.

Everything is out in the open, he said. Everything is up front. The case doesnt disappear.

In May, the office launched the program to give eligible defendants a chance to keep their records clean.

We went to talk with the judges and told them what we were doing. We went to the probation department, Villalobos said. Everyone had to be on board.

The office offers pretrial diversion as an alternative to such programs as deferred adjudication, a probation program that leaves its mark on its participants records, Villalobos said.

Under the pretrial diversion program, defendants offenses are expunged from their records if they successfully complete their probation periods.

Using a set of criteria, the office offers the new program to first-time offenders such as licensed professionals and students whose careers could be ruined by criminal records.

We have to make sure the punishment fits the crime, Villalobos said. Sometimes the punishment outweighs the crime. We have to make sure theres balance.

Of the approximately 100 defendants placed in the program since May, most face misdemeanor charges, Villalobos said.

Under the program, probation terms order defendants to pay fines and perform community service, Villalobos said.

In the place of community service, defendants can make payments to charities. If defendants dont pick charities, the county probation department sends payments to charities it randomly selects, said Richard Santellana, director of the countys adult probation department.

We go to our list and pick the next one in line, he said.

Although the names of defendants in the program are public record, the office could not provide such information because it does not keep a list of defendants in the program, Villalobos said.

The bottom line is the names of these people should be public, said Ted Wood, an attorney with the state Office of Court Administration in Austin. Theres a common law access to court records.

The programs first high-profile defendant was Pullen, who has represented former Cameron County Sheriff Conrado Cantu in his federal racketeering case.

Pullen was arrested July 10 for discharging a firearm within city limits, a Class A misdemeanor punishable by as much as one year in jail and a $4,000 fine.

Police reports show Pullen used a 9mm semiautomatic pistol to fire at least 10 shots in his backyard, several yards away from golfers at Valley International Country Club.

Although golfers said they had to take cover and flee amid the shots, Villalobos described the shooting as a non-violent incident in which Pullen shot the pistol directly into the ground.

As part of an agreement under the pretrial diversion program, Pullen paid $500 in fines, made a $1,000 charity payment and will report by mail to a probation officer.

The agreement prohibits Pullen from drinking alcohol, taking illegal drugs and violating state and federal laws.

If Pullen violates probation terms, he could go to jail for as long as a year and pay a $4,000 fine.

Pullen is no different than anybody else in this situation, Villalobos said after he was placed in the program.

The pretrial diversion program is authorized by the Texas Government Code, Section 76.01 (a) Pretrial Services Section: The department may operate programs for the supervision and rehabilitation of persons in pretrial intervention programs.

Programs may include testing for controlled substances. A person in a pretrial intervention program may be supervised for a period not to exceed two years, the law states.

Criteria for the Cameron County Pretrial Diversion Program:

ELIGIBLE

First-time offenders

Non-violent offenses

Offenders who did not resist law enforcement

INELIGIBLE

Persons with previous arrests (other than a Class C misdemeanor, unless more than three Class C arrests)

Persons who previously participated in pretrial diversion

Persons who previously received a probated sentence

An offense committed against a public servant

An offense involving a blood-alcohol content of 0.16 percent or higher

An offense involving an open container within the vehicle

An offense involving intoxication with any injury or death

An offense committed with the use of a weapon

An offense involving thefts from persons

An offense in which restitution responsibility is still in question

Any offense involving sales of substances listed in the Texas Controlled Substance Act

Any offense involving possession within a drug-free zone of substances listed in the TCSA

Any offense involving possession of an amount greater than a state jail felony of substances listed in the TCSA

Valley Morning Star reporter Allen Essex contributed to this report.