Repairing Our Infrastructure

Infrastructure is vital to our country’s economic growth and development. It’s the fundamental system we rely on to move people, goods, and services. Every business, large and small, depends on it. Every family uses it and expects it to work. Every public safety and public protection effort is built on its foundation. Infrastructure includes the essential pieces of our transportation network like roads, rails, and ports, and it also includes water facilities, our electrical grid, and high-speed broadband networks. There is no part of the economy that infrastructure does not touch. World-class, state-of-the-art infrastructure can boost growth, create opportunities, and spark innovation. Crumbling, outdated and inefficient infrastructure can be a serious drag on the economy, creating barriers to success and mobility.

Unfortunately, whereas once the United States could easily boast of having the most sophisticated, modern infrastructure in the world, today we are rapidly falling behind. We simply have not been making the kinds of investments that are required to even maintain the system we have now, let alone improve and update it. Instead of maintaining and investing in a more efficient and effective system, our infrastructure has deteriorated because of insufficient funding and misplaced priorities.

Making matters worse, old and outdated infrastructure is also less resilient to extreme weather events, and is therefore more costly to repair and maintain, further increasing communities’ recovery time when extreme weather events occur. The failure of the New Orleans levees in 2005 during Hurricane Katrina provides a dramatic and tragic example of what can happen when we neglect our infrastructure, especially in light of a changing climate.

We now face a critical need for investment at nearly all levels of our country’s infrastructure. As of 2010, of the 604,493 bridges in the U.S., 12.8 percent were functionally obsolete (77,375 bridges) and 11.5 percent were structurally deficient (69,517 bridges).1 Across the nation, our bridges are, on average, 42 years old, and have an estimated $76 billion in total needs to address repair and replacement.2 Average commuting times in major U.S. cities already exceed those in nearly every European country.3 Outdated sewer and wastewater systems can overflow after heavy rains, resulting in untreated sewage flowing into rivers, lakes, and streams, contaminating drinking water sources and creating other health hazards for communities.

In its 2013 study, “Report Card for America’s Infrastructure,” the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) estimated that roughly $3.6 trillion in total investment is needed by 2020 to return the nation’s facilities to good repair, which ASCE defines as safe and reliable with minimal capacity issues and minimal risk.4 The Report Card assigned a classroom letter grade to our overall infrastructure, pegging our national performance at a “D+.”5 Our schools, roads, and dams, as well as our wastewater, transit, hazardous waste, drinking water, and aviation systems received a “D.”6 The nation’s surface transportation systems are facing a funding gap of about $94 billion per year under current projected spending levels.7

Part of the reason we currently face such enormous needs in our infrastructure systems is that, as a nation, we have been underinvesting in these areas for far too long. As a percentage of GDP,8 the United States is now spending less on infrastructure than at any point in the last 20 years.9 Prior to the 1980s we devoted 3 percent of gross domestic product annually to public infrastructure spending.10 Since then, however, we have spent less than 2 percent of GDP annually.11 Over the last 20 years, this drop in investment has added up to a $1.7 trillion deficit in transportation infrastructure investment.12

Meanwhile, the rest of the world is outpacing the United States in overall infrastructure investment. Europe spends 5 percent of its GDP on infrastructure, and China spends 9 percent.13 China is tapping into the vast economic potential of its rising middle class by building roads and rails connecting rural workers to the densely populated hubs of Beijing and Shanghai. Prior to 2004, for example, China had no rail lines capable of reaching speeds of 200 kilometers per hour; by 2011, it had the world’s largest high-speed network, and by 2020 China expects to cover about 19,000 miles with track. This rail system is projected to touch 700 million people, boosting business opportunities in the consumer, tourism, and property sectors.14

The impacts of America’s infrastructure deficit are felt most acutely by our businesses, consumers, and families. When businesses cannot move their goods quickly, because of congestion, bottlenecks between transportation modes, or weather-related disruptions, it drives up costs. Inadequate infrastructure drives up supply chain costs for manufacturers and retailers, constraining global trade.15 Long and unpredictable delivery times and other logistical costs can turn profits into losses.16 The American Society of Civil Engineers estimates that, through 2020, the U.S. economy could lose almost $1 trillion in business sales, resulting in a loss of 3.5 million jobs, due to outdated and sub-par infrastructure.17

All those lost sales and job losses translate into lower incomes for the average American family. The 2013 ASCE report estimated that by not meeting the over $1 trillion funding gap between expected funding and the funding needed to adequately maintain our infrastructure system between 2012 and 2020, every household in the U.S. would lose an average of $3,000 per year in disposable income, amounting to around $28,000 per household by 2020.18

In addition to direct economic effects, underinvestment in infrastructure has serious impacts in terms of congestion and related economic costs. According to the Urban Mobility Report from the Texas A&M Transportation Institute, Americans collectively spent about 5.5 billion hours stuck in traffic in 2011, sitting on roads built for 1950s-era traffic.19 Some experts predict that our road traffic will double in about 28 years, but if our current building rate is maintained, it would take 370 years to accommodate this growth.20 As a result, traffic threatens to overload our transportation network for years to come. In fact, fuel consumption resulting from congestion reached a total of 2.9 billion gallons in 2011, wasting over $10 billion in additional fuel costs and adding 56 billion pounds of carbon pollution to the atmosphere.21 Overall, congestion cost the economy about $121 billion in lost output in 2011, or $818 per U.S. consumer.22

The good news is that we can still change our trajectory by making real investments in our infrastructure. By changing our path and investing in infrastructure now, we can yield major dividends down the road. By some estimates, infrastructure investments average a 15 to 25 percent economic return.23 That is, for every dollar invested in infrastructure, the economy grows by $1.15 to $1.25.24 According to a May 2014 report from Standard & Poor’s Rating Services, an immediate $1.3 billion infrastructure investment would likely add 29,000 jobs to the construction sector and would add further jobs to other infrastructure-related industries. The same study found an investment of this size would produce a $2 billion boost to economic growth and reduce the federal deficit by $200 million for that year (2015).25

Throughout our nation’s history, we have made strong investments in transportation systems and infrastructure because they are important for families, communities, the economy, and America’s competitive edge. In the nineteenth century, the United States built a transcontinental railway linking the East and West Coasts, dramatically improving both national and international trade. Within 10 years of the completion of our rail system, the country was shipping $50 million worth of freight from coast to coast every year, roughly the equivalent of $1.2 billion today.26 In the same century, the United States constructed the Erie Canal, helping facilitate the movement of goods by dramatically reducing costs for shippers – moving one ton of flour from Buffalo to New York City dropped from $120 to $6.27 And in the middle of the last century, the United States set out to build a vast interstate system, among the largest public works projects in history. By stitching the country together with nearly 50,000 miles of roads, we made possible untold benefits for generations of American businesses, consumers, and families.

Today, we have a choice. We can continue to uphold our nation’s legacy of a modern, efficient, and resilient infrastructure system by making smart investments to overcome the country’s current deficit in infrastructure – investments that will create jobs, grow the economy, and help businesses and communities thrive. Or we can take the approach favored by the Republicans members of the House of Representatives. In their budget proposal, they call for unprecedented cuts to critical investments for infrastructure needs. Overall, the House Budget for fiscal year 2015 would cut funding for transportation programs next year by $51 billion – a 93 percent cut.28 That would hinder our ability to repair bridges and ease congestion on highways and roads. It would also cost jobs. An estimated 186,000 heavy construction and related jobs would be lost next year under the House Budget for fiscal year 2015, according to analysis from the Center for American Progress.29

And on one of the most urgent challenges our transportation infrastructure faces – the funding shortage in the Highway Trust Fund – the House Budget would shut down all new construction financed out of the trust fund for the entirety of fiscal year 2015, something that has never before happened in the history of the Highway Trust Fund. In total, assuming no additional revenue is identified, it proposes a cut of $167.5 billion from the federal transportation programs over the next ten years.30

The House Budget is a recipe for exacerbating our infrastructure deficits, not solving them. Those who are committed to a 21st century infrastructure, and all the economic benefits that come with it, should take an alternate approach, guided by certain principles. American businesses, workers, and families need and deserve a transportation system that is efficient, resilient, accessible, and able to meet the needs of a growing and dynamic society and economy.

First, a modern transportation system requires certainty in funding, and adequate investments. The threat of a bankrupt Highway Trust Fund forces states and cities to plan year to year, putting off vital projects, and wasting valuable resources anticipating and dealing with the fall-out from uncertain funding.

Second, as we look to increase public investment in transportation, we must also provide new avenues for private sector investment – opening opportunities for innovative financing to supplement federal grant funds. Just as we need to update our infrastructure for the 21st century, we also must update the way we finance infrastructure.

Third, we need transportation policies that meet communities’ specific needs – enabling planning and solutions tailored to local problems, and ready to adapt to a changing climate. A one-size-fits-all approach will not produce the best outcomes. Federal policy should seek to provide sufficient tools so that each community can adequately address its own biggest challenges.

Fourth, our roads, rails, bridges, ports, and our freight network are vital assets, but infrastructure goes beyond transportation. We must also invest in our water and energy systems, and in our broadband network. For example, modernizing our antiquated power grid and generating stations with cleaner, more efficient power plants and transmission systems will reduce power outages, improve air quality, lower energy bills, and reduce the pollution that causes climate change. And updated sewer systems and flood controls will help mitigate the effects of extreme weather events and sea level rise.

Finally, policymakers need to remember that infrastructure investments pay dividends. A better bridge, a faster freight line, an expanded port, a more reliable electrical grid and the like all have positive economic effects that will compound over time, just as crumbling bridges, slow rail, congested ports and a broken grid have costs that will compound. When we plan investments in these areas, their long-term economic and fiscal benefits should not be ignored.

As a start to enacting these principles, Congress should address the looming crisis in the Highway Trust Fund. Since 1956, the Highway Trust Fund has supported transportation projects to repave roads, ease congestion for commuters, and repair bridges that are outdated and unsafe. But this summer, the Highway Trust Fund is facing critically low levels. According to the Department of Transportation, the Trust Fund will dip below $4 billion in available balances by July.31 That level is important because, once reached, the Department of Transportation has announced it will be forced to reduce or delay payments to states.32 The Department of Transportation is predicting that the balances in the Highway Trust Fund will completely zero out by September of 2014.33 This outlook has already prompted many states to delay previously scheduled projects to repair bridges and improve highways and roads in their communities.34

To ensure the Highway Trust Fund can meet its coming obligations, Congress should refill the Trust Fund with revenue generated from closing corporate tax loopholes, an idea supported by both Democrats and Republicans. As a start, Congress should look to close unfair loopholes that encourage multinationals to shift profits overseas to avoid paying taxes. These loopholes cost the government billions of dollars every year, and disadvantage small businesses and other firms without foreign operations. Closing them so we can create jobs here at home would be good for workers, good for the economy, and would make our broken tax system fairer in the process.

Addressing the crisis with the Highway Trust Fund is a necessary first step in tackling the broader infrastructure deficit our nation faces. Providing multi-year funding will give states the certainty they need to plan longer-term projects to address some of the nation’s most pressing transportation needs. In addition, by supporting projects that ease congestion and make our roads and bridges safer, we will create jobs and spark economic growth. Ensuring the Highway Trust Fund has multi-year certainty will pave the way for enacting a forward-looking infrastructure system that is efficient, resilient, and meets the needs of American families, communities, and businesses.