Legality of union violence at heart of court case
One construction executive will testify about the violence and vandalism he witnessed on a picket line at Ralph Wilson Stadium.

Another will recount the threats and intimidation that culminated in a union member stabbing him in the neck.

And still another will tell the jury of a menacing letter sent to his wife.

They are just a few of the 100 or so witnesses expected to testify in the trial that starts this week against seven former labor leaders accused of using death threats, assaults and vandalism to force construction companies into hiring union workers.

The trial, nearly six years in the making, is based on allegations that the former leaders of Operating Engineers Local 17 engaged in a decade of extortion and racketeering as part an ongoing criminal enterprise.

“It’s shocking so little was done for so long,” said Robert A. Doren, a lawyer for several of the companies targeted by the union. “It’s sort of about time.”

Federal prosecutors say the criminal conduct involved some of the region’s biggest construction projects, including Roswell Park Cancer Institute and Ralph Wilson Stadium, and often added millions of dollars to the cost of those projects.

Yet courts have a long history of suggesting that a union’s reliance on violence, threats and intimidation can be permissible under federal law.

Even the nation’s highest court ruled that union members can use violence and vandalism in the pursuit of “legitimate union goals.”

The case was United States v. Enmons, and, in 1973, the Supreme Court ruled that labor unions seeking improved terms and conditions of employment cannot be charged with extortion even if their efforts are accompanied by violence or property damage.

“If you’re looking at an illegal means and an illegal end, you’re going to be in trouble,” said Michael T. Harren, a Rochester lawyer who represents unions. “But if you’re looking at an illegal means and a legal end, you’ll be OK.”

The Local 17 trial begins this week and will focus on a federal indictment that charges the seven defendants – five others have pleaded guilty – with 79 separate instances of alleged wrongdoing.

The allegations range from gluing shut the locks on work sites to pouring sand into the oil systems of heavy machinery to attacking the president of a local company.

Federal prosecutors say the “Local 17 Criminal Enterprise” operated from 1997 through 2007 and was formed with the intention of forcing construction companies into hiring its members and punishing the companies that refused.

The conspiracy, according to prosecutors, was headed by union organizers Carl A. Larson and James L. Minter III and local president and business manager Mark N. Kirsch.

Larson and Minter have admitted their guilt as part of plea agreements with the government.

But Kirsch, a well-known figure in labor circles, has maintained his innocence from day one.