Deep in debt, Rubio bought an $80,000 speedboat and leased a $50,000 luxury SUV
Sen. Marco Rubio's (R-Florida) questionable spending habits may be coming back to haunt him.

The New York Times reports that while the senator was juggling multiple loans and mortgages, he bought a speedboat, a luxury SUV, and made questionable investment decisions.

Rubio has a history of accruing massive debts and then spending big when money comes his way.

According to The Times, Rubio faced huge debts in 2012. Then a miracle appeared: He got an $800,000 advance on a book deal. But instead of using all of the money responsibly, Rubio went out and bought a $80,000 speedboat.

The Times notes that despite the senator's financial woes, Rubio also leased a $50,000 Audi Q7 SUV.

Rubio's history of risky financial decisions has been well documented since he was a young Florida state assemblyman.

In 2006, the Tampa Bay Times described Rubio as "barely solvent."

described During his run for Senate several years later, the Florida senator was forced to defend his record after revelations that he put thousands of personal charges, including hair cuts, liquor-store runs, and a $10,000 family vacation on campaign and Florida Republican Party credit cards.

revelations According to The Times, in the early 2000s, the now presidential candidate bought several homes, putting no money down.

On the eve of his presidential announcement, Rubio cashed out his $68,000 retirement savings to pay bills for a broken refrigerator, air-conditioning unit, and his kids' private-school tuition. The transaction incurs a significant tax penalty that could cost Rubio $24,000.

Last week, Rubio's camp announced that the senator finally sold a Tallahassee home that he'd bought with Florida state Rep. David Rivera. The house proved to be a bad investment — Rubio and Rivera sold the home for $18,000 less than they paid for it.

Rubio's troubling spending habits are well known within Republican political circles. According to The Times, when former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney's team vetted Rubio as a potential vice presidential candidate, they found that the Florida senator's financial decisions were bad enough that they could damage the campaign.

Rubio's team is hoping that his financial struggles humanize him with voters. Rubio allies told The Times that the senator has struggled with money like most Americas, and that Rubio's working-class upbringing left him with few tools to manage his wealth.

In an email to supporters on Tuesday, Rubio used news of his financial situation to criticize former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

"I am not poor, but I'm not rich either. It's true, I didn't make over $11 million last year giving speeches to special interests," Rubio said. "And we don't have a family foundation that has raised $2 billion from Wall Street and foreign interests.

"Like millions of Americans, I had to take out student loans to pay for college and law school, and only paid them off recently," Rubio said. "But the biggest debt I have is to America. For this is not just the nation I was born in, it's the country that changed the history of my family."

On Tuesday, Rubio's campaign also lashed out at The Times.

"Now they think he doesn't have enough money in his bank account. Of course, if instead he was worth millions, The Times would then attack him for being too rich, like they did to Mitt Romney," Rubio spokesman Alex Conant told Politico in a statement.

When asked about his financial decisions on Fox News, Rubio blamed the high costs of running for president and unforeseen family costs.

“My refrigerator broke down,” Rubio said. “That was $3,000. I had to replace the air-conditioning unit in our home. My kids all go to school, and they are getting closer to college, and school’s getting more expensive."