Google looking into grossly inaccurate top news search result displayed as final popular-vote tally
A Google representative told Business Insider on Monday that the company was looking into an issue that displayed an inaccurate source of the popular-vote tally for Tuesday's US election in its top search result.

The most recently updated popular vote tally, according to the Associated Press, shows Hillary Clinton with a lead over Donald Trump. Though Clinton leads in votes by 61,039,676 to 60,371,193, Trump secured the presidency by winning the Electoral College.

The top Google News result for searches of "final election count," however, linked to a WordPress blog called 70 News that said Trump won the popular vote by a margin of almost 700,000 votes. It cited Twitter as its source.

Google

Originally posted on Saturday and updated on Sunday, the post is titled "FINAL ELECTION 2016 NUMBERS: TRUMP WON BOTH POPULAR ( 62.9 M -62.2 M ) AND ELECTORAL COLLEGE VOTES ( 306-232)...HEY CHANGE.ORG, SCRAP YOUR LOONY PETITION NOW!"

The author wrote that the information came from "Twitter posts."

"Except for the twitter posts, the popular vote number still need to be updated in Wikipedia or MSM media — which may take another few days because the liberals are still reeling and recovering from Trump-shock victory," the blog said.

The WordPress blog also shows up in the top Google News results when variations of the search are entered in, like "final popular vote."

Google

Other areas of Google, however, reflect the accurate numbers:

Google

"The goal of Search is to provide the most relevant and useful results for our users. In this case we clearly didn't get it right, but we are continually working to improve our algorithms," a Google spokesperson told Business Insider.

With approximately 7 million votes left to count— many of them from solid blue states like New York, California, and Washington — it seems that Clinton may end with an even larger victory in the popular vote.