Jake Tapper slams Fox News for misrepresenting comments about New York terror attack
CNN anchor Jake Tapper. Twitter/CNN

CNN anchor Jake Tapper admonished Fox News for taking his comments about this week's deadly terrorist attack in New York City out of context.

Fox News published an article with the headline "CNN's Jake Tapper: 'Allahu Akbar' Can Be Said Under 'Most Beautiful' of Circumstances" on Wednesday. The article included comments Tapper made Tuesday after it was reported that the attacker had shouted "Allahu akbar," Arabic for "God is great."

The headline is preceded by a tag saying "OUTRAGEOUS."

But the Fox News headline left out the second half of Tapper's quote, which distinguished Tuesday's attack from the "beautiful" circumstances he alluded to.

Tapper said at the time: "The Arabic chant 'Allahu akbar,' God is great, sometimes is said under the most beautiful of circumstances. And too often, we hear it being said in moments like this."

On Wednesday, Fox News promoted the article with a tweet that distorted the quote even more. "Jake Tapper Says 'Allahu Akbar' Is 'Beautiful' Right After NYC Terror Attack," the tweet said.

Tapper did not respond kindly to that presentation of his words.

"Fox News is lying," Tapper said in a tweet. "I said it can be said at beautiful moments (wedding, birth) and too often at times like this (horrific terrorist attack).

"'Allahu Akbar' is a prayer. If we don't understand how radical Islamic terrorists justify their evil using religion, West cannot defeat it."

"@FoxNews chooses instead to deliberately lie about what I said. Following the slime-coated path of @DailyCaller and @infowars. Disgusting," Tapper continued, alluding to two right-wing websites. "And yes, I know they do this all the time. Still, literally the day after this horrific attack that they would launch this smear — it's sick."

He added: "There was a time when one could tell the difference between Fox and the nutjobs at Infowars. It's getting tougher and tougher. Lies are lies."

Fox News deleted its tweet promoting the article later on Wednesday.