Don M Chance Home Page Index
(click on hyperlink for enlargement and description of photo)

Don M. Chance, Ph.D., CFA James C. Flores Endowed Chair of MBA Studies

& Professor of Finance

Louisiana State University





(For those wanting to connect with me on LinkedIn, please see this item.)

Contact Information:

Office: 2909 Business Education Complex

Phone: 225-578-0372

Fax: 225-578-6366

email: dchance@lsu.edu

(If I do not know you and you email me, please identify yourself and be polite) Snail Mail Address:

Department of Finance

2909 Business Education Complex

Louisiana State University

Baton Rouge, LA 70803



Spring 2017 Teaching Schedule:

BADM 7090: MW, 9:00 - 10:20, 10:30 - 11:50

(Principles of Finance)

FIN 7400: MW, 3:00- 4:20

(Financial Risk Management) Spring 2017 Office Hours:

M, 1:30 - 2:30

Thu, 1:30 - 3:00









Bio:

Don M. Chance, Ph.D., CFA, holds the James C. Flores Endowed Chair of MBA Studies and is Professor of Finance at the E. J. Ourso College of Business at Louisiana State University. He previously held the William H. Wright, Jr. Endowed Chair for Financial Services at LSU, and the First Union Professorship in Financial Risk Management at Virginia Tech. Prior to his academic career, he worked for a large southeastern bank, now part of Regions Bank. He has been a visiting scholar at universities in Hong Kong, Australia, Korea, Singapore, Scotland, and in the U. S. Professor Chance has had numerous articles published in academic and practitioner journals and has authored three books: An Introduction to Derivatives and Risk Management, 10th ed. co-authored with Robert Brooks, Essays in Derivatives: Risk Transfer Tools and Topics Made Easy (2nd ed.), and Analysis of Derivatives for the CFA Program. His current research is on foreign exchange risk management, dividend rights as executive compensation, the performance of random securities analysts, the measurement of alphas from option strategies, corporate boasting, and companies that move from the NYSE to Nasdaq. He has extensive experience conducting professional training programs, and his consulting practice (Omega Risk Advisors, LLC) serves companies, organizations, and law firms. He is also involved in the development and authorship of the derivatives and risk management curriculum in the CFA program. In 2015 he received the C. Stewart Shepard Award for his many years of service to the CFA Institute in the development of its educational programs. In his spare time he plays guitar, sings, composes music, performs as a solo guitar & vocal act. He has traveled to approximately 50 countries, and in March, 2016 he completed a 26-mile hike on the Inca Trail to Machu Picchu. He is also a survivor of three different cancers.



Previous and Visiting Positions:

Fall, 2015 Visiting scholar, Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Fall, 2014 Visiting scholar, University of Macquarie, Sydney, Australia

Fall, 2014 Visiting scholar, National University of Singapore

Fall, 2013 Visiting scholar, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia

Fall, 2006 Visiting scholar, Korea Advanced Institute for Science and Engineering, Seoul, Republic of Korea

Spring, 2002 Visiting scholar, University of Missouri at Kansas City

Spring, 1999 Visiting scholar, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow Scotland

Fall, 1994 Visiting scholar, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

1996-2003 First Union Professor of Financial Risk Management, Virginia Tech

1989-1996 Professor of Finance, Virginia Tech

1983-1989 Associate Professor of Finance, Virginia Tech

1980-1983 Assistant Professor of Finance, Virginia Tech



Google Scholar citations page link

SSRN (Social Sciences Research Network) page link

My Vita and Information about me:

The following links take you to various parts of my web-based vita, which is a summary of my work. Email me for a detailed vita.

Research Material:

Link to this site for various research-related items (collections of links, journals, bibliographies, reading lists, etc.)

Instructional Material:

Link to this site for a collection of short technical notes on derivatives, class-related material, and other pedagogical odds and ends. Lots of good free stuff. People seem to really like this material.

Miscellaneous Professional Material

Link to this site for an assortment of professional items, mostly related to derivatives, finance, and academics.

Personal Stuff

Just some stuff I compiled revealing my other side(s):

My Favorite Charities (and why)

The Salvation Army (Katrina convinced me, when the SA beat out that bloated ARC)

Catholic Relief Services (as you can see, I'm big on supporting disaster relief)

Catholic Charities (they help the poor so much better than wasteful government programs)

American Cancer Society (as a three-time cancer survivor, this is near to my heart)

Wounded Warrior Project (does this really need an explanation?)



- And for those of you who can't get back to the other key places on our site: