Politics: Nine facts Democrats don't want you to hear before you vote tomorrow

Image Credit:

Published by: on Monday November 3rd, 2014

So tell everyone!

As we all get ready to head to the polls tomorrow, Democrats want you focused on the Koch brothers (that evil fang-toothed fictionalized version, not the real ones who are excellent and highly successful businessmen) and their “war on women” crapola.

What they do not want you focused on is the data that shows what failures they have been leading this nation. Many people do not even know the facts I’m about to share, because the mainstream media do not report them. So read them and share them with nine friends who are going to vote tomorrow. It just might help decide whether Harry Reid remains in control of the Senate or is sent to the back bench where he belongs. (Actually that’s not where he belongs, but I’ll not get into that now.)

Nine facts Democrats do not want to talk about:

1. Sluggish economic growth. Yes, we’ve had a couple of strong quarters, but annualized growth throughout the Obama presidency has been less than 2 percent. That is horrendous.



2. Medium income is down $3,000 per household since Obama took office. Astonishing.



3. The labor participation rate is down from 67 percent to 62 percent, which makes the published unemployment rate look much better than it really is. The U6 rate, which includes those who have given up looking for work, remains over 10 percent.



4. More part-time jobs have been created than full-time jobs in last six years.



5. The home ownership rate is down from 67 percent to 64 percent.



6. Taxes went up when the Bush tax cuts were allowed to expire. Liberals will say that’s fine because they only went up on the rich. I say the government did what it too often does and chose to target producers and opportunity creators.

7. ObamaCare is a failure! More people are losing their insurance than are becoming newly insured, and 51 percent of those enrolled in the exchanges say they will not re-up given the opportunity the next time around. Then there are the 29ers (people being limited to 29 hours a week because of ObamaCare mandates) and the 49ers (not the San Francisco ones . . . the businesses intentionally staying under 50 employees to avoid the coverage mandate). There are also thousands of doctors refusing patients with ObamaCare coverage because they can’t cover their costs on the reimbursements, while thousands more doctors are retiring early.

8. The national debt has exceeded $17 trillion for the first time in U.S. history. Remember when Obama declared as a senator that running up debt was unpatriotic? Um. Yeah.

9. From the Middle East to Eastern Europe to Russia to Britain to the Falkland Islands to Latin America to Mexico to the Far East, our foreign policy is a muddled mess. Shockingly to Obama the rest of the world did not conform to his global ideals just because he gave speeches saying they should.

These are facts. Tell everyone!