Campaign Legal Center
Lawrence M. Noble

Senior Director & General Counsel



Lawrence M. Noble is Senior Director & General Counsel of CLC. He is also an on-air CNN Contributor. Prior to joining the Campaign Legal Center, he served as President and CEO of Americans for Campaign Reform (ACR), practiced political law at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, was Executive Director and General Counsel of the Center for Responsive Politics, and served as the General Counsel of the Federal Election Commission for 13 years. He also taught Campaign Finance Law as an Adjunct Professor at George Washington University for over 15 years.

Larry has argued before the Supreme Court of the United States, testified before Congress and state legislatures, served as an official observer and political law consultant with respect to foreign elections, been a member of the Editorial Advisory Committee for the Transparency International Global Corruption Report and has spoken before a wide variety of national and international business, press and civic groups. He also serves as an adviser to the American Law Institute’s Principles of Government Ethics project and served on the Committee on Judicial Review of the Administrative Conference of the United States. Larry co-authored the Corporate Political Activities Deskbook (2012) and has authored and co-authored a number of articles on the regulation of political activity, as well as opinion pieces for such publications as the New York Times and Los Angeles Times. He is frequently interviewed by the press on campaign issues and has appeared on a variety of television and radio news and public affairs programs, including network nightly news programs, ABC’s Nightline, PBS’ The News Hour, CNN, MSNBC, Fox News Channel, National Public Radio, C-SPAN’s Washington Journal and Comedy Central’s The Daily Show.

From 1997 to 1998, Larry was President of the Council on Governmental Ethics Laws (COGEL), an international organization of government agencies that implement and enforce campaign finance, ethics and lobby laws. In December 2000, he received the COGEL Award for his outstanding contribution to the field of campaign finance and ethics.