Editorial: 29 results from Ohio's General Election show every vote matters
Every vote matters.

We hear it so often, there's a risk of the concept becoming cliché.

Yet we were reminded again Wednesday that, yes, in numerous instances last year, every vote mattered.

The Ohio Secretary of State Office announced that 29 local elections were decided by a single vote (with several finishing as ties settled by coin flip) during the 2017 General Election held Nov. 7. Of those, 25 determined the winner in candidate races; four other outcomes decided local issues.

One single-vote result occurred in Stark County: Lexington Township residents rejected a five-year, 0.75-mill current expenses levy (Issue 36), with the final, official tally at 586-585.

Candidate races for Marlboro Township trustee (five votes) and Meyers Lake Village Council (four votes) also fell within a margin that showed how easily results could have turned out differently.

"When we say, 'One vote matters,' it's not just a saying. It has proven true 141 times in Ohio over the last five years," Secretary of State Jon Husted said in his office's news release Wednesday. "Last November's election was another reminder why eligible voters need to be active participants in the democratic process."

Husted's data for November 2017's results come exactly a week before the Supreme Court will hear a case to decide whether Ohio purges its voter rolls legally.

As the Associated Press reported in a story published in Tuesday's edition of The Canton Repository, Ohio has used voters' inactivity to trigger removal from rolls since 1994. Groups representing voters in the lawsuit sued Husted's office in 2016.

Under Ohio rules, registered voters who fail to cast a ballot in a two-year period are targeted for eventual removal from registration rolls, even if they haven't moved and remain eligible. The state says it removes names only after local election boards send notices and there's no subsequent voting activity for the next four years.

Husted's office says this helps ensure election security. When every vote matters, then the state should be certain every vote is legitimate, their argument goes.

Opponents contend Ohio's practice illegally suppresses voting. When every vote matters, then every eligible voter should be accounted for in state records, their argument goes.

A decision is expected in June.

In the meantime, Ohio voters will go to the polls in May to decide primary candidates for statewide races, including governor, along with state and federal lawmakers. Local and school issues typically appear on primary ballots, too.

We'll say it: With races and issues of such importance, every vote will matter.