Fla. Senate budget chief questions no-bid contract - cape-coral-daily-breeze.com
TALLAHASSEE (AP) - The Florida Senate's budget chief wants Gov. Charlie Crist to halt plans for the no-bid extension of a multimillion-dollar human services contract for five years.

Ways and Means Committee Chairman JD Alexander wrote Crist a letter Tuesday, urging that he direct the Department of Management Services to competitively bid the contract for such services as hiring, benefits and payroll.

Known as People First, the privatized personnel system launched by former Gov. Jeb Bush has been plagued by cost overruns and delays since it was outsourced to Cincinnati-based Convergys Corp. in 2002.

"The current contract with Convergys is $44 million per year - assuming even the most experienced state negotiators - there should be no question as to whether a contract this large should be vetted through a competitive process," wrote Alexander, R-Lake Wales.

Crist spokesman Sterling Ivey said the governor's office was reviewing Alexander's request.

"Even if Convergys offers to reduce their price, without a competitive process Florida loses the opportunity to review other companies offering their best solutions, with new technology at their best prices," Alexander wrote.

He added that such contracting practices by Crist's agencies prompted lawmakers to pass a bill (SB 2694) that Crist vetoed last week.

The bill would have given the Legislature approval authority over certain contracts. It could have prevented many of the initial problems with People First if on the books then, Alexander wrote.

In his veto message Crist wrote that the bill would have hindered state agencies' ability to implement policy and injected uncertainty into the contracting process by delaying contracts until the Legislature could act on them. That could have unintentionally increased costs to the state, Crist added.

Bush initiated the effort to outsource human services in the belief private enterprise could handle those functions better than state employees could and at a lower cost, too.

Alexander wrote that the "contract, to date, has been renegotiated and amended 10 times resulting in fewer performance standards and less functionality than the original contract."