State Department punctures Scott's Syrian refugee claim
TALLAHASSEE - Ever since last Friday's terror attacks in Paris, Gov. Rick Scott has been a mainstay on national news outlets criticizing President Obama’s plan to relocate 10,000 Syrian refugees to the United States.

“They want to put 425 in Florida,” Scott told Fox News’ Stuart Varney on Tuesday, adding “get the facts before you continue to proceed.”

But Scott didn’t get all the facts himself.

Despite his repeated suggestions, that 425 number didn’t come from Obama’s administration at all. It’s an estimate culled from 25 “resettlement agencies” located in Florida.

And the 425 figure isn’t tied solely to Syrian refugees. It represents the capacity Florida has to accept additional refugees from anywhere in the world, according to the Florida Department of Children and Families, one of Scott’s own agencies.

In addition, federal officials say they have not discussed a specific number of Syrian refugees that could come to Florida.

“We have not asked Florida to take 425 refugees,” a State Department official told POLITICO Florida. “No specific number of Syrian refugees has been discussed with the governor of Florida.”

But you wouldn’t know that from Scott’s TV appearances this week.

“Stop. Slow down. Think about this,” Scott told Fox News’ Varney. “Get the facts before you continue to proceed. Don’t go forward with adding 10,000 more Syrian refugees in our country. They want to put 425 in Florida.”

In another interview Wednesday with Fox & Friends, Scott was asked "how many [refugees] are you going to get?"

“Right now, they say we are going to get 425,” he reiterated.

Jackie Schutz, Scott’s communication director, stressed in a letter to House Speaker Paul Ryan and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell that the state has been asked to relocate “425 possible Syrian refugees to Florida.” She said the word “possible” is important because there is a lot of uncertainty surrounding the situation.

“We just don’t know. The federal government does not tell us before putting people in our state,” she told POLITICO Florida on Wednesday.

Scott, however, has tethered the 425 figure directly to Syrian refugees.

“We have a variety of organizations that have said they want to bring 425 Syrian refugees into our state,” he told state reporters Monday night. “That’s concerning when we don’t have enough information.”

Because of Obama’s promise to bring 10,000 Syrian refugees to the United States, the overall cap on refugees allowed into the country next year was increased from 75,000 to 85,000. As a result, state organizations that house refugees from all over the world estimated they could handle an additional 425.

Scott is among 32 governors, all but one of whom are Republican, who oppose Syrian refugees coming to their states. Public backlash has flared up since the Paris attacks because one of the terrorists reportedly entered France with a group of Syrian refugees. The governors are concerned terrorists could pose as Syrian refugees to gain access to the United States.

Scott and the other governors participated in a conference call with the White House on Tuesday. He said his concerns were not addressed.

“They [the White House] are not going to pause," Scott told Fox & Friends on Wednesday. "They could not explain to me how the U.S. vetting process is any better than the French vetting process even though we know one of the French terrorists posed as a Syrian refugee.”