How low will de Blasio go on stop-and-frisk?
As a candidate for mayor, Bill de Blasio criticized the NYPD's broad use of stop-and-frisk and promised to reform the practice.

His new police commissioner Bill Bratton said this week that the stop-and-frisk problem has already largely been solved.

De Blasio elaborated at a press conference yesterday, saying, "We are solving this problem as we speak, because the numbers were going down before and we're going to continue to bring them down."

The numbers were in fact "going down before," dramatically, over the last year and a half of the Bloomberg administration.

Below is a chart showing the changes in stop-and-frisk from 2006 to 2013, by quarter. Notice the significant decline throughout 2012 and 2013.

The number of stops in the fourth quarter of 2013 was down 86 percent from the previous year's fourth quarter, and down 93 percent from two years ago.

[Source: NYPD Reports as posted on NYCLU website. Fourth quarter 2014 as reported in Capital.]

What is remarkable about this decrease is how effectively it was masked by the rhetoric of the previous administration.

Michael Bloomberg and Ray Kelly bridled at the election-season assault on their policing policy, and refused to budge rhetorically from the position that stop-and-frisk as they had been practicing it was necessary and saved lives.

Bloomberg attacked the Democratic mayoral candidates for criticizing the policy, and attacked federal judge Shira Scheindlin's ruling that their policy is unconstitutional, saying her decision ignored the realities of how vital the tactic was in decreasing crime.

And yet even as he was digging in publicly, his police department was decreasing the practice significantly.

So this is the police department that Bill de Blasio is inheriting--one with fewer than 200,000 stops in 2013, compared with over 600,000 stops in 2011.

The question now is how much lower de Blasio and Bratton plan to go on stop-and-frisk.

If you use Bloomberg's fourth-quarter number as the new baseline--according to the NYPD press office, the precise number of stops was 12,497--then you will have fewer than 50,000 stops in 2014. De Blasio's statement yesterday indicates that he plans to go even lower.

Brendan Cheney is a former senior policy analyst for Christine Quinn and a former budget and policy analyst for the New York City Independent Budget Office.