Grayson's own campaign corrects him on claim that Times is 'full of shit'
Rep. Alan Grayson accused The New York Times of being “full of shit," in response to questions about the paper's coverage of his hedge fund, which has drawn the scrutiny of congressional ethics investigators.

But in the end, it was Grayson — not the paper — who was in error, and his Senate campaign subsequently corrected the candidate by saying he spoke “incorrectly” about his version of events during his interview with CBS4 Miami.

At issue: The New York Times in February reported that Grayson’s campaign finance director, David Keith, told the paper that he was paid roughly $1,000 a month by the hedge fund, in part to help search for new investors.

“That’s not true, he never spoke to the New York Times,” Grayson told Jim Defede, the host of the Sunday morning show “Facing South Florida.”

“You’re saying he never spoke to the New York Times?” DeFede asked.

"That’s correct,” Grayson said. “The New York Times is full of shit, Jim."

But Grayson’s campaign quickly walked back that claim in a statement to DeFede.

“Rep. Grayson recalled the details of his conversation with David Keith incorrectly,” read the statement, which DeFede read on the air. “Mr. Keith told Rep. Grayson that he had never told the New York Times that Mr. Keith had solicited investors for the investment partnership, not that Mr. Keith had never spoke to the Times at all. In fact, Mr. Keith never did solicit any investors for the partnership.”

Grayson, a pugnacious presence in the House, has had several run-ins with reporters and fellow politicians of both parties in the course of his campaign for the Senate seat.

The Times, meanwhile, stood by its story and its Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter, Eric Lipton, who reported on the hedge-fund documents, which touted Grayson's foreign travel and said the fund aims to “capitalize on markets in turmoil due to economic, political or natural disasters.”

Grayson has claimed the brochure reported by the Times did not come from his hedge fund. The Times disputed his characterization in a written statement: “The NYT is confident that the documents featured in its story were produced by the Grayson Hedge Fund in 2013, as the story asserted.”

As POLITICO reported last year, Grayson’s hedge fund ran afoul of congressional conflict-of-interest rules that generally prohibit members of congress from naming a financial investment company after themselves. The congressman said he broke no rules, but has changed the name of his hedge fund. But Grayson was hit with an ethics complaint, leading the Office of Congressional Ethics to find evidence that he might have committed multiple violations.

On Sunday evening, Lipton, the Times reporter, took to Twitter to dispute the congressman's claim.

“Surprised Grayson has apparently not read OCE Ethics report targeting him. IT DOES include 2013 marketing doc he now claims is a fake,” Lipton wrote.

In response to the OCE report, Grayson’s attorney issued a lengthy rebuttal. But it never mentioned his new claim that the document featured in the Times story was not produced by his hedge fund.

On Saturday, Grayson first denied the authenticity of the brochure in an interview with MSNBC host Joy Reid, whom he accused of “smearing” and spreading “lies” about him. Grayson said she was acting like Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (no relation to the host), who has publicly questioned Grayson’s ethics and backed Grayson’s Democratic rival, Rep. Patrick Murphy.

Grayson on Sunday called Murphy “a crook” and continued to assert the document was not produced his fund.

“I never saw that before the New York Times wrote about it,” Grayson told DeFede on Sunday. “That’s my picture but so what? We didn’t create that information. We weren’t marketing the fund.”

At one point in the interview, DeFede told Grayson, “you’re blowing my mind a little bit on the New York Times thing."

And Grayson continued to slam the newspaper.

"I am appalled, appalled at the smear that they’ve conducted against me,” Grayson said.