Legislative Session: 82(R)





Current state law allows an abortion to be performed with the informed consent of the woman on whom the abortion is to be performed and sets out the conditions that constitute such consent. House Bill 15 amends the Health and Safety Code to include among the conditions constituting such consent that a sonogram is performed on the pregnant woman at least 24 hours before the abortion, or two hours before if the woman lives 100 miles or more from the nearest abortion provider that meets certain requirements; that the woman is informed of agencies that offer sonogram services at no cost to the woman; that certain results and explanations of the sonogram are made available to the woman; that the woman completes and certifies an abortion and sonogram election form; that the physician who is to perform the abortion receives a copy of the signed certification before the abortion is performed; and that the woman is provided with the name of each person who provides or explains required information. The woman may choose not to view certain printed materials or sonogram images, not to hear the heart auscultation, and, under certain conditions, not to receive the verbal explanation of the results of the sonogram images. A copy of the certified abortion and sonogram election form must be placed in the woman's medical records before an abortion begins and be retained for a specified period.

House Bill 15 authorizes a physician to perform an abortion without obtaining informed consent in a medical emergency. The physician must include in the patient's medical records a statement signed by the physician certifying the nature of the medical emergency and must certify to the Department of State Health Services the specific medical condition that constituted the emergency.

The bill adds provisions relating to informational materials to be provided to a woman seeking an abortion. Certain informational materials must include a comprehensive list of agencies and organizations that offer sonogram services at no cost to a pregnant woman. The physician or an agent of the physician is required to direct the woman to a Department of State Health Services Internet website containing such information and to provide the woman with a publication developed by the attorney general that provides information about paternity establishment and child support if the woman chooses not to have an abortion after being provided with a sonogram and information relating to informed consent. Other provisions specify how certain information that must be provided to meet the conditions of informed consent may be provided to the woman.

House Bill 15 prohibits a facility, during a visit made to the facility to fulfill the requirements of informed consent, from making any financial agreement for an abortion or abortion-related service other than payment for a service to fulfill those requirements. The amount charged for such a service may not exceed a reimbursement rate established by the Health and Human Services Commission for statewide medical reimbursement programs. The Department of State Health Services is required to inspect an abortion facility at random, unannounced, and reasonable times to ensure compliance with the provisions relating to informed consent to abortion.