Home
Ministry safety and security must be a decision of leadership.





It should be based in faith and managed in action. We should embrace biblical teachings to “not worry about your life, what you will eat or drink, or about your body, what you will wear…”[i] But being confident in our faith doesn’t mean we stop participation in our own preservation and social interaction.







We shouldn't worry. Worry is a mild case of Atheism.







So, we trust God for provision, but we don’t sit up in bed in the morning and raise our hands for clothes to float down on us out of heaven.



We don’t stroll leisurely through the day with a heavenly mist occasionally sprayed into our mouths to keep us hydrated.







No tasty morsels of manna appear magically in our mouths satisfying our hunger.







We all understand that the procurement & management of those needs is an intentional process of action on our part.



Providing for safety and security of congregations, staff and volunteers is like that.



Yet very few faith-based organizations are intentional about it. This is especially true of churches. Many still say, “God will provide”. He does, but He expects a little participation. The people in our care and the amenities they have funded with their contributions are worthy of intentional care.



This website is maintained as an information resource – to be visited often for new ideas and current data as ministries respond to the wake up call, increase awareness and improve response actions.



Teddy Roosevelt said, “Do what you can, with what you have, where you are”. While speaking to reluctant troops preparing for the battle for San Juan Hill, the inspiration is consistent with the message of this website. Keep it simple -- but get started.



“We prayed to our God and posted a guard…” Nehemiah 4:9



Copyright Notice: If you can use any material on this website to make churches or ministries safer, please do so. Please pass on the information as freely as it is given.



Disclaimer Notice on incident stories and statistics: Extensive effort has been made to verify the accuracy in each story. Information is gathered from major news syndicates, law enforcement press releases, personal witnesses and public court records. While great care is taken with the wording of each incident, a certain margin of error exists in any collection of statistics. I welcome any corrective suggestions discovered by readers.



I welcome you to write.



Thank you,

Carl Chinn

cdchinn@msn.com



Matthew 6:25 (NIV)