Casino City's Indian Gaming Industry Report by Alan Meister PhD
For further information on Dr. Meister, please see the Nathan Associates website.

Dr. Meister has also conducted years of independent, scholarly research on the gaming industry and authored a number of publications, most notably his annual study, the Indian Gaming Industry Report, which has been cited by the United States Supreme Court. He has presented his work at various academic, professional, and industry conferences. Furthermore, his consulting and scholarly work have been used in matters before the Bureau of Indian Affairs, United States Supreme Court, and World Trade Organization. Dr. Meister leads the Gaming Industry and Indian Gaming consulting practices at Nathan Associates, as well as its Native American Advisory Services.

The report is authored by Dr. Alan Meister, an economist with Nathan Associates Inc. Dr. Meister is an economist specializing in the application of economic analysis to public policy, litigation, regulatory, and business planning and operations matters. He has extensive experience analyzing economic issues related to the gaming industry, including Indian gaming, commercial casinos, racinos, card rooms, and online gaming. His consulting work has included industry and market analyses, economic and fiscal impact studies, public policy analysis, feasibility analysis, evaluations of regulations, analyses of land-in-trust gaming applications, economic assessments of tribal-state gaming compacts and revenue sharing, tribal socioeconomic needs assessments, surveys, damage analysis, and economic research, analysis, and expert testimony in litigation and regulatory matters. His clients have included gaming facility operators, industry suppliers, investors, gaming associations, Native American tribes, and other governments.

*Purchasing an "Organization-Wide" license allows you to register up to five (5) users for your online subscription. **An Indian Gaming Report CD may be substituted for the online subscription.

Covers the Indian Gaming Segment of the U.S. Gaming Industry with the Latest Nationwide and State Facts & Figures:

Size of the segment: number of gaming tribes, gaming facilities, gaming machines, and table games; gaming and non-gaming revenue

Performance metrics: growth; measures of concentration; contributions of states to nationwide performance

Historical and trend analyses

State-by-state market summaries

Comparisons of Class II to Class III gaming

Comparisons to other segments of the gaming industry: commercial casinos, racinos, and card rooms

Contribution of Indian gaming to the U.S. economy: sales, jobs, wages, taxes, and revenue sharing payments to non-tribal governments

Future outlook for Indian gaming, including potential growth and challenges

Indian Gaming Industry Report

The Indian Gaming Industry Report provides current, unique, cutting-edge research on Indian gaming appropriate for Native American tribes, gaming companies, casino vendors, investors, regulators, federal/state/local governments, gaming analysts, industry consultants, attorneys, lobbyists, public and government affairs consultants, academics, and any individuals interested in the state of Indian gaming. The report is succinct yet thorough in its analysis and information on the state of Indian gaming today.

The Report provides nationwide and state statistics (the latter not available anywhere else) for calendar year 2015, the most current data available. Market summaries and performance metrics are provided by state. Summaries include year-over-year comparisons for gaming and non-gaming related revenue. The Report includes a directory of the 494 Indian gaming facilities that operated in the United States in 2015 along with a cross-reference listing of 242 gaming tribes and the facilities they own.

The Report also includes comparisons across states and classes of gaming, state-by-state historical perspective and trends, an examination of the reasons for Indian gaming performance, comparisons to other gaming segments, an economic impact analysis measuring Indian gaming's contribution to the U.S. economy, and a qualitative future outlook.

Online Subscription

The Indian Gaming Industry Report Online Subscription contains:

View historical Indian gaming revenue data back to calendar year 2001 by state, along with revenue growth, non-gaming revenue, number of tribes, number of Indian gaming facilities, number of gaming machines and table games at Indian gaming facilities, and revenue sharing payments made by tribes

Indian gaming market analyzer tool

Continuously updated Indian gaming tribe and property data

Online access to the Report in easy-to-use Flipping Book format

> Take a FREE TRIAL Today!



Customer Testimonials

“I have always had deep appreciation for Alan’s Indian Gaming Study. It provides me as a Tribal leader the kind of information that helps me understand the current conditions of the Indian gaming industry, including trends and how our gaming operation is fairing relative to what is going on across Indian Country.”

- W. Ron Allen

Tribal Chairman/CEO, Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe

"Dr. Meister's annual Indian Gaming Report is a well-presented, well-researched report that offers deep insights into the Indian gaming industry. As a gaming law practitioner, I find it to be an incredibly useful tool."

- George Skibine

Counsel, Dentons US LLP; former Deputy Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs and former Acting Chairman of the National Indian Gaming Commission

"The Indian Gaming Industry Report is a great tool for those of us who work in Indian Gaming and Indian Country. Dr. Alan Meister is one of the most intelligent and thorough professionals I have encountered in my multi decade career in Indian Gaming. The report is used by all business disciplines in the gaming business including finance, sales, business development, compliance, and strategic planning. I keep the report close at hand and I refer to it often."

-Knute Knudson

Vice President of Native American Development

IGT

"Casino City's Indian Gaming Industry Report is a seminal work because of its credibility. Dr. Meister's high-quality research and technical analysis have had a significant impact on the industry."

- Joseph Valandra

Chief of Staff

National Indian Gaming Commission (2005-2007)

"Dr. Alan Meister's Indian Gaming Industry Report remains an important tool for people that advise tribal government leaders and those that do business with Indian tribes. His objective, accurate, and concise economic analyses of Indian gaming greatly influence regulators, government officials, managers, and financiers and his report remains one of the few reliable sources of data and more importantly, of meaningful analysis."

- D. Michael McBride III

Partner and Chair of Indian Law & Gaming Practice Group

Crowe & Dunlevy, P.C.

"Casino City's Indian Gaming Industry Report is an indispensable tool for those of us who represent Indian Tribes that have gaming operations. It is the best source I know of for detailed information on the Indian gaming industry. Dr. Meister is to be congratulated for providing this truly excellent report."

-Jerry Straus

Partner

Hobbs, Straus, Dean & Walker LLP

"Casino City's Indian Gaming Industry Report provides key information that is unavailable elsewhere. As misinformation pervades the public discourse on Indian gaming, Dr. Meister's objective economic analysis is a ‘must have’ resource for lawyers, policymakers, and others working in the field."

- Kathryn R.L. Rand, Associate Professor of Law, and

Steven Andrew Light, Dean and Professor of Political Science and Public Administration

University of North Dakota

Co-Directors, Institute for the Study of Tribal Gaming Law and Policy

Co-authors, Indian Gaming and Tribal Sovereignty: The Casino Compromise; and Indian Gaming Law and Policy

"Casino City's Indian Gaming Industry Report provides a bevy of important insights that should be contemplated by government officials as they attempt to formulate 'informed' gambling policy. Dr. Meister should be applauded for this superlative research effort and its contribution to the literature of gaming studies."

- Jeff Dense

Professor

Eastern Oregon University

“Dr. Meister’s report is our go-to source for detailed state-by-state information on Indian gaming. The depth of information provided is a time saver for our team when raising capital for and providing financial advisory services to Native American tribes. Also, we are always needing details for presentations we give and the Indian Gaming Industry Report is the first place we look.”

- Kristi Jackson

Vice Chair and CEO

Tribal Financial Advisors

“Dr. Meister has done it again. His latest Indian Gaming Industry Report zeroes in on the economic and sociopolitical reality of Indian gaming today. Dr. Meister's book should be on the shelf of every Indian gaming analyst and advisor in the country.”

- Gabriel S. Galanda

Managing Partner

Galanda Broadman, PLLC, An Indian Country Law Firm