Castle Coalition
Americans Overwhelmingly Oppose Use of Eminent Domain for Private Gain

Tax-hungry bureaucrats and land-hungry developers generally support eminent domain for private commercial development. That’s no surprise. After all, when cities can take any apartment building and replace it with luxury condominiums, or condemn any corner store and replace it with a Wal-Mart, using eminent domain is much easier than buying property from willing owners.

Ask pretty much anyone else, though, and there’s clear consensus. Americans across the nation from all walks of life-regardless of their religious or ethnic background, political affiliation or geographic location-say the use of eminent domain for private gain is wrong. There is near universal agreement that taking private property should not be taken just so someone else can make more money-regardless.

The following polls all reflect this sentiment. Since the Kelo v. City of New London decision, polls all across the country have reflected the fact that Americans find the landmark-and now infamous-Supreme Court decision just plain wrong:

Associated Press-National Constitution Center Poll

In an August 2008 poll with questions about various constitutional issues, 87% of respondents said government shouldn't have the power of eminent domain for redevelopment and 60% said they were opposed to the use of eminent domain for redevelopment even with fair market price for the property seized. 75% of those surveyed opposed government taking private property and handing it over to a developer, and 88% of respondents said property rights are just as important as freedom of speech and religion

Results

Eminent Domain Reform Polling in Ohio

Among 1,122 Ohio voters polled by the Quinnipiac Polling Institute, 78% favored setting limits on government use of eminent domain and 82% opposed using eminent domain to take property for economic development.

Results

Eminent Domain Reform Polling in Yolo County California

79% of Yolo County, Calif., citizens polled say they "strongly disagree" with the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in Kelo v. City of New London.

Results

Eminent Domain Reform Polling in Minnesota

91% of Minnesotans surveyed oppose eminent domain for private development.

Source: Minnesota Automobile Dealers Association, February 2006

Americans for Prosperity

Among 400 registered Kansas voters, 92% say they oppose the increased use of eminent domain for private interests, according to a poll conducted by Cole Hargraves and Associates and commissioned by Americans for Prosperity.

Source: Americans for Prosperity, Public Opinion Poll on Eminent Domain, February 2006.

HamptonRoads.com | March 2006

93% of respondents oppose the government's ability to seize homes for private economic development that will produce jobs and tax revenue.

Source: "Should local governments be able to seize homes for private economic development that will produce jobs and tax revenue?" HamptonRoads.com, March 2006.

CBS News (Denver, Colorado) | February 2006

95% of Colorado citizens oppose eminent domain for retail development

(Source: “Poll: Should local governments exercise eminent domain for retail development?” CBS News Denver, Feb. 24, 2006.)

Results

St. Louis Business Journal | January 2006

86% of Missouri voters overwhelmingly favor more restrictions on eminent domain.

Source: “Survey question: Should the use of eminent domain be more restricted?” St. Louis Business Journal, Jan. 9, 2005.

Mason-Dixon Polling & Research, Inc. | October 2005

In a poll of 625 registered Florida voters, 89 percent said they supported having the state legislature adopt "increased protections for property owners." The opposition to the Kelo decision was nearly uniform across party lines, with 74 percent of Democrats, 75 percent of Republicans and 72 percent of independent voters disagreeing with the ruling.

Source: "Florida voters favor eminent domain restrictions," Jacksonville Business Journal, November 8, 2005.

Monmouth University/Gannett NJ Poll | October 5, 2005

90% of New Jerseyans say it’s not ok to take low value homes to build a shopping center, and 86% believe it’s wrong to take low value homes for higher value homes. 76% feel private developers benefit more than the local community when eminent domain is used.

Official Poll Results

American Survey | July 14-17, 2005

An American Survey of 800 registered voters nationwide shows 68% favoring legislative limits on the government's ability to take private property away from owners, with 62% of Democrats, 74% of independents and 70% of Republicans supporting such limits.

Source: Gary J. Andres, "The Kelo backlash," The Washington Times, August 29, 2005.

Retail Traffic | August 2005

Poll of readers shows an overwhelming majority oppose the Supreme Court ruling that states can employ eminent domain for private developments.

(Source: David Bodamer, "Eminently unfair," Retail Traffic, August 2005, at 10.)

Results

Decatur Daily | August 8, 2005

Readers: Eminent domain law isn't strong enough?

A new Alabama law does not adequately protect property owners from government seizures, according to most of the 230 readers who answered a poll at decaturdaily.com.

Wall Street Journal/NBC News Poll

"In the wake of court's eminent domain decision, Americans overall cite 'private-property rights' as the current legal issue they care most about, topping parental notification for minors, abortions or state right-to-die laws."

(John Harwood, "Poll Shows Division on Court Pick," Wall Street Journal, July 15, 2005)

University of New Hampshire Poll

"And while New Hampshire may be divided over many issues concerning the Supreme Court, they are nearly unanimous in their opposition to the effect of the Kelo decision – 93 percent say they oppose the taking of private property for economic development reasons, only 4 percent favor this use of eminent domain, and 3 percent are unsure."

MSNBC poll

Should cities be allowed to seize homes and buildings for private projects as long as they benefit the public good?

Results

CNN poll

Should local governments should be able to seize homes and businesses?

Results

Christian Science Monitor Poll

Should the government be allowed to seize private property and turn it over to developers?

Augusta Chronicle

Do you agree with the Supreme Court's ruling Thursday on eminent domain?

Results

HamptonRoads.com

Should local governments be able to seize homes for private economic development that will produce jobs and tax revenue?

Results

Bradenton.com

Should local governments be allowed to use eminent domain for private economic development?

Results