Protest erupts as Tarleton State University Uses Tax Dollars to Sponsor Blasphemy
March 26, 2010 - 11:45 PDT

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

MEDIA ADVISORY

SPRING GROVE, PA (March 26, 2010) - Thousands of Catholic students and concerned parents are calling for the cancelation of a blasphemous play at Tarleton State University in Texas. The offensive production Corpus Christi portrays Christ and the twelve Apostles as homosexuals. Since its 1998 premier the play by Terrence McNally has provoked controversy, outrage and protest.

New protest is erupting now as Tarleton State University plans to host the play on Saturday morning, March 27, shortly before the beginning of Holy Week, when Catholics honor the Passion of Jesus Christ.

Among those calling for the cancelation of the play is a Catholic group called The American Society for the Defense of Tradition, Family and Property - TFP. Its student members launched an online petition yesterday inviting people to send protest emails to the university. Thousands have already done so at www.tfpstudentaction.org

"No. Blasphemy is not free speech," the petition reads.

"I vehemently oppose the production of the blasphemous play Corpus Christi at Tarleton State University, which includes a Christ-like figure who reportedly has sexual relations with his Apostles," it continues. "The Person of Jesus Christ is sacred and untouchable. To portray Him as a homosexual is an unspeakable blasphemy, which I reject with all my soul."

"With this play Tarleton State University is offending the honor of Our Lord, the Apostles, and 68 million Catholics," said TFP Student Action director John Ritchie. "What makes it even worse is the fact that it's taking place right before Holy Week. When it comes to Our Lord, I don't find any tolerance here," he continued.

"The university receives tax dollars. And it just adds insult to injury when those federal and state tax dollars are used to promote blasphemy. It's unacceptable," he said.

When the play staged in Cincinnati in 2003, Archbishop Daniel E. Pilarczyk stated: "Corpus Christi seems to go out of its way to present Jesus and His story in the crudest and ugliest of ways." He further added, "I believe that this play will offend the sensibilities of most people who reverence the Lord Jesus in any way."

Those who wish to sign the petition may visit:

www.tfpstudentaction.org

Contact

TFP Student Action

http://www.tfpstudentaction.org/

PA, 17362 US

John Ritchie - Director, 717-225-7147 ext 229

Keywords

Corpus,Christi,blasphemy,protest,tarleton,state,university,tfp,student,action,jesus,terrence,mcnally

Category

Catholic Organizations