During shooting, Mateen told cops: "You people are gonna get it"
ORLANDO - Newly released transcripts show Orlando gunman Omar Mateen spoke in Arabic to a 911 dispatcher and told a crisis negotiator that the U.S. needed to stop bombing Iraq and Syria.

The FBI released partial transcripts Monday of four calls between Mateen and law enforcement, as investigators prepared to give additional details about its investigation into the massacre at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, which left 49 victims dead. Mateen also died.

The communications, along with Facebook posts and searches made before and during the shooting, have been slowly adding to the public understanding of the final hours of Mateen's life.

The FBI said Mateen called 911 at 2:35 a.m., a little less than 30 minutes after the first reports of shots being fired inside the nightclub. He had already engaged in a firefight with several of them before the call.

He spoke with an emergency dispatcher, saying "I'm in Orlando and I did the shootings."

During the 50-second call with a dispatcher, Mateen "made murderous statements in a chilling, calm and deliberate manner," Ronald Hopper, FBI assistant special agent in charge in Orlando, said during a news conference.

On that phone call, Mateen also said a Muslim prayer, and pledged his allegiance to the leader of ISIS.

CBS News senior investigative producer Pat Milton reports that a law enforcement source confirms authorities have a video of Mateen practicing with the assault rifle he used in the attack. The video is apparently from a Florida shooting range where he purchased the rifle in early June.

Additionally, on Monday, ISIS released a videotape praising Mateen, reports CBS News' Khaled Wassef. In the videotape, an American-sounding militant calls Mateen "one of the soldiers of the Caliphate," and calls him "one of the few who was truthful to his lord."

Officials have repeatedly shot down any suggestions there was a direct link between ISIS and Mateen, stating that he was a "lone wolf" inspired by their online propaganda.

City officials have refused to provide hundreds of 911 calls made by victims and witnesses during the Orlando shooting to a coalition of news organizations, citing confidentiality under Florida law, and arguing that an ongoing investigation kept the tapes secret.

Hopper said Monday that the tapes would not be released out of respect for the victims.

"Yes, the audio was compelling, but to expose that now would be excruciatingly painful to exploit them in this way," Hopper said.

Hopper also said officials are "not going to propagate violent rhetoric" by giving full transcripts with no redactions.

After the initial 911 call, the FBI said Mateen "engaged in three conversations with (the Orlando Police Department's) Crisis Negotiation Team."

The calls lasted nine minutes, 16 minutes and three minutes respectively.

Mateen told negotiators he was "an Islamic soldier," and that he was demanding America "stop bombing Syria and Iraq," giving that as the reason he was "out here right now."

According to the FBI: "When the crisis negotiator asked the shooter what he had done, the shooter stated, 'No, you already know what I did.'"

Mateen told police he had placed a bomb in a car outside the club.

"You people are gonna get it, and I'm gonna ignite it if they try to do anything stupid," Mateen said.

Later in the call with the crisis negotiator, the shooter stated he had a vest like they "used in France," likely in reference to the suicide bomb vests several of the killers in the Paris attacks possessed.

Mateen also threatened more similar style attacks "in the next few days."

After this, the shooter hung up and did not answer his phone anymore.

At 4:21 a.m., police pulled an A/C unit out of the wall and began evacuating victims.

Eight minutes later, victims began telling police he was planning on putting suicide vests on four victims inside the club.

At 5:02 a.m., the SWAT team breached the bathroom wall at Pulse to free hostages and engage the shooter. Thirteen minutes later, he was reported dead.

The FBI says that during the three hours between the initial gun battle with cops and the final showdown with SWAT, there were no reports of shots fired in the club, and that officials were going in and out rescuing people.