Center For Continuing Study of the California Economy
Stephen Levy is Director and Senior Economist of the Center for Continuing Study of the California Economy (CCSCE) in Palo Alto. CCSCE is a private research organization founded in 1969 to provide an independent assessment of economic and demographic trends in California.

CCSCE works with public agencies and nonprofit institutions that require an explanation and analysis of California growth trends including detailed projections and implications for public policy.

Steve’s main work involves preparing regional job projections for California regional planning agencies. This work includes an understanding of national, state and regional job trends and projections and assessments of regional competitiveness conditions and the implications for public policy. He has prepared growth forecasts for for regional agencies including ABAG, SACOG, SCAG, AMBAG and SBCAG and for the City of San Jose.

Steve’s other areas of expertise include workforce and housing. He serves on two workforce boards and has prepared analyses of retirement and occupational trends and related policy implications. He is currently working with SPUR on the future of the Bay Area. Steve serves on the housing committees of the Palo Alto and Santa Clara County League of Women Voters and is involved with several community housing organizations in addition to his professional work.

His interests also include the conditions for economic competitiveness in California and the impact of immigration on the state economy.

Steve is often asked to speak before public and private groups and has a reputation for being frank, provocative as well as serious and non partisan.

He is a member of the NOVA (Silicon Valley) and California Workforce Boards and the Board of the Bay Area Council Economic Institute (BACEI). He writes a monthly economic update for BACEI.

Stephen Levy has degrees in economics from MIT and Stanford University. Steve lives in Palo Alto with his wife, Nancy.