Wash Your Hands
Handwashing is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your family from getting sick. Learn when and how you should wash your hands to stay healthy.

Wash Your Hands Often to Stay Healthy

You can help yourself and your loved ones stay healthy by washing your hands often, especially during these key times when you are likely to get and spread germs:

Before, during, and after preparing food

and preparing food Before eating food

eating food Before and after caring for someone at home who is sick with vomiting or diarrhea

and caring for someone at home who is sick with vomiting or diarrhea Before and after treating a cut or wound

and treating a cut or wound After using the toilet

using the toilet After changing diapers or cleaning up a child who has used the toilet

changing diapers or cleaning up a child who has used the toilet After blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing

blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing After touching an animal, animal feed, or animal waste

touching an animal, animal feed, or animal waste After handling pet food or pet treats

handling pet food or pet treats After touching garbage.

Follow Five Steps to Wash Your Hands the Right Way

Washing your hands is easy, and it’s one of the most effective ways to prevent the spread of germs. Clean hands can stop germs from spreading from one person to another and throughout an entire community—from your home and workplace to childcare facilities and hospitals.

Follow these five steps every time.

Wet your hands with clean, running water (warm or cold), turn off the tap, and apply soap.

your hands with clean, running water (warm or cold), turn off the tap, and apply soap. Lather your hands by rubbing them together with the soap. Lather the backs of your hands, between your fingers, and under your nails.

your hands by rubbing them together with the soap. Lather the backs of your hands, between your fingers, and under your nails. Scrub your hands for at least 20 seconds. Need a timer? Hum the “Happy Birthday” song from beginning to end twice.

your hands for at least 20 seconds. Need a timer? Hum the “Happy Birthday” song from beginning to end twice. Rinse your hands well under clean, running water.

your hands well under clean, running water. Dry your hands using a clean towel or air dry them.

Why? Read the science behind the recommendations.

Use Hand Sanitizer Only When You Can’t Use Soap and Water

Washing hands with soap and water is the best way to get rid of germs in most situations. If soap and water are not available, you can use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. You can tell if the sanitizer contains at least 60% alcohol by looking at the product label.

You can use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.

Remember these key facts about alcohol-based hand sanitizers.

Sanitizers can quickly reduce the number of germs on hands in some situations.

Sanitizers do not get rid of all types of germs.

get rid of all types of germs. Hand sanitizers may not be as effective when hands are visibly dirty or greasy.

Hand sanitizers might not remove harmful chemicals from hands like pesticides and heavy metals.

Keep hand sanitizer out of the reach of young children and supervise their use. Swallowing alcohol-based hand sanitizers can cause alcohol poisoning if more than a couple mouthfuls are swallowed.

How to Use Hand Sanitizer

Apply the gel product to the palm of one hand (read the label to learn the correct amount).

Rub your hands together.

Rub the gel over all the surfaces of your hands and fingers until your hands are dry. This should take around 20 seconds.

For more information on handwashing, please visit CDC’s Handwashing website. You can also call 1-800-CDC-INFO or contact CDC-INFO for answers to specific questions.