News and Media : Faculty & Research : Faculty Directory : Steve Sanders : Indiana University Maurer School of Law: Bloomington
Faculty Profile

Steve Sanders

Associate Professor of Law

Affiliated Faculty, IU Department of Gender Studies

Affiliated Faculty, Kinsey Institute for Research in Gender, Sex, and Reproduction

Affiliated Faculty, Department of Political Science



In the News

More

Background Magna cum laude graduate of the University of Michigan Law School

Former associate of Mayer Brown LLP, Chicago, practicing in the Supreme Court and appellate litigation group

Previously taught at the University of Chicago Law School and Michigan Law

Biography

Steve Sanders joined the Maurer School of Law faculty in January 2013, teaching in areas of constitutional and public law. His current scholarship focuses on issues affecting same-sex couples and their families at the intersection of constitutional law, conflict of laws, federalism, and family law. He also has interests in higher education law and academic freedom.

Sanders began his career as an administrative staff member at IU Bloomington, serving as Assistant to the Chancellor and Assistant Dean of the College of Arts Sciences. He then earned his J.D. from the University of Michigan, where he was an articles editor on the law review and received the Bates Memorial Scholarship, the law school's highest award to graduating seniors. He clerked for the Hon. Terence T. Evans of the 7th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.

Sanders practiced for four years with the Supreme Court and appellate litigation group at Mayer Brown LLP in Chicago, where he became the firm's most-junior attorney to present a U.S. Supreme Court argument in a paid client matter. He has represented, among other clients, the ACLU, the American Association of University Professors, and groups of university faculty members.

Before coming to Indiana, Sanders taught at the University of Chicago Law School as a lecturer and at Michigan Law as a visiting assistant professor. In addition to his scholarly publications, he has written for The Huffington Post, SCOTUSBlog, the Chronicle of Higher Education, and other print and online media.

Selected Works

Related Links