Get the Whooping Cough Vaccine While You Are Pregnant
Getting the whooping cough vaccine while pregnant is better than getting the vaccine after you give birth

Whooping cough vaccination during pregnancy is ideal so your baby will have short-term protection as soon as he is born. This early protection is important because your baby will not start getting his whooping cough vaccines until he is 2 months old. These first few months of life are when your baby is at greatest risk for catching whooping cough. This is also when he’s at greatest risk for having severe, potentially life-threating complications from the infection. To avoid that gap in protection, it is best to get a whooping cough vaccine during pregnancy. You will then pass protection to your baby before he is born. To continue protecting your baby, he should get whooping cough vaccines starting at 2 months old.

You may never have gotten the Tdap vaccine before and did not get it during this pregnancy. If so, you should make sure to get the vaccine immediately after you give birth, before leaving the hospital or birthing center. It will take about 2 weeks before your body develops protection (antibodies) in response to the vaccine. Once you have protection from the vaccine, you are less likely to give whooping cough to your newborn while caring for him. But remember, your baby will still be at risk for catching whooping cough from others.

A recent study looked to see how effective Tdap was at preventing whooping cough in babies whose mothers got the vaccine while pregnant or in the hospital after giving birth. The study found that getting Tdap between 27 through 36 weeks of pregnancy is 85% more effective at preventing whooping cough in babies younger than 2 months old.

Blood tests cannot tell if you need a whooping cough vaccine

There are no blood tests that can tell you if you have enough antibodies in your body to protect yourself or your baby against whooping cough. Even if you have been sick with whooping cough in the past or previously received the vaccine, you still should get the vaccine during each pregnancy.

Breastfeeding may pass some protective antibodies onto your baby

By breastfeeding, you may pass some antibodies you have made in response to the vaccine to your baby. When you get a whooping cough vaccine during your pregnancy, you will have antibodies in your breast milk that you can share with your baby as soon as your milk comes in. However, your baby will not get protective antibodies immediately if you wait to get the whooping cough vaccine until after delivering your baby. This is because it takes about 2 weeks for your body to create antibodies. Learn more about the health benefits of breastfeeding.

Top of Page