- Msnbc Info
Rich Saal/The State Journal-Register Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton talks with MSNBC Host Chris Matthews during an MSNBC Clinton Town Hall at the Old State Capitol State Historic Site in Springfield, Ill. Monday, March 14, 2016.

TRANSCRIPT: MSNBC Town Hall with Hillary Clinton

MARCH 14, 2016 – Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton participated in an MSNBC town hall moderated by Chris Matthews today from Springfield, Illinois.

Below is the full transcript.

Chris Matthews is the host of MSNBC’s “Hardball.”

MSNBC has hosted previous town halls with Republican and Democratic presidential candidates this campaign season, including Chris Christie, Hillary Clinton, John Kasich, Martin O’Malley, Marco Rubio, Bernie Sanders, and Donald Trump.

# # #

MANDATORY CREDIT: MSNBC

CHRIS MATTHEWS: Welcome to this special town hall. For the next hour -- the full hour -- Hillary Clinton.

CLINTON: Hello, hello. Hi, Mr. Matthews. Hello.

MATTHEWS: Well, thank you, Madame Secretary, and as you know, as an Illinoisan, that this is the room where Abraham Lincoln -- oh, there's Washington -- Abraham Lincoln gave his house divided speech.

CLINTON: That's right.

MATTHEWS: So, that was in 1858. How we doing on that subject today?

CLINTON: Well, we could use that speech again from a lot of leaders, as well as citizens, because there's a disturbing amount of divisive rhetoric in this campaign that is playing on people's fears and really engendering a lot of mean-spiritedness, bigotry that I think is not only bad for politics, it's bad for our nation and we need to stand up against it.

We've had periods in our history, as you know so well, being such a history buff, Chris, where people have strong feelings. I totally accept that. And there's even reason for some people to be frustrated, angry, fearful. But, that's when leaders are supposed to be trying to find common ground, bringing people together, not flaming the discontent and setting up us versus them. And I fear that's part of what we're seeing in this campaign this time.

MATTHEWS: You've called Donald Trump a political arsonist.

CLINTON: Yes.

MATTHEWS: Do you believe that he's responsible for igniting all this fists -- people throwing punches at each other? They're not just yelling at each other --

CLINTON: Right.

MATTHEWS: -- and waving placards. They're fighting out there. Is he responsible?

CLINTON: Well, I do hold him responsible. I think if you go back now several months, he's been building this incitement. He has been leading crowds in jeering protesters. He has been talking about punching people in the face. He's been encouraging the manhandling of both people who are attending, as well as journalists on the floor and in the stands of his events.

So, I think what happened on Friday in Chicago is tragically a natural outgrowth of that kind of incitement. You know, look, all of us in public life -- and you've covered all kinds of people running for office, in office -- we all get protested against. Somebody's always upset about something.

The other day I had a man who's convinced that cell towers are causing cancer in your salivary glands. Maybe someday we'll find out he's right, but at the moment he's unfurling flags and he's yelling and screaming.

We all have to deal with that and you try to deal with it calmly and peacefully, and don't tell people hey, do something to him. Take him out. Beat him up. That's what leadership requires. You're supposed to be calming people down to try to find solutions to problems.

MATTHEWS: Would you encourage a young person or a person of any age now to go out if they did believe that Trump was saying terrible things -- to go out and protest him? Challenge him in public? Would you encourage them to do that?

CLINTON: Well, what I would encourage them to do is to protest peacefully. Protest in the most effective way, which is actually getting people to come out and vote against him. That's how we --

MATTHEWS: How about disrupting?

CLINTON: You know, I think disrupting -- you have to be really careful that it's done in a way that is peaceful, that is respectful, insofar as that's possible. So, yes, people who are inside an event that they know is going to be, unfortunately, filled with folks who are going to be against them, they should be careful about that.

I think walking with signs, engaging in peaceful protests outside of venues probably makes more sense, but the best thing they can do is organize against anybody who incites violence, who is belligerent, who is dividing our country, and vote them down.

MATTHEWS: Let's look at two American politicians on this little screen here now, and everybody will know what's going on -- and how they, in very different ways, address political and racial tenseness (ph).

CLINTON: Right.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

ROBERT F. KENNEDY: What we need in the United States is not division. What we need in the United States is not hatred. What we need in the United States is not violence and lawlessness. But, it's love and wisdom and compassion toward one another, and a feeling of justice toward those who still suffer within our country.

DONALD TRUMP (R), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: But, if you see somebody getting ready to throw a tomato, knock the crap out of them, would you? Seriously, OK? Just knock the hell -- I promise you I will pay for the legal fees. I promise. Do you know what they used to do to guys like that when they were in a place like this? They'd be carried out on a stretcher, folks. I'd like to punch him in the face, I'll tell you.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

MATTHEWS: Bobby Kennedy --

CLINTON: Yes.

MATTHEWS: -- talking to people in a tough neighborhood in Indianapolis the night that Dr. King was killed. He told them -- a white guy had to come and tell them. And Trump -- compare and contrast.

CLINTON: Well, you couldn't have a starker contrast between a leader, a statesman, a visionary. Someone who was willing to take on the sorrow and the burden of the assassination of Dr. King to talk to people who were distraught and just absolutely heartbroken over what had happened.

And you have someone like Trump -- a demagogue, a showman, an inciter who is actually fanning the flames instead of trying to, as we saw in that clip from Bobby Kennedy -- trying to bring down the passion (ph) so that people could work together to find common ground.

MATTHEWS: Yes.

CLINTON: That's what we need today in America.

MATTHEWS: He started this number by saying that President Obama wasn't born in this country.

CLINTON: Right.

MATTHEWS: That he was an illegal immigrant, basically, who snuck in in some weird way of going from Kenya to Honolulu and faking the birth records and everything. Do you think that's one reason why African-Americans, as a group, have really, really turned on him? There's something that I haven't been able to quite figure out, but denying the first American president who was African-American to be legitimate would seem to be grounds for hostility.

CLINTON: Yes.

MATTHEWS: It would to me.

CLINTON: I think it's that plus other feelings. I think, certainly the fact that Trump led the campaign to try to delegitimize President Obama from the very beginning.

MATTHEWS: Right.

CLINTON: He used this phony issue about where he was born. There was definite proof. We knew where he was born. It didn't matter. Trump kept beating that drum and kept trying to, again, incite people to be hostile towards the president, who happened to be the first African-American president. That sent a lot of signals, not just to African-Americans, but to all Americans. Wait a minute. What's going on here?

But I think it's more than that. You know, when you are inciting mob violence, which is what Trump is doing in those clips, there's a lot of memories that people have. You know, they're in the DNA. People remember mob violence that led to lynching. People remember mob violence that led to people being shot, being grabbed, being mistreated.

And it's something that has a deep, almost psychological, resonance to people who've ever been in any position of feeling somewhat fearful, somewhat worried. We've come so far in our country that to be here in this State Capitol in this room where Abraham Lincoln gave that speech about a house divided, and to see that someone who is vying to be President of the United States is using divisiveness is stoking fear, is pointing fingers, scapegoating against all kinds of people, I think, is so dangerous. And, yes, it's wrong, it's offensive, it's also dangerous.

MATTHEWS: When you were a young girl in Illinois, somebody was bullying you in the new neighborhood you moved into.

CLINTON: Yes, that's true.

MATTHEWS: And your mother said go out and deal with this person physically, and you decked the big, bully woman.

CLINTON: Right, yes.

MATTHEWS: You're going to have to deal with that similar situation if you win the nomination. You've got Trump calling you a criminal.

CLINTON: Yes, yes.

MATTHEWS: He's turning his fire on you. Are you --

CLINTON: He can ask where I was born.

MATTHEWS: I think he's -- I don't know, maybe not.

CLINTON: The condo -- Edgewater Hospital.

MATTHEWS: Have you got the -- you have the certificate ready, I hope.

CLINTON: I do. I have my birth certificate ready.

MATTHEWS: We have to flag it.

CLINTON: You know, triplicate, in case anybody wants it.

MATTHEWS: You might get carded.

CLINTON: Yes. That's so nice.

MATTHEWS: It would be nice to be carded. You went to Wellesley.

CLINTON: I did.

MATTHEWS: What would have happened if you'd gone to Trump University?

CLINTON: I would have been out a lot of money, from what I hear, and nothing to show for it.

MATTHEWS: You said something rather odd the other day. You said you're not a natural politician like your husband. Who is, everybody knows, certified natural.

CLINTON: Yes.

MATTHEWS: What is the difference between you and him? Forget President Obama. Bill Clinton -- I've seen him at a million occasions. He won't leave.

CLINTON: Yes.

MATTHEWS: The occasions, though, when you see him, he's working the room. He doesn't want it to end.

CLINTON: Yes.

MATTHEWS: What is that DNA? You talk DNA. What is it in a being that makes him never want to leave the crowds?

CLINTON: You know, for Bill, and obviously I've now known him much more than half my life, he is someone is so curious, almost in a way that I don't know anybody else. He is constantly seeking out people, waiting to hear their stories, trying to make connections something he's heard in one place and something he might hear in another place.

He refused to come off rope lines at the end of big events when he was running for governor or running for president, obviously. And he'd say, I've learned so much. And he would tell me stories and sometimes it would just be a 30- or 60-second interchange, but he could really derive from that something about the person in front of him.

And I learned an enormous amount in those 18 wonderful years that we spent in Arkansas going to all kinds of events, from tiny events to big events, listening to people, learning what was on their minds. You know, when I moved to Fayetteville, Arkansas to teach at the law school -- and really it was because I was trying to figure out whether --

MATTHEWS: How do you say that again? How do you say that again? Fayetteville?

CLINTON: Fayetteville. I tried to figure out whether we were get married or not, because that was the big iffy for me. So, I moved there. I was teaching at the University of Arkansas Law School, and I noticed that one of my students hadn't shown up for a couple of days -- a couple of classes.

So, I call information. We used to have information in those days. I called information and I said I'm looking for John Smith. The operator said to me, you know, he's not home. I said what do you mean? He's not home. He went camping. I mean, it was just such an incredible experience where people's stories, their lives were so intertwined.

And I think Bill is someone who was brought up hearing stories from his family and just lived in that great storytelling tradition. So, I am in great admiration of that. I am somebody who believes strongly in public service, in doing all the good I can for all the people I can --

MATTHEWS: How about this part?

CLINTON: -- for as long as I can.

MATTHEWS: How about this part?

CLINTON: I enjoy it, but I'm not deluding myself. I'm not speaking in poetry. I'm not bringing people to fever pitches of incredible admiration. But every time I've had a job, I do it well and I do it in my own way, and I produce results for people. When I ran for the Senate -- and you know that. You covered that. I ran for the Senate. People are oh, my God, she can't win. I won.

MATTHEWS: You were going to take on Rudy Giuliani.

CLINTON: Well, that's why I was recruited because people didn't think anybody else could beat him. And then six years later I won by an even margin because I did the job. I'm somebody who believes, OK, you have a job to do, you want help people, you want to produce results. And maybe that is more governing in prose than campaigning in poetry, but that's what I want to do as president.

MATTHEWS: Well, we'll come back. It will get tougher. We'll be back, and when we come back let's talk about the race for the Democratic nomination.

CLINTON: Yes.

MATTHEWS: You and Senator Sanders held a race. This is a special Hardball town hall with Hillary Clinton, of course, from the Old State Capitol of Illinois in Springfield.

Welcome back to the Old State Capitol in Springfield, Illinois. Thank you Madame Secretary.

I am amazed, maybe I shouldn't say I'm amazed but I have to say Senator Sanders has pulled some big victories. He won in Iowa, he's won ...

CLINTON: I won in Iowa.

MATTHEWS: I thought you did.

(LAUGHTER)

CLINTON: I hope that stays in the show.

MATTHEWS: That will stay in the show. Why did I think the other -- let's go to ...

CLINTON: It was very close. Very close.

MATTHEWS: You're getting me in a mood here. Let's go to Michigan ...

CLINTON: That's dangerous.

MATTHEWS: Michigan -- all those numbers looked really good for you and I was thinking tomorrow's numbers looked good for you in most cases, majority here, and you've got Missouri, Ohio's OK, Florida looks good -- do you trust the polls anymore?

CLINTON: No. Honestly I don't, Chris, in large measure because I think pollsters are trying to do the best job they can, but it's very difficult to poll now. If you have only online information, that's been proven to be often unreliable, if you try to call landlines you miss everybody with cell phones, if you call cell phones you miss people often because they don't answer -- so no, I think it's very difficult now to predict the outcome of elections. Somehow we're going to have to get better at it because people do rely on the information.

MATTHEWS: Young people, even as old as their early 30s say, "People don't have phones, they don't have landlines -- look at the numbers for you in Michigan though. Here it was, 80 percent of people under 30 voted for Senator Sanders. He also had 57 percent of whites -- I hated doing things by race, but we do. And what do you think happened there?

CLINTON: First let me put it in context, because that night I actually won a hundred thousand more votes than Senator Sanders because of my huge victory in Mississippi, where I did win both white and black voters. On Super Tuesday, other than Vermont, I won a majority of white voters as well as black voters. So I think you can focus on one state and sort of miss the big picture because where we stand today, before the primaries tomorrow, I've gotten far more votes than anybody else running on either side.

I've gotten 5 million votes, 600,000 more than Trump, 1.6 million more than Bernie Sanders. So I feel really good about where I am in this campaign, and of course the number of delegates that I have won is also considerably higher than Senator Sanders. So I have a broad, inclusive coalition which I think puts me in a very good position to be able to get the nomination and to go against Trump or whoever they nominate.

MATTHEWS: Let's talk about the tough part, the trade-sensitive states. Ohio is one, Missouri is always historically against trade, here we are in Illinois, Michigan's tough of course you've seen that -- how do you deal with that? Bernie Sanders is known as an anti-trade guy, he's opposed to all the trade deals, you've been for most of them, you were for PTP initially -- how do you deal with the fact that to a lot of working people trade is the enemy?

CLINTON: I really understand that, and I think that we've had a number of years of experience now about what trade can and can't do in a globalized economy. So last night in Ohio I said, "Look, I want to set the record straight. Yes, I did vote against the biggest multinational trade agreement when I was in the Senate. It was called CAFTA. I voted against it. I've learned some things since the 1990's and I put that to work.

I also said that I hoped I would be able to support PTT, but I actually waited until I knew what was in it and then I stated my opposition to it.

MATTHEWS: But you said it was exciting and innovative, ambitious, groundbreaking, cutting edge, high quality and high standard.

CLINTON: Before it was finished. I think that we could deal with currency manipulation, and a lot of the other problems that our country and our working people have faced. It turned out when it was all said and done, it didn't meet my standards, and that's why just like I voted against CAFTA, I've said I'm against PTP.

But here's what's happening. Before coming here I was in Chicago and I was meeting with a group of workers who were most likely going to lose their jobs at the big Nabisco factory on the South Side of Chicago. Six hundred really good jobs. I met with some of the workers.

What this company is doing is taking those jobs, sending them out of the country, and turning around and basically saying to the workforce, "Too bad, we're done, we're not gonna be there for you." When that company and its predecessors have received millions and millions of dollars in taxpayer benefits.

We've got to figure out how to get some leverage against some of these companies and I am proposing we have a claw back. If you took any money from the local, state or federal governments to put in a plant, to upgrade the plant, to do anything to the plant, you have to pay it back. That's how I think we're going to get leverage on these companies so when they do the cost benefit on the cost side is, "Hey, we're gonna owe back some money that we took, telling the people of this state or city that we're gonna be there when -- hey, we're not. We're moving out."

MATTHEWS: How come the -- what we were taught in school? That trade is good. All the economists thought it was. By comparative advantage, all the countries that were good at one thing, make it, the ones that aren't so successful do something else, and you all trade, everybody wins. What went wrong with that theory?

CLINTON: I think what went wrong is that you have countries now that are not shy about putting a heavy sum on the scale. They are supporting their own industries in China, for example -- there's no free market, that's just an illusion. It's not a market economy. You have state-owned enterprises, you have the government being used to threaten companies.

When I was a Senator from New York I was always in some kind of controversy with the Chinese government because they were coming and threatening New York companies, and I would go to bat for the New York companies. So you have in Europe a more refined, genteel way, you have in Asia a more rough and tumble way -- it sets up trade conditions where we end up having the only, in my view, really free trade economy, and we've been able to manage that until relatively recently.

Now because of competition with increases in technology, automation and the like, we've got to really fight for our jobs. And fighting for our jobs means yes, improving our skills, yes, incentivizing advanced manufacturing and clean and renewable energy -- but it also means sending a really clear message, "You aren't going to mess with us. We're going to do what is necessary to make sure you're not dumping steel, you're not stealing our intellectual property and you're not walking out on communities where we've given you money in effect to stay.

So I'm taking a very tough line on this. I think we need to. I'm not sure we would have a decade, 20 years ago, because the situation was different, but the way I look at it now, we've got to really stand up.

MATTHEWS: Are you the same as Bernie Sanders, now, on trade?

CLINTON: No. No. Because you know what? I know you have to have trade with the rest of the world. We have like less than five percent of the world's population. We have to trade with the other 95 percent.

MATTHEWS: And you don't think he agrees with that.

CLINTON: I don't know. His position is so anti -- he's against things before they're even finished, before they're read -- he was against not only PTP before it was completed he was against the Paris Climate Agreement before it was signed, he just is reflexively against anything that has any international implications.

My view is let's get tough and smart and effective, but we can't shut the door to the rest of the world. We've got to trade with the rest of the world. I want us exporting more, I want more jobs with rising incomes in America, and I think that's the way to do it.

MATTHEWS: So, speaking of being tough, are you a hawk?

CLINTON: No, I'm a smart-power advocate. OK?

MATTHEWS: Smart.

CLINTON: Smart.

MATTHEWS: When you're smart about Iraq, endorsing the President's position on Iraq, did you believe, ever, that Saddam Hussein, when you had a big chance to vote to authorize the war in Iraq, did you ever believe that Saddam Hussein had nuclear weapons?

CLINTON: I did.

MATTHEWS: Who told you?

CLINTON: I know at the end of the Clinton Administration there was a very strong sense that he was reconstituting his nuclear weapons program and I like to remind people that at the end of the '90s there was a Sense of the Congress passed, that my opponent Bernie Sanders voted for, basically talking about regime change in Iraq because of the threat of potentially nuclear, biological ...

(CROSSTALK)

Bernie Sanders voted for it -- I'm just telling you, that was the prevailing opinion. And what -- look, I've said it was a mistake, because ...

MATTHEWS: I went over the facts because if you were told by somebody that he had nuclear weapons they weren't telling the truth, because Mike Morell, who's the chief CIA briefer on the subject, told me on my show, that they never told anybody because he said they had no evidence they had nuclear weapons, so who if it wasn't the CIA told you they had nuclear weapons?

CLINTON: What was going on, was a continuing, intensive inspection program. Hans Blix, remember Hans Blix?

MATTHEWS: I remember it all.

CLINTON: And Hans Blix and his team of inspectors were trying to get to the bottom of this. Now here's what was misleading, was that Saddam Hussein could have ended it immediately. He could have said, "Come anywhere, look anywhere, we have nothing." But he didn't choose to do that, so the inspectors were racing to get to all the sites that they were worried -- remember at the end of the First Gulf War, we did find evidence of a nuclear weapons program. Then we had a number of years where we were flying a no-fly zone over Iraq, and where we saw him diverting a lot of money into not just him building palaces but building, we thought, programs.

MATTHEWS: Dick Cheney's all over the country back in the fall of 2002 saying Saddam has nuclear weapons -- not a nuclear weapons program, nuclear weapons, even though the CIA never told him that. The question is, is Donald Trump right when he said they lied?

CLINTON: What Mike Hayden and others have said is that it was an intelligence failure. I don't know what they said ...

MATTHEWS: But they never said they had nuclear weapons. How could it be a failure?

CLINTON: They led some people to believe that ..

MATTHEWS: But not with evidence. But not with evidence. You didn't have evidence they had nuclear weapons, did you?

CLINTON: What we had was a -- I had, let me speak for myself --

MATTHEWS: You never had evidence of nuclear weapons.

CLINTON: No, but that was because the inspections program had not been completed, and where I stood, I believed George W. Bush when he said, "We are going to let the inspectors finish the job, this vote will give me the leverage," he claimed, "to make sure that happens." Read Hans Blix's book.

MATTHEWS: Why did you trust Dubya?

CLINTON: I thought that using diplomacy, which is what it seemed to me he was offering, made a lot of sense.

MATTHEWS: Did he seem the diplomatic type, Dubya?

CLINTON: He seemed to be someone who in my opinion, at least rhetorically, that speech he gave in Cincinnati, was aimed at saying< "We're going to let the inspectors finish."

Now, he didn't let the inspectors finish. And that's where I made a mistake. Because if he had let the inspectors finish, what Blix and others argue, they would have been able to prove to the world, so if there had been any doubt, whether manufactured or believed, it would have been ended. That's why I've said repeatedly it was a mistake for me to ...

MATTHEWS: Why was Bernie Sanders right, and you were wrong. What do you think was in him that allowed him to see what you couldn't see.

CLINTON: I don't know because as I said he voted for the regime change resolution. By the time ...

MATTHEWS: It was rhetorical.

CLINTON: It was only a few years earlier. That was a mistake, and I've said it was a mistake, and I had good friends like Vice President Biden who were with me and I had good friends who were on the other side. And I think part of what certainly influenced me is after 9/11, I went to New York with Chuck Schumer, the next day, my fellow Senator. We were the only plane in the sky, and we flew over Ground Zero and we saw the devastation, and we were briefed fully on all of the threats that were still out there.

We get back to Washington. I go and see then-Senator Byrd, get him to commit to helping New York, because the first request out of the White House was for $20 billion for the Pentagon, for Homeland Security, not a penny for New York. So I went and said, "Look, we have to get money for New York." When I went to the White House, there were about four of us Senators, the two from Virginia, the two of us from New York, and I know that the Republicans in the White House and in the Senate didn't want to rebuild New York. Or at least they weren't willing to put money into it.

So I'm sitting there in the Oval Office and Bush says to me, "What do you need?" I said, "I need $20 billion to rebuild New York." He said, "You've got it." And he was good to his word. So my experience with him on something of great import to our country was positive. Literally that same day I get back to the Capitol, the Republicans are trying to take that money away, We kept calling the White House, Bush kept saying, "I gave them my word, I'm going to stick with it."

So I had a different set of experiences.

MATTHEWS: But we have 100,000 people dead in Iraq because of that war that we started, we invaded. We did the war. We were the war. And then you went into Libya, and you supported regime ...

CLINTON: That's a very different case.

MATTHEWS: Why do you think, why do you keep wanting to do these things of regime change. What's in your thinking that says the United States government has some right and duty to go to Middle Eastern countries and knock off their leadership?

And I think you're more aggressive about knocking off Bashir Assad too.

CLINTON: Let me tell you what I believe. And then people can make their own judgment.

I've said Iraq was a mistake. I've said that what I thought the strategy was, which was to let the inspectors finish and to find out and if necessary to be able to then put pressure of a different kind on Saddam Hussein wasn't allowed to go forward. So that we know.

Libya was very different. Conflating the two does a disservice ...

MATTHEWS: Principle of regime change -- what do you make of it?

Congress says to knock off their leaders.

CLINTON: That is just an overstatement that doesn't really reflect the situation.

MATTHEWS: Don't you support knocking off Assad? Bashir Assad?

CLINTON: I think that given the bloodshed he has spilled that would be a good outcome but Americans aren't going to do it. That; s not us doing it. In Libya, you had a dictator who had American blood on his hands. Remember, Reagan tried to knock him off, as you recall, because you were working in the Congress. Missed, we tried. When he said that he was going to track down his people and murder them, the Europeans and the Arabs came to us and said you've got to help us. Because what they feared is what we see in Syria. What they feared was an out-of-control civil war on their shores, right across the Mediterranean, right next to Egypt, right next to rest of the Middle East.

Remember, we had those countries helping us in Afghanistan in our very big coalition.

Now when somebody that has helped you, there people have died. They have expended their treasures, to help us, come and say, this is personal to us.

MATTHEW: Yes.

CLINTON: We in Europe, we in the Middle East. If the United States is supposed to say, you know what, that's not our problem. And they can say to us, yes, Afghanistan wasn't our problem either.

But that's not the way you work with allies and when you build coalitions.

So what did we do there? We provided our unique abilities, and they ran most of the air missions. They were really very much involved in helping to, you know, cordon off Libya and eventually defeating Ghadaffi and his forces.

Now is Libya perfect? It isn't. But did they have two elections that were free and fair where they voted for moderates. Yes, they did. So you know, changing from a dictator who has hollowed out your country to something resembling a functioning state and even hopefully more of a democratic one doesn't happen overnight.

And we've got to continue to support the Libyan people, to give them a chance, because otherwise you see what has happened in Syria, with the consequences of millions of people flooding out of Syria, with more than 250,000 people killed, with terrorist groups like ISIS taking up almost -- huge blocks of territory, as big as some of the states in that area.

So, yes, I mean, Libya was a different kind of calculation. And we didn't lose a single person. We didn't have a problem in supporting our European and Arab allies in working with NATO.

And now we've got to support the Libyan people.

MATTHEWS: What do you think, quickly, of the whole history of the United States in your lifetime of knocking off leaders, whether it's Mosaddegh in Iran or it was Arbenz in Guatemala, or knocking off Allende in Chile, or knocking off Patrice Lumumba in the Congo, or knocking off Trujillo, or who else have I missed?

I mean, we've been doing this for a long time, that's why I'm skeptical. But what is your view of all those assassinations, all of the attempts to change the history of other countries? Should we be doing that kind of thing?

CLINTON: Well, I don't think...

MATTHEWS: Knocking off leaders.

CLINTON: In the vast...

MATTHEWS: Diem, we knocked him off.

CLINGTON: In the vast majority of cases, the answer is no. But, you know, there's always these historical games you can play. If somebody could have assassinated Hitler before he took over Germany, would that have been a good thing or not?

You cannot paint with a broad brush. Individual situations, and most of the ones you named, are ones that I think in retrospect did not have a very defensible kind of calculation behind them.

But I think it's a mistake to say you can't ever prevent war, you can't ever save people. You know, if there had been a way to go after the leaders of the massacres in Rwanda, to stop that before 800,000 people were killed, what would we have done?

We do, as you know very well, target terrorists. We target them because we believe that they are plotting and planning against us, our friends, and our allies.

Now they may not be a head of state, but they are very well the head of a terrorist group. So these are tough, hard choices. That's why I wrote a whole book called "Hard Choices" about some of this.

MATTHEWS: It looks like you're ready for the role of commander-in-chief already, anyway.

Back with more of our special MSNBC townhall with Hillary Clinton, a special HARDBALL, the place for politics.

MATTHEWS: We're back at the Old State Capitol of Illinois where Lincoln once worked.

CLINTON: That's right.

MATTHEWS: Many years he was here, about 20 years as a legislator and as a lawyer. His (INAUDIBLE) will help us all today.

Go ahead, first question.

QUESTION: Hi, my name is Summer Gosney (ph). And right now a lot of college students are backing Bernie Sanders. So I want to know what specifically are you going to do for college students who are graduating with a large amount of debt.

CLINTON: Well, I'm really glad you asked that, Summer, because I have a plan I call the New College Compact, which not only will make college more affordable with debt-free tuition for students, but will also refinance the student debt that young people already have.

I want to refinance it saving thousands of dollars for people who have graduated but are weighted down by this debt. I want to move people into what are called income contingency repayment programs so that you pay back as a percentage of your income.

And I want to put a time certain to end your payments. So I think actually my approach is more comprehensive and will do more for people. It's affordable. It meets the needs that folks have. And I think it will lift the debt off of millions of Americans.

MATTHEWS: Thanks.

QUESTION: Good evening. I'm Jim Langfelder, the mayor of the city of Springfield.

MATTHEWS: Yes, you are.

CLINTON: Yes, you are.

QUESTION: Well, thank you.

QUESTION: On behalf of the citizens of Springfield, I want to express our welcome and our thanks for coming to Springfield, Illinois, the home of Abraham Lincoln, where usually people come together to solve the world's problems and our own problems.

But my dad, he grew up in Vienna, Austria, and as a teenager he had to flee there because of Hitler taking over. And when they came to America, before they could enter they had to have a sponsor as immigrants, which helped protect the United States as well as make sure that the family wasn't a burden on the government.

As president, what steps would you take to put in place to make sure that immigrants are screened properly so it does keep America safe and they don't become a burden on our government?

CLINTON: Well, mayor, first of all, thanks for the welcome. I'm happy to be back in Springfield. I think the first time I came to Springfield was in fifth grade as I remember.

CLINTON: A lot of, you know, laughter recognizing that's when we all came to learn about our history, learn about President Lincoln.

I think when we talk about people coming to the United States, they have to go through a process where they are vetted and screened. That often is quite extensive and time-consuming, as it must be to gather the information to make sure that no one, insofar as we can tell, is permitted to come into our country who would do us harm and would possibly be some kind of, you know, additional burden.

The way that the system works now, for people coming, seeking asylum, who are refugees, they have to have a sponsor. It's usually a sponsoring organization, very often churches and other faith groups are the sponsoring organization.

But they have to pledge that they're going to look out for the individual and families who are coming after being vetted and screened.

So I agree that we've got to have a very thorough, effective process on the screening and on the receiving end so that there is an organization we can look to that is sponsoring people such as what happened with your father.

And I have said that that's what I support. And I will be sure that as president I will do everything I can to make it work as effectively as possible.

QUESTION: Thank you.

MATTHEWS: Thank you.

CLINTON: Thank you.

MATTHEWS: And we're going to be right back with more of our town meeting with Hillary Clinton at the Old State Capitol of Illinois. You're watching HARDBALL, the place for politics.

MATTHEWS: Welcome back to the Old State Capitol in Springfield, Illinois. I thinkthere's a bunch of talk about your opponent, the one you have right now in tomorrow's primaries.

I've talked to Howard Dean. Known him a long time, as you have, the former governor of Vermont, former DNC chair. And I asked him about Bernie Sanders because he has been with him for all these years.

And he said, Bernie is the same as he was 40 years ago. So the same approach, same philosophy, Democratic socialism, very much comfortable with that and has never really changed his tune.

You're more protean over your lifetime. In fact, I admire it, because it's the same route I took. Back when you were a girl, you were a Goldwater girl. And then a libertarian guy with a very attractive -- he was a very attractive candidate, I remember, and very libertarian.

And everybody when you're young wants to be libertarian. You don't want Social Security, you don't need anything else, you just want to be left alone. And that was Goldwater.

And then, of course, you made the move, like so many of us did, to Eugene McCarthy, who was our hero starting in the fall of '67. Explain that route, how you -- because I think most people are like that. They learn.

CLINTON: Well, I think we are supposed to learn. I think that's part of what experience should be teaching you. And, you know, I grew up in a family where my father was a rock-ribbed conservative Republican, very much in the line of being self-sufficient and responsible.

Although he believed in community. So good public schools, good park districts, things that he supported.

My mother was much more Democratically-oriented. We used to laugh that they canceled each other's vote out every election.

CLINTON: And I grew up really talking about politics, particularly with my dad. And when I went off to college, I went believe I was a Republican. And actually I was the president of the Young Republicans for a couple of months.

And then I decided...

CLINTON: I decided that I was much more in the camp of people like, you know, President Lyndon Johnson, trying to promote civil rights, voting rights, ending poverty, things that I began to understand were really important to have a basic safety net and a basic understanding of what our rights were.

MATTHEWS: I didn't get into that when I -- I remember my dad saying, we need Social Security because Goldwater said (INAUDIBLE). My dad would say, what about the people who are employed, (INAUDIBLE) the people who have been lucky in lucky in life? You know, you don't want to government to have to support them. So it's better to have Social Security that they pay into.

CLINTON: Right. Absolutely, absolutely.

MATTHEWS: So but he had that understanding about the needs of people, even though he was a suburbanite.

CLINTON: Well, but, you know, I give a lot of credit to my mother and my church, because...

MATTHEWS: Methodist.

CLINTON: Yes, I was raised a Methodist. And we had a great youth minister who would say to us all the time, you know, you kids are lucky, you have a lot of blessings, you need to open your eyes to the rest of the world.

He took us to see and hear Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. preach in Chicago. He had a set up exchanges so we went into the inner city and visited with kids, black kids in churches, Hispanic kids in churches.

I babysat for the children of migrant farm workers when I was just, you know, like 11 or 12 years old.

So I was lucky because my mother and my church kept pushing open my understanding of the fact that, you know, not everybody looked like me, not everybody was raised like me, not everybody had the opportunities that I had.

And I'm really grateful for that. So by the time I got to college, I said, you know, I want to work out my own political...

MATTHEWS: You became a real liberal.

CLINTON: I like to say progressive.

MATTHEWS: Well, that's the new word...

MATTHEWS: Well, why do people change the word if they like the word? What was wrong with liberal?

CLINTON: Nothing is wrong with it. You know...

MATTHEWS: Progressive covers such a broader front. It goes all the way over to Democratic socialism all the way over to moderate, I mean, progressive...

CLINTON: No, it doesn't go as far as socialism. I'm sorry, it does not cover that.

MATTHEWS: For you it doesn't.

CLINTON: No.

MATTHEWS: You're not comfortable with that word.

CLINTON: No, I'm not. I'm not. I think, look, what I learned starting, you know, in my late teens and in my 20s is that in a complex, diverse society like ours, you were going to have to have safety nets, you were going to have to create opportunities for people.

You were going to have to try to end the legacies of oppression, of slavery, of, you know, all of the kinds of wrongs that we had visited upon people from the very beginning that, you know, this chamber where Abraham Lincoln spoke, he literally gave his life for.

MATTHEWS: So you know how tough it is for those people who don't have health care yet.

CLINTON: Absolutely.

MATTHEWS: The unemployed.

CLINTON: Absolutely.

MATTHEWS: People like that who don't qualify for Medicaid because they're not broke yet.

CLINTON: That's right. There were...

(CROSSTALK)

MATTHEWS: There are a lot of people lost through the cracks there.

CLINTON: Well, we have like 90 percent of coverage now, but that's 30 million people left out that we have to...

(CROSSTALK)

MATTHEWS: It's pretty horrible.

CLINTON: It is horrible. And I know a lot of the stories of these people because I've been working on this, you know, before there was something called Obamacare, it was called Hillarycare. I've been trying to get health care for people for a very long time.

MATTHEWS: Thank you. Our townhall with Hillary Clinton continues with more.

MATTHEWS: We're back in Springfield, Illinois with Hillary Clinton.

Next question.

QUESTION: Madam Secretary, my name is Robert Moore (ph). I'm a retired law enforcement executive. I had the pleasure of working for your husband for eight years.

My question is, in light of all of the issues that have been involved with the black community and police, what would you do to encourage dialogue between the African-American community and the police to improve their relationships?

CLINTON: Well, I think that's the beginning that we have to do is to recreate a dialogue, and to have people in law enforcement, both currently serving and retired, with a lot of experience, really going into communities and listening.

You know, we've got a rebuild respect between the police and the people they are sworn to protect. And there are a lot of excellent police officers and departments who could lead this dialogue.

And where we need retraining, where we need to have body cameras, which I think would help protect police as much as protect people on the street. We need to be moving to try to rebuild that confidence and trust.

So I'm going to look for ways, if I'm so fortunate enough to be president, to build on the recommendations from President Obama's policing commission and try to implement those and go further.

But I want it to be led by people in law enforcement who I deeply respect, but we've got to have accountability so that the public respects the police as well.

MATTHEWS: Last question, Madam Secretary, here it is.

QUESTION: Madam Secretary, my son attends school here in District 186 (ph) in Springfield. And frequently when he's running across the playground to line up for school, I can't help but think about the children killed at Sandy Hook.

I can't help but think about Tyshawn Lee, assassinated (ph) on the South Side of Chicago, and all the children who aren't at school and won't be at school tomorrow.

And I want to know, when you're president, what you're going to do to reduce gun violence, and what we can do to help you.

CLINTON: You know, this is an issue that I am so profoundly disturbed about, because I have met too many families who have lost loved ones, particularly children.

You mentioned Sandy Hook, and the parents there, I mean, for any parent, the image of, you know, adjusting the backpack on your little 6-, 7-year-old daughter or son and sending the child off to school and then only to be called some hours to say that that child that you are so deeply committed to and love so much has been murdered.

It's just more than I can imagine. You know, today in Chicago, I visited a wall of bricks with the names of young people who have been murdered in Chicago in the last several years. I've gotten to know the mothers of a number of those children.

And we have to take on the gun lobby. And I know it's not easy. I'm well aware of that. But when you have on average 90 people a day dying from gun violence, 33,000 a year, we need comprehensive background checks.

We need to end the immunity from liability, the Sandy Hook parents are suing the maker of the AR-15, trying to do something, you know, that channels their grief into action to prevent other children and people from being murdered.

And I know that 92 percent of Americans agree with me, and 85 percent of gun owners do. But we've got to make this a voting issue. You know, the gun lobby really intimidates elected officials.

And they just basically vote the way they're told. You know, my opponent talks about powerful lobbies in Washington, and there are a number of them. Nothing is more powerful than the gun lobby.

And until we're ready to take them on and hold them accountable, we will not be in a position to try to begin to reduce the death from the epidemic of gun violence.

So I'm going to need the help of every single American.

MATTHEWS: That's the end, thank you, Secretary Clinton.

CLINTON: Thank you.

MATTHEWS: Thank you for coming here.

And thank you to the Old State Capitol here in Springfield for hosting all of this tonight.

"ALL IN WITH CHRIS HAYES" starts right now.

END