CDC-RFA-CE14-1402: Collecting Violent Death Information Using the National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS)
Initial Fiscal Year: 2014

Program: DVP

FOA Number: CDC-RFA-CE14-1402

FOA Title: Collecting Violent Death Information Using the National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS)

Purpose and Description of FOA:

Violence is a major public health problem. Over 55,000 people died violently in the US in 2010. These violent deaths included over 38,350 suicides and 16,650 homicides. Preventing violence is a critical public health goal because violence inflicts a substantial toll on individuals, families, and communities throughout the United States.

The purpose of this funding announcement is to support awardees in collecting and disseminating surveillance data on violent deaths (homicides, suicides, deaths of undetermined manner, and unintentional firearm) in order to improve the planning, implementation, and evaluation of violence prevention programs.

Awardees will be required to collect standard CDC data elements on all violent deaths in their targeted areas. The data must be submitted to CDC using a CDC-based web system. Data elements must be collected from three sources (Appendix 1 below has a list of all the data elements):

death certificates (DC),

coroner/medical examiner (CME) reports (including toxicology reports), and

law enforcement (LE) reports.

Awardees can choose:

to collect data on all violent deaths in their jurisdiction (e.g., all violent deaths in the state or territory) for all funding years, OR

to conduct a pilot in year one of funding that leads to the collection of all violent deaths in their jurisdiction in years two through five of funding, OR

to collect data on violent deaths occurring in a subset of counties in which over 80% of all violent deaths occur in their jurisdiction OR at least 1,800 violent deaths occur (see FOA for more details).

All three choices are considered equally responsive to the FOA. Funding to awardees is determined by the number of violent deaths collected.

Throughout the funding period, the awardee will work with data providers and stakeholders to engage in four primary activities:

Create and update a plan to implement NVDRS in their targeted areas across jurisdictions and agencies. Collect and abstract comprehensive data on violent deaths from DC, CME reports (including toxicology), and LE reports using CDC guidelines and web-based data entry system. Disseminate NVDRS data to awardee stakeholders, the public, and the multi-state database maintained by CDC. Explore innovative methods of accessing, reporting, and sharing data that could lead to improved timeliness and greater utilization of data for prevention efforts.

Eligible applicants include:

U.S. state governments (including the District of Columbia) or their bona fide agents, and

U.S. territorial governments or their bona fide agents.

Only one application will be accepted from each state or territory.

Type and Length of Award:

This is a five-year cooperative agreement.

Additional Resources:

How to Access the Full FOA:

Go to www.grants.gov Select Applicants Select Apply for Grants Select Download a Grant Application Package Type in the Funding Opportunity Number: CDC-RFA-CE14-1402

Questions and Answers:

A teleconference will occur on Thursday May 01, 2014 at 1:00pm ET to answer questions from potential applicants (see FOA for details).