Colorado Hospital Association Supports Effort to Reduce Youth Nicotine and Tobacco Use Through Referred Measure April 29, 2019 Colorado Hospital Association (CHA) supports House Bill 19-1333 to send Colorado voters a referred measure increasing the state’s tobacco tax and include liquid nicotine used in e-cigarettes. “CHA and its member hospitals have historically supported measures of this kind, as they reduce use of tobacco and nicotine products and improve the health of our communities,” said Steven Summer, president and CEO, CHA. Read More

Colorado Hospital Association Supports Legislation to Improve Colorado’s Vaccination Rates April 26, 2019 “Given the recent measles outbreak across the country, and the impact that has had not just on patient safety and public health – but also on health care costs, this is an ideal time to recognize the importance of vaccines in our health care system,” said Steven Summer, president and CEO, CHA. “CHA and its member hospitals support HB 19-1312 because we believe it will improve our state’s vaccination rates. This legislation is based on proven efforts to improve immunization rates, and vaccines are cost-effective and evidence-based way to prevent diseases in our communities. Read More

Colorado Hospital Association Advocates for Creation of Statewide Advance Directives Registry April 16, 2019 This legislative session, CHA has helped develop Senate Bill 19-073, sponsored by Sen. Joann Ginal and Rep. Lois Landgraf, which would require the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment to create and administer a new statewide electronic advance medical directives system, making them available to hospitals and health care providers through the state’s two health information exchanges. Colorado’s new system would be modeled after the many other states that have implemented a statewide electronic advance directives registry that allows providers to see a person’s wishes for medical treatment, regardless of where the person is seeking care and if he or she has provided a copy of the advance directives for the medical staff. Read More

Colorado Hospital Association Receives Funding From COPIC Medical Foundation to Further CO’s CURE Initiative April 15, 2019 CHA was recently awarded a grant from the COPIC Medical Foundation to further its efforts to end the opioid epidemic in Colorado through the Colorado’s Opioid Solution: Clinicians United to Resolve the Epidemic (CO’s CURE). The CO’s CURE initiative aims to bring together the clinician/physician specialty societies of Colorado to develop the nation’s first comprehensive, multispecialty medical guidelines to address and resolve the opioid epidemic in Colorado. Read More

Colorado Hospitals Reach Agreement on Reinsurance Bill April 5, 2019 Colorado Hospital Association and its member hospitals and health systems are committed to improving the affordability of health care in Colorado. The Association has worked diligently with the Gov. Polis Administration and Reps. Julie McCluskie (D-Dillon) and Janice Rich (R-Grand Junction) and Sens. Kerry Donovan (D-Vail) and Bob Rankin (R-Carbondale) on this year’s reinsurance proposal – House Bill 19-1168. This work was focused on developing a reinsurance program that could successfully reduce premiums for Coloradans without causing unintended consequences for Colorado’s providers, including hospitals. CHA has moved to neutral on this bill, with the anticipated adoption of amendments that will be introduced in the House on Friday, modifying the funding mechanism for the proposed reinsurance program. Read More

Colorado Hospital Association Reacts to Reinsurance Analysis March 22, 2019 GREENWOOD VILLAGE, COLO. – March 22, 2019 – CHA applauds the Division of Insurance for investing the time and resources to obtain the actuarial analysis for HB 19-1168. While the report sheds light on some aspects of this proposal there are still many unanswered questions and fundamental flaws in this bill. “For the first time … Read More

Colorado Hospital Association Leads Legislation to Provide Rural Hospitals Regulatory Relief March 6, 2019 GREENWOOD VILLAGE, COLO. – Leaders from Colorado’s rural hospitals traveled to the Capitol today to meet with legislators and discuss topics of key importance – including health care affordability, access to care in rural Colorado and opportunities for regulatory relief. Rural hospitals are often the lifeblood of their communities, yet many are challenged by state … Read More

Colorado Hospital Association Issues Position on Out-of-Network Legislation February 7, 2019 Colorado Hospital Association strongly supports ensuring that patients are informed of their rights and protected from unexpected financial consequences when they receive care. Katherine Mulready, CHA senior vice president and chief strategy officer explained “The bill’s sponsors said today that they are looking for the ‘sweet spot’ that will bring consumers, carriers, providers and facilities … Read More

Colorado Hospitals Support Financial Transparency Legislation to Improve Health Care Affordability January 29, 2019 In their ongoing support for meaningful transparency and being part of the solution in managing health care costs and affordability, CHA supports Rep. Chris Kennedy’s House Bill 19-1001, legislation to further hospital cost transparency. The bill will require hospitals to report a number of components to the state’s Department of Health Care Policy and Financing … Read More