Gov. Walker discusses Israel trip, defends travel
LA CROSSE, Wis. -- -

Governor Scott Walker says he is "fully engaged" in state business as he continues to travel the country and the world as part of an exploration of a presidential bid in 2016.

Walker spoke to News 3 Saturday in La Crosse at the Republican Party of Wisconsin state convention.

Walker says he doesn't plan to announce his intentions for 2016 until the state budget is done, but will continue to travel regularly.

"If we're even thinking about it you have to be prepared," Walker said. "You can't just make a decision and things magically appear. So if we are going to make those considerations, obviously Iowa is one of those very important early states and we're trying to make some in-roads to see as we make this decision if there is a connection. So far, so good."

But all the travel has brought a host of criticism and dropping approval ratings. Walker says those "on the left" who say he isn't focused enough on the state budget are hypocritical.

"Ironically the same democrats who are critiquing me were supportive of a group of 14 senators leaving the state when they were supposed to vote on something for a month and are behind Russ Feingold who announced his candidacy for U.S. Senate while he was still in California," Walker said. "So it's a little bit of hypocrisy in some regards. For us, we get the job done every day, we're fully engaged."

If he is running, he made an important trip this last week, traveling across Israel on a "listening tour." Walker says he was taken by helicopter across the country with a former general of the Israeli army.

"You see in a small area like that here they had Hamas in the Gaza Strip, they have Hezbollah in Lebanon, they have ISIS and others in Syria," Walker said. "You can understand why for many in Israel, security like we felt on the day after 9-11, many of them feel like that just about every day. So it really put that in perspective."

When asked what the trip brought to his job as Governor of Wisconsin, Walker said he tried to learn more about entrepreneurship in the country.

"I talked with not just Netanyahu, which we did with government leaders, but one day in Tel Aviv we spent a day with a number of entrepreneurials (sic) and a number of entities that help scale up and start-up businesses and it was really interesting to see how they did that," Walker said.

The Governor says he will be in Wisconsin this week to meet with lawmakers about the state budget, but will have at least one meeting in Washington with Christian conservatives as he continues to try to garner support behind a potential White House run.