Ryan says he's 'on the same page' with Trump
Ryan says he's 'on the same page'...

JANESVILLE, Wis. - U.S. Speaker of the House Paul Ryan said he is "on the same page" with President-Elect Donald Trump on an Obamacare replacement.

Trump, in an interview with the Washington Post Sunday promised "insurance for everybody," sparking questions about whether his plan was the same as congressional Republicans.

"Yes, we are on the same page," Ryan said Monday in an interview with News 3. "Our goal is to get everyone access to affordable insurance."

Ryan said congressional Republicans are working off the "Better Way" plan that has been online since the fall.

"Now we're in the middle of trying to put that into legislative form," Ryan said. "We're working on the strategy to get this plan in place to have a choice-based system."

But some are drawing a distinction in Ryan promising "access" to insurance, and Trump promising "insurance for everybody." News 3 asked Ryan if he thought there was a difference.

"Access to affordable insurance for everybody is the key," Ryan said. "If you have a pre-existing condition we want to make sure you have access to affordable coverage. That's why we think risk pools make a lot of sense. We want to make sure people can customize insurance that meets their needs and get affordable coverage so they can get covered. We are not going to have the government make you buy something you don't need to buy and that's too expensive and that's what Obamacare is doing."

News 3 asked Ryan whether he'd seen Trump's plan. Trump told the Post that his plan was "down to the final strokes."

"We are all working on this together, working hand-in-glove with the new administration," Ryan said. "We've been working on this for over a year and now we're just figuring out the proper legislative strategy to get it done."

Ryan would not say what kind of timeline the legislation should be on for passage, or how long it may take to issue a full replacement of the Affordable Care act.

"We will do our legislating this year," Ryan said. "The question is how long it will take to execute and implement that legislation. And that's something we just don't know yet because the Trump administration isn't in place yet."