Charlie Crist for US Senate 2010
Charlie Crist on Protecting Our Freedoms

On his first day in office and in his first Executive Order, Governor Crist created the Office of Open Government. This office creates an even higher standard of service and makes government more accessible to the people. He also created the Commission on Open Government to review and evaluate the public’s right of access to government meetings and records.

The Governor also launched a partnership with Google that will make it easier to access information through the Internet. With improved technology, search engines can access and index state agency records, ensuring our government operates under 21st Century standards of transparency.

2nd Amendment

Governor Crist has never wavered in his support of the Second Amendment, the right to bear arms. This support has been recognized with tremendous support by gun owners and sportsmen across Florida. Governor Crist was named “Gun Rights Defender of the Month” by the Citizens Committee for the Right to Keep and Bear Arms in July 2009.

Ethics

Governor Crist began his administration instituting very strict ethical guidelines for all employees within his administration. Since 2007, the Governor suspended and/or removed 44 elected or public officials for violation of the public trust.

Troubled by the number of officials involved in ethics violations, Governor Crist requested that the Florida Supreme Court impanel a Statewide Grand Jury to investigate criminal activity committed by public officials while acting in their official capacity.

Election Reform

Governor Crist implemented election reforms including the establishment of a paper trail for all votes cast in Florida.

Protecting our Right to Vote

In 2008, in the face of strong opposition, Governor Crist did the right thing and stood up for all of Florida’s voters by extending voting hours so that everyone who wanted to exercise their right to vote could do so.

Restoration of Rights

Implemented a fair process to restore rights to those who have successfully paid their debt to society.