African Americans for Charlie
Governor Charlie Crist is the right choice for Florida’s African-Americans because he believes what we believe: every Florida family should be able to pay the bills, put food on the table, and save a little for the future. Charlie is focused on building an economy that grows from the middle-class out – not from the top down. After his election as Governor in November, Charlie will work with us every single day to make life better for Floridians like us.

It’s clear that Rick Scott doesn’t share our values and priorities. His policies have benefited those at the top, while everyone else struggles. Florida families are hurting — but Charlie Crist is ready to help.

Developing Minority Businesses

“Rick Scott has done nothing to support minority businesses. We need a Governor who will support minority business leaders and their employees to help them achieve success. Charlie Crist will be that Governor, and I urge you to support him.”

– Florida House Minority Leader and State Representative Perry E. Thurston, Jr.

Rick Scott vetoed four minority business development centers, but Charlie Crist is committed to helping minority businesses achieve success. He’ll create a new Women and Minority Business Advocate who will oversee the state’s progress on diversity, improve minority business certifications and procedures for state contracting, and push for policies that foster minority business growth. Charlie will also work with businesses to provide more internship opportunities for students.

Raising the Minimum Wage to $10.10

Charlie Crist will fight to give Floridians a raise, because no one who works full time in the Sunshine State should live in poverty. While Rick Scott says that raising the minimum wage makes him “cringe,” Charlie will raise the minimum wage for state workers and contractors and fight to raise it for all Floridians.

Fighting Against Voter Suppression

“Rick Scott made it harder for us to vote. Charlie Crist defended our democratic rights. He expanded early voting because he believed then and he believes now that every vote deserves to be counted.”

– Senate Democratic Leader-Elect Arthenia Joyner

In 2008, when voters waited in long lines and were unable to cast their ballots, Charlie extended voting hours so that every citizen who wanted to vote could do so. Republicans told him he was handing the election to President Obama — but Charlie knew it was the right thing to do for Floridians. After his election in November, Charlie Crist will put an end to Rick Scott’s voter suppression tactics by making it easier for Floridians to exercise their voting rights.

Reversing Rick Scott’s Cuts to Education

“Rick Scott’s cuts to education have hurt African-American children throughout Florida. We need Charlie Crist to get our schools back on track.”

– Miami-Dade School Board Member Dr. Dorothy Bendross-Mindingall

Gov. Crist will fight to restore the $1.3 billion that Rick Scott cut from public schools in his first year in office and the $300 million he cut from Florida’s colleges and universities his second year.

Making College More Affordable

Charlie Crist is committed to reversing Rick Scott’s devastating cuts to Bright Futures by restoring funding to the record level it was when Charlie was Governor. Bethune-Cookman University and Florida Memorial University were zeroed out of Rick Scott’s first spending plan, but Charlie will stand by our HBCUs. He’ll also create a student loan financing authority to help young adults refinance student loan debt.

Expanding Access to Health Care

Gov. Crist believes we must support working families by fighting for President Obama’s plan to expand Medicaid. This would bring back $51 billion of our own taxpayer dollars to expand access to quality health care — for everything from regular checkups to chronic conditions such as diabetes and sickle cell disease — and in the process create tens of thousands of new jobs and provide coverage for up to one million Floridians.

Automatic Restoration of Voting Rights

Charlie Crist believes that non-violent offenders who have completed their sentences and paid all restitution and fines should have their civil rights restored automatically. This is about fundamental fairness, and Charlie will fight to restore the rights of those who deserve a second chance.

Diversity in State Appointments

As Governor, Charlie will ensure that his board, council, government, and judicial appointments reflect the rich diversity of our state. Rick Scott has appointed fewer African-Americans to Florida judgeships than any modern governor.