Section 17-6-21

Contents; amendments; withdrawal of name.

(a) The official ballots shall contain the names of all candidates nominated by caucus, convention, mass meeting, primary election, or other assembly of any political party or faction, or by petition of electors and certified as provided in Section 17-9-3, but no person's name shall be printed upon the ballots who, within the time period set forth in subsection (c), notifies the judge of probate in writing, acknowledged before an officer authorized by law to take acknowledgments, that he or she will not accept the nomination specified in the certificate of nomination or petition of electors. The name of each candidate shall appear but one time on the ballot and under only one emblem.

(b) A nomination for a candidate in a primary or general election shall be finalized by the respective state executive committees not later than 76 days before the primary or general election. Any amendment to a certification of a candidate by a state executive committee shall be filed with the judge of probate in the case of a county office, or the Secretary of State in the case of a state or federal office. Any amendment filed after the 76th day before a primary or a general election shall be accepted by the judge of probate or the Secretary of State but shall not be cause for reprinting of the ballots. The name of a candidate who is the subject of the amendment and who is disqualified by a political party or who has withdrawn as a candidate shall remain on the ballot, not be replaced by the name of another candidate, and the appropriate canvassing board shall not certify any votes for the candidate. Any amendment to a certification to correct the spelling of the name of a candidate that is filed after the 76th day before a primary or general election, or after the printing of absentee ballots for a primary runoff election has commenced, shall not be cause for reprinting of the ballots and shall not affect the counting or certification of any votes cast for the candidate.

(c) The notification deadline for persons who do not wish to accept nomination in a primary election is 76 days before the date of the election. A person who does not wish to accept nomination in a second primary election shall submit the notification set forth in subsection (a) before the printing of absentee ballots. The notification deadline for persons who do not wish to accept nomination in a general election is 76 days before the date of the election. In the event that a candidate submits a notification of withdrawal after the applicable deadline, the name of the candidate shall remain on the ballot and the appropriate canvassing board may not certify any votes for the candidate.

(Code 1896, §1607; Code 1907, §373; Acts 1909, No. 110, p. 277; Code 1923, §463; Code 1940, T. 17, §148; §17-8-2; amended and renumbered by Act 2006-570, p. 1331, §29; Act 2014-6, p. 21, §1.)