Rauner lifts the veil on his earnings and wealth
Bruce Rauner late today lifted the veil some on his considerable personal wealth, disclosing that he made more than $100 million in the past three years, paying a relatively modest 19 percent of that to the federal tax man, and that he owns chunks of everything from three professional sports teams to oil companies in Norway and Russia, as well as shares of trading exchanges in both Chicago and Atlanta.

In a press release and economic disclosure released on the same day candidate filing opened for the 2014 elections, Mr. Rauner said he and his wife, Diana Rauner, and their family foundation also made $13 million in charitable donations from 2010 through 2012. The bulk of that money went to education-reform and civic causes, they said. (See candidates' financial disclosures below.)

"Capitalism is the greatest poverty-fighting machine in the history of mankind, and I'm proud of the role I've played in it," the Chicago private-equity mogul declared in his press release. “I've worked extremely hard and feel incredibly blessed to have earned financial success. I'm driven by the challenge of business, the team-building aspect and the problem solving.”

Mr. Rauner's list of investments reflect the wealth he earned as a founder and former principal in Chicago's GTCR LLC. He is the “R” in the title.

On the income side, the Rauners in 2012 reported total federal income of $53.4 million, with federal taxes of $10.1 million, or a tax rate of 19 percent. The Rauner campaign did not elaborate in replies to questions, but much of that income is believed to have come from capital gains on investments, which draw a lower tax rate than salaries.

In 2011, the Rauners said they had a smaller $28.2 million income but paid a higher share in taxes, $6.1 million, or 21.5 percent. In 2010, reported income was $27.2 million and $4.6 million was paid in federal taxes, for a rate of 16.9 percent.

Combined state income taxes paid in the three years totaled just more than $5 million.

RUNNING MATE'S TAXES

The Rauner campaign also disclosed summaries for his running mate for lieutenant governor, Evelyn Sanguinetti, and, interestingly, her tax rate wasn't much different than his, even though her income was much lower. She and her husband, Ray, reported paying 14.8 percent to 19.5 percent of their income to the feds in the past three years, with taxable income of $210,000 to $268,000.

In a required statement of economic interest filed with the State Board of Elections, Mr. Rauner listed 136 separate entities in which he held at least a $5,000 interest or made at least $1,200 in dividends last year. And he listed more than 100 other firms, some of them also on the first list, in which he made a capital gain of at least $5,000 or professional-services income of at least $1,200.

Included were interests in the Chicago Bulls basketball team, Boston Red Sox baseball team and Pittsburgh Steelers football franchise, shares in the Norwegian Statoil and Russian Lukoil companies, and pieces of the Chicago Board Options Exchange and the Intercontinental Exchange — the latter a big rival to Chicago-based CME Group Inc.

The candidate for governor also was a big investor in other foreign-based companies, such as Nestle S.A., BOC Hong Kong Holdings Ltd. and British American Tobacco PLC as well as a wide range of domestic firms, from Citadel Tactical Trading LLC and baby store Giggle here.

WENT FURTHER THAN REQUIRED

In making the tax disclosure, Mr. Rauner went further than he had to: No state law requires candidates to release summaries of their tax returns. But 2010 GOP nominee Bill Brady caught a lot of flak when his voluntary disclosure came in the form of a two-hour viewing session in which reporters were invited to review them in Bloomington in one day and could not bring cameras or copying equipment.

Mr. Rauner's release of all of this information just before a holiday likely was timed to minimize publicity about the personal wealth of the gubernatorial candidate. Companion releases by the other candidates show their income is much less than his.

In a related bit of news, Mr. Rauner announced that if elected, he will place his financial holdings in a blind trust. He did not say who would administer the trust, or whether it would be an actively traded account.

Mr. Rauner also made one more move: He's contributed another $500,000 to his campaign, putting his personal donations at the $1.25 million mark — so far. Given that list of holdings, he can afford to spend considerably more.

Financial Disclosures