The conundrum of Chicago's economy
At a time when Chicago's job growth is markedly lagging both the nation's and most other big metros, a trade publication is reporting that metropolitan Chicago once again is leading the nation in luring new or expanded corporate facilities.

How can both be true? The study hints that different sections of the regional economy are headed in different directions, with downtown Chicago doing fine and the rest of the city and much of suburbia not as fine.

The "best in the nation" finding comes from Site Selection magazine, a well-regarded publication that does an annual survey of who is expanding or moving where.

Chicago always has done well in the survey, leading the pack as far back as 2001. Maybe it's the methodology. But Mayor Rahm Emanuel is once again seizing on the report, noting that firms such as ConAgra Foods, Oscar Mayer and Kraft Heinz are moving into town.

Said the mayor in a statement, "Chicago's central location, tremendous access to transportation, unmatched talent and business-friendly environment continue to attract companies of all sizes and sectors. They see a city with a bright future that they want to be a part of."

But there's a larger reality.

A fair number of the corporate moves are within the metropolitan region, with no net gain in jobs or even a loss as firms like Kraft Heinz and Motorola Mobility shed jobs in the trek from the burbs to the Loop.

Overall city job growth has been slowing for at least six months. In fact, according to World Business Chicago, both the number of employed city residents and the number of private-sector jobs in Chicago was less in December 2015 than it was in December 2014.

Similarly, data compiled by the Illinois Department of Employment Security showed that the total number of jobs in the metropolitan area grew about 1.2 percent last year, not much over half the national rate. The folks at the University of Illinois' Regional Economic Applications Lab continue to forecast slower job growth here than in most other large cities. Ditto home-price watcher Zillow, which cites slow job growth here for slow price appreciation.

Almost all of those trends have existed for many years. Even Emanuel himself has referred to the "lost decade" of the 2000s.

So what gives?

The Site Selection survey "isn't about job growth per se. This is a scorecard on corporate relocation," concedes Deputy Mayor Steve Koch, who drew the short straw on this one. "If you want to look at the biggest picture in the end, job growth is important. Attracting companies is one component in that."

Adds Koch, "You would rather win on this than not. . . .Would it be better if we were 10th?"

No, it wouldn't be. But it's not enough.

I'll leave the "what more" to a later column. It has something to do with Gov. Bruce Rauner's reforms, better education in Chicago and otherwise using the central area's growth as a catalyst for the rest of the region, rather than a piggy bank just to be robbed.

So, thank you, Site Selection. Now, back to work.