Cook County pop tax survey shows opposition
I'm not normally a big fan of industry-commissioned polls, which tend to have stacked wording and endorse whatever view the designers intend.

But there are polls, and then there are polls. Which leads to a new survey released today by the Illinois Manufacturers' Association that shows that a stunning 87 percent of county residents questioned do not like Cook County's new penny-an-ounce levy on pop and other sweetened beverages.

Yes, 87 percent.

IMA is a close political ally of the Illinois Retail Merchants Association, which has been vigorously contesting the new levy in court. Beyond that, the survey of 1,119 registered voters from Aug. 3 to 6 via automated and operator-initiated calls was conducted by We Ask America, an IMA subsidiary. But the latter has done extensive work lately, and has a credible record, and the wording of the questions appears reasonably legit.

Asked if they "approve or disapprove of the new Cook County beverage tax that places a new tax on most sweetened beverages," 87 percent said they disapprove, and just 12 percent approve. Asked if they'd be more or less likely to re-elect a commissioner who voted for the tax, 83 percent said they were less likely.

The wording on a third question was a little less neutral: "Some of the Cook County commissioners who voted for this tax say they did so to improve the health of Cook County residents while many in the media speculate that the tax was passed merely to raise money for county officials to spend. We'd like to know which reason for passing the tax you think is more accurate."

Eight percent said it was for health, and 11 percent were unsure. Just over 80 percent said it was the money.

Crosstabs indicate that disapproval was highest in the 24-34 young adult bracket, with 94 percent disapproving of the levy.

Frank Shuftan, spokesman for Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle, shrugged off the findings as predictable.

"The reason behind the tax continues to be misrepresented," he said in an email. "The president clearly defined the need for a revenue source to plug a budget gap in FY 17, avoid layoffs in critical public health and public safety jobs and programs, and establish a three-year go-forward financial plan. We settled on a modest tax on sweetened ready-to-drink beverages because in addition to provide needed revenue, it would have a clear and undeniable public health benefit over the long term."

But IMA chief Greg Baise is in full snarl on this one. The 87 percent figure is the highest opposition number We Ask America has found in years of polling, Baise said. "Results clearly indicate that taxpayers aren't buying this attempt by politicians to hoodwink them about the reason for passing it."

Figures this high might normally prompt some eager young pol to challenge Preckwinkle in the March primary. I don't see any sign of that yet, but there's still a bit of time for a viable challenger to emerge.

Meanwhile, I have two takeaways from this:

One, if you're going to tax "sin," kindly remember that while not everyone smokes or drinks alcoholic beverages, just about everyone quaffs pop, sports drinks, sweetened tea, Frappuccinos and the like on occasion.

Two, if Preckwinkle tried to send a message to IRMA by asking a judge to make them pay her $17 million in damages for opposing her tax, the merchants have returned fire via IMA with their own missive: Watch your political back.