Who's telling the truth on the state budget?
As the state by all counts heads toward another round of fiscal unrest, who's coming closer to telling the truth about last week's budget and tax override vote: Gov. Bruce Rauner, or House Speaker Mike Madigan and the Democrats?

I put three key questions about the conflicting claims to a pair of financial watchdogs I trust, Chicago Civic Federation President Laurence Msall and Illinois Taxpayers' Federation President Carol Portman. Here's what they said.

Question one: Democrats say the $36 billion spending plan they enacted last week is "balanced." Rauner says it's $2 billion out of whack. Who's right?

Msall notes that the bulk of the $2 billion is due to extra spending in fiscal 2017 that was not financed then or in the fiscal 2018 spending plan that just was adopted by override. "We believe a calculation on of the operating surplus or deficit should be based on the current year's results," he adds. "The prior year's results are reflected in the backlog of bills."

So, one vote for the Democratic position—and Portman tends to agree. "We've frequently spent more than we've brought in and not cleaned it up before carrying on into the next year. That doesn't make it OK," she says. "But that doesn't mean the FY18 budget package as passed doesn't balance, if it truly spends no more than we expect to bring in for the fiscal year. . . .I'd say both sides are right—they're just using a different definition of 'balanced.' "

Question two: Democrats claim their version cuts spending by $1 billion or more below the budget Rauner introduced. True?

Msall sides with Rauner on this one. "The spending is roughly equivalent, even though on paper the governor's budget is $37.3 billion and the General Assembly's $36 billion. The (General Assembly's) budget appears to be smaller mainly because of transfers out" from the general funds to other funds that spend the money themselves. That reduced general funds spending, but not total spending.

Portman says she's still studying that issue.

Question three: Will the budget indeed provide enough money to pay off roughly half of the state's current $15 billion backlog of bills, most of them to Medicaid vendors, as Democrats suggest?

Portman says it's too early to say. "I think there are too many variables on that one to predict," she says. "How much will we be able to borrow, if our credit rating stabilizes? Will the projected savings materialize, and how quickly?"

Msall says the budget "will help" with the backlog. "The (General Assembly's) plan calls for borrowing $3 billion to pay Medicaid bills, which is expected to generate about $2 billion in federal reimbursements that would help to pay down more bills," he says. Another $3 billion would come from borrowing and grabbing excess from separate, special purpose state funds.

But the Civic Federation "questions" whether the budget will provide the promised $355 million surplus, the revenue stream needed to make the first year payment on that $3 billion to Medicaid. "We have questions about the cost of the borrowing and the state's ability to generate sufficient surplus to pay debt service."

Got that? So much for truth telling. I hope this helped.