$2.5 million Bloomberg grant funds UIC study on Cook County soda tax
Former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg has spent millions on advertisements touting the public health potential of Cook County’s controversial sweetened beverage tax.

Now, thanks to about $2.5 million in funding from his Bloomberg Philanthropies, researchers at the University of Illinois at Chicago will study whether the tax actually improves public health over an extended period of time.

Though the study’s funded by Bloomberg’s charity, UIC researchers and officials at Bloomberg Philanthropies say the research will be rigorous in method, free of Bloomberg’s influence and, ultimately, peer-reviewed by independent experts before being published.

“Regardless of what they find, if it shows a public health benefit or not, it will be published either way,” Dr. Kelly Henning, an epidemiologist who runs the public health program at Bloomberg Philanthropies. “The more we know, the better.”

The study aims to examine the public health and economic impact of the penny-per-ounce tax on sugar- and artificially sweetened beverages over a period of three years. The idea is to better understand the consequences, intended or otherwise, of the tax to inform future policymakers, said Lisa Powell, director of health policy and administration at UIC’s School of Public Health.

“Taxes like this may be good at raising revenue, but do they have an impact on public health?” said Powell, lead investigator on the study. “The whole point is to look at this objectively, over time, in order to understand its true impact on all fronts, from public health to effect on the economy. … At the end of the day, you want the best policy possible.”

The Bloomberg grant totals about $4.9 million, about half of which will be used to conduct similar analysis of the sugar-sweetened beverage tax in Oakland, Calif., which was approved by voters last year.

Powell’s team began collecting baseline data in April and will compare data at incremental time periods — six months, one year and two years — following the Aug. 2 implementation of the tax, Powell said. The researchers also will compare Cook County to St. Louis city and county, where there is no such beverage tax, to better understand the impact.

The study will examine changes in the data over time to better understand how the tax affects public health, employment, prices, and cross-border shopping, among other topics, Powell said.

For example, shoppers may initially buy their sweetened beverages across the county line in reaction to the tax, but eventually decide to shop closer to home and pay the added cost. Or, Powell said, they may continue cross-border shopping. Either way, the study will shed some light on unintended consequences, she said.

To understand the public health impact, the UIC researchers have surveyed 2,500 people aged 18 to 64 on consumption and health issues in Cook County and another 2,500 in St. Louis, Powell said. Researchers also hope to determine what, if any, public health impact Cook County’s sweetened beverage tax will have on low-income people receiving federal food stamp benefits. The county’s sweetened beverage tax does not apply to food stamp purchases.

The UIC study isn’t the first time Bloomberg Philanthropies has funded research on the impact of a soda tax. The organization also funded a study on the sugar-sweetened beverage tax in Berkeley, Calif. That study, conducted by researchers at the Oakland-based Public Health Institute and University of North Carolina and published in PLOS Medicine earlier this year, found a sharp decline in volume sales of sugary drinks sold was largely offset by an increase in sales of healthier beverages.

Separately, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation is funding another study that examines how such taxes affect children’s consumption of sugary drinks. The nonprofit awarded $2.5 million to the New Jersey-based Mathematica Policy Research to study Cook County, Oakland and Philadelphia.

While it’s not uncommon for nonprofit foundations or industry groups to fund research, medical journals have increasingly sought greater transparency in disclosing potential conflicts of interests.

Before any study is published in PLOS Medicine, for example, it’s subject to a rigorous vetting, typically by two topical experts and one methodology expert, a process that can take months, said Larry Peiperl, the journal’s chief editor. In addition to that, researchers have to disclose funders and roles of funders in the research, Peiperl said. Even after all that, there’s no guarantee it will be published.

“It’s rare to see a study where nothing can be declared as competing interests. It’s our goal to make sure competing interests are declared,” Peiperl said.

Outside money on both sides has poured into Cook County in the ongoing debate over the so-called soda tax. Bloomberg has spent millions on television and radio advertisements in support of the tax, countered by millions spent by the American Beverage Association, the industry group that represents the Coca-Cola Co. and PepsiCo.

Of course, should Cook County’s sweetened beverage tax be repealed, there would be no study of its results. Cook County’s commissioners are expected to vote on repeal Oct. 10, though it’s unclear at this point if there are enough votes to overturn the controversial measure.

“If it gets repealed, unfortunately I don’t think we’d be able to say much about two months of post-tax data,” Powell said.

gtrotter@chicagotribune.com

Twitter @GregTrotterTrib

Bloomberg to spend 'whatever it takes' to re-elect Cook County soda tax backers »

How Preckwinkle's pop tax backfired »

Editorial: Welcome to Cook County, Mayor Bloomberg. You're getting played on the soda tax. »