Illinois Obamacare sign-ups down, but so were costs for many
Fewer Illinois residents signed up for health insurance through the Obamacare exchange this year, and premiums soared — but many are actually paying less for coverage.

This year nearly 335,000 Illinois residents selected exchange plans, compared with more than 356,000 last year, according to a report released Tuesday by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

The lower number of sign-ups comes as no surprise, given that the Trump administration cut advertising and outreach and the enrollment period for this year was about half as long as for the previous year.

Premiums increased this year, to an average price of $644 a month in Illinois, up from $517 last year, before tax credits. That increase is squeezing people who make too much money to qualify for tax credits that would offset monthly premiums.

Nearly 12 million people enrolled in 2018 health coverage under the ACA »

But most Illinois residents on the exchange — nearly 82 percent — qualified for tax credits this year. Those with tax credits are paying, on average, $135 a month, down from $174 last year. The lower costs are primarily because the average amount of the tax credits in Illinois spiked to $533 a month, from $364 a month last year.

Insurers in Illinois and across the country raised premiums partly in response to uncertainty surrounding the future of Obamacare, particularly over whether they would continue to receive subsidies from the federal government. Illinois regulators instructed insurance companies, however, to load those higher costs into silver level plans, triggering an increase in the amount of the tax credits people could receive.

The trends in Illinois were similar to those nationwide. Across the country, 11.8 million people signed up for exchange plans for this year, down from 12.2 million people last year.

Overall, enrollment was higher than many expected it would be, given the reduction in outreach and advertising. It’s possible, however, that the lower monthly prices for those with tax credits helped offset the reduced outreach, said Katherine Hempstead, a senior adviser at the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

lschencker@chicagotribune.com

Twitter @lschencker