Developer, builders group sue city over affordable housing rule
A Chicago developer and a trade group representing local homebuilders have filed a lawsuit against the city for its affordable housing requirements, two months before even more stringent rules are set to take effect.

In the suit filed Thursday, Hoyne Development and the Home Builders Association of Greater Chicago say the city's long-standing Affordable Requirements Ordinance is unconstitutional because it involves the taking of private property without "just compensation," violating the Fifth Amendment.

The city says the suit has no merit and plans to "defend the ordinance vigorously," Shannon Breymaier, a spokeswoman for Mayor Rahm Emanuel, wrote in an email.

Specifically, the suit involves a former Ford dealership that Hoyne Development bought at Irving Park Road and Hoyne Avenue and was rezoned to allow for two six-unit condo developments and a separate mixed-use project containing two apartments. In the suit, Home Builders and Hoyne say the city wrongfully applied the ordinance to the project and forced the developer to either provide two below-market-rate units or pay an in-lieu fee of $200,000 to the city.

Chicago's Affordable Requirements Ordinance, passed in 2003 and updated in 2007, applies to residential developments of 10 or more units when the property involves a zoning change that increased its density or allowed a residential use where there wasn't one before. It also applies to projects that involve city-owned land or get financial assistance from the city.

Developers with properties that fall under the ordinance must either set aside 10 percent of their units as affordable housing sold or rented at below-market rates or pay an in-lieu fee of $100,000 per required unit.

The timing of the case comes as a much stricter version of the ordinance, one that was passed in March after much negotiating between City Hall and some of the city's most active developers, is set to take effect in October. Backed by Emanuel and passed by the City Council, the ordinance splits the city into three zones and requires developers to either create more affordable housing at or near their projects or pay in-lieu fees that range from $100,000 to $225,000.