How do 'blind trust' procedures announced by Rauner work?
Bruce Rauner's wealth proved to be a double-edged sword on his march to becoming Illinois' governor, buying top-notch campaign machinery but giving rivals an opening to question his ability to wall off official actions from his interests in a vast investment portfolio.

Just before taking office, Rauner moved to allay any lingering concerns with a vow to "avoid even an appearance of a conflict of interest." Rauner said he was "establishing specific blind trust procedures during my service as governor to eliminate my day-to-day involvement in any company or issuer in which I hold any security interest or investment."

Rauner may have invoked the term "blind trust" — a legal instrument establishing an ignorance-is-bliss financial structure when it comes to public officeholders — but he didn't actually set up one. Nor likely could he have without running afoul of a peculiarity of Illinois ethics law.

What Rauner did instead was create a different, less rigorous structure known as a power of attorney that granted management authority over much of his wealth to a New York investment adviser.

Experts say the arrangement as outlined by Rauner appears to fall short of the conflict of interest safeguards of a blind trust. Larry Noble, senior counsel with the Campaign Legal Center, a Washington-based ethics watchdog, said wiggle room remains for Rauner and his new money manager to share financial information.

"Generally, a blind trust is supposed to insulate the government official from information and any involvement in the decisions regarding his or her investments," Noble said. "It does not work if the (adviser) can share info with the official prior to making investments or get the official's input into what investments should be made."

Lance Trover, a spokesman for Rauner, said the governor used the term "blind trust" to describe the type of safeguards he sought to replicate. Trover said it was not "feasible" for the Republican to establish a traditional blind trust and still comply with Illinois ethics law that requires officeholders to annually list investments doing business in the state.

"This is the strongest possible structure that both established blind trust procedures and allows the Rauners to fully comply with the state's economic disclosure laws moving forward," said Trover, who noted that blind trusts can be used to shield a politician's assets from public view. "Doing this ensures to the people of Illinois that Gov. Rauner will not try to hide his financial assets behind a blind trust."

Rauner, who long ran Chicago's GTCR private equity firm, is one of the wealthiest officeholders in state history. He earned more than $60 million in 2013 and pegs his net worth at more than $500 million.

You can't disqualify everyone because they have a history. We want transparency and disclosure, but we don't want so much that it becomes a disincentive to engage in public service — Megan Ballard, Gonzaga University School of Law

An economic disclosure filed by Rauner as a candidate in late 2013 listed dozens of holdings in firms and investment funds doing business in Illinois, and now as governor he will be required to renew that listing annually. The disclosure, however, gives just a narrow glimpse into Rauner's holdings, revealing only the identities of investments and not their values.

Still, the sheer breadth of Rauner's portfolio heightens the possibility that his financial interests could intersect with his actions as governor.

If Rauner had set up an actual blind trust, he would have had to transfer to it ownership of most of his wealth. Rauner would still have been the beneficiary of the trust, but he would have relinquished control over his assets to an independent trustee pledged to keep the governor in the dark about transactions.

What Rauner did with his money is quite different.

Documents made public by Rauner show he executed a power of attorney granting management authority over his investments to Roundtable Investment Partners, a firm in which Rauner is an investor. Roundtable's CEO donated more than $50,000 to Rauner's campaign, state records show.

In addition, Rauner released what he terms his "blind trust commitments," essentially public pledges to act as governor without regard to his personal finances.

He promised that all information about his investments would bypass him and be routed to Roundtable, and he also said Roundtable would be instructed to share with him only the minimum details he needs to accurately complete his state financial disclosure.

Such promises are not legally binding, however. Rauner didn't relinquish ownership control over his assets as would be required under a blind trust.

Overhanging all this is the goal of reassuring a skeptical public that those in office are not using their power for personal enrichment. No foolproof safeguard exists, but ethics experts say the next best thing is transparency, with officials making a full public accounting of what they own and its value.

Rauner and many other public figures are unwilling to go that far, and ethics laws in the states and at the federal level rarely require it.

Federal law, however, allows officials to set up blind trusts while imposing rigorous oversight of such arrangements. Among other things, federal officeholders who set up a trust must designate a trustee with whom they have no association. An arrangement similar to the one Rauner announced with Roundtable would likely not pass muster, given his ties to the investment adviser.

Transparency proved a sensitive issue for Rauner during his campaign, with critics jabbing repeatedly at his refusal to make public the full contents of his tax returns. Illinois law does not require such disclosure, but many politicians do it voluntarily.

Former Gov. Pat Quinn, the Democrat whom Rauner defeated, signed an executive order on his way out the door aimed at requiring the Republican to fully disclose his tax returns. Just days after Rauner announced his "blind trust procedures," he rescinded Quinn's order on taxes.

Blind trusts have come to be perceived as the tool of choice for public officials seeking to reassure voters they are above reproach, perhaps a reason that Rauner freely wove the phrase into his announcement about his arrangement with Roundtable.

They are, however, no panacea. In 2005, then-U.S. Sen. Majority Leader Bill Frist, a Tennessee Republican, improperly directed several blind trusts to dump stock in a hospital firm linked to his family just days ahead of a poor earnings report that sent the value of the investments tumbling.

That same year, new Illinois Sen. Barack Obama was in the process of setting up a blind trust when he discovered that his designated trustee had invested the future president's money in companies tied to campaign donors. One of the firms was in the biotech industry and could have benefited from Obama's push for more spending on flu research.