Blue Cross and Blue Shield wants to lower premiums on some Obamacare plans it sells in Illinois
In a dramatic change from recent years, the state’s largest health insurer is proposing lowering the premiums on many of the plans it sells through the state’s Obamacare exchange next year.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois wants to lower average rates slightly for many of its plans for individuals, by anywhere from 0.84 percent to about 1.5 percent, according to data released by the federal government Wednesday. It’s the first time Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois has proposed an average rate reduction since the exchange opened, said Blue Cross spokeswoman Colleen Miller. The insurer is proposing one average increase, to its BlueCare Direct plans, but only by 0.25 percent.

Other insurers that sell plans on Illinois’ Obamacare exchange are proposing increases in next year’s premiums, but not of the magnitude of years past. Celtic Insurance Co. is proposing increases of about 1 percent or less. Cigna is proposing an average increase of 10.7 percent. And Health Alliance Medical Plans is proposing average increases of about 10 percent or less.

At this time last year, average proposed rate increases ranged from 5 percent to 43 percent.

The proposals released Wednesday are the result of a complex series of calculations made by insurers and will likely be finalized in coming months. Open enrollment to buy coverage through the exchange will begin Nov. 1, for coverage beginning Jan. 1.

The proposals come as the Trump administration continues to try to weaken Obamacare, more formally called the Affordable Care Act. The administration has already taken a number of steps to offer consumers alternatives to purchasing exchange plans, and Congress passed a tax bill last year that will, starting in 2019, eliminate Obamacare’s requirement that everyone buy insurance or pay a penalty.

READ MORE: Five things to know about short-term health insurance plans in Illinois »

Most consumers get health insurance through their employers or through government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid. But this year, more than 300,000 Illinois residents are covered by insurance plans purchased on the exchange.

In its rate filings, Blue Cross said it took a number of factors into account when proposing rates, including the administration’s changes.

“We know that health coverage still remains out of reach for many,” Miller said in an email. “It’s critical that we find the right balance of affordability for consumers and stability in the market so premiums don’t vary dramatically from year to year.”

Cigna took into account customer claims, expected medical costs and overall market performance, among other things, said Cigna spokeswoman Holly Fussell in an email.

“The long-term success of the individual health insurance market starts with rational, competitive pricing, as reflected in our filing,” Fussell said.

Cigna, Blue Cross and Celtic all offered exchange plans in Cook County, among other places, this year.

Illinois is one of a number of states where insurers are actually proposing price decreases after years of double-digit jumps.

Insurers hiked rates for this year amid uncertainty over changes to Obamacare at the time they were setting their rates. In some cases, however, insurers might have set rates too high, and they’re now correcting for that, said Sabrina Corlette, a research professor at Georgetown University's Center on Health Insurance Reforms.

“I think the worst of it was felt this year and, in many cases, was actually an overshooting on the part of the carriers, and I think maybe some of the carriers may feel they’ve weathered the worst of the storm,” Corlette said.

In other cases, such as in Minnesota, states got permission from the federal government to set up reinsurance programs, in which the state and the federal government kicked in to help insurers handle high cost claims — a strategy that helped lower premiums this year, she said.

The information released Wednesday by the federal government shows only by how much insurers plan to increase or decrease premiums for exchange plans for next year, on average. The Illinois Department of Insurance plans to release more detailed information about plans and costs in October, once they’re finalized.

The proposed rate increases came out the same day the Trump administration relaxed rules to allow consumers to use short-term health insurance plans longer, as an alternative to buying exchange plans. The short-term plans could be used for only three months at a time, but the Trump administration will allow them now to be used for a year and renewed for up to three years.

They are generally cheaper than plans offered on the exchange, but they often don’t cover things like maternity care, pre-existing conditions or prescription medications.

Illinois lawmakers recently passed bills that would limit short-term plans’ use to six months in the state, amid concerns that their lower levels of coverage could leave consumers on the hook for pricey medical care and that they could attract large numbers of healthy consumers, leading to higher premiums for those who continue buying insurance on the exchange.

Those bills are now before Gov. Bruce Rauner.

lschencker@chicagotribune.com

Twitter @lschencker