Senate President Cullerton offers new pension plan
Lawmakers returned to the Capitol on Tuesday facing renewed pressure to overhaul the state's employee pension system after the Illinois Supreme Court struck down a law aimed at sharply curbing benefits, with Senate President John Cullerton proposing an updated version of a plan he floated two years ago.

While details are still being worked out, Cullerton's plan amounts to giving government workers a choice between keeping more generous yearly cost-of-living increases or continuing to count pay raises in calculating their retirement benefits.

Cullerton, D-Chicago, said he planned to approach Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner and legislative leaders with a broad outline in an effort to build support to pass the legislation during the final weeks of the spring session that's scheduled to end May 31.

It's a tight timeline and the proposal faces numerous political hurdles, but the effort demonstrates what's at stake as lawmakers seek to rein in $105 billion in pension debt that has led to ballooning yearly payments and forced cuts in other state programs to cover the cost.

"We wasted two years with an unconstitutional bill that saved us zero," Cullerton said in an interview Tuesday, referring to the law the state's high court tossed out Friday. "We all know what zero is."

The proposal emerged the same day Democratic Speaker Michael Madigan convened the entire House for a hearing that pushed back on changes Rauner wants to limit big-dollar lawsuit damage awards as part of his pro-business, anti-union agenda.

Senate President John Cullerton proposed an updated version of an proposal that aimed to give employees a choice about their retirement benefits. (WGN-TV) Senate President John Cullerton proposed an updated version of an proposal that aimed to give employees a choice about their retirement benefits. (WGN-TV) SEE MORE VIDEOS

Cullerton's pension plan is aimed at working around a clause in the Illinois Constitution that says once someone is in a retirement system, they've entered into "an enforceable contractual relationship, the benefits of which shall not be diminished or impaired."

It's that clause on which unions based their legal challenge of the pension changes lawmakers approved in 2013, arguing that the language amounts to an ironclad guarantee that pension benefits cannot be cut. The state Supreme Court sided with workers, saying the state's dire budget troubles do not trump the constitution.

Justices appeared to offer little in the way of a path forward other than requiring the state to pay up, but Cullerton contends the ruling left open the possibility for changes to be made based on a theory in contract law called "consideration." Under that theory, Cullerton says, benefits can be scaled back, but only if workers agree to the changes and are given something in return.

As such, the plan Cullerton floated Tuesday calls for giving employees a choice about their retirement benefits. Under the first scenario, a worker could choose to not have future pay increases factored into their pensions. In exchange, they would receive an annual 3 percent compounded cost-of-living pay increase. If they chose to count pay raises toward their pensions, workers would receive lower annual cost-of-living increases that are not compounded over time.

It's a revamped version of a Cullerton proposal that passed the Senate in 2013 with union support that would have allowed employees and retirees to choose between compounded cost-of-living increases or health care benefits. That measure was never called for a vote in the House, as critics argued it would save about a third of the more sweeping proposal that ultimately became law but was struck down last week.

Changes to health care aren't on the table this time around, a nod to a state Supreme Court ruling last summer that all but spelled out the fate of the larger pension bill when justices declared that subsidized health care premiums for retired state employees are protected under the Illinois Constitution.

Cullerton estimates his latest plan could save the state about $1 billion a year, a fraction of the pension system's overall debt, but savings he says could be spent elsewhere. Cullerton pitched the idea Tuesday before a group of lawmakers and Rauner officials examining the pension idea, but overall support remains unclear.

"We'll keep the Supreme Court decision close by," said Madigan spokesman Steve Brown. "It's an important topic that can't be ignored."

A Rauner spokesman declined to comment specifically on Cullerton's proposal, saying "the governor has his own pension plan but recognizes that he will need to work with the General Assembly to fix our pension problems, which he believes should include a constitutional referendum."

Rauner has proposed allowing veteran state workers to keep the current benefits they've earned through a certain date, then move them into a lower-paying benefit plan created for newer state workers. To survive a legal challenge, the governor wants lawmakers to put on the ballot a proposed constitutional amendment to clarify that future retirement benefits could be changed.

Still, questions remain about whether a change in the constitution could be applied to current state workers. Even if lawmakers put the amendment on the ballot and voters approved it, such a change could take years to implement and would do little to address the state's pressing budget problems.

Sen. Bill Brady, R-Bloomington, said Rauner's plan would bring about more savings than the one put forth by Cullerton but said lawmakers may need to pass several plans in order to see which would withstand any legal tests. "You can do both and see which survives, if that's possible," said Brady, who sits on the pension overhaul group.

Still, Brady acknowledged the difficulties ahead for any pension proposal as Rauner works to strike a sweeping budget deal that also incorporates everything from an overhaul to pensions and workers' compensation insurance to scaling back union powers.

"It all ties into the budget, the budget all ties into long-term economic growth and that all ties into workplace reforms," Brady said. "It's all got to be one, big, master plan because it's all one, big reorganization of the state's economic viability."

One piece of that larger plan was under scrutiny in the House Tuesday as Madigan summoned the chamber for a six-hour hearing on the state's civil lawsuit system. Rauner wants to limit avenues for multimillion-dollar damage awards in civil cases, something that has long been on the wish list of business groups. Madigan and his Democratic caucus, registering their reluctance, invited almost a dozen victims of medical malpractice and corporate negligence to give testimony in support of the current system. Business groups were excluded from the hearing.