Obama, Keyes put on kid gloves
In a race marked by sideshows, U.S. Senate candidates Barack Obama and Alan Keyes faced off in their first debate Tuesday, a surprisingly cordial, policy-oriented discussion that ranged from the war in Iraq to the condition of Illinois' infrastructure.

Over 53 minutes, the radio debate gave voters what was likely their best chance yet to hear a substantive dialogue and exchange of ideas between the two.

The only time the two addressed each other directly was near the end of the debate when the Republican Keyes reiterated his stance that Obama, a Democratic state senator from Chicago, voted two years ago against a state version of the Born-Alive Infants Protection Act. He said those votes were akin to supporting infanticide.

"I think that's a travesty," said Keyes, a former Reagan administration diplomat and talk-show host. "The senator ignored that travesty and not once, not twice, but three times on the plea, now I suppose, that this problem does not exist. I guess he's calling the nurses involved liars."

Obama, noting that Keyes has pointed to those votes as the main reason he left Maryland to join the race, shot back that Keyes was mischaracterizing the issue.

"If Ambassador Keyes had called me up, he could have saved himself a trip," Obama said, "because existing Illinois law mandates that any infant that has a chance of survival is provided life-saving treatment."

Obama said the bills he voted against were back-door measures to get around the landmark U.S. Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion, Roe vs. Wade.

The debate was heard on radio stations across the state but was seen only by a collection of reporters and campaign aides who squeezed into Representatives Hall inside the refurbished Old State Capitol here.

Sitting beside each other in the ornate chamber where Abraham Lincoln delivered his memorable "House Divided" speech in 1858 before making an ill-fated run against Stephen Douglas for U.S. Senate, the two candidates who vastly differ on the issues even occasionally found themselves in agreement.

Dais illuminated

The chamber was darkened except for lights on the upper and lower daises. Bright lights lit the blond wood of the dais, and a few tall candles burned on an upper railing above the candidates.

Oddly enough, the candidates sat throughout the debate on stacks of packaged photocopying paper. Without the elevation of the packaged paper, their chairs would have left them clearing the rail of the lower dais by just a few inches, obscuring their view of the reporters questioning them.

The meeting between Keyes and Obama, heard locally on WBBM-AM 780, was the first of three scheduled debates in this historic U.S. Senate race, in which for the first time the candidates from both major parties are black. Whoever wins will be the fifth African-American to serve in the Senate's history and only the third since Reconstruction.

The next two debates, both of which will be televised, are scheduled for Oct. 21 on WLS-Ch. 7 and Oct. 26 on WTTW-Ch. 11.

Effect unclear

Despite the historic nature of the campaign, it remains unclear how much the session will alter the dynamics of the campaign, where Obama has a massive advantage in the polls and fundraising.

With such a wide lead for Obama, the burden was on Keyes to go on the offensive. But he seemed reluctant to take that route, despite having routinely attacked Obama on the campaign trail.

During a discussion on foreign-policy matters, including the war in Iraq, the proliferation of nuclear weapons in Iran and terrorism, Obama and Keyes spoke like surrogates for their presidential candidates, following the outlines of arguments Sen. John Kerry and President Bush have made in their debates.

Keyes expressed the beliefs that the war in Iraq was justified and that those opposed to it are not recognizing the real threat to America that came from Iran and Saddam Hussein. Keyes added that American forces should stay in Iraq until Americans at home feel secure.

"I think G.W. Bush has done the correct thing. He has moved pre-emptively in Afghanistan. He has moved pre-emptively in Iraq," Keyes said. "He has moved not only on the wisdom of hindsight, but on the foresight that is required in order to make sure the American people will not again suffer even worse damage from this kind of insidious attack."

Obama, who opposed the war months before troops arrived on the ground, said the conflict was built on faulty evidence. But he said that leaving now is the wrong strategy because it would only create civil war and chaos.

"I don't think any of us should be rooting for failure in Iraq at this point," Obama said. "This is no longer George Bush's war. This is our war."

As the debate moved to domestic matters, Keyes and Obama agreed that Illinois' infrastructure needs work, from renovation of locks and dams to an airport in the south suburbs. They disagreed, however, over some details over how that airport should be built.

The two presented voters sharply conflicting views on other issues, including the high cost of prescription drugs and trade.