Madigan's kind of town
Not long after developer Anthony Rossi got City Hall approval for a much-needed zoning change in downtown Chicago, he received a surprising phone call from the speaker of the Illinois House.

Michael J. Madigan wasn't calling to talk about state issues. Instead, Madigan was drumming up legal business for his property tax appeal firm.

"When Mike Madigan calls and asks for a meeting, you meet with him," Rossi said in an interview with the Tribune.

Madigan and his law partner met with Rossi in September 2008. Together they went one by one through the portfolio of buildings Rossi represents until he referred them to a downtown high-rise he manages that might need a tax attorney.

"Nobody wants to piss off the speaker of the House," Rossi said. "I mean, I was born and raised in this town."

The firm got the contract. It was another success for Madigan, the rainmaker.

Madigan & Getzendanner has become a go-to firm in Chicago's lucrative field of commercial property tax appeals. In 2008 it represented 45 of the 150 most valuable downtown buildings, based on values set by the last complete city reassessment in 2006, according to public records. That's more than twice what the closest rival represented.

The high-stakes competition to handle tax work for buildings worth hundreds of millions of dollars plays out quietly among a small group of local law firms. Many are armed with deep political connections — including Ald. Ed Burke, former Clinton adviser Kevin O'Keefe and former county Assessor Thomas Tully. Only one has Michael Madigan.

House speaker for a quarter-century and chairman of the Illinois Democratic Party since 1998, Madigan's influence stretches beyond the Statehouse to the corridors of City Hall and the Cook County Building. His political power even touches the levers of government that affect the success of his private law firm.

Ald. Brendan Reilly, who got his start in Illinois politics with a six-year stint in the speaker's office, holds tremendous control over development decisions in his Loop ward where Madigan competes for new clients.

Joseph Berrios, a longtime Madigan ally, sits in judgment over property tax appeals filed by Madigan's firm and others as the senior member of the county Board of Review. At the same time, Berrios' business as a state lobbyist depends on his success in the Statehouse dominated by Madigan.

Now Madigan is putting his political weight behind Berrios' bid to replace a political nemesis — retiring Cook County Assessor James Houlihan, whose office affects Madigan's clients by setting the taxable value for all county real estate.

Madigan declined to be interviewed about what role political connections might play in the tax appeal business. He said in a written statement that most of the firm's new business comes from referrals by other clients or competitive bidding.

Asked about the meeting with Rossi, Madigan said he had no knowledge that Rossi played a role in the firm getting tax work. In looking for business leads, Madigan wrote, the firm keeps an eye on City Council zoning decisions.

In Chicago, aldermen have near-total control over zoning decisions in their wards. Asked whether Madigan talks with his former aide Reilly about potential clients, Madigan spokesman Steve Brown said Madigan "talks to a range of people" who know developers.

"And aldermen could be part of that group," Brown said.

Reilly, alderman for the 42nd Ward since 2007, said he and Madigan still talk about politics, but not about zoning matters.

The client list for Madigan & Getzendanner includes some of the most prestigious skyscrapers in Chicago's famous skyline — from the John Hancock Center on Michigan Avenue to the Prudential Plaza towers across from Millennium Park.

In 2006, the last reassessment year in which full statistics are available, Madigan's firm won enough appeals to cut more than $183 million from the taxable value of the top high-rises it represented, the Tribune examination shows. Most of that success was at the Board of Review, where Madigan ally Berrios is one of three elected members. The panel was established as a separate avenue of appeal to contest the assessor's decisions.

The assessed value for top properties represented by Madigan & Getzendanner clients in the 2006 tax year was cut by more than 11.5 percent at the Board of Review, among the best results of the city's major law firms. At the assessor's office, the assessed value for those same properties was reduced by less than 1 percent — the worst result compared with those same major law firms, the records show.

Asked about the firm's success, clients and competitors say the firm has first-rate lawyers — including Madigan's law partner, Vincent "Bud" Getzendanner — who adeptly handle appeals.

"I respect both administrative bodies and believe they both act with integrity and good faith," Getzendanner said in an e-mail. "I would note that the BOR affords the appellants the opportunity to orally argue their case (which is impractical for the assessor to do) and that this increases the chance that all relevant facts will be considered in reaching a decision."

In his written response, Madigan said his firm does not track rates of success at the assessor versus the Board of Review. He only speculated as to why the firm did better at the board.

"To the extent the firm in recent years has been more successful at the Board of Review, it may be attributable to a systemic difference of opinion between these assessing officials concerning the proper method of valuing property," Madigan said.

Berrios said his political ties to Madigan have nothing to do with the Board of Review's decisions and suggested that the difference had more to do with the strained relationship between Madigan and outgoing, three-term Assessor James Houlihan.