Local taxpayers picking up a greater share of school district funding
Almost every cent flowing into affluent Butler School District 53 in Oak Brook comes from local dollars, roughly $10.1 million. Most comes from property taxes paid by homeowners and businesses that cover everything from teacher salaries to school building projects.

State and federal dollars coming in are minimal by comparison. The local share represents 97 percent of all revenue for Butler, illustrating just how heavily many communities are investing in public schools. Throughout Illinois, the reliance on local taxpayers is growing.

Local taxes and school fees now make up 67.4 percent of revenue for districts statewide — the highest percentage in at least 15 years, according to the most recent state finance data. The state contributes 24.9 percent — one of the lowest shares in the country — and the federal government 7.7 percent.

The local portion for education has slowly climbed since 2001, when local dollars covered, on average, 61.9 percent of K-12 public school expenses in Illinois.

A confluence of factors affects the figures, including rising and falling levels of state aid. Some school administrators say local tax dollars are making up for what they say is a lack of funding from the state. At the same time, some districts are leaning on local taxpayers to make a steeper investment in education.

Whatever the reasons, the investment in education from local tax dollars is on the rise, sparking concerns from Gov. Bruce Rauner — who has called for a freeze on local property taxes — and anti-tax advocates.

The reliance on local dollars also has exacerbated the unequal funding for schools, as wealthy districts pump in local revenue to spend more on students, while less affluent districts can't keep up. The gap in per-pupil spending has grown wider in Illinois: The highest-spending school district now spends five times more per student than the bottom district, based on 2015 data. A decade ago, it was about four times more.

Bob Anderson, who owns a barber shop in McHenry County's Wonder Lake and recently helped launch the Illinois Tax Revolution group, lamented the property taxes in his community.

"It's terrible," Anderson said.

"People are leaving my barber shop. They're leaving Wonder Lake ... they're tired of these property taxes. Every five minutes someone is leaving the state because of property taxes," Anderson said. Like many residents, most of his annual property tax bill is for schools.

Anderson serves on the Harrison School District 36 board and wants to merge districts in the area to cut costs that could reduce the burden on taxpayers.

Reliant on local dollars

The Tribune reviewed 2015 state finance data in about 850 public school districts that were included in the annual Illinois Report Card made public in October.

In nearly 100 districts, local taxpayers contributed 90 percent or more of the funding to their schools, mostly in the Chicago region. Affluent communities such as Winnetka, Lake Forest, Libertyville, Hinsdale and Oak Brook have high property values that can easily generate local property tax dollars for schools. That means those districts will get fewer state dollars, based on the complex formula the state uses to divvy up money to districts.

For example, revenue flowing into Winnetka's New Trier Township High School District totaled $107.4 million in 2015. Of that, $102.9 million came from local dollars, about 96 percent. The state share was close to $3 million, and the federal $1.5 million. The district was able to spend $23,571 per student in 2015, almost entirely from the influx of local dollars.

Likewise, Hinsdale Township High School 86 in DuPage County took in $82.4 million in local dollars in 2015 — 94 percent of all revenue. The state share was about $4 million and the federal share $1.3 million. The local dollars largely pushed up per-student spending to $18,804.

About 330 districts in all, including many that are less affluent, are getting at least 75 percent of revenue from property taxes and other local dollars, the state data show.

In the massive Chicago Public Schools district, about $2.7 billion in local dollars made up 51.6 percent of school revenue in 2015, a relatively low percentage compared with many statewide districts.

CPS gets more state dollars because of its high-poverty student population and large number of pupils, among other factors. In 2015, the district got about $1.8 billion from the state, and about $776 million from the federal government.

Total state funds sent to CPS divided by the district's student population show that state dollars provided $4,553 per student in the massive school system, according to 2015 data. In contrast, New Trier received $742 per student in state dollars, Hinsdale 86 got $907 and Butler 53 collected $521.

Overall, the state share of contribution to schools — 24.9 percent — is low compared with what most other states provide for their schools, according to national school finance data. And educators and lawmakers long have complained the figure conflicts with language in the Illinois Constitution, which states: "The State has the primary responsibility for financing the system of public education."

State and federal contributions have risen and fallen with little consistency over the past decade. Education funding from the state was roughly $5.8 billion in 2006, according to Illinois State Board of Education school finance data. It dipped to about $5.6 billion in 2009, rose to nearly $7 billion in 2011 and was about $6.7 billion in 2015, the most recent year available in the statewide data.

The contribution from local taxpayers, for the most part, has steadily increased every year since 2006, starting near $13.8 billion and climbing to more than $18 billion in 2015.

Administrators acknowledge that many residents may not know that local funds have become so dominant in the school financial pie.

"The everyday citizen looks at their tax bill, but they're not looking at it comparatively in terms of what percentage of those dollars comprise their (school) budget," said Jenny Wojcik, superintendent in the one-school Rondout District 72 in Lake County.

"Illinois has really become much more reliant on local resources to support their schools," Wojcik said.

Her tiny district has about 140 students, and high property values generated 97.4 percent of the district's revenue — about $5 million in 2015. The rest came from state dollars, about $89,000, and federal dollars, $45,000.

The district's influx of local dollars pushed up per-student spending to $31,412 — the largest per-pupil figure in the state. The lowest per-pupil figure was $6,235, in a downstate grade-school district where local funds totaled 54.5 percent. The average per-pupil spending statewide is about $12,820.