Inside Airbnb. Adding Data to the Debate.
How is Airbnb really being used in and affecting the neighbourhoods of your city? Airbnb claims to be part of the "sharing economy" and disrupting the hotel industry. However, data shows that the majority of Airbnb listings in most cities are entire homes, many of which are rented all year round - disrupting housing and communities.



Browse the data for your city below, and see for yourself.

A Year Later - Airbnb as a Racial Gentrification Tool. January 30, 2018 A year later, we look at damning new research on the impact of Airbnb in New York City and talk about the response to the Airbnb Racial Gentrification study, in particular how Airbnb reacted to the research.

The Face of Airbnb, New York City - Airbnb as a Racial Gentrification Tool. March 1, 2017 In this new study, which looks at Airbnb's role in racial gentrification, Inside Airbnb has racially categorized every host's photograph and found that in prodominatnly Black neighborhoods, white hosts own the majority of listings and recieve most of the economic benefits, while long-term Black residents are most impacted by the loss of housing and neighborhood disruption.

NYC: Report on the new Anti-Airbnb Advertising Law - mostly disregard from Airbnb and hosts. November 16, 2016 Despite the prospect of increased enforcement under the new Anti-Airbnb Advertising Law, Airbnb and their NYC hosts have responded with disregard - ony a small number of illegal listings have been taken off the market, and many hosts are blatantly trying to hide their illegal listings through simple misdirection.

City of LA: Incentive Data Shows that Landlords Make More Money Renting Short-term for as Few as 60 Days Per Year August 30, 2016 Inside Airbnb’s Murray Cox releases data showing that affordable housing will be lost if short-term rentals are permitted for as few as 60-days per year in some Los Angeles neighborhoods.

NYC: Battle Against Airbnb Hosts with Multiple Entire Home Listings Won, but the War Against Commercial Listings Continues July 8, 2016 Airbnb re-writes the disappearance of multiple home hosts in NYC to fit their lobbying, but Airbnb's business model incentivizes commercial use, regardless of whether you rent one home permanently or multiple.