Weekend marks deadliest of year with 17 fatally shot
A bloody year for Chicago hit a new low this past weekend as 17 people were fatally shot, marking the deadliest weekend so far this year and pushing homicides past the 600 mark for the first time since 2003.

Beginning with 50 killings in January, violence has erupted in 2016 at levels unseen since the 1990s. Even with the end of summer, typically the year's most violent stretch, no letup has occurred. Not counting Halloween, October saw 76 homicides, 2 1/2 times the 30 killings a year earlier.

The shootings over the last weekend came as Chicago police shifted resources to accommodate the crowds in and around Wrigley Field on the North Side for the Cubs' three home World Series games. But Superintendent Eddie Johnson said the department was not caught short-handed in the South and West Side neighborhoods where the bulk of the violence took place.

"We had canceled days off as well as (required) 12-hour shifts over the entire weekend, so I'm confident that we had the resources out there," he said.

The violent final weekend of October pushed homicides to 614 as of midnight Sunday, in excess of 200 more than the same year-earlier period and the most at the 10-month mark since 1997, official Police Department records show.

In addition, shooting incidents for the year are closing in on 3,000, a 46 percent jump from 2,044 a year earlier, according to the department statistics. At least 3,662 people have been shot, 1,106 more than a year earlier, according to a Tribune analysis.

In addition to the 17 fatally shot between Friday afternoon and early Monday, another 42 were wounded. It was the deadliest weekend since 13 were slain and 46 were wounded over Father's Day. The last weekend in August saw 11 killed and 56 others wounded.

Jose M. Osorio / Chicago Tribune Chicago police Superintendent Eddie Johnson salutes newly sworn in police Officer Maria Garcia as Garcia receives her certificate at a graduation ceremony held at Navy Pier's Grand Ballroom on Oct. 31, 2016. Chicago police Superintendent Eddie Johnson salutes newly sworn in police Officer Maria Garcia as Garcia receives her certificate at a graduation ceremony held at Navy Pier's Grand Ballroom on Oct. 31, 2016. (Jose M. Osorio / Chicago Tribune) (Jose M. Osorio / Chicago Tribune)

Seven of the 17 people who were killed this past weekend were younger than 20.

The youngest, 14-year-old Demarco Webster Jr., was shot at about 1:20 a.m. Saturday while helping his father move out of a building in the 500 block of South Central Avenue, according to police and relatives.

At about 3:15 a.m. Sunday, 17-year-old twins Edward and Edwin Bryant were killed in an apparent drive-by shooting in the Old Town neighborhood. Police responding to calls about gunfire found one of the boys lying on the sidewalk in the 400 block of West Evergreen Avenue and the other around the corner in the 1300 block of North Hudson Avenue. Both had been shot several times and were pronounced dead at Northwestern Memorial Hospital.

In what may be only an odd coincidence, the families of both the twins and Demarco knew one another from living next door in town homes in the 700 block of South Kedzie Avenue in the East Garfield Park community, though their killings took place elsewhere.

Weekend violence photos from the weekend of Friday, Oct. 28 through Sunday, Oct. 30, 2016. (Erin Hooley) (Erin Hooley)

Police said the shootings appear unrelated and that none of the three victims were believed to be gang members — though the twins were with individuals who were gang-affiliated.

On Monday, Demarco's stepfather, Juawaun Hester, said his stepson loved going to Jensen Elementary Scholastic Academy.

Hester recalled how he had gone to tell a neighbor at 4 a.m. Saturday about his stepson's killing but bumped into the Bryant twins' mother as she headed to work.

"She said, 'I'm sorry to hear that,' shook her head, and she walked off," Hester said.

A little more than 24 hours later, D'Nya Webster, Demarco's 16-year-old sister, screamed in horror upon learning of the twins' deaths on Facebook, Hester said.

"I can't believe it," Hester, 45, said in the family's living room. "I feel like this is worst city. I don't really understand what is really going on. It's just not safe. But I just feel like it's going on everywhere now. No matter where you go."

The Bryant twins had just turned 17 on Oct. 1. Edward, who went by Ed, was a standout basketball player with the Chicago Demons, playing at Project Education Plus' Stamps-Rhine Center. Brother Edwin had played basketball when he was younger but was more interested in football.

The director of the nonprofit center said he struggled Sunday to find the right words to comfort Ed's friends.

"I just told them a lie, that it's going to be all right," said Vince Carter, head of the center, which offers sports and education programs for youngsters. "I ran out of answers, so I just went to that."

Naseer "Nas" Turner, 16, became close friends with Ed after playing together on the Demons for about five years. During a recent two-week trip to Las Vegas for a basketball tournament, they shared a room, where they strategized at length on how to win the next game.

Turner said Ed hoped to play basketball at North Dakota State after graduating from Marshall Metropolitan High School in East Garfield Park.

"He had a laid-back personality and was very welcoming. He always made the best out of situations," Turner said.

Demons coach Michael Horton also met up with a few of Ed's teammates Monday. He said he tried to reassure them to keep on the same path.

"I told them, 'Don't lose faith in humanity. Keep doing the things you were doing. Although this happened to one of your brothers, this is not the norm," he said. "You're in disbelief, and from there you almost don't trust that doing the right thing is the right thing," Horton said.

Horton said he last saw Ed, who loved fast food and Snickers bars, on a warm September day after the team won the Houston tournament. The 6-foot-5-inch-tall Ed started getting letters and brochures from college basketball scouts.

One scout had called Horton that day to ask about the high school junior. Horton had picked up Ed in his car and let him listen in on the conversation — full of compliments about the high school junior.

Carter said he's already heard some rumblings about the boys being out so early in the morning. He said countless times he's told the teenagers he mentors the same thing his mother told him: "Nothing good happens after midnight."

"I've heard, 'What were they doing out at 3 in the morning?' And I get that, I really do, and I'm not trying to excuse that, but whatever time at night, you don't need to be gunned down. I don't think they were doing anything naughty . . . They are teenagers pushing the limits, testing boundaries," he said.

Carter said the entire Project Education community has been rattled by the deaths of the two popular, fun-loving boys.

"They stuck together," he said of the brothers. "They're twins. They were born on the same day and they were shot on the same day and they died on the same day. It's hard for anyone to wrap their heads around."

jgorner@chicagotribune.com

kdouglas@chicagotribune.com