39,000 homicides: Retracing 60 years of murder in Chicago
The spike in violent crime that has plagued Chicago since 2016 has even more gravity when viewed in comparison with six decades of homicides in Chicago. Since 1957, the city has had homicide totals of 700 or more nearly half the time, 27 of 60 years, and has been lower than 500 a third of the time, 19 of 60 years. To understand this long-term view, the Tribune asked two experts to give perspective as to what was behind Chicago crime decade by decade, and combed through news coverage going back to the 1960s. The Tribune turned to John Hagedorn, a professor of criminology at the University of Illinois at Chicago who has written extensively on Chicago's gangs as well as Wyndell Watkins, a retired Washington, D.C., deputy chief of police with more than 40 years of public safety experience. Here is a closer look at the numbers and some of the influences behind them.

✶✶✶✶ 1970s An alarming spike (Chicago Tribune archives, Oct. 28, 1979) 1974 remains the city's deadliest year in six decades with 970 homicides. The year was marked with sensational headlines from the start. On Jan. 3, an 81-year-old man suffering from dementia shot and wounded an officer before police returned fire and killed him. Less than two weeks later, a school principal was killed, allegedly by the 14-year-old son of a policeman. The boy, who was upset about being transferred, also allegedly shot and wounded three others. In early February, Chicago police Officer James Campbell was shot in a robbery attempt. The father of five died eight days later. In mid-March, three elderly people were killed in an apartment in an apparent burglary in the 1900 block of North Clark Street. A sergeant on the scene called it, "the cowardliest sort of crime." In early June, a North Side doctor was stabbed to death, allegedly by his 50-year-old son, and that same week police hunted an ex-convict suspected in a triple slaying in the 5700 block of North Winthrop Avenue. What was going on? The nation's social net appeared to be tearing apart. The Tribune published a three-part series on the homicides in January 1975 that found, in part: "Police and criminologists express chagrin at what they see as a change in the nature of homicide, long thought to be something that mostly happens indoors among people who know each other, and on hot summer nights." "There are more senseless, irrational killings," First Deputy Police Superintendent Michael Spiotto told the Tribune for the series. "There are more cases of murder for which we can't determine any motive." Today, experts point to many factors for the homicide epidemic. The nation was in the middle of a recession in 1974, but that could only have exacerbated a murder rate that had jumped before the economic malaise hit. Unemployment remained a problem, Watkins said, as the drug problem grew. He said police attempted to increase staffing and training but low pay was a problem. In terms of street violence, "super gangs" were competing with one another citywide over colors and drug markets, not just on local corners, Hagedorn said. Gang-related homicides grew over the second half of the decade. More high-ranking gang members were sent to prison, causing them to form alliances for protection: Most street gangs belonged to one of two broad alliances, the "Folks" and the "People." Though homicides fell after 1974, they remained around 800 a year through the end of the decade. Notable death Harl Meister The off-duty Chicago police officer -- a six-year veteran of the force -- was shot in the back while finishing up some last-minute holiday shopping with his son, Harold, 8, who was shot in the face and critically wounded on Dec. 23, 1974. Four teens -- including one who admitted to buying the "Saturday night special" .22-caliber pistol found at the scene from a youth on the West Side for $5 -- were charged with Meister's murder. He was the sixth Chicago police officer to be shot to death in 1974.

✶✶✶✶ 1980s A decline, then gangs become more violent (Chicago Tribune archives, Dec. 30, 1984) "There were killings in the '60s," Chicago Police Department Cmdr. Edward Pleines told the Tribune in 1984, "but gangs at that time were not as violent overall. There is more killing today over a larger area." Pleines' quote came in a Tribune story that detailed 97 gang homicides of young people ages 11 to 20. The Tribune's coverage was under the headline "Year of slaughter on city streets." Those 97 contributed to 748 homicides that year. The total dropped slightly from the 1970s but remained high. The city passed a strict new handgun freeze in 1982 banning further sale and registration in the city. The shootings of Pope John Paul II and then President Ronald Reagan contributed to anti-handgun efforts in the city and suburbs. The emergence of crack cocaine added to the volatile mix. Meanwhile, the Folks and People coalitions broke up, Hagedorn said, and gang conflicts were about to send homicide numbers soaring. Notable death Ben Wilson The 6-foot-7 Simeon high school senior, 17, was considered the best high school basketball player in the country when he was gunned down on Nov. 20, 1984. On his lunch break from school, Wilson was walking with his girlfriend and another friend near a convenience store. Wilson reportedly bumped into William Moore, 16, a suspected gang member, who then shot the basketball star. Wilson's heart and liver were punctured by the gunshots, and he died the next day.