Illinois U.S. Rep. Dold breaks ranks with GOP, endorses gun control measures
Republican U.S. Rep. Bob Dold, who is in a tough re-election battle, broke with GOP colleagues Tuesday by calling for a series of gun control measures.

Dold spoke from the House floor in the aftermath of the massacre at a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla., that left 50 dead including the gunman, Omar Mateen.

The Kenilworth lawmaker is being challenged for his 10th Congressional District seat by Democratic former Congressman Brad Schneider of Deerfield. Dold's proposals on firearms align him more closely to his challenger, who has called for even stricter laws.

The Republican opened his remarks, saying: "Thoughts and prayers are not enough. It's time for action.

"The hateful terrorist attack targeting America's (lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender) community in Orlando is another reminder of the pressing need to come together and work across party lines to root out terrorism, prevent gun violence and put an end to bigotry of all kinds," he said.

"We cannot allow partisanship to define this debate," Dold continued. "We must take decisive action and united action to ensure nothing like the attacks on Orlando, Paris, Newtown or San Bernardino ever happen again."

Observers say the prospects of Congress approving gun control measures are low in light of staunch opposition by most Republicans.

In his remarks, Dold was silent on the issue of banning assault weapons — Mateen used an assault rifle in the attack — and on the issue of large-capacity magazines.

His communications director, Brad Stewart, said "all options are on the table for him when it comes to effectively reducing gun violence. He's not ruling those out, but he's focused on legislation he thinks we can build consensus on and actually pass."

Dold endorsed measures including one to prevent people on the FBI's terrorist watch list from buying or possessing firearms and explosives and another to close the so-called "gun-show loophole" by requiring universal background checks before firearm purchases.

He also gave his support to a measure introduced by U.S. Rep. Mike Quigley, a Chicago Democrat, to alert local law enforcement agencies when a person tries to buy a firearm but fails a background check.

And Dold called for passage of a bill he introduced with Rep. Debbie Dingell, D-Mich., to expand the list of people barred from buying or owning firearms to include those who have abused dating partners or been convicted of stalking. The ban now applies to people convicted of domestic abuse of a spouse, ex-spouse, live-in partner or their child's parent.

Magen Ryan, a Schneider spokeswoman, said Tuesday that the Democratic candidate, who held Dold's seat for one term, has been an "outspoken gun-safety advocate since he was first elected."

Soon after entering Congress in 2013, Schneider spoke from the House floor urging passage of universal background checks, making gun trafficking a federal crime and limiting access to high-capacity magazines and military-style assault weapons.

Analysts call the Dold-Schneider contest on Nov. 8 a toss-up. It's the third time the two are vying for the seat: Schneider prevailed in the 2012 race and Dold in 2014.

Dold first won the seat in 2010.

kskiba@tribpub.com

Twitter @KatherineSkiba