Inside Cable News :: Bill Richardson on CNN Newsroom… :: October :: 2007
Today during CNN’s Newsroom, Don Lemon interviewed New Mexico governor and presidential hopeful Bill Richardson. Transcript follows…

DON LEMON, CNN ANCHOR: He is a governor of New Mexico, Democratic candidate for president of the United States, and today, he’s here at CNN World Headquarters in Atlanta. Right here sitting next to me, Governor Bill Richardson is in Georgia to meet state leaders and to raise some money.

And speaking of raising money, was it $5.5 million that you raised the third quarter? And you say, you believe that’s respectable?

GOV. BILL RICHARDSON, (D) NEW MEXICO: It’s enough for me to win the nomination because it’s going to be the first four states that are key. Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada, South Carolina, all in January. I feel that it’s not going to be about how much money you raise, it’s about who has the most experience, qualifications, change, and I’m starting to move up in the polls.



LEMON: Well, since you mention that, I mean, how do you compete against, you know, $27 million to Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, $19 million. And would you be willing, because John Edwards said he’d be willing to take some money from other places in order to run his campaign. Would you do that?

RICHARDSON: No, I think what Senator Edwards did, going to public financing, really disadvantages Democrats because you’re not able to raise funds between the day you win the primaries and the time you’re officially nominated.

So, I’m going to continue raising money. It’s painful, but it’s part of the process. We need public financing. That should be the lesson in this race will (ph) the huge amounts of money that are being raised.

LEMON: That’s being raised, OK.

Let’s talk to the — on sort of a sadder topic. Pete Domenici, who’s from your home state, making this sad announcement the other day about having dementia. Have you spoken to him?

RICHARSON: Yes, I have. He’s a good man and he was a great senator. But obviously, his doctors said he couldn’t run. I think he’s going to beat this, but he made the right decision. This was a man with a great intellect, and to be hobbled like this is — I’m very sorry about it. But, he was a great senator and the guy is a fighter. And I know he’s going to be OK.

LEMON: OK, Governor, let’s talk about the issues now. When it comes to Iraq, you said immediate pull-out of troops in Iraq. Members of your own party disagree with that. Why is this — why are you calling for it and how do you feel about the others disagreeing with you?

RICHARDSON: Well, the big difference is that I say, take them out as quickly as we can, as safely as we can. Let the military decide that, whether it’s six or eight months, but I say leave no troops behind.

LEMON: But the leaders there on the ground and many critics say that’s going to lead to a civil war. And some people say there’s already a civil war going on.

RICHARDSON: There’s a civil war, sectarian conflict already. Our kids, our troops have become targets. Not until they all leave, can we start political compromise and reconciliation, and Senators Clinton, Obama and Edwards are saying they’re going to leave troops ’til 2013. That’s not ending the war.

My plan ends the war, but it doesn’t just wave away with our troops leaving. It’s diplomacy. I would personally participate in that diplomacy. I know the region …

LEMON: Yes.

RICHARDSON: …I was the U.N. Ambassador. I went head to head with Saddam Hussein. Got two political prisoners out. LEMON: Yes, so, and you did that — you know, I just — not to hop scotch and jump back and forth, but I missed my opportunity to ask you about would you consider taking that seat, Pete Domenici’s seat because he’s not going to run again.

RICHARDSON: No, I’m running for president.

LEMON: OK.

RICHARDSON: And being governor is better than being a senator.

LEMON: OK, would you consider the vice presidency if it doesn’t turn out the way you want?

RICHARDSON: I mean, we haven’t even had a vote and you want me to do something else. I’m going to win this nomination. I’m not interested in the vice presidency. If it doesn’t work out for me as president, I’ll go back to the best job in the world. Governor of New Mexico in the sunset, riding my horse.

LEMON: So, if one — the person who gets to be the — be candidate, if they say to you, Governor Richardson, I want you to be my running mate, you’re going to say no?

RICHARDSON: I’m going to say I want to be governor of New Mexico again, and I’m very happy where I am, but I’m going to win the nomination. You guys have me running for the Senate, vice president, secretary of state, we haven’t even had a vote. We’re three months away. I’m going to win the nomination. I’m going to be an upset winner.

LEMON: OK, I see you’re wearing your flag pin today. There’s been some controversy about Senator Obama, who’s saying he’s not going to wear a flag pin because his patriotism is on the inside. That’s how he’s going to show it.

RICHARDSON: Patriotism is what you do. And I don’t think anyone should — I think if you feel good about wearing it, wear it. I wear it. It’s perfectly good to wear it. I love this flag. I love this country. I wear it. But patriotism is what you do, not what you say. It’s what you do.

LEMON: OK, let’s talk about immigration. Of course, you know, New Mexico’s a huge state for immigrants coming in. And it has been called a sanctuary state. New York City and other cities have been called sanctuary cities. Are you opposed to that idea of having sanctuary states or sanctuary cities where people can go and not necessarily have to worry so much about immigration rules?

RICHARDSON: No, I’m not opposed to it. The reason that exists is because we have a broken immigration system. The Congress and the president have refused to act on comprehensive immigration reform. We got to secure our borders, we got to find those that knowingly hire illegal workers, but there has to be a legalization plan. You can’t deport 12 million people. You can’t give them amnesty, but you can let them stay if they learn English, if they pay back taxes, if they pass a background check. Let’s be sensible about immigration reform.

LEMON: And real quick, you said no fence.

RICHARDSON: No fence, it’s not going to work. You have a 12- foot fence, you know what’ll happen? Thirteen foot ladders. It’s not going to work.

I had a border emergency in my state because there was a huge flow. It’s technology, it’s people, trained border patrol agents, the National Guard. But a fence is not going to work. It’s a terrible symbol. Fences have not worked. The Great Wall of China, the Berlin Wall. That’s not good among peoples, especially friends like the United States and mexico.

LEMON: Governor Bill Richardson, we appreciate you dropping by today in person to speak with us.

RICHARDSON: Thank you, nice to be with you.

LEMON: Nice to be with you, thank you.

RICHARDSON: Thank you.