Rauner signs gun crime bill, favored by Emanuel, that cracks down on repeat offenders
Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner and Democrats orchestrated a brief reprieve from their fighting Friday as they touted a new law to crack down on repeat gun offenders.

Rauner inked his approval to the legislation at a hastily arranged signing ceremony in his Capitol office, a day after his staff accused Democrats of holding onto the bill in order to deny the governor a chance to celebrate the political accomplishment.

The governor called lawmakers to Springfield for a 10-day special session, during which Democrats have cast the governor as unwilling to negotiate and incapable of completing a political deal.

The new gun law was long sought by Mayor Rahm Emanuel, whose relationship with the governor also has been strained. Emanuel and Chicago Police Department Superintendent Eddie Johnson pushed the measure as a way to help reduce crime in the city.

The legislation changes gun sentencing laws so that instead of a range of three to 14 years for some repeat gun crimes, judges would hand out sentences of seven to 14 years. If they want to depart from that guideline, they will have to explain why.

The bill also expands probation eligibility for first-time drug offenders, gives the state Department of Corrections more discretion in awarding sentencing credit, creates a task force within the Illinois State Police for combating gun violence and other violent crimes, and creates a program aimed at first-time offenders to address the underlying reasons behind their crimes. It takes effect in January.

Zbigniew Bzdak / Chicago Tribune Gov. Bruce Rauner at event in Amazon's Romeoville fulfillment center on June 8, 2017. Gov. Bruce Rauner at event in Amazon's Romeoville fulfillment center on June 8, 2017. (Zbigniew Bzdak / Chicago Tribune) (Zbigniew Bzdak / Chicago Tribune)

The bill was shepherded through the legislature by Sen. Kwame Raoul, a Chicago Democrat. In an emotional speech, he recounted a recent shooting in his neighborhood and the shooting death of 23-year-old Xavier Joy, an AmeriCorps volunteer who was gunned down earlier this month near the University of Chicago campus, just two blocks from his home.

"This has got to stop," Raoul said of the gun violence. "This is a piece of what we can do. This is not going to do it by itself. We have to continue work on this. But it has got to stop."

Johnson, who was on hand for the bill signing, touted the law as a first step to deter gun violence and bring Chicago more in line with other big cities that have managed to curb such crimes.

"As I've said time and time again, I don't believe that we can arrest our way out of the gun violence that we've seen in some of our neighborhoods on the South and West sides. And I'm certainly not in support of the mass incarceration of people of color. That's not what this bill is designed to do," Johnson said.

The bill had critics, though.

Among them were some African-American lawmakers, who contend there is no proof tougher sentences drive down crime and say the proposal would lead to a spike in arrests of African-American and Latino men. In addition, Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle said Chicago Police would do better to focus on solving more murders and other shooting incidents, as well as arresting gun traffickers.

"Let's focus on the people we know are the bad actors — the shooters and the suppliers — because unfortunately so many of our communities are so unsafe that people think that they need to have guns to protect themselves," Preckwinkle said in a recent interview.

For his part, Rauner touted the legislation as evidence that Republicans and Democrats can come together to get things done.

"This was not easy legislation to pass. This took a lot of work for many months by many people. Many compromises, many new ideas that needed to be discussed and debated," Rauner said. "This was a compromise. It shows what we can do when we put our minds to it and decide to work together to solve problems and take a step forward."

The governor's compromise talk came a day after the legislation got caught up in a different political fight over the sale of the Thompson Center.

Emanuel portrayed the failed deal on a plan to sell the downtown building as yet another missed opportunity for Rauner, who has estimated a Thompson Center sale could bring in $300 million for the state. The Rauner administration countered that if Emanuel was interested in demonstrating to the public that the two offices were capable of working together, then the mayor should travel to Springfield and hold a signing ceremony for the gun bill.

Rauner's camp noted that as of Thursday, Senate Democrats hadn't forwarded the governor the bill paperwork yet. Raoul ensured it was sent by Friday morning, and Rauner quickly arranged for a signing ceremony.

Before the ceremony, Emanuel hammered Rauner for threatening to veto a 911 bill that could lead to higher phone taxes and more money for Chicago, casting it as another example of what the mayor says is the governor's inability to see past his political fights to reach agreements with other officials to help lead the state.

"He should actually start governing on building and pushing Illinois forward, not through his anger at everybody else," Emanuel said while leaving a tour of an unfinished West Side training facililty he took with Blackhawks officials, NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman and Hawks star Patrick Kane.

Emanuel spokesman Adam Collins sent reporters an email that referred to Rauner as "Gov. No" and suggested loaded questions they could ask at the bill-signing ceremony about the mayor and governor's failed Thompson Center negotiations.

Raoul, meanwhile, dismissed the idea that the gun legislation was a victory for Rauner.