Rauner warns Democrats on tying stopgap budget to CPS 'bailout'
Gov. Bruce Rauner continued the political posturing ahead of state lawmakers' return to the Capitol on Wednesday, accusing Democrats of standing in the way of a stopgap budget deal by insisting on a financial "bailout" of struggling Chicago Public Schools.

Rauner previously has said he was open to providing aid to the cash-strapped district if Mayor Rahm Emanuel used his influence among Democrats in the legislature to help push through portions of the Republican governor's agenda. That didn't happen, and since then Rauner has said he's putting his wish list on hold until after the November election and is now focused on a bill to keep government operating through the end of the year and a related spending measure to ensure that schools open on time this fall.

While Rauner contended Monday that the sides are close to an agreement to keep core services operating, he said he feared that Democratic leaders would derail a potential deal by insisting on adding hundreds of millions of dollars in help for CPS. State government is poised to enter its second year without a complete budget Friday, which marks the start of the new fiscal year. Rauner vetoed the out-of-balance plan Democrats sent him last year, and Democrats failed to send him a spending proposal before leaving Springfield at the end of May because of divisions between House and Senate members.

"I think the good news is it looks like we pretty well have an agreement on the stopgap budget itself," Rauner said during a news conference in his Capitol office. "The differences are very, very minor. We are basically done with the stopgap budget part. And we should be done on the education funding bill. But (Senate) President (John) Cullerton in particular, along with (House) Speaker (Michael) Madigan, say no budget deal unless the funding formula changes and we get a lot more money for CPS."

"People across the state should not be held up with their tax money to go bail out CPS," Rauner said.

For their part, Democrats say the education funding fight would have to be resolved for a broader deal on state government funding to emerge. That leaves it uncertain what, if anything, will actually happen Wednesday in Springfield.

"We'll find out when we get there," Rep. Barbara Flynn Currie, a Chicago Democrat and top Madigan deputy, said Monday.

Currie said Rauner's two-part solution is "inadequate" because it doesn't boost education funding enough to help CPS and other struggling school districts. Currie said working groups of lawmakers and Rauner administration staff reached agreement on a number of ways to keep state government afloat in the new budget year but deadlocked on school funding.

"There were issues we didn't resolve. We said, 'OK, we've done our job, now it's up to the leaders,'" Currie said. "We didn't come to final decisions about the overall cost of funding public schools for the next year. And we didn't come to agreement about all those community-based social services that have been without funding through all of the current budget year.

"I think we have to deal with the education upfront," Currie said. Rauner's proposal would add about $200 million to the pot for education to ensure that no school district loses money compared with what it received last year. Currie said that isn't enough.

"Not only Chicago, but school districts across the state are looking for more. $200 million does not cut it," Currie said.

While it's unclear what House Democrats may propose, Senate Democrats unveiled a plan late Monday that would increase school spending by $760 million, along with an extra $75 million for early childhood education. CPS would get an additional $286 million in general state aid a year under the plan, along with an extra $100 million for pension payments. The proposal would not include a major overhaul of the school funding formula.

But Rauner said he will not agree to one-time financial help for the city as part of a stopgap deal.

"CPS has been financially mismanaged for decades. It's not the fault of the people of Illinois," Rauner said. "And I have always said I will do some amount of bad policy as part of getting a lot of good policy. I've always said that. That's politics, that's trade-off. Right now, there are no reforms coming from the other side of the aisle. Speaker Madigan has no interest in compromising on anything, while I have repeatedly offered compromise."

Rauner's team has been trying to build pressure for his proposal, warning of a shutdown of government services if a deal isn't reached by Friday. Last week, his administration sent notice to contractors who perform roadwork for the state, ordering them to stop work July 1.

"All work shall cease except for maintenance of existing traffic controls, maintenance of erosion and sediment controls and such efforts that will secure conditions of danger to highway system users as directed by the engineer," the administration wrote in a letter to contractors. "The department will notify you when work may resume."

On Monday, Rauner walked back the warning that services will immediately cease, saying "it won't be exactly July 1st, but starting July 1st, there's the risk." He declined to detail what contingency plans his office has in place.

mcgarcia@tribpub.com

kgeiger@tribpub.com