Rauner made $60.1 million last year, tax returns show
Republican governor candidate Bruce Rauner made $60.15 million last year — up from $53 million the year before, according to cover sheets of his tax returns his campaign released Friday.

All told, Rauner and wife Diana reported paying $17.25 million in federal and state taxes for 2013. That’s only slightly more than the $17.1 million of his own fortune that Rauner has put into his campaign against Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn. That total includes a $1.5 million contribution the Republican challenger reported making to his campaign fund Friday.

In keeping with past practices, Rauner’s campaign released only copies of the 1040 federal and state forms but did not provide copies of other forms, attachments and schedules that would provide more information about the sources of Rauner’s income, business losses and tax deductions. Rauner released his tax information late Friday afternoon on a holiday weekend, a time when the public tends to be less focused on the news.

State law does not require candidates to release their income tax filings, but it has become commonplace for office seekers to do so. Quinn and many other candidates also provide copies of their entire filings, including attachments and schedules.

Rauner had filed for an extension for the April 15 filing of his federal and state income taxes. That made them due next week, less than a month before the Nov. 4 election.

Prior to launching his campaign in March 2013, Rauner left his position as a name partner at private equity firm GTCR. The candidate’s economic disclosure with the state showed he kept a partnership interest in a lengthy list of the firm’s investment funds.

The federal tax information Rauner released Friday showed the bulk of his income — more than $41 million — took the form of capital gains, which are taxed at a lower rate than regular income. Another $14 million came from interest and dividends.

Rauner’s tax return cover sheet showed more than $10.1 million in federal deductions, but the materials the campaign released did not specify what they were. Instead, the campaign issued a statement saying the Rauners and a separate family foundation made charitable contributions of more than $5 million.

The campaign said the donations included $1 million to the Red Cross last November for relief efforts following a tornado that struck the central Illinois community of Washington. The town’s Republican mayor has endorsed Democrat Quinn, citing the state’s disaster response.

Rauner also reported paying $1,848 in self-employment taxes, akin to Social Security and Medicare taxes. The campaign said Diana Rauner took no salary as the president of the Ounce of Prevention Fund, a nonprofit that advocates for early childhood education programs.

Quinn released his 2013 tax return in April, reporting an adjusted gross income of $163,471 and paying $29,408 in federal taxes.

CBS 2 Chief Correspondent Jay Levine reports on the first major debate of the Illinois gubernatorial election. CBS 2 Chief Correspondent Jay Levine reports on the first major debate of the Illinois gubernatorial election. SEE MORE VIDEOS

In 2012, Rauner and Quinn each paid about the same tax rate of about 19 percent. But in 2013, Quinn paid a marginal tax rate of about 18 percent while Rauner’s rose to about 24 percent of the family’s adjusted gross income. The top federal tax rate increased from 35 percent to 39.6 percent last year.

The issue of wealth and taxes has been the centerpiece of Quinn’s campaign against Rauner, waging class warfare against the Republican by contending the first-time candidate is out of touch with average Illinoisans. Quinn often criticizes Rauner for the challenger’s previous support of cutting the state minimum wage by $1 an hour to match the $7.25 federal rate.

From the earliest days of his campaign, Rauner has sought to portray himself in TV ads as a successful businessman who wears a cheap wristwatch and, more recently, as someone who drives a beat up, 21-year-old van. But Rauner has said his net worth is somewhere above $500 million, and he has extensive real estate holdings across the nation, including Chicago, New York, Florida, Montana and Wyoming.

Tribune reporter Bob Secter contributed.

rap30@aol.com

Twitter @rap30