Wealthy Bruce Rauner announces for Republican governor race
Wealthy Republican businessman Bruce Rauner today formally announced his campaign for governor in a web video where he criticized state government as broken and pitched himself as someone who grew up milking cows, riding horses and shooting rifles.

The venture capitalist and private equity specialist and ally of Mayor Rahm Emanuel had been expected to get in the governor’s race following a “listening tour” across Illinois.

Rauner narrated the nearly three-minute video posted on his campaign web site, not appearing on camera until the final minute.

"We have to be bold, tough and fundamentally change government because Springfield is broken," he said.

Rauner also pitched himself as a businessman without telling viewers much about his wealth. He told an up-by-the-bootstraps story in which he learned to ride a horse at 6, milk a cow at 8 and fire a rifle at 10. The video, with its choice of music and biographical elements, was decidedly pitched at a Downstate audience.

While Rauner railed against what he said is a broken, corrupt state government that's lead to a poor Illinois economy and finances, he did not say how he would fix the public worker pension system that's approaching $100 billion in debt.

A first-time candidate, Rauner didn’t hold a news conference, perhaps to avoid stepping on his first-day message. Instead, he did a series of short interviews with reporters.

In an interview with the Tribune, Rauner said he would tackle the pension issue by keeping benefit levels intact for current workers and retirees, but eliminating the existing pension system for new hires.

Instead, new workers would be given a choice of retirement plans that could include a defined contribution plan such as a 401k, a restructured and less generous defined benefit plan than is currently on the books, or a mix of both. It’s unclear how that would eliminate a public employee pension debt that’s approaching $100 billion.

"We need a dramatic restructuring of the pensions and I don't think the bills that were discussed in Springfield went nearly far enough," Rauner said. "I think we need to say look, ‘the system that we've had through today we need to end.’ We're not going to take away any historical payments or benefits of agreements, but that system is ended as of today and we'll dig ourselves out of that massive hole that Democrats created by underfunding and taking money out of the pensions."

"Frankly, the historic system is absolutely unaffordable and incredibly generous, it's way beyond anything that the average voters and people of Illinois get in their private sector jobs and it’s not right that taxpayers should be funding a pension system that's so much more generous than they get in their own lives," Rauner said. "Our government works should be treated fairly and appropriately, they should have a decent retirement, but not a gold-plated system where they can retire multimillionaires in their 50s."

Rauner blamed ruling Democrats for a lack of action, saying they answered to money doled out by union bosses over the public interest.

"The government union bosses are the most powerful politicians in Springfield," Rauner said. "They own the Democratic Party."

On social issues, Rauner said he believed voters should decide whether to legalize same-sex marriage via referendum, saying it's "the best way to handle a social acceptance issue like that."

Rauner said he supports abortion rights early in pregnancy, but also backs restrictions for late-term abortions. He said he would also support parental notification for minors seeking to end a pregnancy.

Rauner said he hasn't had time to review the concealed carry measure lawmakers passes to allow citizens to carry guns in public, but noted he's a gun owner and hunter who "is supportive of gun ownership rights."

Rauner joins a Republican governor field that’s expected to be crowded. Illinois Treasurer Dan Rutherford launched his campaign Sunday. State Sen. Kirk Dillard of Hinsdale is expected to do so within weeks. And state Sen. Bill Brady of Bloomington, who narrowly lost the 2010 governor’s race, also is weighing a bid.

The Democratic field remains fluid. Gov. Pat Quinn is seeking a second full term and former White House chief of staff William Daley, who is from the famous Chicago political family, has told the Tribune he could announce his intentions within a week. Illinois Attorney General Lisa Madigan also is contemplating a bid for governor.