Illinois House overrides Rauner vetoes of income tax increase, budget
SPRINGFIELD — Seeking to restore stability to a state government teetering on the abyss, lawmakers on Thursday turned aside Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner's opposition to a major income tax increase and a spending plan, ending a record-setting impasse.

Illinois had gone 736 days without a budget, and the final seven packed in plenty of statehouse drama. Tempers flared, threats were issued, alliances shifted. A surprise tax hike vote over a long holiday weekend was met with a quick veto by a governor who'd dug in his heels. Lawmakers, though, stood their ground, with members of both parties coming together long enough to override.

Even that final vote was not without delay, however, as the Capitol was locked down for two hours after a hazardous materials team went in to test white powder that was thrown into the reception area of the governor's office.

Tests proved negative, even as a woman was taken in for questioning after being handcuffed. When the session got underway, House Speaker Michael Madigan's Democrats were joined by about one-fifth of House Republicans, who broke ranks with Rauner. As a result, the state income tax rate will rise from 3.75 percent to 4.95 percent, costing an extra $1,200 a year for a family with a net income of $100,000.

Madigan, speaker for all but two years since 1983, had outflanked Rauner, who'd staked his first term as governor on trading a tax hike for an agenda he hoped would jump-start Illinois' economy.

Following the vote, Madigan praised Republicans who voted for the override, saying the budget agreement showed what was possible "when legislators on both sides of the aisle looked beyond partisan differences and put the best interest of our state and its residents first."

"The people in this chamber did not do what was easy today," Madigan said. "But we did what was right for the future of our state."

Rauner, who a day earlier said his team was "doing everything that we can" to block an override, issued a statement Thursday blasting "Speaker Madigan's 32 percent permanent income tax (rate) hike."

"Today was another step in Illinois' never-ending tragic trail of tax hikes," Rauner said. "Now more than ever, the people of Illinois must fight for change that will help us create a brighter future."

The tax hike took effect retroactively on July 1, the start of the budget year. (July 7, 2017) The tax hike took effect retroactively on July 1, the start of the budget year. (July 7, 2017) SEE MORE VIDEOS

The stakes were high ahead of Thursday's votes. The state's bill backlog topped $15 billion, with small businesses throughout the state owed money. Wall Street had threatened to downgrade the state's credit rating to junk status, a distinction that could still happen. Schools and public universities needed to know if money was coming before starting back up.

With the budget now law, the Illinois Department of Transportation announced that road contractors can resume working on projects that were suspended days earlier. And the Illinois Lottery announced Mega Millions ticket sales had resumed and the agency has requested that it be allowed to resume sales of Powerball tickets.

The House vote represents a setback for Rauner. Back in April 2015, less than two months before the impasse started, Rauner suggested he could leverage a state budget crisis to win approval of his economic agenda.

"Crisis creates opportunity," Rauner told the Chicago Tribune editorial board. "Crisis creates leverage to change ... and we've got to use that leverage of the crisis to force structural change."

The Springfield impasse did create a budget crisis, and for two years, Rauner kept Republicans unified. In the end, however, the intense pressure that built up led 15 House Republicans to crack, and they joined with Democrats on Sunday to vote for a tax hike and spending plan. Rauner's last, best chance to block a tax hike was for the override vote in the House to fail.

By Thursday, just 10 Republicans voted to override their governor. The GOP lawmakers that jumped off the proposal cited talks with constituents.

"The more than one thousand calls, emails and Facebook messages I have received have been about 10-to-1 opposed to any more taxes. The message from my constituents has been loud and clear that they do not want a tax increase so I had to oppose this plan with a permanent tax increase," Rep. John Cavaletto, R-Salem, said in a statement.

While the tax increase initially passed Sunday with 72 votes, that number fell to 71 on Thursday — the bare minimum needed for an override. To make up for the Republicans who changed their minds, four Democrats who earlier had opposed the tax hike now voted to override Rauner.

When it looked like the fight between Rauner and Madigan would stretch on throughout the summer without end, rank-and-file lawmakers pressed their leaders to get something done. They shared their frustrations about the impact of the stalemate on their universities and home towns in meetings across dinner tables and in quiet corners of the Capitol. That effort culminated Thursday.

"I believe it's a historic day because it's a day where we decide the fate of our state," said Rep. Steve Andersson, a Republican from Geneva who voted for the tax hike and override. "Do we want to save it? Or do we want to let it go into meltdown?"

While Rauner had said he could support a tax hike, it came with a list of conditions. That included a property tax freeze and an overhaul of the workers compensation system to cut costs on businesses.

Still, an override of his veto could prove politically beneficial for Rauner in two ways. It breaks the budget impasse, allowing state spending to return closer to normal and relieves some pressure, even if it wouldn't repair all the damage done during the stalemate. And as he seeks re-election next year, he can blame the outcome on Madigan's power and the "Chicago Machine," playing into the geographic politics that divides the state.

The Illinois House voted on July 6, 2017, to override Gov. Bruce Rauner's vetoes on an income tax hike and budget, breaking the state's historic budget impasse that has lasted more than two years.

Meanwhile, the Illinois Republican Party, which Rauner heavily funds, released a statement that attacked Democrats and suggested primary opponents could await GOP lawmakers who broke with the governor.