Illinois Supreme Court ruling forces city to find new fix for 2 pension funds
The Illinois Supreme Court dealt Mayor Rahm Emanuel — and in turn Chicago taxpayers — a big blow on Thursday when it found unconstitutional a law that aimed to shore up two city pension funds by cutting benefits and requiring workers to pay more toward retirement.

A group of unions, current workers and retired employees sued in response to the law, noting the 1970 Illinois Constitution states that pension benefits, once granted, "shall not be diminished or impaired." In a 5-0 ruling, the state's high court once again agreed with that argument, less than a year after reaching the same conclusion in a separate case covering state pension systems.

"These modifications to pension benefits unquestionably diminish the value of the retirement annuities the members of (the city workers and laborers funds) were promised when they joined the pension system," Justice Mary Jane Theis wrote in an opinion released Thursday. "Accordingly, based on the plain language of the act, these annuity reducing provisions contravene the pension protection clause's absolute prohibition against diminishment of pension benefits, and exceed the General Assembly's authority."

The new ruling raises further questions about the city's precarious financial situation.

Under the 2014 law, the city was supposed to gradually put hundreds of millions of dollars a year more into the two pension funds. That's why the mayor and aldermen decided in 2014 to raise 911 fees on land lines and cellphones by $1.40 a month, to $3.90.

It was unclear how Emanuel was going to come up with the rest of the money, and now he doesn't have to, at least in the short term. But the court ruling means that absent a new plan to fix the pension funds, they'll run out of money in about 12 years.

With the mayor also facing financial crises at Chicago Public Schools and huge debt at City Hall, the pressure is rising in Emanuel's second term.

Mayor Rahm Emanuel is going to have to go back to the drawing board. March 24, 2016. (CBS Chicago) Mayor Rahm Emanuel is going to have to go back to the drawing board. March 24, 2016. (CBS Chicago) SEE MORE VIDEOS

Moody's Investors Service, which already has lowered the city's bond rating to junk status and has warned of further downgrades if the city does not come up with a pension funding solution, reiterated in a statement Thursday that it "will continue assessing Chicago's actions to address unfunded pension liabilities, including any initiatives specifically aimed at the plans affected by today's court decision."

Standard & Poor's Ratings Services also said Thursday that the city's credit rating could be downgraded if it doesn't take action to address the issue.

The city's top attorney, Corporation Counsel Stephen Patton, had tried to squeeze the city through a loophole. He contended that the funds themselves, and not the city, were solely responsible for paying out benefits to retirees.

But Justice Theis considered the argument — benefits would be severely diminished if the funds went broke — and concluded that scenario "would lead to an absurd and unjust result."

"The General Assembly and the city have been on notice since the ratification of the 1970 constitution that the benefits of the membership must be paid in full, and that they must be paid without diminishing or impairing them," she wrote.

Clint Krislov, who represented the retired workers that sued, called that part of the court opinion "perhaps the most significant."

That "eliminates the city's threat that we'll just let the funds go bankrupt, and you'll be stuck with a claim on a fund that has no money. This makes it clear that the city is going to be on the hook to make sure that these pensions are paid," Krislov said.

The Emanuel administration did not offer any immediate solutions Thursday. In a statement, the mayor said he would "continue to work with our labor partners on a shared path forward that preserves and protects the municipal and laborers' pension funds, while continuing to be fair to Chicago taxpayers and ensuring the city's long-term financial health."

The law Emanuel pushed through the General Assembly under then-Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn tried to require city workers and laborers to increase their retirement contributions by 2.5 percentage points — to 11 percent of their wages — in phases over five years. The law also would have lowered annual cost-of-living increases for retired workers — the element the Supreme Court determined would diminish benefits.

In exchange, the city agreed to increase its annual contribution to the pension funds by nearly $450 million a year, which under the overturned law accounted for about two-thirds of the money needed to close most of the current $10 billion funding shortfall in the two funds by 2055.

Although a majority of the unions affected by the changes agreed to them, some did not, and both the opposing unions and a group of retired workers challenged the new law in court. Last July, Cook County Judge Rita Novak ruled the law unconstitutional, noting a May 2015 unanimous ruling by the Illinois Supreme Court in a state pension case that held inviolate the state constitution's clause protecting pension benefits.

The city appealed Novak's ruling, and during oral arguments in November, justices directed a barrage of skeptical questions at Patton — who maintained that the changes to the two funds did not diminish or impair them. Instead, they "preserved and protected" them, he said.

The court rejected the idea that by restoring financial soundness to the two pension systems, the law was creating a "net benefit" or "offsetting benefit" to workers and retirees, rather than diminishing or impairing their benefits.

"By offering a purported 'offsetting benefit' of ... sound funding and solvency in the funds, the legislation merely offers participants in those funds what already is guaranteed to them — payment of the pension benefits in place when they joined the fund," the ruling stated. "Thus, the 'guaranty' that the benefits due will be paid is merely an offer to do something already constitutionally mandated by the pension protection clause."

The unions who sued noted that Chicago mayors and aldermen have known for a long time the financial reckoning was coming.