Illinois Senate votes to override Rauner veto of income tax hike, budget
Illinois lawmakers are one crucial step away from ending the record state budget impasse following a flurry of activity on Independence Day that saw the Senate override Gov. Bruce Rauner's vetoes of a tax hike and spending plan.

The measures now await action in the House, where 15 Republicans broke ranks with the governor over the weekend to approve the budget package and stave off further destruction to universities, social services and possibly the state's credit rating.

Democratic House Speaker Michael Madigan, the Republican governor's chief nemesis in a budget battle that's consumed state government for more than two years, said he expected the package of bills to eventually become law.

When and if that would happen is another question. Just 54 of 118 House members were in town Tuesday. That wasn't enough to do any official business, much less attempt an override, which would require 71 votes to be successful.

While some House Democrats said they expected an override vote to be held Thursday, a Madigan spokesman said nothing is "firm."

Rauner did not appear in public Tuesday and has not taken journalists' questions for weeks. He announced his veto via Facebook.

"I just vetoed Speaker Madigan's 32% permanent income tax (rate) increase,'" the governor said on his Facebook page, with an accompanying image showing him using his veto stamp on a large pile of paperwork.

Last week, as a special session was underway before Saturday's start of a new budget year, Rauner took to Twitter to try to build pressure for a deal.

"At my desk preparing for a balanced budget to arrive," the governor's Twitter account said, alongside a picture of Rauner sitting at his desk. "Lawmakers need to come together & get this done for Illinois. Time is running out."

The budget sent to Rauner got votes from both Democrats and Republicans, but he still vetoed it because it didn't include his economic agenda. The governor's contradictory social media statements illustrate the politics at play in the historic budget impasse.

While both sides say publicly that they are eager to end the stalemate, neither wants to shoulder the blame for raising taxes to do so. And while each side has appeared content to let the budget impasse play out until the other side caves, neither wants to be known as the one responsible for tanking Illinois' credit score as New York ratings agencies have threatened to downgrade its debt to junk status.

Rauner has long cast himself as reluctantly willing to approve tax hikes, but only alongside other items on his wish list, including a property tax freeze and changes to workers' compensation, which he says will spur job growth and change the state's economic trajectory.

The Democrats who control the legislature have resisted Rauner's agenda, contending that it would hurt the middle class. In recent months, Democrats have approved legislation that speaks to Rauner's agenda items, but the governor contends they're watered down versions of what he's seeking.

By vetoing the budget legislation, Rauner is able to say he acted to protect taxpayers from a tax hike. Lawmakers who vote to override him risk being blamed when voters feel the pinch to their wallets.

Rich Saal / State Journal-Register Illinois House Speaker Michael Madigan, left, and Senate President John Cullerton talk on the state Senate floor in Springfield on July 4, 2017. Illinois House Speaker Michael Madigan, left, and Senate President John Cullerton talk on the state Senate floor in Springfield on July 4, 2017. (Rich Saal / State Journal-Register) (Rich Saal / State Journal-Register)

That's why Madigan and Democratic Senate President John Cullerton had spent the first two years of the impasse insisting that any tax hike would have to include Republican votes. But mounting pressure for a deal, felt most intensely by Downstate lawmakers whose districts are home to universities that have been hit especially hard by the budget impasse, caused rank-and-file House Republicans to break from the governor on Sunday.

The Senate did not see a similar revolt Tuesday. Just one Republican joined 35 Democrats in voting for the income tax increase and then to override Rauner's veto hours later. Thirty-six was the minimum number required for each.

Two Senate Democrats voted no: Sen. Julie Morrison of Deerfield and Sen. Tom Cullerton of Villa Park. Both likely will face tough re-election challenges. Democratic Sen. Bill Haine of Alton, who has been undergoing treatment for blood cancer since February, traveled to the Capitol to vote for the plan.

Sen. Dale Righter of Mattoon, the lone Senate Republican to vote yes, noted the damage done to Eastern Illinois University in his district.

"Every dollar that we throw onto the backlog of bills is a dollar the next generation has to pay for even though we got to spend it," Righter said. "That's simply wrong, and that is the basis for which I support this."

Righter dismissed questions about whether he would face retribution from Rauner in the form of a primary challenger, saying he informed the governor's office and Republican leadership of his decision. Righter is not up for re-election in 2018.

"I enjoy as much as anyone the sometimes caricature the media likes to paint of the governor as this angry, vengeful guy," Righter said. "I've spoken with the governor's office, I spoke with my leader, Bill Brady, and both were very respectful, they understood very well that I had to represent my district."

The Senate votes came after an earlier breakdown of talks between the two sides.