Rauner 'horrified' by 'ugly, nasty, weird' rhetoric in presidential race
Gov. Bruce Rauner has spent months trying to navigate the murky political waters created by the Republican presidential campaign, refusing to take sides and saying only that he'll support his party's eventual nominee.

But the first-term Republican governor, who has a habit of revealing his more candid side when he encounters a friendly audience, offered some thoughts on the race Monday as he talked with schoolchildren at a north suburban middle school.

Asked by a student why young people should get involved in politics, Rauner riffed briefly on the presidential race, saying he was "horrified" by the rhetoric of the campaign.

"Democracy is hard, you know, and this presidential election, oh my goodness, I'm appalled by the rhetoric, it's appalling," Rauner said. "And it's ugly and it's nasty and it's weird, and just some of the statements that get made, I'm just, I'm horrified."

The comment, made during a question-and-answer session with students in the library of Wilmette Junior High School, was the most insight Rauner has publicly offered on his views of the presidential campaign.

But minutes later, as he departed the assemblage of schoolchildren and took to a lectern under the glare of TV news cameras, Rauner clammed up.

Asked to explain what had "appalled" and "horrified" him, Rauner said: "It's probably self-evident," before launching into his standard retort that he's staying out of the race. The Republican contest has been a raucous affair fueled by the controversial candidacy of businessman and former reality TV star Donald Trump, who recently feuded with Texas Sen. Ted Cruz about their wives.

Rauner repeatedly has deflected inquiries about his opinions of the candidates and issues in the Republican nominating contest. Last week, after Trump notched a resounding victory in the March 15 Illinois primary, Rauner said he would support Trump as the party's nominee, but did so without even uttering the brash businessman's name.

"I will support the Republican Party's nominee for president," Rauner said. "I'll do everything I can to work with that nominee."

Reporters pressed for more: Even if the nominee is Trump?

Rauner repeated himself, saying he would support the party's nominee because "I am the leader of the Republican Party in Illinois."

As the state's top Republican official, Rauner is the standard-bearer for the party apparatus here. But Rauner also shares some pedigree with Trump. The governor is a wealthy businessman who rode into office with no prior political experience, and did so on a pledge to use boardroom tactics to shake up state government.

For Rauner to weigh in during the party's ongoing nominating process would be to invite conflict and attention to Illinois, where he is occupied in a battle with ruling Democrats at the statehouse. Criticizing Trump directly risks Trump's wrath on Twitter or in a speech, where a single comment about the Illinois governor's job performance could set in motion a weekslong narrative.

To be clear, Rauner has not indicated if he agrees or disagrees with Trump or any of the other candidates in the GOP race. But many of his Republican allies in the legislature are lined up behind Ohio Gov. John Kasich. And at least two Republican congressmen, Rep. Bob Dold, of Kenilworth, and Rep. Adam Kinzinger, of Channahon, have said they don't support Trump.

On Monday, Rauner tried to stay on message with reporters after briefly deviating from it with the students.

"I don't really want to talk further about the presidential race," Rauner said. "I've made the comments — I've tried to stay out of it and I'm trying to stay impartial. I've not made any endorsements in it, I'm not being active in it. I'm going to let the process play out."

kgeiger@tribpub.com

Twitter @kimgeiger