Ives' anti-Rauner ad ripped as 'racist, sexist, homophobic'
Update: On Saturday, Illinois Republican Party Chairman Tim Schneider released a statement calling on state Rep. Jeanne Ives to take down the ad.

"There is no place in the Illinois Republican Party for rhetoric that attacks our fellow Illinoisans based on their race, gender or humanity. Rep. Ives' campaign ad does not reflect who we are as the Party of Lincoln and as proud residents of our great and diverse state," said Schneider, an ally of Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner, who Ives is challenging in the March 20 primary.

"She should pull down the ad and immediately apologize to the Illinoisans who were negatively portrayed in a cowardly attempt to stoke political division," added Schneider, a Cook County commissioner.

---

Republican primary challenger Jeanne Ives is mounting a full-bore attack on Gov. Bruce Rauner’s conservative credentials, launching a TV ad featuring an actor portraying a transgender woman thanking the governor for signing a law expanding trans rights.

The “Thank you, Bruce Rauner” ad, scheduled to start airing Saturday, also depicts a young woman wearing a pink protest hat thanking the governor for making Illinois families “pay for my abortions.” And it has a hoodie-wearing man with his face partially hidden by a bandana thanking Rauner for making Illinois “a sanctuary state for illegal immigrant criminals.”

The ad was quickly deemed offensive by groups supporting transgender, abortion and immigration rights in Illinois. The spot also illustrated the hard-edged social ideology that Ives frequently has displayed in representing her Wheaton district in the General Assembly. The three-term lawmaker is now attempting to bring that approach statewide in a traditionally Democratic-leaning state.

“It is sad that a candidate for the office of governor of Illinois would seek to divide voters by attacking our neighbors, friends and colleagues who are newcomers and refugees, those of a different race, those who are transgender and poor women in need of health care,” ACLU Executive Director Colleen Connell said in a statement.

Anticipating questions and criticism, the Ives campaign put out a statement when it sent out the commercial.

“The ad represents Gov. Rauner's chosen constituents based on the policy choices he made,” Ives’ campaign said.

“Those Republican primary voters who don't know of Rauner's betrayals of conservatives need to know. Now they will,” the campaign said.

Ives’ camp also contended the ad represents a “fair and accurate representation of the implications” of Rauner’s policy choices. But the ad exaggerates the effects — and misstates the facts — about laws Rauner signed.

Take the ad’s most highly charged accusation. A deep-voiced actor wearing a dress says, “Thank you for signing legislation that lets me use the girls bathroom.”

The law Rauner signed did not address the use of bathrooms. Rauner signed legislation in August allowing transgender people to change the gender on their birth certificates with authorization from a medical professional confirming treatment. Previously, the law required proof of a surgical operation.

Brian C. Johnson, the CEO of Equality Illinois, the state's LGBTQ civil rights organization, said the group had hoped for “a higher level of discourse” from someone running for governor.

“At a time when our leaders should be bringing Illinoisans together, Jeanne Ives is launching a campaign of division and rancor. We need a governor who will stand up for all Illinoisans, not someone who will target transgender Illinoisans for her personal political benefit,” Johnson said in a statement.

On Saturday night, Rauner and his wife, Diana, are scheduled to make their first-ever appearance at the organization’s gala fundraising event and paid $25,000 as “platinum sponsors,” the group said. Democratic governor candidate J.B. Pritzker and his wife, Mary Kay, gave $15,000 as “gold sponsors” of the event. Pritzker chaired the group’s fundraiser in 2016.

Ives’ ad also features an actor wearing a hoodie and a handkerchief around his mouth saying, “Thank you Bruce Rauner for opposing law enforcement and making Illinois a sanctuary state for illegal immigrant criminals.”

A law Rauner signed in August ultimately was backed by major law enforcement groups. It prevents law enforcement from detaining someone solely on the basis of their legal status. It also prevents law enforcement turning over someone to immigration authorities without a judicial warrant.

The Illinois Business Immigration Coalition, which advocated for the law, issued a statement saying Ives’ ad “is full of misinformation, hate and bigotry.”

The ad’s depiction of a women’s rights protester talking about getting “abortions” was a reference to Rauner’s signature on legislation that expanded taxpayer-subsidized abortions for women covered by Medicaid and state employee health insurance.

Ives has maintained Rauner’s approval of the law motivated her candidacy after he had earlier told conservatives that he would veto the measure. Rauner has said his support for abortion rights was evident from his first bid for governor four years ago.

Terry Cosgrove, president and CEO of Personal PAC, an abortion rights political advocacy group, said Ives was appealing to “the craziest of the crazy” and displaying the “lowest form of politics.”

“She wants to make all abortions and the most commonly used from of birth control illegal in Illinois,” said Cosgrove, whose group has endorsed Pritzker in the Democratic primary. “This is an extreme right-wing position that totally ignores the reality of most people's lives.”

Another part of the ad features an African-American woman wearing a red Chicago Teachers Union T-shirt thanking Rauner “for making the rest of Illinois bail out Chicago teacher pensions and giving (Mayor) Rahm (Emanuel) everything he wanted and more.”

In late August, Rauner signed a historic rewrite of the state’s school funding formula after vetoing an earlier version that he contended was a “bailout” for the Chicago Public Schools.

The version the governor signed has the state picking up a larger share of city teacher pension costs, in line with all the other school districts in the state, while also allowing higher city property taxes to help fund pensions. Emanuel said the bill gave CPS all the money it was slated to get “and more.”

Asked for a reaction to the ad, Chicago Teachers Union spokeswoman Chris Geovanis emailed, “we’re not going to dignify this racist, sexist, homophobic piece of crap with a response.”