Fallout from veterans' home deaths reaches Illinois comptroller race
The political fallout from a Legionnaires’ disease outbreak at a downstate veterans home spilled into the comptroller’s race Thursday, as Democrat Susana Mendoza said her Republican challenger “violated the public trust and compromised her integrity” by sending an email that sought to tie the deaths to Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Duckworth.

“There is no excuse whatsoever for trying, for actually sending an email, trying to blame the deaths of 13 war heroes on, of all people, another decorated war hero who has absolutely nothing to do with this scandal,” Mendoza said of the outbreaks that began at the Quincy Veterans Home in 2015.

“Darlene Senger has violated the public trust and compromised her integrity in a most disqualifying way,” she said of the Republican challenger, who is a former aide to Gov. Bruce Rauner.

Mendoza made her comments at a West Loop news conference where she was joined by Democratic governor candidate J.B. Pritzker. Each accused Rauner of failing to act quickly in dealing with the health issue and demanded apologies to Duckworth, a disabled Iraq War veteran who served as director of the Illinois Department of Veterans’ Affairs from 2006 until 2009 — six years before the fatal outbreak.

Attempts to reach Senger were unsuccessful Thursday, and a request for comment from the Illinois GOP, which Rauner heavily subsidizes, went unanswered. But a Rauner spokeswoman defended the administration’s Quincy actions in 2015 and accused Mendoza and Pritzker of using veterans as “pawns in their political game.”

Earlier this week, Chicago Public Radio station WBEZ-FM released a Dec. 13, 2017, email from Senger involving the issue at the Quincy Veterans Home. Senger, a former lawmaker from Naperville, served as a deputy governor in the Rauner administration before stepping down to run as the GOP candidate for comptroller.

Senger’s email to Rauner’s chief of staff and other upper-echelon administration officials was in response to an emailed copy of a news story about state Sen. Tom Cullerton, D-Villa Park, seeking a legislative audit of potential mismanagement at the veterans home.

“We can maybe tie this back to Duckworth,” Senger’s email said. The radio station said it had waged a four-month battle to have the email released under the state’s Freedom of Information Act.

Since the deadly 2015 Legionella outbreak, cases of the disease have occurred annually at the veterans home despite millions of dollars spent on remediation efforts. On Tuesday, the Rauner administration proposed rebuilding the post-Civil War-era facility and using a new water system at a cost of up to $245 million. The report came days after Rauner’s veterans’ affairs director, Erica Jeffries, announced her resignation.

On Thursday, Mendoza accused Rauner and his administration of “essentially handing a death sentence to 13 war heroes” and having “robbed those veterans of their lives” by failing to promptly notify families of the home’s residents of the outbreak.

And Pritzker questioned why the governor didn’t propose a comprehensive plan sooner so that lawmakers could “have been working on this six months ago.”

Democratic state Rep. Linda Chapa LaVia of Aurora, who chairs the House Veterans Affairs Committee, accused the Rauner administration of “almost setting us up for failure so nothing does happen this time in the game” by issuing its report May 1. Lawmakers are scheduled to adjourn their spring session May 31 but have yet to pass a budget.

“We’re out of there at the end of May hopefully. But that’s the point,” she said. “It’s taken them so long in this administration to get us something so we can work.”

Still, Pritzker and other Democrats said legislation is in place and urged speedy adoption of the recommendations.

Rauner spokeswoman Rachel Bold accused Mendoza and Pritzker of “politically driven, ill-informed” statements that were “certainly not helpful to what should be a universal commitment to maintaining quality care for our veterans.”

Bold said that after the 2015 outbreak, the administration took “immediate action,” including calling in the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and implementing water remediation procedures and increased testing.

“Our administration is looking forward,” she said. “This week we released the plan that addresses ongoing efforts and lays out a clear path to provide a world-class facility for our heroes. There is ample time left this spring for the General Assembly to provide funding for this critical project.”

rap30@aol.com

Twitter @rap30

RELATED:

Rebuild veterans home plagued by Legionnaires' disease, Rauner task force says »

Rauner's point person on Quincy veterans home Legionnaires' crisis makes $20,000 a month »

Rauner’s veterans affairs director resigns in wake of 13 Legionnaires’ deaths at Quincy home »