Trump activates $1 trillion infrastructure plan, but challenges mount
President Donald Trump's pledge to create a program that funds $1 trillion in new infrastructure programs has kicked off with numerous meetings but few firm decisions, beset by understaffing, bureaucratic challenges and major questions about how to pay for everything.

Trump promised in a February speech to Congress that a $1 trillion infrastructure rebuilding plan would create "millions of new jobs," but few of those jobs are expected to materialize this year because no firm deadlines have been set and much of its work could spill into 2018.

Despite those challenges, the White House's infrastructure team has become one of the White House's broadest task forces, as Trump considers it to be a central plank of his promise to create more jobs. He has now activated a team of White House and cabinet-agency officials to identify a wide range of infrastructure projects across the United States and come up with a way to fund them, launching the internal deliberations to design the $1 trillion package he promised on the campaign trail.

On Wednesday, Trump hosts an infrastructure-focused luncheon with SpaceX founder Elon Musk, General Atlantic chief executive William Ford, and a number of others. On Tuesday, Trump discussed infrastructure with AFL-CIO Preisdent Richard Trumka.

And on Capitol Hill, some ideas for funding new projects were aired Wednesday at a Senate hearing by highway officials and other interested parties.

Behind the scenes, a government-wide effort kicked off last week, when White House National Economic Council Director Gary Cohn led a meeting with officials from 15 different federal agencies and departments, pressing them to come up with answers to six different planks for the infrastructure plan.

They were told they need to identify new projects, find existing projects that need help with completion, come up with policy reforms, regulatory reforms, and statutory reforms, and finally come up with a way to pay for it all.

"We're still kind of getting geared up," a senior administration official said.

The quick shift from popular campaign promise to a bogged down bureaucratic negotiation is the latest case study of how difficult it has been for Trump to pivot from thematic ideas to concrete action. He has run into similar quagmires on tax reform, repealing and replacing the Affordable Care Act, and forcing Mexico to pay for a wall along the U.S. border.

On infrastructure in particular, Trump faces challenges selling members of his own party on his plans once they gel, given GOP resistance to government spending programs.

"This is going to take a lot of work in the administration and on Capitol Hill," said Doug Heye, a Republican strategist and former Capitol Hill staffer. "They don't have the personnel right now to get that done."

White House officials are hopeful that the infrastructure planning, even if it moves slowly, will gain ground because of a methodical process they've put in place.

The agencies that attended last week's meeting, which work on issues like transportation, housing, and energy, are expected to continue meeting and planning, but the White House has not set any deadlines. White House officials envision the projects could include projects such as building or rebuilding ports, roads, bridges, airports, expanding access to broadband, and expanding access to housing, among other things.

The process that began at the meeting last week in the Diplomatic Room of the Eisenhower Executive Office Building represents a back-to-the-drawing-board moment following an exhaustive effort to identify infrastructure projects during the presidential transition.

Daniel Slane, an Ohio developer who worked on the infrastructure package for Trump during December and January, said he crafted a list of more than 50 projects and turned them over to Trump officials before he left the team on January 20. These projects included expanding access to the Port of Baltimore and the development of a wind power project in Oklahoma, among other things.

He said he has been frustrated by the slow start.

"It takes a long time to mobilize," Slane said in an interview, frustrated that the program hadn't been launched yet. "If you want to be moving dirt in the fall you have to start now. Now the weeks are turning into months."

He never had the authority, however, to expedite any projects and the Trump team had long planned on taking a more comprehensive review of the project.

One of the biggest challenges officials face is finding a way to pay for $1 trillion in projects.

Infrastructure projects can be politically popular, but funding them is tricky, particularly as Republicans are torn about growing levels of federal debt.

Trump has said he wants the financing to be a combination of public and private money. This could include tax credits for developers, toll projects, and government payments to private developers who issue debt to finance specific projects, among other things, a senior administration official said. No decision has been made on whether there will be a uniform funding plan or whether the White House will pursue different funding models for different projects, the senior administration official said, speaking on condition of anonymity because the deliberations are private.

Potentially complicating matters, Trump has said the infrastructure plan must be revenue neutral, meaning it cannot add to the federal debt. That means even if the government pays $200 billion of the $1 trillion package, it must find a way to raise revenue or cut cost elsewhere to offset the pricetag.

In anticipation of a major infrastructure initiative promised by Trump, the National Governors Association last month forwarded a list of 428 "shovel-ready" projects to the new administration.

The list, culled from the states, includes an array of transportation, water, energy and emergency-response projects. And the sheer size of it underscores the intense interest in the initiative from governors in both political parties.

Based on guidance from the Trump transition team, states were asked by the NGA in December to submit three to five projects apiece. Most far exceeded that number.

California alone offered 51 "priority" projects that Brian Kelly, secretary of the California State Transportation Agency, said represents more than $100 billion in targeted investments throughout the state.