2016 NFL Draft Results and Analysis: Round 1
Round 1

PICK(OVR) PLAYER/SCHOOL POS DRAFTED BY NOTES

1 1

Jared Goff California

QB

Los Angeles

From TEN Video Highlights

What he brings: Goff is an experienced three-year starter who is one of the most natural passers in this class. He has excellent pocket presence and feels pressure naturally to buy time while going through progressions. Goff shows accuracy and touch with the ability to deliver from an uneven platform. He has added weight and that eases concerns about his durability. He might need time adjusting to an NFL playbook coming from a wide-open system. He is one of the top two quarterbacks in this class and has the tools and acumen to develop into an above-average starter.



How he fits: Goff is more NFL-ready than Carson Wentz with more starts and experience against a higher level of competition, which likely factored into the Rams' decision. Coming from Cal's "Bear Raid" spread system, Goff will need time adapting and learning an NFL playbook. The good news for Goff is that the Rams have an excellent defense and a Pro Bowl RB in Todd Gurley they can lean on while Goff develops in the early going. -- Kevin Weidl

2 2

Carson Wentz North Dakota State

QB

Philadelphia

From CLE Video Highlights

What he brings: One of the top two quarterbacks in this class, Wentz is blessed with a strong combination of size and athleticism. He has very good arm strength to make all the necessary throws. He displays quality accuracy at all three levels. There are some concerns about his lack of experience and making the jump from the FCS level. However, Wentz has the tools, football intelligence, maturity and leadership skills to develop into a quality starting QB in the NFL.



How he fits: Wentz comes with an excellent physical skill set and overall makeup, but he has just 23 career starts and will be making a significant jump coming from the FCS level to the NFL. Similar to Goff, Wentz goes to an ideal situation -- assuming the Sam Bradford situation works itself out -- where he can have the luxury of being developed the proper way by sitting and learning from head coach Doug Peterson, who has been an excellent mentor at the position. -- Kevin Weidl

3 3

Joey Bosa Ohio State

DE

San Diego

Video Highlights

What he brings: He's the best edge defender and arguably one of the top two prospects in this class. Bosa displays heavy and active hands and possesses excellent core strength, along with the instincts to find the ball and finish plays as a run stopper. While he doesn't have elite quickness or bend, he is a relentless pass rusher who brings strong speed-to-power ability and the versatility to kick inside and cause disruption. He brings a great motor and approach to the game and will instantly upgrade a defensive front.



How he fits: We felt Bosa's best fit was as a DE in a base 4-3 scheme, but he has the size, power and versatility to line up in multiple spots along their 3-4 scheme. His best scenario may be to continue to try and bulk to line up at the 5-technique where he can help improve a 27th-ranked rush defense and provide some pass rush with his power and hands. -- Kevin Weidl

4 4

Ezekiel Elliott Ohio State

RB

Dallas

Video Highlights

What he brings: Elliott is a highly competitive runner with an excellent combination of agility, power and top-end speed for a bigger back. He also shows natural pass-catching ability, and he brings elite toughness to the field as a blocker. Elliott is the best running back in the class, and while he's not as dynamic of a runner as Adrian Peterson or Todd Gurley, his well-rounded skill set makes him the rare RB prospect who's actually worth a first-round pick. -- Kevin Weidl



How he fits: This may not appear to be a pressing need considering the Cowboys finished fifth in yards per rush last year, but Elliott has the vision, power and speed to immediately leapfrog Darren McFadden and Alfred Morris to take over as the primary ball carrier. He should also become quarterback Tony Romo's best friend as he catches the ball well and he's an effective pass-blocker. -- Steve Muench

5 5

Jalen Ramsey Florida State

CB

Jacksonville

Video Highlights

What he brings: An explosive athlete with the rare versatility to line up in multiple spots in the secondary, Ramsey has exceptionally long arms and the most natural movement skills of any defensive back in this class. He also plays with a physical edge in run support. Minor concerns include inconsistent ball skills and the fact that he does not always finish when provided the opportunity. Still, whether he lines up at cornerback or safety, he's the top defensive back in this class and will serve as an instant upgrade in the secondary.



How he fits: Ramsey is an ideal fit within Jacksonville's press-zone scheme, which should enable them to keep at cornerback if they wish. He also brings excellent versatility to provide defensive coordinator Todd Walsh a weapon to be a matchup in multiple rolls in the back end. Ramsey, along with the free-agent signing of Prince Amukamara, should instantly help improve the Jaguars' pass defense, which was 29th in the NFL last season. -- Kevin Weidl

6 6

Ronnie Stanley Notre Dame

OT

Baltimore

Video Highlights

What he brings: A left tackle prospect with three years of starting experience and quality awareness, Stanley excels in pass protection with natural feet, good agility and the length to keep edge rushers at bay. At this point, he's more of a positional run-blocker who will need to continue to get stronger and play with more aggression in this area. The second-best offensive tackle in this class, Stanley should be ready to step into a starting role from day one. -- Kevin Weidl



How he fits: We had Ole Miss offensive tackle Laremy Tunsil ranked ahead of Stanley, but this is an excellent pick nonetheless. The Ravens need an upgrade at left offensive tackle, where Eugene Monroe has missed 15 games over the past two seasons. Stanley isn't an elite run-blocker but he's effective enough to help improve a ground game that finished 26th in the league last year, and he's an outstanding pass-blocker. -- Steve Muench

7 7

DeForest Buckner Oregon

DE

San Francisco

Video Highlights

What he brings: Buckner is a top-five prospect with outstanding measurables, raw power and above-average athleticism. He's a long-levered run defender who has the ability to create penetration and hold the point of attack. He needs some refining as a pass rusher and has to learn to play with lower pad level, but Buckner has the quickness, heavy hands and speed-to-power capability to add value getting after the QB. The bottom line? He is a durable and productive defender, whose versatility will allow him to play multiple spots along the D-line.



How he fits: The 49ers are still looking to replenish the talent along the front seven and Buckner fits the mold. He needs to continue to get stronger but he has the ideal frame to fit as 5-technique. Buckner will instantly be an upgrade for their 29th-ranked rush defense and provides upside as a pass-rusher, if he gets the proper coaching. -- Kevin Weidl

8 8

Jack Conklin Michigan State

OT

Tennessee

From MIA through PHI and CLE Video Highlights

What he brings: Conklin is a former walk-on who plays with a chip on his shoulder. A powerful run-blocker, he has good inline power and is constantly working to finish blocks. He is not an elite athlete, but he has ideal length and enough athleticism to keep blockers at bay when his technique is sound. Conklin played left tackle in college, but he projects as a right tackle in the NFL. He has the physicality and toughness that is coveted at the position. -- Kevin Weidl



How he fits: Most felt that Titans first-year general manager Jon Robinson would target an offensive tackle had he not traded out of the first pick, considering Tennessee surrendered a league-high 54 sacks last year. Now he trades back into the top 10 to get one of the top three tackles in this draft. We projected Conklin as a right tackle but he tested better than expected and he could stay at left tackle, which would allow Taylor Lewan to shift over to the right side. -- Steve Muench

9 9

Leonard Floyd Georgia

OLB

Chicago

From TB Video Highlights

What he brings: Floyd is arguably the most versatile edge defender in this class who has an outstanding combination of length and athleticism. He displays natural instincts as a pass-rusher with quality first-step quickness and flexibility to gain the edge while also flashing an effective inside changeup move. Though his sack production dipped in 2015, he played as more of an off linebacker where he showcased his range as a space player in coverage. He will bring immediate help on third downs and should quickly push for a starting job.



How he fits: After helping find help at the inside linebacker position by signing Jerrell Freeman and Danny Trevathan in free agency, the Bears add the most versatile edge rusher in this class for defensive coordinator Vic Fangio's 3-4 defense. Floyd will add another pass-rushing option across from OLB Pernell McPhee, while also providing quality athleticism and range as a space player. -- Kevin Weidl

10 10

Eli Apple Ohio State

CB

NY Giants

Video Highlights

What he brings: Apple's 4.40 40-yard dash is the fourth-fastest by a defensive back 6-foot1 or taller at the NFL scouting combine since 2006. He's not only an athlete, though. He does an above-average job of reading routes in man coverage and reading quarterbacks' eyes in zone coverage on tape. He has to get stronger and improve his ability to match up with bigger receivers, but he has the frame to bulk up and develop into an excellent press corner.



How he fits: The Giants didn't have a pressing need at corner considering they signed Janoris Jenkins in free agency and Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie went to the Pro Bowl last year. Apple is a reach this early, but he has the frame, top-end speed and instincts to develop into an effective starter in defensive coordinator Steve Spagnuolo's scheme and he should provide quality depth early on. -- Steve Muench

11 11

Vernon Hargreaves III Florida

CB

Tampa Bay

From CHI Video Highlights

What he brings: Hargreaves is an undersized cornerback who is one of the most instinctive and natural man coverage cornerbacks in this class. He shows smooth and balanced movement skills to mirror receivers, and he displays excellent anticipation and ball awareness. On the flip side, he lacks ideal measurables and doesn't have elite top-end speed, which brings up some concerns about his downfield range against elite receivers at the next level. Overall, he has the football intelligence, the movement skills and the willingness in run support to develop into a quality starting cornerback outside the hashes or become one of the better nickelbacks in the NFL.



How he fits: First-year defensive coordinator Mike Smith's heavy zone scheme is a good fit for Hargreaves. This scheme will allow him to minimize the downfield range concerns and allow him to line up outside the hashes, while also letting him maximize his playmaking anticipation and ball skills to manufacture turnovers. Hargreaves provides the versatility to bump inside to the slot where he could ultimately end up and be most effective as a player. -- Kevin Weidl

12 12

Sheldon Rankins Louisville

DT

New Orleans

Video Highlights

What he brings: One of the more disruptive interior defenders in this class, Rankins is an undersized defensive tackle with very good quickness and lower-body explosiveness. He played multiple spots along Louisville's front and can potentially do the same in the NFL, although his best fit is as a 4-3 nose tackle. Rankins is a better run defender than pass-rusher at this point, but he's capable of developing into an every-down player. -- Kevin Weidl



How he fits: It should come as no surprise that the Saints went defense with their top pick considering they finished dead last in points allowed per game in addition to 31st in rushing, passing and total defense last year. Rankins is a plug-and-play starter who should make an immediate impact both as a pass-rusher and run defender. -- Steve Muench

13 13

Laremy Tunsil Mississippi

OT

Miami

From PHI Video Highlights

What he brings: Born to protect the quarterback, Tunsil is blessed with an outstanding combination of natural athleticism and length. He also has natural flexibility in his lower half to sink and anchor against power moves, displaying quality awareness in pass protection. Durability is a bit of concern, as Tunsil missed time because of injury in his first two seasons at Ole Miss. While he isn't a road-grading run-blocker, he has enough inline power and agility to cover up defenders and sustain blocks. One of the elite prospects in this class, Tunsil has the makings of a franchise left tackle for the next decade.



How he fits: This appears to be more as a value pick as it wasn't as big a need for Miami after signing Jermon Bushrod in free agency. However, left tackle Branden Albert turns 32 and Tunsil has the talent to quickly develop into a franchise left tackle if he is able to maintain his focus on and off the field. This pick makes sure they continue to help provide protection to enable the opportunity for QB Ryan Tannenhill to take more steps forward. -- Kevin Weidl

14 14

Karl Joseph West Virginia

S

Oakland

Video Highlights

What he brings: Joseph is coming off a season-ending knee injury, but he's a difference-maker when he's healthy and is the most complete safety in this class. He's rangy, he showed much improved diagnostic skills in coverage last season and he's a ball hawk. He's also an outstanding run defender with above average stopping power even though he doesn't have great size. Finally, he was a two-time team captain at West Virginia.



How he fits: The Raiders signed Reggie Nelson to help replace Charles Woodson but they need a safety capable of starting opposite him, as a torn MCL limited Nate Allen to five games in 2015. Joseph is the top safety on our board so he's a good value in addition to filling a need. The Raiders finished 13th in interceptions last year and Joseph has the potential to be a playmaker. -- Steve Muench

15 15

Corey Coleman Baylor

WR

Cleveland

From LA through TEN Video Highlights

What he brings: Coleman needs to make strides as a route runner, and his 2015 drop percentage (6.6 percent) is reason for concern, but he has the potential to get better in those areas. He does have something you can't coach up, and that's speed. He's fast enough to run past corners who don't give him a healthy cushion, and he has the burst to pull away from pursuit when he gets a crease after the catch. -- Steve Muench



How he fits: After losing Travis Benjamin to free agency and with the uncertainty of Josh Gordon's future, the Browns needed to add a spark on the perimeter. Coleman is the most explosive receiver in this class who has the speed to stretch the field and ability to create with the ball in his hands. Cleveland has done a nice job of maneuvering back to acquire picks while finding the receiver it targeted with a quality value. -- Kevin Weidl

16 16

Taylor Decker Ohio State

OT

Detroit

Video Highlights

What he brings: Decker is an experienced three-year starter who has played at both tackle positions. He doesn't have elite athleticism, and combined with his lack of length he projects as a right tackle at the next level. Decker doesn't have a lot of flash in his game, but he's one of the steadier offensive linemen on tape. He's a technician with the right makeup to become a very solid starter for a decade in the NFL. -- Kevin Weidl



How he fits: This pick makes sense from a value and need standpoint. The Lions need to improve a ground game that finished dead last in rushing yards per game last year and address the right tackle position. While he's just an average pass-blocker and the bulk of his experience is at left tackle, Decker is a powerful run-blocker with some experience lining up on the right. -- Steve Muench

17 17

Keanu Neal Florida

S

Atlanta

Video Highlights

What he brings: Neal is an outstanding run defender with above average stopping power and the potential to quickly develop into a starter. While his timed top-end speed (4.63 in the 40-yard dash) is slightly below average, he covers more ground than safeties who run similar times. He has the ability to diagnose quickly, meaning he gets an early break on the ball. -- Steve Muench



How he fits: William Moore departed in free agency, leaving a void at strong safety that will be filled by Neal. He brings a physical edge that defensive coordinator Richard Smith will welcome and need to infuse within the defense. Smith can also get creative with Neal in his pressure packages, as Neal is an underrated blitzer. -- Kevin Weidl

18 18

Ryan Kelly Alabama

OC

Indianapolis

Video Highlights

What he brings: Kelly has one of the highest floors in this class and that's why he's the top center on our board. While he's not an overpowering run-blocker, he gets into position and sustains both as a run-blocker and in pass protection. He also tested well in key categories for centers at the combine -- running a 5.03 40-yard dash, recording a 4.59 short shuttle and recording an 8-foot-7 broad jump. He's a team captain and three-year starter who makes sound line calls and has the football IQ to step in as a Day 1 starter.



How he fits: Right tackle is arguably a greater need for Indianapolis but the value isn't there with Decker coming off the board two picks earlier, and center is still a pressing need. The Colts fill that need by getting the top center on the board in Kelly who has one of the highest floors in this class and projects as an immediate starter. He also has the resume and smarts to quickly emerge as a leader who can keep the Colts' offensive line on the same page. -- Steve Muench

19 19

Shaq Lawson Clemson

DE

Buffalo

Video Highlights

What he brings: Lawson has a great looking frame, a strong football-character makeup and plays with infectious energy. He is an excellent run defender with heavy hands and quality upper-body power. While he has some athletic limitations, he possesses a strong combination of quickness, power and relentlessness as a pass-rusher. He will provide an immediate physical edge to a front seven and should quickly develop into an impact edge defender.



How he fits: Lawson adds some youth on the edge and helps ease the loss of Mario Williams' departure in free agency. He also plays with a relentless motor and physical edge that head coach Rex Ryan covets on defense. Lawson does come with some durability concerns due to a shoulder injury, but should push for a starting spot opposite of Manny Lawson quickly if he remains healthy. -- Kevin Weidl

20 20

Darron Lee Ohio State

OLB

NY Jets

Video Highlights

What he brings: One of the better space linebackers in this class, Lee is a rangy run defender who shows fast eyes and quality recognition skills. His best value as a prospect comes on third down, during which he has the athleticism to matchup in zone or man coverage. He is an underrated blitzer. While he is undersized and will never be a strong point-of-attack defender, Lee is an ideal fit for today's game and should quickly develop into an impactful weak-side linebacker. -- Kevin Weidl



How he fits: Lee is an excellent value at this point. Though he doesn't appear to be an ideal fit for the Jets' scheme, he has the potential to develop into an effective weakside inside linebacker in New York's base 3-4 scheme and the Jets have a need there with Demario Davis signing with the Browns this offseason. At the very least, he has the range and athletic ability to make an immediate impact on third down. -- Steve Muench

21 21

Will Fuller Notre Dame

WR

Houston

From WSH Video Highlights

What he brings: Averaging more than 20 yards per catch in 2015, he has elite top-end speed and is the top vertical receiving threat. He also shows an adequate feel as a route runner and is an underrated runner after the catch. His best value will come in a heavy vertical passing game with a strong-armed quarterback. However, though he can deliver a big play down the field at any point, teams must also be ready for some drops as he does not appear to be a natural-hands catcher and has the highest drop percentage of any receiver in this class (8.6 percent).



How he fits: After signing QB Brock Osweiler in free agency, the Texans needed to infuse speed at receiver to complement his big arm. Fuller fits the bill here as he ran the fastest 40-yard dash at the combine and is the top vertical threat in this class. He should have plenty of one-on-one opportunities to manufacture big plays due to the attention WR Deandre Hopkins will garner lining up on the opposite side. -- Kevin Weidl

22 22

Josh Doctson TCU

WR

Washington

From HOU Video Highlights

What he brings: The best receiver in this class tracking and playing the ball in the air, Doctson has the size, leaping skills and focus to present a one-on-one matchup problem down the field outside the hashes. He needs to add some polish and comes with some minor durability concerns, but he has enough speed and agility to develop and should quickly become a quarterback's best friend in the red zone.



How he fits: This may not seem like a need for Washington, but Pierre Garcon and DeSean Jackson are both entering contract years with high cap numbers, plus Jackson missed seven games with injuries last year. In addition, Doctson is an excellent value at this point and he should quickly earn the trust of quarterback Kirk Cousins with his ability to come down with 50-50 balls downfield. He's also a big threat in the red zone. -- Kevin Weidl

23 23

Laquon Treadwell Mississippi

WR

Minnesota

Video Highlights

What he brings: Treadwell is a highly competitive and physical receiver who thrives in contested situations. He isn't a burner, but he is a quality route runner who has the size, strength and length to create late separation. Treadwell is a strong and balanced runner after the catch and takes a lot of pride as a run-blocker. Though he might never be an elite No. 1 receiver, he's arguably the top at this position who will instantly upgrade a receiving corps.



How he fits: The Vikings found great value with their 2015 fifth-round selection of WR Stefon Diggs and continue to try to add weapons on the perimeter. Treadwell is the strong and physical receiver who has the ability to win in the contested situations Minnesota has been missing outside the hashes and in the red zone. With the addition of Treadwell, while also addressing the offensive line in free agency, general manager Rick Spielman continues to build around his young quarterback, Teddy Bridgewater. -- Kevin Weidl

24 24

William Jackson III Houston

CB

Cincinnati

Video Highlights

What he brings: There has been a lot of buzz building around Jackson leading up to the draft. He has excellent top-end speed and the fluidity to turn and run with NFL receivers. Although Jackson doesn't show elite fluidity in space, he has above-average balance and foot speed for a 6-foot-1, 193-pound cornerback. Finally, he has above-average ball skills, and he's a threat to score when he does come down with the ball.



How he fits: In a perfect world the Bengals would have gotten a receiver here and filed a more pressing need, but the value wasn't there with the top four WRs already off the board. Jackson is a good value here and he has the length as well as the speed to excel in defensive coordinator Paul Guenther's unit. Corner is also a need considering that Adams Jones is 32 years old and Leon Hall, 31, is an unrestricted free agent coming off back surgery. -- Steve Muench

25 25

Artie Burns Miami (FL)

CB

Pittsburgh

Video Highlights

What he brings: Burns has a long and wiry frame with above-average fluidity and top-end speed. He displays quality mirror skills with the ability to hold up both in press or off-man technique. He also shows good range. He has improved his ball awareness throughout the course of his career. He needs to get stronger, not only in coverage but also supporting the edge as a run defender. He has a chance to add immediate depth and quickly push for a starting spot as a cover-cornerback outside the hashes.



How he fits: The Steelers needed to infuse youth and talent into a secondary that struggled to find any consistency and ranked 30th in the league in 2015. Burns is a strong fit within defensive coordinator Keith Butler's press-zone scheme due to his length, speed and range. Pittsburgh should be improved in the back end with the additions of Burns, as well as Senquez Golson coming back (2015 second-round pick who missed all of his rookie season with a shoulder injury). -- Kevin Weidl

26 26

Paxton Lynch Memphis

QB

Denver

From SEA Video Highlights

What he brings: At just under 6-foot-7 and 244 pounds, Lynch has one of the strongest arms and highest ceilings in this class. He's an above-average athlete, showing the ability to extend plays with his mobility and pick up first downs when he scrambles. Lynch lacks polish, though. He played in a scheme that simplified his reads, and he doesn't always see the entire field despite his height. He fails to locate the open man at times.



How he fits: Trades with the 49ers and/or the Eagles never materialized and Mark Sanchez isn't the long-term answer at QB, so general manager John Elway fills the Broncos greatest need by taking Lynch. Lynch is a developmental prospect and this is a bit of a reach, as he needs to work on his ability to read coverages and isn't ready to start right away. However, he has great size, a strong arm and his mobility makes him a good fit for head coach Gary Kubiak's offense. -- Steve Muench

27 27

Kenny Clark UCLA

DT

Green Bay

Video Highlights

What he brings: An excellent run-stopper, Clark has the core strength to anchor when teams run at him and enough quickness to disrupt plays in the backfield. In addition, he made strides as a pass-rusher in 2015. He has the first-step quickness as well as the athletic ability to continue to get better in that area. Clark has some versatility as he's capable of lining up on the inside in a base four-man front and on the outside in a three-man front.



How he fits: Green Bay finished 21st in the league in rushing yards allowed last year and nose tackle B.J. Raji retired. They needed a nose tackle capable of pushing Letroy Guion for the starting job and Clark is more than capable of moving past him on the depth chart. Clark is an outstanding run-stuffer with the strength to anchor Green Bay's 3-4 defense and he doesn't turn 21 until October. -- Steve Muench

28 28

Joshua Garnett Stanford

OG

San Francisco

From KC Video Highlights

What he brings: Garnett is the best interior run-blocker in the class. He has a massive and well-proportioned frame with an excellent inline power base. Garnett improved his overall balance in 2015, and he has the ability to drive and steer defenders off the ball when he is able to gain quality initial positioning. He has improved his awareness and pass protection and his longer arms for a guard help him keep rushers at bay. He should immediately add depth on the interior offensive line and quickly develop into a starter, ideally for a power-man blocking scheme. -- Kevin Weidl



How he fits: Offensive guard is a need for the 49ers, and Garnett is the top offensive guard on our board. He's a physical run-blocker who should help improve a ground game that finished 21st in the league in rushing yards per game last year. It's also interesting that he took part in one of the better battles we saw on tape when he faced off against DeForest Buckner last year. However, this is too early for him to come off the board in our estimation. -- Steve Muench

29 29

Robert Nkemdiche Mississippi

DT

Arizona

Video Highlights

What he brings: One of the biggest boom-bust prospects in this class, Nkemdiche has a rare combination of size, explosiveness and natural athleticism but comes with some risk both on and off the field. He is a versatile defender who flashes as quick and as explosive a first step as any defensive tackle in this class to create penetration up the field. However, while he is very disruptive on tape, he hasn't been productive and can show better instincts to finish. In addition, there are major red flags with his off-the-field character and that could ultimately determine whether he can reach his potential as a player. -- Kevin Weidl



How he fits: Nkemdiche's best fit is probably at 3-technique in a base four man-front but he's a unique talent with the potential to develop into an effective 3-4 defensive end as well, and the Cardinals had a need there. Perhaps more importantly, this is a good landing spot for Nkemdiche, who fell this far only because of concerns about his maturity. Arizona has the leadership in place to help him stay focused and realize his considerable potential. -- Steve Muench

30 30

Vernon Butler Louisiana Tech

DT

Carolina

Video Highlights

What he brings: Blessed with a rare physical skill set, Butler has one of the highest ceilings of the defensive tackle crop. He brings an excellent combination of size and strength to go along with very good athleticism for a 325-pound defensive tackle. He needs refining as a pass-rusher, particularly using his hands more efficiently, but his ability to win with both quickness and power on the interior provides him with upside in this area. There are flashes of dominance on his tape, however his motor will run hot and cold at times. He must learn to play with more consistency if he wants to reach the Pro Bowl-caliber potential he has as a prospect. -- Kevin Weidl



How he fits: Carolina finished fourth in rushing yards allowed per game last year and defensive tackles Kawann Short and Star Lotulelei form a formidable starting tandem, but both are entering contract years and Butler is a good value at this point in the first round. He improves depth and puts the Panthers in an even better position in terms of defensive line depth. -- Steve Muench