Jeb Bush's War on Poverty revamp
The tragedy that took place on the streets of Baltimore starts with a young man whose life ended far too soon. We will hopefully learn the full truth surrounding that death, and the initial reports are disturbing. For the family now bereaved, for the community in which he lived, there is only loss, and no amount of anger can close the hole in their hearts.

We also must recognize the tragedy of a community ripped apart by those who live in it. We saw stores getting looted. We saw a senior center set afire. We saw cars smashed and windows shattered. Those who permitted this to happen must be held accountable because public safety is the first responsibility for those who lead our cities.

These events inevitably generate extensive discussion and analysis of how this could come to be in a country as great as ours. It shouldn't be surprising that, in response, voices on the left tick off tired explanations for urban violence and anger, explanations that too often revolve around spending more on government programs or weakening criminal laws that make communities safer.

Trouble is, from the War on Poverty to the persistence of liberal big city mayors, the same government programs have been in place for over a half-century — and they have failed. We have spent trillions of dollars in the War on Poverty, and poverty not only persists, it is as intractable as ever. This represents a broken promise. And it feeds the anger of Baltimore.

Now is the time for solutions — new approaches that reflect what we've learned by fighting poverty and hopelessness elsewhere. These solutions should be based on ensuring that every person has the ability to rise up the income ladder if we create an environment that gives each of them the opportunity to do so.

If our government leaders want to attack poverty, they should first acknowledge that an effective anti-poverty program is a strong family, led by two parents. The evidence on this is incontrovertible. And conservatives should not be afraid to say that as the family breaks down, so does opportunity. Our goal should be to build up families.

Jeb Bush, a possible Republican candidate for U.S. President, responds to questions about the recent race riots in Baltimore and poverty in America at a North Carolina GOP headquarters event in Raleigh, NC on May 1, 2015. (YouTube) Jeb Bush, a possible Republican candidate for U.S. President, responds to questions about the recent race riots in Baltimore and poverty in America at a North Carolina GOP headquarters event in Raleigh, NC on May 1, 2015. (YouTube) SEE MORE VIDEOS

Then we must take aim at our deeply failed education system. The schools in our cities are not underfunded. But they nevertheless fail to prepare their students for the demands of life — college, a job and the responsibilities of citizenship.

If we raise standards, demand accountability, reward great teachers and provide meaningful choices, we can create the tools that parents and kids need to rise up from poverty. Baltimore spends more than $15,000 per student each school year. That is more than virtually every developed nation in the world spends. And the third-highest for a large school system in America. Yet Baltimore's results are among the worst.

It is shameful that we have allowed the teachers unions and the economic interest of adults to leave school systems in cities like Baltimore in shambles with no plan for fixing them. Low-income kids have the God-given ability to learn and to succeed just like anyone else does. It is incumbent upon us to give them that chance.

If our government leaders want to attack poverty, they should first acknowledge that an effective anti-poverty program is a strong family, led by two parents. — Jeb Bush

To do so requires policies that encourage people in the toughest neighborhoods to start up businesses. Reducing regulations, removing expensive licensing requirements for startups and cutting occupational fees would make a substantial difference and give self-starters a chance to create high-paying jobs and hope where they live.

It can get better. I know it because I've seen it as governor, where a combination of education reforms and pro-growth policies helped raise household incomes up and down the income ladder — and gave a generation of children a real chance to rise up.

We can't afford to wait any longer. Today's opportunity gap threatens to widen as the demands of tomorrow's economy get higher, putting those first rungs on the job ladder further away from those who weren't raised in a strong household, weren't given a real education and didn't have anyone in their community fighting for their future.

Those who are struggling the most are the ones who will be most transformed by conservative solutions that give everyone the right to rise. Because with economic opportunity, education and support from family and community, anyone can share in the promise that is America, achieve earned success and realize their dreams.

Jeb Bush, former governor of Florida, is the honorary chairman of the Right to Rise PAC. He is expected to announce his candidacy for president.