Jeanne Ives responds to criticisms of her attack ad
At the close of her speech to the City Club of Chicago Monday afternoon, Republican gubernatorial hopeful Jeanne Ives responded to criticism of an attack ad her campaign begain airing over the weekend against incumbent Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner.

Here are her remarks on that topic in full:

"What the commercial that is generating the expected hysteria from the expected quarters attempted to do — admittedly, provocatively — was to properly and truthfully characterize the extreme issue positions Rauner took and their implications. The commercial does not attack people. It tackles issues by truthfully illustrating the constituencies Rauner has chosen to serve to the exclusion of others.

"Rauner chose Exelon fatcats over taxpayers. Rauner chose Rahm and CPS schools over suburban and downstate schools. Rauner chose Planned Parenthood and Personal PAC over pro-lifers or even simply over abiding the sprit of the Hyde Amendment, which remains in force at the federal level. And Rauner chose the political agenda of the LGBTQ movement over the privacy interests of moms and dads who don’t want their daughters forced to be in the same bathrooms and locker rooms as men.

"This is a real issue being litigated in Palatine Distinct 211 and across the country. Last month a Wisconsin school district agreed to pay a transgender student $800,000 to settle a lawsuit she filed in a successful attempt to share bathrooms nand overnight sleeping quarters with male high school students. There was a story in the New York Post over the weekend about a father-daughter dance at a Staten Island elementary school being cancelled because it offended the trans rights community. I’m sorry, but as parents of a daughter in elementary school, my husband Paul and I are not on board for this.

"As Christians we believe every person is made in God’s image and deserving of dignity. I respect people who are different from me. I respect people who have different views than me. In fact it seems that the converse is not true among many (with) whom I disagree. They shouldn’t be silenced. But neither should I. And I won’t be.

"And if I could make one more comment on this topic in the context of the real-world dynamic of this election and to some extent all elections. I wish the Sir Galahad theory of politics — I shall win because I am more pure of heart — was true. The occupants of the halls of power would be a lot different. This race would be over and fortunately, it isn’t. Unfortunately we have six weeks, not six months, to break through and capture people’s attentions, introduce me, educate 800,000 GOP primary voters and expose Rauner’s betrayals to them, and distill it all to a single question we want primary voters asking themselves as they walk in the voting booth starting with early voting in as little as three days.

"That is simply not possible solely with good editorial board performances, community events, field work and the dispassionate presentation of a detailed case on the merits. I would prefer that method, actually. Obviously, the tone and illustration of the truth do not comport with everybody’s sensibilities, but accomplishing the objective described is fraught with risk. Risk that’s worth doing, not not doing.

"The truth is uncomfortable for some and ignored by others. Certainly it has been a stranger to Bruce Rauner during his time as governor. But I was first taught by my parents and then swore a code to my fellow cadets in this country. I will not lie cheat or steal, nor tolerate those that do. My husband Paul and I have lived by that code our entire adult lives, we have imparted that sense of honor in our children, and that’s the code I will live by as governor."

Republican primary challenger Jeanne Ives is mounting an attack on Gov. Bruce Rauner’s conservative credentials, launching a TV ad featuring an actor portraying a transgender woman thanking the governor for signing a law expanding trans bathroom access. Republican primary challenger Jeanne Ives is mounting an attack on Gov. Bruce Rauner’s conservative credentials, launching a TV ad featuring an actor portraying a transgender woman thanking the governor for signing a law expanding trans bathroom access. SEE MORE VIDEOS

In the Q&A portion of the event, the topic came up again.

"I think it’s edgy, absolutely. I want to know why people are so offended by it. What’s so offensive about the ad? The ad is a policy ad. That’s what it is. It’s an accurate depiction of the polices that Rauner put in place. Look, I talk about it on the stump. My literatures has all these issues laid out there.

"The fact that you saw a visual representation of the policies he put in place is maybe considered offensive. I don’t understand that. That’s exactly the fat-cat Exelon guy, that’s exactly who you bailed out. Hello! The teacher from CPS, that’s whose pension you just bailed out. The transgender man, that’s exactly what, typically, a transgender man looks like (groans in the audience). Sir, with all due respect, I’ve had them show up at my door, so ..."

(Dave Lundy, left-leaning political consultant, calling from the audience: You want to know what’s offensive and you’re asking what’s offensive. That was offensive.)

"Here’s the deal. That is an accurate representation of what the policies look like on the ground. We just put it in a visual."