Ms. Ives, here is what's wrong with your ad
Republican state Rep. Jeanne Ives, who wants to be governor of Illinois, campaigned into controversy a few days ago by releasing a television commercial that disturbed a lot of people, us included.

Ives heard the criticism and deflected it. “I want to know why people are so offended by it,” she said Monday during an appearance at the City Club of Chicago. “What’s so offensive about the ad? The ad is a policy ad. That’s what it is.”

OK, let’s talk about that ad and the message it sends about the candidate.

Ives, seeking to defeat Gov. Bruce Rauner in the Republican primary election, is a social conservative who believes her views on issues such as abortion and gay and transgender rights will resonate with GOP voters across the state. The TV commercial is a spoof that attacks Rauner by using actors to “thank” him for supporting their progressive causes.

The ad is not subtle. It’s harsh. Several actors appear in the spot, including a young woman in a pink cat protest hat who thanks Rauner for expanding taxpayer-supported abortions, and a man whose face is covered by a kerchief who thanks Rauner for protecting “illegal immigrant criminals.” The portrayals are demeaning.

The shocking moment is near the start of the ad, when an adult male actor with a deep voice appears. He’s wearing a dress and carrying a purse. Looking at the camera, he says, “Thank you for signing legislation that lets me use the girls bathroom.” The reference is to a bill Rauner signed that makes it easier for transgender persons to change the gender designation on their birth certificates. That bill did not address the use of school bathrooms so the claim is misleading, while the portrayal of a transgender person is mean-spirited and inaccurate.

Republican primary challenger Jeanne Ives is mounting an attack on Gov. Bruce Rauner’s conservative credentials, launching a TV ad featuring an actor portraying a transgender woman thanking the governor for signing a law expanding trans bathroom access. Republican primary challenger Jeanne Ives is mounting an attack on Gov. Bruce Rauner’s conservative credentials, launching a TV ad featuring an actor portraying a transgender woman thanking the governor for signing a law expanding trans bathroom access. SEE MORE VIDEOS

Yes, the ad is directed at Rauner and lampoons his political record. We get that, and we get that campaigns are rough and tumble. “The commercial does not attack people, it tackles issues,” Ives said. That’s where she’s wrong. The Ives campaign created a TV ad with bouncy background music that featured cartoonish liberal characters, and included a man in a dress who claims he can now use the girls bathroom. The ad goes well beyond tweaking Rauner. It mocks and belittles Illinois residents who shouldn’t face derision from a gubernatorial candidate. Ives is punching down, and in a way that strikes many voters as intolerant of people who already face a lot of that.

We already knew that Ives has troubling views about homosexuality and gay marriage. In 2013, Ives gave an interview to a Catholic radio show in which she called gay marriage a “disordered relationship” and said the homosexual community is trying to redefine society. “They are trying to weasel their way into acceptability so they can then start to push their agenda down into the schools because this give them some sort of legitimacy,” Ives said.

So gay relationships lack legitimacy? We asked Ives if she stood by those hurtful words when she appeared with Rauner at a Tribune Editorial Board debate. Her reply was cautious. “I still believe in traditional marriage,” she said, but as governor she wouldn’t seek to challenge the gay marriage law. “I have no problem working with anybody no matter what their disposition,” she added.

Fine, but now with the TV commercial we have a fuller understanding of Ives’ views. She wants to be governor of all the people, yet she reveals a side of her character that’s unbecoming of an elected leader. Ives disparages the LGBT community to ignite her campaign.

What’s offensive? The ad doesn’t dwell on her policy positions. Its scoffing tone shows that Ives believes people who are different from her are fair game for ridicule. That’s a problem for someone who wants to be governor.

Join the discussion on Twitter @Trib_Ed_Board and on Facebook.