City Clerk Valencia and Mayor Emanuel Officially Launch the Chicago CityKey Program
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

April 26, 2018

CONTACT:

Kate LeFurgy

312.744.2507

CITY CLERK VALENCIA AND MAYOR EMANUEL OFFICIALLY LAUNCH THE CHICAGO CITYKEY PROGRAM

Open to all Chicagoans, the"3-in-1” government issued id provides benefits and discounts for over 30 cultural institutions, restaurants and sports teams throughout the City

Mayor Rahm Emanuel and City Clerk Anna M. Valenica today officially launched the CityKey program. CityKey is a 3-in-1 card serving as a government-issued ID, Ventra card and library card all in one. While the card allows holders to pick up a prescription, sign a lease or get married, it also offers all Chicagoans an array of benefits and discounts to more than 30 businesses, cultural and financial institutions, restaurants and sports teams throughout the city.

"If you live in Chicago, you should feel a part of our city – not apart from it,” said Mayor Rahm Emanuel. "The CityKey breaks down barriers and allows all Chicagoans to take advantage of the very best our City has to offer."

The new suite of benefits offers Chicagoans a wide array of options for enjoying the City from discounts at theaters and museums, to discounts at restaurants and gyms. CityKey holders will get 50 percent off tickets at the Goodman Theater, one free day at the Field Museum, 25 percent off Navy Pier park attractions and more.

“We are thrilled that we have over 30 businesses, cultural and financial institutions, restaurants and sports teams signed up for the initial launch of the CityKey program to offer benefits and discounts to cardholders across the Chicago area including the Field Museum, Goodman Theater, Chicago Children’s Museum, Lyft, Chicago Fire and the Joffrey Ballet to name a few, and we know that more will join us soon,” said Clerk Valencia. “One of the initial goals of the program was to create a card that everyone would want to carry in their wallet, and by partnering with both private and public institutions, cardholders from all walks of life can get benefits for just being a Chicago resident.”

Residents can begin scheduling appointments with the City Clerk’s office to apply for a CityKey. The first 100,000 applicants will receive the card free of charge. Cards will be printed starting on Monday, April 30 at Kennedy King College’s W Building located at 6301 S. Halsted Street from 10:00 AM until 7:00 PM. Additional printing events will be taking place in neighborhoods across Chicago.

U.S. Veterans will have the option to have a special insignia located under the cardholder’s photo on their ID, indicating their service in the U.S. Armed Services. Cardholders will also have the option to include intent to donate organs, as well as emergency contact or medical information.

A full list of benefits and discounts include:

Name Discount Sports Team Chicago Fire Discounted ticket prices on select games. Chicago Red Stars 10% discount on all Red Star tickets Chicago Sky 20% off tickets Arts & Cultural Institutions 2nd Story $5 off tickets Broadway in Chicago Discounts on a show-to-show basis Chicago Children's Museum $2 off regular priced admission ticket purchased at the museum's admissions desk Ed Paschke Art Center 25% off memberships priced between $75 and $500 Field Museum 1 free day Goodman Theatre 50% discount on four mezzanine tickets per production through August 2018. Subject to availability. Haitian American Museum of Chicago 10% off gift shop Joffrey Ballet 10% off tickets to select performances Lincoln Park Zoo 10% off membership National Museum of Puerto Rican Arts & Culture 10% off gift shop National Museum of Mexican Art 10% off gift shop National Veterans Art Museum 25% off membership Windy City Play House 15% off all tickets Entertainment Cinemas Entertainment Movie ticket and Small popcorn $8.50 Navy Pier 20% off pier park attractions Food & Restaurants Back of the Yards Coffee 10% discount Brew Brew Coffee and Tea 10% discount Carbon Arc Bar & Board 15% discount on food, dine-in only, offer not valid on already discounted items Chef Sara's Cafe Tuesday 10% off Dulcelandia 10% off candy, piñatas and frozen yogurt Jugrnaut Chicago 15% off Majani Soulful Vegeterian Cuisine 5% discount Surf's Up South Shore Tuesday - Thursday 10% Off The Jibarito Stop 10% off Uncle Remus 10% off Apparel & Beauty Monarch Thrift Shop 10% off Replica Chi 10% off apparel Rinse 6 months free delivery Urbane Blades 30% off first time visit Other Services Lawndale Fitness Center One free month of membership when signing up for auto payment Lyft 25% discount on first five rides or next five rides Mind + Hand 10% off space rental & co-working space membership, certain courses Park Whiz 5% off parking Financial Institutions Seaway Acceptable form of Identification at the following locations Second Federal Acceptable form of Identification at the following locations

To support the program’s implementation, the City’s 2017 and 2018 Budget allocated $1 million to the program.

For a complete list of printing events or to schedule an appointments at City Hall to apply for a CityKey, visit at www.chicityclerk.com/chicagocitykey.

For businesses interested in becoming a Chicago CityKey partner, download the application by visiting: www.chicityclerk.com/chicagocitykey.

Why partners are signing up to be a part of the CityKey program

“We have been in the community for over 50 years in various capacities not only as a business but also as a community partner, giving back to the residents whether it’s through Block Clubs or local organizations. It was an easy decision to partner with the City as we have four generations of customers which makes it easy to give back,” said Charmaine Rickette, President and CEO of Uncle Remus Saucy Fried Chicken.

"Here at the Field Museum, it is our mission to fuel journeys of discovery and find solutions for a brighter future rich in nature and culture. All of this begins with access — so when the city reached out to us about getting involved in CityKey as a community partner, we were honored to take part," said Chicago Field Museum CMO, Raymond DeThrone. "The Chicago CityKey program unlocks opportunities for all Chicagoans to take their own journeys of discovery. Bit by bit, we’re building that brighter future, rich in nature and culture, for all who call this city home."

“Goodman Theatre is thrilled to participate in the CityKey program,” said Roche Schulfer, Goodman Theatre Executive Director. “As Chicago’s flagship not-for-profit theater, we believe in making our productions and programs accessible to all—and we are grateful to the City of Chicago and City Clerk’s Office for making such an important commitment.”

“Second Federal and Seaway, both divisions of Self-Help Federal Credit Union, have a long legacy of serving Chicagoans. We are honored and privileged to be among one of the first financial institutions to participate in the CityKey program, which aligns with our mission of “Economic Opportunity for All,” said Rodolfo Medina, President of Second Federal.

“The Joffrey is committed to enriching lives by making the arts accessible,” said GregCameron, Executive Director of The Joffrey Ballet. “The CityKey initiative is about providing opportunities to Chicagoans, and we are proud to partner with the Mayor’s office to make sure our doors remain open to all, especially those who call Chicago home.”

“Partnering on the CityKey program Initiative was an easy decision for the Sky. The priorities of the program align with our core value of diversity and inclusion. Our hope is that this program will help create a more inclusive city for all of its residents,” said Jim Burda, Chief Revenue Officer, for the Chicago Sky.

“Goodman Theatre is thrilled to participate in the CityKey program,” said Roche Schulfer, Goodman Theatre Executive Director. “As Chicago’s flagship not-for-profit theater, we believe in making our productions and programs accessible to all—and we are grateful to the City of Chicago and City Clerk’s Office for making such an important commitment.”

“Chicago Children’s Museum and other cultural institutions provide communities the opportunity to connect to each other and the City as a whole,” said Chicago Children’s Museum President and CEO Jennifer Farrington. "The CityKey does the same— it unlocks the potential of this great city to its citizens."

###