State funding for buses, lunches and special ed arrives late
The state budget crunch continues to affect schools' bottom line despite the promise last summer by lawmakers and the governor to fully fund K-12 education.

In addition to general state aid, which schools have been receiving, districts receive four categorical payments throughout the year to cover costs that include transportation, special education and free and reduced-price lunches.

With little in the state till because the ongoing budget stalemate, the Illinois comptroller cannot pay bills on time, including providing schools with their quarterly categorical installments.

It's taken the state six months for the comptroller to write Indian Prairie School District 204 a check for its final categorical payment of the 2015-16 fiscal year.

Jay Strang, chief school business official, said District 204 on Tuesday received $4.8 million, "our last categorical payment from last year."

"The state is behind in paying our first categorical payment for this year. At this point of the year we should have received $6.5 million for this year," Strang said.

A spokeswoman for the Comptroller's Office last week confirmed checks for the fourth categorical payment would be released to schools at the end of the year.

If and when schools will receive more funding is a concern for many school officials, said Mike Chamness, director of communications for the Illinois Association of School Administrators.

As the budget standoff continues, Chamness said, school administrators he's spoken to are increasingly concerned the state won't be able to fulfill general state aid payments it promised.

"We have a full-year budget, so the presumption is that will carry through the school year," he said. "But the reality is if the checkbook has no funds in it, it may end up affecting public schools this spring.

"We are grateful the state fully funded general state aid for the first time in several years, but they're putting money in the left pocket and taking money from the right pocket by not making categorical payments," Chamness said.

Chamness said as a result of the delay some districts are in worse shape today than at this time a year ago.

Because the $4.8 million was received long after the 2015-16 fiscal year books were closed, Indian Prairie officials expect the district will be listed under review for its deficit spending when the Illinois State Board of Education releases its annual School District Financial Profile Scores report that gauges the financial health of districts.

The previous year District 204 was among the 568 districts making the top category, or Financial Recognition. There are four categories of financial health.

Tribune wire services contributed.

subaker@tribpub.com

Twitter @SBakerSun1