Schneider: What Trump doesn't understand about the environment
I always look forward to Earth Day as a moment to celebrate the responsible progress we've made over the past 47 years to improve the quality of our air, water, and environmental stewardship. Just last year, the celebrations were particularly meaningful as the United States and more than 170 other countries marked the occasion by signing the historic Paris Agreement to voluntarily lower global greenhouse gas emissions.

Sadly, as we observe Earth Day again this week, advocates for our environment may find little cause for celebration. In fact, the future of the Paris agreement hangs in doubt as President Trump contemplates fulfilling a campaign promise to unilaterally withdraw the United States from its obligations.

Our global atmosphere does not respect national boundaries, and the international commitments under the Paris Agreement cannot be met without the full cooperation and participation of multiple countries. Major world economies, including China and India, have committed to the Agreement; the United States must remain committed as well for it to have any chance of success.

But regardless of whether the United States formally leaves the Paris Agreement, the Trump Administration has already moved to undercut American efforts to meet our goals to reduce the emissions driving global climate change. President Trump signed an executive order rescinding President Obama's Clean Power Plan that aimed to cut emissions from U.S. power plants. In the same order, he weakened restrictions to allow more heavy emission power plants to be built, reconsidered regulations on methane (an even more potent greenhouse gas), and jumpstarted coal mining leases on federal lands.

Trump disingenuously claims that cutting environmental safeguards will put Americans back to work, but this economic argument reflects a fundamental misunderstanding of the problem. The transition to clean energy should not be viewed as a burden to be overcome, but rather, an extraordinary job creation opportunity for the United States.

Already more than 3 million people work in green energy jobs. More than 260,000 Americans are employed by the domestic solar industry — three times as many workers as employed by the entire coal mining industry.

America is home to the best researchers, advanced manufacturers, and entrepreneurs in the world. There is no reason we cannot lead the planet in manufacturing solar panels and wind turbines, engineering the smart energy grid, and inspiring the next great companies that will be the titans of a new green energy economy.

Whether this Administration embraces it or not, the global transition to cleaner energy is happening. Burying our head in the sand and ignoring both the global consequences and international consensus on this issue is not a strategy for future success in our increasingly interconnected world. Rather, it only ensures the green energy companies, and the jobs they will bring, will be created and filled by workers overseas rather than here at home.

The business community certainly understands this. Shortly after the election, more than 360 companies from Starbucks to Hewlett Packard to DuPont urged President Trump to continue U.S. participation in the Paris Agreement and uphold our commitment to cut carbon emissions. "Failure to build a low-carbon economy puts American prosperity at risk. But the right action now will create jobs and boost U.S. competitiveness," the business leaders wrote.

Even major energy companies — formerly the staunchest opponents of environmental regulations — support the Paris Agreement. In a March letter to the Administration, Exxon Mobil wrote the pact is an "effective framework for addressing the risks of climate change" and that the United States is "well positioned to compete" under the agreement.

Walking away from the Paris Agreement may be a bold talking point for President Trump and his EPA Director Scott Pruitt, but it is disastrous policy. We are rapidly approaching the tipping point in the warming of our planet. I urge President Trump to maintain American participation in the Paris Agreement — for the sake of our international leadership, economic competitiveness, and children's environmental future.

Brad Schneider is a U.S. Congressman representing Illinois' 10th District. He introduced the CLIMATE or "Congressional Leadership in Mitigating Administration Threats to the Earth" Act, which would prevent enforcement of President Trump's anti-environment executive order.