Grocery stores on Cook County border see soda pop sales boom
Frank Perez operates a small vending machine company, S & P Vending, that serves customers in Chicago’s northwest suburbs. A Schaumburg resident, he used to stock up on soda to service his accounts near home.

Not anymore. Perez now does his shopping north of Lake Cook Road.

Perez was one of dozens of people buying soda and other sweet drinks at stores just across the Cook County line in Buffalo Grove and Highland Park last week. Their trips were an effort to avoid paying the Cook County penny-per-ounce sweetened beverage tax that went into effect Aug. 2.

“I estimate it would cost me upwards of $300 a month and I’m a smaller local business,” Perez said. “I’m coming up here now. I can’t afford to keep buying it in Cook County.”

By the time he was done shopping at the Jewel-Osco at Lake Cook and McHenry roads in Buffalo Grove, Perez said he bought 40 12-packs of different soda products to stock machines.

Stephanie, a Chicago resident who declined to give her last name, said she and a friend were visiting the Chicago Botanic Garden in Glencoe. She saw an opportunity to stock up on soft drinks in Lake County.

A frequent visitor to the garden, Stephanie said it was her first trip since the tax went into effect and she decided to take advantage. She went to the Highland Park Jewel to secure her savings.

There was other merchandise in Stephanie’s shopping cart as well. She said as long as she was there, it was time to do the rest of the grocery shopping. She said she does not plan to buy any more sweetened beverages in Cook County.

Joe Licastro, a sales representative working for Dr. Pepper at Sunset Foods in Highland Park, said he has noticed a significant change on both sides of Lake Cook Road. He talked about the difference between a Walmart on the south side and a Target on the north.

“The Target is up 300 percent,” Licastro said referring to Dr. Pepper sales only. “The Walmart across the street is (way) down.”

Mike Morres, a 7-UP representative servicing the Jewel near downtown Highland Park, said sales for his products at stores north of Lake Cook Road have increased between 82 and 90 percent. He said the decrease in Cook County is around 48 percent.

Jennifer Horn of Arlington Heights had a shopping cart full of groceries including four one-liter bottles of soda and a quartet of 12-packs. She plans to do more of her shopping in Lake County.

“I’m here because I don’t want to pay the tax,” Horn said. “As long as I’m shopping, I’m getting other things too.

Ronald Peplow of Des Plaines was also stocking up on soft drinks. He said he was there to avoid the tax and did his other shopping at the same time.

Steve Sadin is a freelancer.