Can Terry Gou fulfill his American dream?





TAIPEI, Taiwan — Hon Hai Chairman Terry Gou's “Flying Eagle” plan to manufacture in the U.S. officially began last week when he appeared alongside U.S. President Donald Trump at a press conference. Trump praised Gou lavishly as “the world's greatest businessman” and a friend; Gou, meanwhile, announced that he would invest US$10 billion in the U.S. over the next four years. The first step of Gou's plan: building a world-class display panel plant in Wisconsin, creating thousands of jobs in the process. Yet, while the market overwhelming praised the deal, Gou's previous unfulfilled promises are also under scrutiny. And the challenges he and the plant face are just beginning to surface. In fact, Gou had hinted at the U.S. investment in Hon Hai (called Foxconn abroad) during a previous shareholders meeting. What the market did not anticipate was that just a month later, Gou would appear on stage alongside Trump at that press conference in the White House's East Sitting Hall, where U.S. presidents have received countless foreign heads of states, to announce the high-profile investment. It stands not only to be the largest foreign greenfield investment in U.S. history but also to mark the beginning of several investments in American manufacturing by Hon Hai over the next few years. When Gou made the vow to bring forward-looking high-tech manufacturing to the U.S., he seemed to be taking Hon Hai to a whole new level. The joint press conference by Gou and Trump was also a landmark for Taiwanese entrepreneurs on the world stage. However, while Hon Hai has made numerous investment proposals in the past, not all of these have come to fruition — and there are growing concerns that this latest “Made in USA” check will also bounce. U.S. financial news channel CNBC ran reports with titles like “Concerns increase in Wisconsin over deal for Foxconn” and “Will Wisconsin actually get Foxconn's factory?” questioning the company's less than perfect record of making good on its promises. The reports pointed to Hon Hai's 2013 promise to build a US$30 million high-tech plant and hire 500 employees in Pennsylvania — which was never realized. The company also previously announced a US$1 billion investment deal in Indonesia — which is still yet to be realized. The Washington Post also reported on the go-nowhere Pennsylvania and Indonesia projects. The newspaper quoted a statement from Pennsylvania's Department of Community and Economic Development on the US$30 million plan: “unfortunately, a project did not come to fruition.” For his part, Gou has said that the Pennsylvania plant had to be suspended because the state elected a new governor who refused to honor the deal. Though that investment seems to be off the table for now, Hon Hai has signed a US$30 million investment plan with Pennsylvania-based Carnegie Mellon University. In other words, Hon Hai has not stopped investing in the U.S. state.