National Survey of Prolife Pregnancy Centers Shows Major Influence of Ultrasound on a Mother's Choice for Life Contact: Thomas A. Glessner,



FREDERICKSBURG, Va., March 3, 2015 /



NIFLA has a membership of more than 1,350 pregnancy resource centers, of which 1050 currently operate as medical clinics providing ultrasound confirmation of pregnancy to patients who are abortion-minded or abortion-vulnerable. NIFLA's medical clinics were asked to report the number of ultrasounds provided in 2013 to such abortion-at-risk patients and what percentage of such patients decided against abortion and for life.



Four-hundred and ten (410) of NIFLA's medical membership (less than one-half) reported providing 75,318 ultrasound confirmations of pregnancy in 2013 on patients identified as either abortion-minded or abortion-vulnerable. Of these abortion at risk patients, 58,634 chose to carry to term, indicating that 78% of those mothers who saw an ultrasound image of their unborn child before deciding about abortion chose life.



When asked whether ultrasound confirmation of pregnancy has a positive impact upon a mother considering abortion to choose life 83.5% said "Absolutely," 15.76% said "More than likely," and 0.74% said, "Only a small impact."



"These results show conclusively what we have known for many years. When a prolife pregnancy center becomes a medical clinic and provides ultrasound confirmation of pregnancy the vast majority of patients receiving such services will choose life," said attorney Thomas Glessner, President of NIFLA.



"Planned Parenthood has tried over the years to downplay the significance of ultrasound examinations for a pregnant mother considering abortion," continued Glessner. "However, the results of this survey, which is the largest national sampling to date on this issue, conclusively show that when a mother considering abortion sees an ultrasound image of her baby she will, more than likely choose life."



Glessner also noted that the sampling was from less then one-half of NIFLA's current medical membership. NIFLA will be conducting this survey on an annual basis.



NIFLA's current network of more than 1,350 prolife pregnancy centers is the nation's largest pregnancy resource and medical clinic network. For more information call Thomas A. Glessner at 540-372-3930. Contact: Thomas A. Glessner, National Institute of Family and Life Advocates , 540-372-3930FREDERICKSBURG, Va., March 3, 2015 / Christian Newswire / -- The National Institute of Family and Life Advocates (NIFLA), a national legal network of prolife pregnancy centers, has unveiled the results of a survey of its medical members indicating the powerful and effective impact of ultrasound upon an abortion-minded patient empowering her to choose life.NIFLA has a membership of more than 1,350 pregnancy resource centers, of which 1050 currently operate as medical clinics providing ultrasound confirmation of pregnancy to patients who are abortion-minded or abortion-vulnerable. NIFLA's medical clinics were asked to report the number of ultrasounds provided in 2013 to such abortion-at-risk patients and what percentage of such patients decided against abortion and for life.Four-hundred and ten (410) of NIFLA's medical membership (less than one-half) reported providing 75,318 ultrasound confirmations of pregnancy in 2013 on patients identified as either abortion-minded or abortion-vulnerable. Of these abortion at risk patients, 58,634 chose to carry to term, indicating that 78% of those mothers who saw an ultrasound image of their unborn child before deciding about abortion chose life.When asked whether ultrasound confirmation of pregnancy has a positive impact upon a mother considering abortion to choose life 83.5% said "Absolutely," 15.76% said "More than likely," and 0.74% said, "Only a small impact.""These results show conclusively what we have known for many years. When a prolife pregnancy center becomes a medical clinic and provides ultrasound confirmation of pregnancy the vast majority of patients receiving such services will choose life," said attorney Thomas Glessner, President of NIFLA."Planned Parenthood has tried over the years to downplay the significance of ultrasound examinations for a pregnant mother considering abortion," continued Glessner. "However, the results of this survey, which is the largest national sampling to date on this issue, conclusively show that when a mother considering abortion sees an ultrasound image of her baby she will, more than likely choose life."Glessner also noted that the sampling was from less then one-half of NIFLA's current medical membership. NIFLA will be conducting this survey on an annual basis.NIFLA's current network of more than 1,350 prolife pregnancy centers is the nation's largest pregnancy resource and medical clinic network. For more information call Thomas A. Glessner at 540-372-3930.

Share Tweet