List of places than ban fracking keeps growing

Hydraulic fracturing bans in the U.S. and beyond



Scotland is the latest to join the ranks of governments that prohibit fracking. Last week, the country's executive announced the practice would be stopped pending a survey of public input and studies into impacts on health and the environment. Pictured: A protest against Fracking in Scotland outside the SNP Autumn Conference on October 19, 2013 at the Perth Concert Hall, Perth Scotland. Alex Salmond opens the last autumn conference of the Scottish National Party before next year's referendum on Scottish independence in Perth, attracting strong international interest. (Photo by Mark Runnacles/Getty Images) less Hydraulic fracturing bans in the U.S. and beyond



Scotland is the latest to join the ranks of governments that prohibit fracking. Last week, the country's executive announced the practice would be stopped pending ... more Photo: Mark Runnacles, Getty Images

Denton, Texas--the birthplace of fracking less than 40 miles from ExxonMobile's headquarters--voted to ban shale extractions of oil and gas in November 2014. The state's oil and gas regulator, the Railroad Commission, has challenged the city's authority in the ban. less Denton, Texas--the birthplace of fracking less than 40 miles from ExxonMobile's headquarters--voted to ban shale extractions of oil and gas in November 2014. The state's oil and gas regulator, the Railroad ... more Photo: Tony Gutierrez, Associated Press

North Carolina reversed course on fracking in 2014, overturning a moratorium that had been in place for almost two years. The state also outlawed the disclosure of fracking chemicals. North Carolina reversed course on fracking in 2014, overturning a moratorium that had been in place for almost two years. The state also outlawed the disclosure of fracking chemicals. Photo: Jonathan Drew, Associated Press

New Jersey doesn't have a single shale reserve, but activists in the state have been pressuring the legislature to impose a moratorium on fracking waste disposal from nearby Pennsylvania. Gov. Chris Christie has vetoed two of these bills. less New Jersey doesn't have a single shale reserve, but activists in the state have been pressuring the legislature to impose a moratorium on fracking waste disposal from nearby Pennsylvania. Gov. Chris Christie ... more Photo: Andrew Harrer, Bloomberg

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-5', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 5', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

CAPE TOWN, SOUTH AFRICA - AUGUST 9: (SOUTH AFRICA OUT) Protesters carry a banner as they take to the streets on August 9, 2011 in Cape Town, South Africa. The march was in protest of Shell's fracking plans in the Karoo. A 2011 fracking ban was overturned in 2012. (Photo by The Times/Gallo images/Getty Images) less CAPE TOWN, SOUTH AFRICA - AUGUST 9: (SOUTH AFRICA OUT) Protesters carry a banner as they take to the streets on August 9, 2011 in Cape Town, South Africa. The march was in protest of Shell's fracking plans in ... more Photo: Gallo Images, Getty Images

Germany outlawed fracking in 2012. The country plans to permit the practice only at depths greater than 3,000 feet to avoid groundwater contamination. AFP PHOTO / GERARD JULIEN (Photo credit should read GERARD JULIEN/AFP/Getty Images) less Germany outlawed fracking in 2012. The country plans to permit the practice only at depths greater than 3,000 feet to avoid groundwater contamination. AFP PHOTO / GERARD JULIEN (Photo credit should read ... more Photo: GERARD JULIEN, AFP/Getty Images

Northern Ireland banned fracking in 2011. Pictured: Michael McIntyre from Enniskillen sits beside his boat with an anti-fracking banner in Enniskillen, Northern Ireland, on June 15, 2013. McIntyre will be taking part in the anti-fracking demonstration against the use of fracking to extract gas from shale rock in County Fermanagh ahead of the G8 summit. AFP PHOTO/ PETER MUHLY (Photo credit should read PETER MUHLY/AFP/Getty Images) less Northern Ireland banned fracking in 2011. Pictured: Michael McIntyre from Enniskillen sits beside his boat with an anti-fracking banner in Enniskillen, Northern Ireland, on June 15, 2013. McIntyre will be ... more Photo: PETER MUHLY, AFP/Getty Images

France was the first nation to ban fracking in 2011. The law was upheld in the country's highest court when an American drilling company filed suit for revoked permits in 2013. Pictured: People demonstrate in streets of Montelimar, southern France, on October 19, 2013, to protest against the exploitation of shale gas and oil. Extracting shale oil and gas reserves through controversial 'fracking' will in future require an environmental impact study, European lawmakers agreed on October 9, 2013, despite opposition this will add to costs and hurt jobs. AFP PHOTO / JEFF PACHOUD (Photo credit should read JEFF PACHOUD/AFP/Getty Images) less France was the first nation to ban fracking in 2011. The law was upheld in the country's highest court when an American drilling company filed suit for revoked permits in 2013. Pictured: People demonstrate in ... more Photo: JEFF PACHOUD, AFP/Getty Images

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-10', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 10', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Bulgaria instated the world's second national fracking ban in 2012. Pictured: Protesters gather and stage demonstration against the visit of U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry in Sofia, holding posters saying, KERRY, GO HOME and NO FRACKING SHALE GAS IN BULGARIA. (Photo by Hristo Vladev/Pacific Press/LightRocket via Getty Images) less Bulgaria instated the world's second national fracking ban in 2012. Pictured: Protesters gather and stage demonstration against the visit of U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry in Sofia, holding posters ... more Photo: Pacific Press, LightRocket Via Getty Images

Hawai'i County, on the state's Big Island, banned fracking in 2013. Hawai'i County, on the state's Big Island, banned fracking in 2013. Photo: Christopher Kimmel, Getty Images/Flickr RF

Two California counties--Mendocino and San Benito--banned fracking in November 2014 elections. Pictured: Coastal town of Mendocino, California Two California counties--Mendocino and San Benito--banned fracking in November 2014 elections. Pictured: Coastal town of Mendocino, California Photo: Miles Ertman, Getty Images/Robert Harding World Imagery

Beverly Hills was the first in California to outlaw fracking in May 2014. Beverly Hills sign, Beverly Hills, California, United States of America, North America Beverly Hills was the first in California to outlaw fracking in May 2014. Beverly Hills sign, Beverly Hills, California, United States of America, North America Photo: Adina Tovy/Robert Harding

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-15', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 15', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Five Ohio cities have banned fracking since 2012: Athens, Mansfield, Broadview Heights, Oberlin and Yellow Springs. Five Ohio cities have banned fracking since 2012: Athens, Mansfield, Broadview Heights, Oberlin and Yellow Springs.

Bould County, Colorado, prohibited fracking in 2012. Last November, county officials voted to extend the ban until 2018, so they can review the results of a National Science Foundation study into health and environmental impacts of the practice. Pictured: Rod Brueske, silently protests outside the meeting room, Thursday, Dec. 13, 2012, at the Boulder County Courthouse in Boulder, Colo. (AP Photo/Times-Call, Matthew Jonas) less Bould County, Colorado, prohibited fracking in 2012. Last November, county officials voted to extend the ban until 2018, so they can review the results of a National Science Foundation study into health and ... more Photo: Matthew Jonas, Associated Press

Culver City, California, shares the largest urban oil field in the country with neighboring Los Angeles and has been considering a hyrdaulic fracturing ban since 2013. Local news has reported that the city is tentatively moving forward with its plans for a ban. Fracking opponents across California have criticized Gov. Jerry Brown, pictured, for showing no signs of considering a statewide ban. less Culver City, California, shares the largest urban oil field in the country with neighboring Los Angeles and has been considering a hyrdaulic fracturing ban since 2013. Local news has reported that the city is ... more Photo: Jonathan Alcorn, For The Chronicle

New York has imposed a moratorium on hyrdaulic fracturing across the entire state since 2010. In 2014 the state's mayor outlawed the practice indefinitely. New York has imposed a moratorium on hyrdaulic fracturing across the entire state since 2010. In 2014 the state's mayor outlawed the practice indefinitely. Photo: Spencer Platt, Getty Images

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-20', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 20', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

The Dallas city council effectively banned the process in December 2013, but that ordinance is in limbo following a lawsuit from Trinity East Energy LLC. The Dallas city council effectively banned the process in December 2013, but that ordinance is in limbo following a lawsuit from Trinity East Energy LLC. Photo: David Woo, Staff Photographer

Pittsburgh was the first city in the country to outlaw hydraulic fracturing in November 2010. Pittsburgh was the first city in the country to outlaw hydraulic fracturing in November 2010. Photo: Keith Srakocic, Associated Press

Mora County, New Mexico, population 4,881, was the first county in the country to ban hydraulic fracturing in 2014. Mora County, New Mexico, population 4,881, was the first county in the country to ban hydraulic fracturing in 2014. Photo: Plains Exploration And Productio

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-24', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 24', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});



































Photo: Mark Runnacles, Getty Images Image 1 of / 24 Caption Close List of places than ban fracking keeps growing 1 / 24 Back to Gallery

Scotland banned fracking last week, implementing an indefinite moratorium while the government studies environmental and health impacts of the oil and gas extraction technique, the BBC reports.

The nation joins a small but growing group of cities, counties, states and countries that have prohibited fracking, including some locations in the technique's Texas birthplace.

Scottish officials stated several concerns with fracking that will be investigated: earthquakes, water pollution and "inappropriate development in the countryside," according to the BBC.

Fracking--short for hydraulic fracturing--is a process in which a mixture of water, sand and chemicals is pumped at extremely high pressure down a well to shatter shale bedrock. Many small pockets of oil or gas, trapped as if in Swiss cheese, are cracked open and sucked to the surface. Since 2008, the technique has made available massive swaths of oil and gas reserves and boosted U.S. oil production to the world's highest.

In the U.S., Texas is the largest oil producer. Fracking was born near the city of Denton, so it caused an upset when voters there outlawed the extraction technique last November. Industry voices protested and the state's oil and gas regulator contested Denton's authority to instate the ban, but it held.

Also last November, two California counties and an Ohio city passed fracking bans, while Boulder County, Colorado, extended a 2012 ban pending the release of a National Science foundation study on environmental effects, slated for release in 2017.

In December, New York became the first state to prohibit fracking, following a four-year statewide moratorium on the practice. Other U.S. regions to ban fracking include:

-Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in 2010

-Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in 2012

-Broadview Heights, Mansfield, Oberlin and Yellow Springs, Ohio, in 2012

-Hawai'i County in 2013

-Mora County, New Mexico in 2014

-Beverly Hills, California, in 2014

Fracking is also currently prohibited in Germany, Northern Ireland, France and Bulgaria.

Proponents of the bans raise concern with drinking water contamination from chemicals pumped miles underground in the fracking process, including toxins ethylene glycol, formaldehyde and naphthalene. A standard fracking well produces the equivalent of three to 10 Olympic-sized swimming pools of contaminated wastewater, which is injected into deep wells for disposal.

Many scientists allege the disposal wells have triggered recent earthquake swarms.

But fracking advocates say no scientific studies have proven the drilling technique causes contamination or earthquakes; studies have only demonstrated correlation.

Advocates also point out the massive economic growth brought on by the fracking boom. In recent years, the industry has created hundreds of thousands of Texas jobs, upped the state's oil production to the highest level in decades, made the U.S. the world's biggest oil producer and largely helped make Houston the country's fastest-growing city last year.

The Scotish ban came two days after a nationwide ban in the United Kingdom was voted down in parlilment. Scotland is estimated to have enough shale gas reserves to cover Britain's gas needs for more than 30 years, EurActive reports.