King: City budget not balanced despite claims to contrary Commentary

A few weeks ago there was an exchange between Councilmember Pam Holm and Controller Annise Parker over whether the city’s budget was balanced and what it actually means to have a balanced budget. The controller asserted that the city’s 2009 budget was balanced. Let me assure the reader that is not the case. Here are the facts.

The city’s 2009 budget projects that the city will have general fund revenues of $1.84 billion. These revenues are derived from property taxes, sales taxes, fees and fines and certain miscellaneous categories such as interfund transfers and the sale of capital assets. However, general expenses were originally budgeted at $1.93 billion, leaving a projected deficit of about $70 million. The budget called for this shortfall to be made up by borrowing $20 million and reducing the city’s general fund balance (the amount we have left over in the bank at the end of the year) by about $50 million. In other words, the budget was “balanced” by borrowing money and going into our savings.

However, since the budget was adopted projected revenues have been falling and are now estimated to be about $30 million to $40 million less than originally expected. The city has reduced budget expenses by about $10 million, leaving a projected general fund deficit of $90 million to $100 million.

In the January monthly report, the controller included a line entitled “Amount Needed to Balance the Budget” in the amount of $64 million. (See this document.) In the February report, after the controller had declared that the budget was balanced, this line was euphemistically renamed “Budgeted Decrease in Fund Balance.” (See this document.)

The fact that the city is running this kind of deficit may be surprising to many readers. But the city has actually run deficits, albeit much smaller ones, since 2004. This fact has not been widely recognized by the public because, as our city officials are quick to boast, the city’s general fund balance has been increasing. In fact, between 2002 and 2008, the general fund balance increased from about $80 million to nearly $260 million. However, this increase did not come from surpluses. Rather it came from borrowed money.

In 2003, the Texas Legislature passed a law that allowed cities that were behind on their pension plan contributions to issue long-term bonds (without voter approval by the way) to help make contributions to the pension plans. The city began issuing these bonds in 2005. To date, the city has borrowed about $700 million by issuing pension bonds. About $200 million of the proceeds from these bonds have been funneled through the general fund to help make contributions to the pension plans and thus went to “balance” the budget. Without borrowing money to make some of its pension plan contributions, the city’s general fund balance, instead of increasing, would have actually decreased by about $30 million since 2002.

What is even more ominous is that the controller is now estimating that the general fund balance by the end of this year will be slightly more than $200 million. In other words, had the city not borrowed $200 million on pension bonds since 2005, the general fund would be completely depleted by the end of this year.

You do not balance a budget by borrowing money or using your savings. You balance it by increasing revenues and/or decreasing expenses. Early in my business career I made the fatal mistake of confusing borrowing money with making money. The personal financial consequences were disastrous. If we, as a city, make the same mistake, I fear that we are destined for a similar fate.

King recently retired as a managing partner of Linebarger Goggan Blair & Sampson, a national law firm representing government entities in receivables management.