Texas needs laws to stem tide of illegal immigration
Recommend Texas needs laws to stem tide of illegal immigration Share Email Close [X] Now that Obamacare has passed and Wall Street reform is in the pipeline, the White House is looking to spend what’s left of its political capital before the November elections. Political expediency, as well as open threats from the immigrant community, have pushed immigration reform to the top of the president’s list. Although the specifics of this divisive legislation will change many times before final passage, Texas cannot just sit by and wait for the Obama administration to act. Now that Obamacare has passed and Wall Street reform is in the pipeline, the White House is looking to spend what’s left of its political capital before the November elections. Political expediency, as well as open threats from the immigrant community, have pushed immigration reform to the top of the president’s list. Although the specifics of this divisive legislation will change many times before final passage, Texas cannot just sit by and wait for the Obama administration to act. Like many of the other border states, Texas grapples with the growing problem of paying for illegal immigrants. With an estimated 1 million plus immigrants currently living illegally in Texas, our state spends about $4.5 billion annually on the services that they receive. Illegal immigrants already have a major impact on the Harris County Hospital District’s patient load. In recent years, 81 percent of babies born at the LBJ General Hospital were born to mothers who were here illegally. The cost of performing this uninsured health care is high, but it is not the only area in which illegal immigrants have an impact on Texas. Like many of the other border states, Texas grapples with the growing problem of paying for illegal immigrants. With an estimated 1 million plus immigrants currently living illegally in Texas, our state spends about $4.5 billion annually on the services that they receive. Illegal immigrants already have a major impact on the Harris County Hospital District’s patient load. In recent years, 81 percent of babies born at the LBJ General Hospital were born to mothers who were here illegally. The cost of performing this uninsured health care is high, but it is not the only area in which illegal immigrants have an impact on Texas. It is estimated that nearly 20 percent of Texas students in K-12 have come here illegally or were born in America to parents who came here illegally. While the latter group of children are citizens, many of them grew up in non-English speaking homes. Educating these students poses great challenges and high costs to our school districts. It is estimated that nearly 20 percent of Texas students in K-12 have come here illegally or were born in America to parents who came here illegally. While the latter group of children are citizens, many of them grew up in non-English speaking homes. Educating these students poses great challenges and high costs to our school districts. The costs continue to climb in the corrections system as well. An estimated 9,000 criminal illegal immigrants are currently in the custody of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice. The state of Texas spends $13.5 million a month to hold these convicted criminals while we wait for the federal government to deport them. As each of these cost drivers continues to climb, The costs continue to climb in the corrections system as well. An estimated 9,000 criminal illegal immigrants are currently in the custody of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice. The state of Texas spends $13.5 million a month to hold these convicted criminals while we wait for the federal government to deport them. As each of these cost drivers continues to climb, Texas must address illegal immigration to ensure that our economy is protected and our safety is preserved. Texas must address illegal immigration to ensure that our economy is protected and our safety is preserved. In the next legislative session, I will seek to pass two bills to stem the tide of illegal immigration. During the last session, I passed a bipartisan bill that required local jail officials to report suspected illegal immigrants to federal officials upon their conviction and not to release them on bail. The Texas Senate passed the bill with a vote of 30-1. Ultimately, this bill died in the Texas House of Representatives, but support for the bill is growing. In the next legislative session, I will seek to pass two bills to stem the tide of illegal immigration. During the last session, I passed a bipartisan bill that required local jail officials to report suspected illegal immigrants to federal officials upon their conviction and not to release them on bail. The Texas Senate passed the bill with a vote of 30-1. Ultimately, this bill died in the Texas House of Representatives, but support for the bill is growing. We must also address the sensitive issue in our state of employers hiring undocumented workers. I’m proud of our strong business climate in Texas. I carried the bill that cut business taxes for more than 40,000 small businesses across the state. Unfortunately, many of these businesses face unfair competition from businesses that hire illegal immigrants and gain an unfair advantage. The state of Texas must strike a balance between protecting legitimate businesses doing their best to comply with the law and rooting out those who think they are above the law. We must also address the sensitive issue in our state of employers hiring undocumented workers. I’m proud of our strong business climate in Texas. I carried the bill that cut business taxes for more than 40,000 small businesses across the state. Unfortunately, many of these businesses face unfair competition from businesses that hire illegal immigrants and gain an unfair advantage. The state of Texas must strike a balance between protecting legitimate businesses doing their best to comply with the law and rooting out those who think they are above the law. Texas can no longer afford to ignore the problem or wait for the federal government to secure our border. Securing the border may be the responsibility of the federal government, but its failure to do so has become our burden. I remain committed to this issue, and will continue our fight to keep Texas safe and strong. Texas can no longer afford to ignore the problem or wait for the federal government to secure our border. Securing the border may be the responsibility of the federal government, but its failure to do so has become our burden. I remain committed to this issue, and will continue our fight to keep Texas safe and strong. Patrick represents Texas Senate District 7, which covers the northwest region of Harris County. Patrick represents Texas Senate District 7, which covers the northwest region of Harris County.

Report item as: (required) X Obscenity/vulgarity Hate speech Personal attack Advertising/Spam Other Comment: (optional) Read all comments ( ) »