Amid re-election bid, McCaul vows to drop earmarks

Rep. Michael McCaul, whose name was attached to $20 million in earmarks this budget year, says the system needs "transparency." Rep. Michael McCaul, whose name was attached to $20 million in earmarks this budget year, says the system needs "transparency." Photo: Carlos Antonio Rios, CHRONICLE FILE Photo: Carlos Antonio Rios, CHRONICLE FILE Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Amid re-election bid, McCaul vows to drop earmarks 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

WASHINGTON — Republican Rep. Michael McCaul, apparently facing a stiff challenge for re-election in November, said Monday that he would no longer request controversial spending projects known as earmarks.

McCaul's well-financed opponent, Democrat Larry Joe Doherty, questioned the sincerity of the congressman's reversal but said he, too, would not ask for earmarks if elected to the district that sprawls from western Harris County to Austin.

McCaul, a two-term congressman widely viewed as the most politically vulnerable Republican House member from Texas, joins a small but growing number of lawmakers who have rejected earmarks, which are special orders to federal agencies to fund specific projects.

Critics complain that the orders do not receive adequate scrutiny and are not always awarded on merit. One other member of the Texas congressional delegation, GOP Rep. Jeb Hensarling of Dallas, has also refused to request earmarks.

Other lawmakers from the Houston area indicated they asked for earmarks this year. The deadline for submitting the requests to the House Appropriations Committee was midnight Monday.

"The system is broken and it needs to be fixed," McCaul said. "A majority of these earmarks wouldn't get through Congress if they were given the best test of sunlight. Until they put more transparency into the system, I am not going to play the game."

McCaul won re-election in 2006 to a second term by the smallest margin of any Texas Republican running for the House, 55 percent of the vote.

McCaul said he will not request earmarks until it is easier for members of Congress to challenge them on the House floor. He also said it is unfair for Appropriations Committee members to get more projects than other members.

McCaul, a former federal prosecutor, said the upcoming campaign was not a factor in the decision he made last week to reject earmarks. "This goes well beyond my district," he said. "The American people have lost confidence in the way Washington spends money."

His millions in earmarks

McCaul hasn't always opposed the pet projects. In the current budget year, which began Oct. 1, he sponsored or co-sponsored nearly $20 million in earmarks.

One project, a $245,000 grant for the Houston Zoo that was co-sponsored with Rep. John Culberson, R-Houston, was singled out by the watchdog group Citizens Against Government Waste as an example of pork-barrel spending. The money will be used to set up a television closed-circuit system so hospitalized children can interact with the animals.

McCaul said it was harsh to criticize such an earmark. "You are talking about children with cancer," he said.

He may be trying to inoculate himself against a potential attack in what could shape up to be a tough re-election battle with Doherty, who is running on a clean-up-Congress theme.

"Michael McCaul has gone into rehab over earmark addiction," said Doherty, a Houston attorney who played a judge on television in Texas Justice.

He said politicians such as McCaul try "to convince voters to forgive them, and they're not going to do it again."

Not everyone in his district opposes earmarks. In Brenham, business leaders' top priority was a $245,000 earmark secured by McCaul this year for improvements to U.S 290 and Highway 36 to ease congestion in the Central Texas town of 14,700 people. The project includes building U.S. 290 overpasses in place of traffic lights.

Lu Hollander, a public relations manager with the Washington County Convention and Visitors Bureau, said the earmark will help pay for improvements on a stretch of highway that was a nightmare during the Hurricane Rita evacuation.

"There is nothing wrong with earmarks if they are appropriate and useful and return taxpayer dollars," she said.

Other members of the Texas delegation remain supportive of earmarks, which they say ensure that representatives have a say in how federal tax dollars are spent in their districts.

Rep. Culberson, who sits on the Appropriations Committee, has refused to endorse a moratorium on earmarks.

He said it would not reduce overall spending but rather would put those earmarked dollars back into the general fund that the Bush administration allocates.

Rep. Kevin Brady, R-The Woodlands, said he scaled back his earmark requests to about one quarter of what it has been because spending had become "out of whack" in Washington. However, earmark funding has benefited the state, Brady said.

"We wouldn't have gotten some of our Hurricane Rita funding but for our ability to earmark and tell Washington to do the right thing," he said. "There is a role for earmarks. We just have to make it a smaller one than it is today."

bennett.roth@chron.com