Houston's crime outpaces officers
Data show Houston crime rate outpaces officers But getting more police on the streets poses its own challenges By BRADLEY OLSON HOUSTON CHRONICLE Aug. 2, 2009, 10:45PM

Share Print Share

Houston has a higher rate of violent crime than any other Texas city and ranks among the highest in the nation, according to a Houston Chronicle analysis of FBI crime data in the 25 most populous U.S. cities.

The city also has fewer police officers per capita or per square mile than the national average, the analysis shows.

In the nearly six years of Mayor Bill White's administration, the number of police officers has remained roughly the same, despite the Houston Police Department budget increasing more than 40 percent since 2004, from about $480 million to $680 million for fiscal 2010. That increase is due almost entirely to the ballooning costs of salaries, pension and health care benefits built into police contracts with the city.

The federal government last week declined to provide stimulus funding for additional police academy classes based on the city's fiscal health and recent declines in Houston's crime rate compared to previous years. Overall crime in the city is as low as it has been in decades, but looming budgetary problems have led to cuts in overtime and plans for only two police academy classes this year, compared to an average of five a year since White took office.

Several City Council members and mayoral candidates have voiced concern that recent gains may not last.

“That's a recipe for disaster, and I'm not being overdramatic,” City Councilman Mike Sullivan said of staffing and overtime shortages.

“There's no doubt that there's going to be a spike in crime as a result of this,” said Gary Blankinship, president of the Houston Police Officers Union. “We have to learn to work smarter and try to use technology a little bit more, but some hard decisions may have to be made and some other city budgets may have to be looked at. Tough times cause people to have to make tough decisions.”

White said drastically increasing police staffing could cause a different kind of downward spiral: double-digit property tax increases that would price many Houstonians out of their homes. Instead, he said, the city has made better use of technology to ensure officers are more productive, building a 24-hour crime analysis center and redeploying more than 300 officers from desk jobs to the streets.

“It's not just a matter of head count, but it's the tools and procedures you give police,” he said.

Property crimes drop rate

Of the top 25 most populous cities in the United States, Houston ranked eighth highest in violent crime in 2008, the Chronicle analysis shows, with 1,105 violent crimes per 100,000 Houstonians. Dallas had 892 violent crimes per 100,000.

Violent crime, a metric kept by the FBI and police departments across the country as a barometer of an area's safety, includes murder, rape, robbery and aggravated assault.

Considering murder alone, Houston falls to ninth on the list, with 13 murders per 100,000 residents, the same as Dallas. When property crimes, such as burglary and larceny, are included, Houston falls among the 25 largest cities to 13th, putting its total crime rate in the median range of big U.S. cities.

Police Chief Harold Hurtt said the best measure of where Houston stands in terms of criminality is in comparing its crime rate to previous years, since different places present different crime-fighting scenarios, such as the geographic area of a city or its number of high-crime apartment complexes. The FBI warns against comparisons for those same reasons.

But Houstonians, according to polling data, are as concerned about crime as ever. Nearly three quarters of residents interviewed in 2008 for Rice University's annual Houston Area Survey said they were “somewhat worried” or “very worried” they or a family member will become a crime victim. That is higher than any year since the mid-'90s, a time only a few years removed from when Houston had more than 500 murders annually and some of the highest crime rates in the country.

Murder down 8 percent

Hurtt said murder is down 8 percent this year compared to last, and he said the number of sexual and aggravated assaults is difficult to impact because about two thirds of those crimes are relationship-based.

Hurtt said he asked City Council to drastically increase police staffing several years ago by initiating 10 police academy classes per year. That, he said, would bring the city's staffing levels to about 3 officers per 1,000 residents, the average among other major U.S. cities. Right now, there are about 2.3 officers per 1,000 Houstonians.

“I think they have given us what they can afford to give us ...,” he said of council. “Public safety is the No. 1 concern of people in order to be successful in a city, whether to have a business, raise a family, or have good employees.”

Some on council have called for the mayor to reconsider the two academy classes budgeted for this fiscal year after the Department of Justice decision not to fund four additional classes.

Over a two-year period, each academy class costs roughly $10 million. Bringing the city to the 3-per-1,000-resident average would take more than 20 academy classes at a cost of $200 million or more.

In light of that price tag and ongoing budget problems, some council members have said increasing the number will be nearly impossible.

Joseph Fenninger, HPD's chief financial officer, said current projections show a decline in the number of officers in Houston beginning in 2012. That year, and those immediately after, HPD will lose about 87 officers a year unless the city's economy and fiscal strength rebound by then, he said.

Chronicle reporter James Pinkerton contributed to this report.

bradley.olson@chron.com