Houston's budget woes may mean furloughs, layoffs
Share Print Share

Mayor Annise Parker raised the possibility of furloughs and layoffs for city employees for the first time Wednesday, saying the city's dire budget outlook will require City Council to consider all available options for closing roughly $110 million in budget gaps during the next two years.

The key to the negotiations, Parker indicated, could be the willingness of the city's police, fire and municipal employee unions to offer concessions, such as forgoing salary increases.

“If our employees' groups will work with me to, perhaps, delay some of the statutory increases, we may be able to save jobs,” Parker said. Otherwise, some job losses are possible if City Council determines certain services to be unnecessary.

The mayor, who has indicated that rate hikes for water and sewer usage, as well as other fee increases, may be imminent, emphasized that no budget-cutting strategy was certain because she merely is putting all options on the table for council consideration. So far, however, she has ruled out a tax increase.

“For years now, we have spent more money than we have taken in,” she said. “You can't spend more than you earn. It is a very unbusinesslike approach to running things.”

Leaders of the city's unions for police, firefighters and municipal employees indicated a willingness Wednesday to negotiate with the mayor, although none would give away what concessions they consider impossible.

“It is what it is,” said Melvin Hughes, president of the Houston Organization of Public Employees. Furloughs or layoffs “are just proposals that are on the table at this point, and we have a partnership not only with the city, but also with the mayor, and that's something we can sit down and talk about.”

City Controller Ronald Green said the city is facing a budget gap of $12 million to $20 million this year and a $100 million gap for fiscal 2011. About $50 million of that could be closed by drawing down surplus funds the city built up several years ago, but the remainder will have to come from cuts, Green said.

Falling tax revenues are the primary reason for the gap this year. Sales tax collections are roughly $55 million less than anticipated as thousands of Houstonians have lost their jobs, and property tax revenues have plummeted $18 million as home values have declined, Green said.

In a memo Parker gave to council members Wednesday, she said the primary reason for the budget gap in 2011 is an expected $43 million decrease in revenues and higher expenditures due to mandated salary increases, spikes in health care benefit costs and pension contribution requirements and higher costs for electricity and fuel.

The budget-cutting options she presented include furloughs for city employees, across-the-board departmental budget cuts, putting off pay increases or debt payments and selling off city property.

bradley.olson@chron.com