Shami could be tough sell in governor's race
Steve Campbell Houston Chronicle file Farouk Shami said he will put $10 million of his own money into his gubernatorial campaign and raise another $10 million. Share Print Share Resources FAROUK SHAMI • Age: 66 • Married with two adult sons • Born near Ramallah on the West Bank • Immigrated to the United States 44 years ago • Invented hair care products • Founded Farouk Systems in 1986

But it could be a tough sell for the naturalized U.S. citizen from the West Bank in the wake of the Fort Hood shootings and anti-Muslim rhetoric against the accused gunman. Even before the Fort Hood incident, Shami had come under fire from a national conservative commentator who claimed his support for Palestinian rights put him in opposition to Israel.

Shami, who made a fortune through hair-care products, said he will put $10 million of his own money into his campaign and raise another $10 million. He will make his formal announcement today at his Chi USA headquarters in Houston.

Shami, 66, said he is running for governor as someone who has lived the American dream, a successful businessman who wants to stimulate the economy by creating tens of thousands of jobs in the solar energy business in Texas.

“I am pure Texan and pure American,” Shami said.

Shami and two brothers moved to the United States from Jordan in the early 1960s. He dropped out of the University of Arkansas when he started making more money in the hair business than he could as a doctor. He developed the Bio-Silk and Chi product lines.

Draws conservative fire

While Shami has a history of philanthropy in the United States and helping victims of Hurricanes Katrina and Ike, he also has a history of actively pushing for Palestinian rights. He built a girls school and a company factory for Palestinians. In a 2007 article he wrote for the Houston Chronicle, Shami complained that Israeli policies were discriminating against Palestinians and holding back development in their lands.

“The absence of economic and social freedom for Palestinians is in no one's long-term interest — not Palestinians, nor Israelis, and certainly not Americans,” Shami wrote.

Such sentiments brought him under fire from conservative commentator Debbie Schlussel, who suggested he is anti-Israel in a piece titled “Jihad and hair care: Meet Texas Dems' Palestinian Muslim candidate for governor.” Conservative talk show hosts have been railing against Muslims because a Palestinian-American is accused of killing 13 people at Fort Hood.

“What has this to do with me?” asked Shami, noting he chartered an airplane for one group of U.S. soldiers so they could spend more time with their families before deploying overseas. “There are crazy people and fanatics in all countries. I love our troops.”

His Farouk Systems Web site had prominently played his Palestinian heritage. It is not mentioned on his campaign Web site, which states that he came to the United States 44 years ago. His biography has been removed from the company Web site.

Visceral reaction

Southern Methodist University political scientist Cal Jillson said Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal proved a candidate like Shami can overcome ethnic prejudices among voters. But Jillson said visceral reactions remain strong among many Texans.

“There has been a great deal of progress on race and ethnicity in Texas, but those things are not gone and Fort Hood reactivated that visceral reaction,” Jillson said.

Shami's brother, Jamil, who lives in Virginia, said “only time will tell” whether Texas voters will accept Farouk as a legitimate candidate. Jamil Shami said voters should realize that most Americans have an immigrant background. He said Farouk is sincere in his love of Texas.

“I view Farouk as an American success story,” his brother said, “And he gives credit to the American environment and the more immediate environment which is Texas.”

rg.ratcliffe@chron.com