In race for ag commissioner, dirt takes center stage
This year it's about existentialism, quantum mechanics, negligent homicide, failure to pay taxes and accusations of bribery.

The low-profile contest between incumbent Republican Todd Staples and Democratic challenger Hank Gilbert has turned into a snarling, gouging, roll-in-the-dirt rhetorical grudge match.

Staples fended off a Gilbert challenge in 2006 with 55 percent to 42 percent of the vote. Gilbert is back and brawling. Although both sides have been flinging the dirt, Gilbert's campaign has been driving the mud train lately.

SleazySleazy­Staples.com, Gilbert's website about his Republican rival, includes an item called: "Blood on his hands?" linking Staples to tainted peanuts that killed people in other parts of the country.

Staples' site about Gilbert, GuiltyguiltyGilbert.com, includes a mug shot from when the Democratic candidate pleaded guilty to a Class C misdemeanor and paid a $100 fine for bouncing a $500 check at Lowe's.

Mark Jones, chairman of political science at Rice University, said Gilbert's campaign lacks the money to do television or radio advertising so his only hope of getting traction in the race is to generate enough heat to get publicity in the free news media.

"He needs to do something to get himself noticed," Jones said.

Gilbert says Staples' campaign started the mud slinging even before the primary was over. But Gilbert has not been shy about his own attacks.

Gilbert's latest assault on Staples has been to claim Staples bought a Suburban with campaign funds and then used it for personal reasons in violation of state law.

Staples campaign consultant Bryan Eppstein said the charge was false because there were two Suburbans, one personally owned by Staples and another bought by the campaign. Eppstein said the campaign had to report buying the Suburban to the Texas Ethics Commission but not when it was sold several years ago as a diminished asset. Gilbert says not reporting the vehicle sale violated state ethics laws.

After a North Texas newspaper reported that the campaign vehicle "did not exist," Gilbert's consultant, Vince Leibowitz, put out a muse on the vehicle and quantum mechanics:

"Was the Suburban raptured? If no one is looking at the Suburban, does it exist? If the door of the Suburban is opened in Arizona, does that cause a typhoon in the Pacific? Could the quantum nature of Todd Staples' Suburban be the key to the Grand Unified Theory?"

Rat feces and dead birds

Gilbert also has accused Staples of trying to shirk responsibility for failure to fully inspect a Peanut Corporation of America plant in Plainview that was partially responsible for salmonella that poisoned more than 600 people across the nation. The company's Georgia plant was linked to nine deaths.

Staples fired an inspector in February 2009 after it was learned the man had incorrectly reported that the plant had a state health permit. If he had correctly reported that the plant was operating without a permit, Staples' office would have contacted the Department of State Health Services.

Gilbert said the department under Staples did not properly supervise its inspectors and said the plant should have been observed from the factory floor, a move that would have discovered rat feces and dead bird bodies.

"We can rightfully say they are responsible for the tragedies that happened from this plant," Gilbert said.

Gilbert claimed that he talks to the news media but Staples speaks only through surrogates. Staples said he was unavailable for this story because of family commitments.

Staples' campaign regurgitates Democrat Kinky Friedman's claim that hair-care millionaire Farouk Shami donated $150,000 to Gilbert's political fund to get him to drop out of the governor's race. Shami and Gilbert denied the accusation.

IRS and frozen accounts

Staples also chides Gilbert over a 2001 dispute with the federal Internal Revenue Service for unpaid payroll taxes that led the IRS to freezing Gilbert's bank account, which in turn resulted in bounced checks. Gilbert said the dispute was caused by an error of switching accountants for the family's janitorial service. Gilbert said he hired a lawyer to settle the IRS dispute and made good on the checks.

"I don't have anything to hide," Gilbert said.

r.g.ratcliffe@chron.com