HISD faces politically tough choices in closing schools
Lakeshia Scott, a freshman at Jones High School, lives a few blocks from the campus and walks there daily.

She's different from many of the teenagers in her south Houston neighborhood lined with dilapidated houses. Most decide to transfer out of Jones, which has earned the state's lowest academic rating for three of the last five years.

"They don't want to go to this school," said Scott, 14, whose father was a Jones graduate.

Like dozens of campuses in the Houston Independent School District, Jones is losing students and brimming with empty seats. HISD trustees must make politically tough choices about such campuses: Should they be closed, merged, left alone or overhauled with more popular programs?

Superintendent Terry Grier's administration last week released a list of 66 campuses with low student enrollments. They're not all expected to be closed — that would mean shutting down one-fifth of the district's 300 schools — but they're under review.

"We're not closing 66 schools," Grier said. "We are trying to look at, do we have school buildings that are underutilized, and how can we either encourage parents to send their children to school there or, if not, does it make financial sense to merge those schools with others nearby?"

HISD Trustee Paula Harris was more blunt.

"We know we can't keep all 66 of these schools," she said. "Everyone's not going to be happy, including myself, because it's going to be tough."

HISD spends about $10 million a year to boost the budgets of most of the 66 low-enrollment schools plus 21 others it considers small. Because HISD funds its schools on a per-pupil basis, those with low enrollments struggle to afford extras such as art and music teachers.

Hector Mireles, who represents HISD employees, said he worries the district will target high-minority schools for closure.

"I'm against closing any schools," said Mireles, the president of Texas Support Personnel Employees Local 1. "If we're in the interest of trying to save the children, we feel other budget cuts could be made."

No 'magic number'

Trustee Harvin Moore said the district shouldn't set a "magic number" for the right size of schools but should evaluate them individually. Is the school losing students because the population in the neighborhood is declining, or is there a problem with the academic offerings?

Across the district, more than 60,400 students — out of 204,000 — transferred out of their neighborhood schools to other HISD campuses this year. HISD's open-enrollment policy allows students to switch schools as long as space is available. While parents regularly praise this policy, it has drawn criticism for draining neighborhood schools.

About 40 HISD schools are undercapacity by more than 400 students, according to district estimates.

Popular campus

Lamar High School, which serves the affluent River Oaks neighborhood, is one of HISD's most popular high schools. The campus, designed for about 2,525 students, enrolled about 740 more than that this fall.

Christopher Sharpe, a Lamar sophomore, said he had to sit on the floor in his business class last year, but he didn't mind because he prefers Lamar to Sterling, where he is zoned.

Sharpe and two of his friends, who transferred in from Lee High School, said they fled their home campuses because they didn't feel safe there and doubted the academic rigor.

About half the students zoned to Lee and Sterling don't attend those schools.

Jones was the least popular high school, with nearly 900 students — or two-thirds of those zoned there — opting out. The new principal, Tracey Lewis, said she is on a mission to draw back students.

"It's been our goal to make sure we're in the community, that we're communicating," Lewis said. "We're having to shout from the mountaintops about the great things happening at Jones High School."

Jones is one of the nine campuses in HISD's Apollo 20 reform program, which launched this year. Participating schools got new principals, many new teachers and tutors to work individually with students on math. Students also have a longer school day and year.

Scott, the freshman who lives blocks from Jones, said she's glad she chose her local school. But two friends transferred because of the extended hours, she said.

Progress shown

Despite some groans about the extra time, students are embracing the higher expectations, and preliminary test scores show progress, Lewis said. A new magnet program in biotechnology, engineering and architecture should bump up enrollment next year, she said.

In west Houston, Long Middle School is surrounded by several popular charter schools, which Principal Diana De La Rosa acknowledges are drawing away students. Long is built to hold about 1,790 students, yet its enrollment is at 700 this year.

De La Rosa said she has extended Long's hours and joined with the nonprofit Citizen Schools to run an after-school program. She also holds monthly parenting workshops.

The school was expecting 200 sixth-graders this year but ended up with 244.

"Apparently," De La Rosa said, "our strategy has begun to work."

ericka.mellon@chron.com