HISD chief Grier now proposes closing 4 elementaries
Four Houston ISD elementary schools would close this fall under a scaled-back cost-cutting proposal revealed Thursday by Superintendent Terry Grier.

The plan would shut down McDade, Rhoads, Grimes and Stevenson, sending their 1,300 students to other campuses.

Grier would spare Love Elementary, which he previously had recommended for closure to loud criticism from the Heights-area community. Grier also decided against a more sweeping plan that could have closed or merged up to 17 of the 300 campuses in the Houston Independent School District.

Grier acknowledged at a school board meeting Thursday that his administration had "sent a lot of mixed messages to the community" about school closures.

"I personally want to apologize for that," he said.

The closures, plus changes to the attendance boundaries at a few other schools, should save at least $1.7 million, district officials estimated. Those savings would come from eliminating the extra money traditionally given to small schools to boost their budgets, which the district funds on a per-pupil basis.

The principals at the closed schools would be allowed to apply for other jobs in the district, and the teachers likely would follow the students to their new schools, said HISD chief of staff Michele Pola.

The state deadline for giving notice to contract employees has passed, so HISD likely wouldn't save much in salaries next year by closing the schools.

Doretha Harris, president of the parents group at Rhoads, said she was heartbroken at the idea of closing the south Houston school, which all her children and grandchildren have attended.

"It's a horrible feeling that I won't be able to walk the halls again," Harris said.

The board is expected to vote on the closures May 12. While trustees raised some concerns Thursday, none vowed to vote against the entire plan.

Legislative complication

HISD could face a challenge to the closures if state lawmakers pass bills filed by Rep. Harold Dutton, D-Houston, that would require the commissioner of education to approve decisions to shut down schools. The bills have not passed out of committee.

Grier said his revised plan was designed around the four elementaries with the lowest enrollment: McDade, Rhoads, Memorial and Paige. Each has fewer than 350 students.

While Memorial and Paige wouldn't close, they would absorb students from some of the campuses that would be shut down.

Under the proposal, students from Stevenson Elementary in north Houston would be rezoned to Memorial and Love; students from McDade, another north side school, would be routed to Paige, Cook and Kashmere Gardens; and most children from Grimes and Rhoads would go to Woodson, a combined elementary and middle school.

Melanie Porterie, a teacher at Grimes who has two children of her own at the south Houston school, said she worries the students won't have a safe route to walk to Woodson, and she fears sending them to a campus with middle school students.

"Some of them would get lost in the shuffle," Porterie said. "We do a lot of nurturing to a lot of these children. A lot of the teachers have been here many years and have taught the parents and now are teaching the children."

Grimes, which is rated academically acceptable by the state, was supposed to be part of the district's Apollo school reform plan next year. The other three schools tapped for closure have one of the state's top two academic ratings.

HISD board president Paula Harris, who represents Grimes, said she would feel better about the merger with Woodson if the middle schoolers who are over-age for their grade level are sent to the district's special campus for such students.

Summer school changes

To boost enrollment at other small elementaries, Burrus would get some students from Roosevelt, while Roosevelt would pick up some children from Herrera. Some students zoned to Cook would be rerouted to Houston Gardens.

Grier also proposed a four-day work week over the summer. The plan, not yet approved, means summer school for students would be canceled on Fridays, and most staff would have the day off. Several other local districts have the shorter summer week.

For HISD, the four-day summer week could save an estimated $1 million in utilities and busing, according to Leo Bobadilla, the chief operating officer. But Grier said that money might be put back into expanding summer school programs, perhaps for struggling readers.

ericka.mellon@chron.com