FEMA squeezes Houston over apartment leases HURRICANE AFTERMATH

FEMA squeezes city over apartment leases

The agency's demands could make Houston break promise to 100,000 exiles

Unless federal policy changes soon, Houston will find itself in an embarrassing position three months from today — breaking a key promise made to hurricane evacuees in their most desperate hour.

Despite written statements to the contrary, the Federal Emergency Management Agency will cease honoring the 24,000 year-long leases, backed by the city, signed between hurricane evacuees and local apartment landlords.

As a result the city could fail to deliver on a promise made to nearly 100,000 storm-ravaged evacuees from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita — a safe roof over their heads for a year.

Landlords, who are accepting tenants without a security deposit or credit checks, would be left with scores of families unable to pay their rent.

"Everybody is concerned about what could happen," said Larry Hill, president of the Houston Apartment Association.

"The city, the mayor, the judge, everyone stepped up to the line after these storms hit. We opened our doors. I have no idea what these people would have done if the city of Houston hadn't stepped up."

Since Katrina struck the Gulf Coast on Aug. 29, FEMA has repeatedly come under fire for failures associated with hurricane relief. But it would be a surprise for Houston, which worked closely with FEMA and has had a good relationship with the agency, to be in the position of counting itself among the jilted.

Unprecedented plan

Days after Katrina triggered a flood that devastated New Orleans, with hundreds of thousands of Louisiana residents streaming into Houston, Mayor Bill White and his advisers realized that temporary shelters were no solution for those whose homes or apartments were destroyed.

So in early September, White worked out an unprecedented plan in concert with FEMA officials: Any family affected by the storm could receive a voucher from the city good for 12 months of rent and utilities at decent but not extravagant apartments that participated in the program. The city paid the landlords directly, and then received reimbursement from FEMA.

The program has been a success. Within weeks, city and county shelters were drained, and nearly 100,000 evacuees have been given a chance to find schools for their kids, get a job and begin putting their shattered lives back together.

But then, last month FEMA announced a dramatic change — instead of reimbursing Houston for the 12-month leases, it would terminate the program on March 1. Tenants who qualified for further help with rent payments, the agency said, could participate in its standard individual assistance program for all disaster victims.

Mayor White and others expressed concern about this policy shift at the time, but believed they could work out the issue with the agency after explaining a one-size-fits-all approach wouldn't solve the complex, unprecedented housing needs in the wake of Katrina and Rita.

Yet FEMA's position appears to have, if anything, hardened since then.

Three-month leases

On a teleconference with the news media this week, top FEMA officials in Texas reasserted the agency's position. They even said the city should now be writing three-month leases to comply with the March 1 deadline, even while acknowledging that landlords often won't consent to such short-term rental agreements.

"We certainly understand that there are some situations where they may have trouble finding that," said Bill Boone, a public assistance officer for FEMA, of evacuees looking for short leases.

As more evidence it intends to stand by the March 1 deadline, FEMA staffers, including Sandy Coachman, the top official for disaster recovery operations in Texas, said the agency will pay any fees associated with breaking leases early. FEMA officials cited a desire to standardize services for evacuees and diligently watch taxpayer dollars as part of the reason for their decisions.

For its part, Houston has not stopped writing 12-month leases. White still believes the issue will be resolved.

"FEMA and the Department of Homeland Security are dealing with an unprecedented situation," White said in an interview Thursday. "From time to time, people in the middle of the bureaucracy have a tendency to resort to standing operating procedures that simply shouldn't be applicable to a situation like this."

Washington decision

White said the final decision does not rest with the FEMA's main Texas office, in Austin. He said a delegation of top FEMA and Homeland Security officials from Washington, D.C., are expected to visit Houston in January to assess the program "on the ground," and that the March 1 issue should then be resolved.

It would have to be, if Houston is to avoid taking a serious financial hit. Each of the 24,000 leases backed by the city includes notification that the city can terminate the agreement with 30 days notice. Houston would have to do that by Feb. 1 to avoid financial losses, unless FEMA relaxes the March 1 deadline. Realistically, White said, there's no way Houston will execute its 30-day out on the leases. FEMA, he said, will almost certainly change its stance.

"The American people," he said, "are not going to stand for putting 100,000 Americans out on the street, period."

FEMA insists that its March 1 deadline will not put people on the streets. Evacuees, the agency says, will transition into its section 408, or individual assistance program. Under this program, qualified applicants will be able to receive money every three months for rent.

The program, however, has not been without criticism. It's even been the target of a lawsuit filed by some evacuees against FEMA and the Department of Homeland Security, in part, plaintiffs say, because it's difficult to qualify for and payments are often not timely.

In other words, even if evacuees begin filing for benefits now, it is possible the majority of them wouldn't have checks in hand to begin paying rent on March 1, said Howard Godnick, a partner with the law firm Schulte Roth & Zabel, which filed the suit in New Orleans this week.

"What you will have is landlords who are now going to find that they, too, are victims of Katrina," he said.

Hill, of the Houston Apartment Association, acknowledged fielding calls from concerned landlords. He manages seven properties that have taken in evacuees. John Walsh, a deputy chief of staff for Mayor Bill White who has spearheaded the city's hurricane housing program, has heard the concerns, too.

"Really, this is an ethics issue," Walsh said. "In a time of need we provided some structure and security for people who needed to be able to count on something. And we did it at the direction of FEMA."

eric.berger@chron.com