Perry sets deadline for White in debate standoff
Perry repeatedly has said he would not debate White unless the Democrat releases his returns from his time as deputy energy secretary under President Bill Clinton and a stint as Texas Democratic Party chairman. Thursday was the first time Perry put a due date on his demand.

"Texans are tired of waiting for Bill White to release his taxes, as am I," Perry said in a statement. "I am eager to participate in a debate, as I have during previous statewide campaigns, but if Bill White refuses to be honest with the people of Texas about how he profited while serving the public, I will not share a debate stage with him."

Perry has drawn criticism for setting the condition on the debate. The Houston Chronicle and four other newspapers have said they will host an Oct. 19 debate even if White is the only one who shows up. A political action committee called Back to Basics ran a full-page ad in 24 newspapers across Texas last month calling Perry a coward for refusing to debate White.

Public data vs. blind trust

White has released his tax returns from his three terms as Houston mayor — his only time in elected office - but he has not made public the older returns. He has released personal financial statements from that time period. White has said that people know less about Perry's income, assets and debts than they do about his because Perry puts his assets in a blind trust.

Perry, who previously had released his income tax returns from 1987 through 2008, released his 2009 return Thursday.

"Bill White's staunch opposition to transparency is unbecoming of someone seeking to be elected the chief executive of the greatest state in the nation," Perry said. "There is a very simple solution to this situation. Release your taxes, Mr. White, and we can move forward with debate preparations."

White campaign spokeswoman Katy Bacon, noting that White on Thursday released a border security proposal, said in a statement, "It's time for Perry to stop playing games and show up. Perry wants to hide from his failure on border security and his record of nearly doubling state spending, doubling state debt, and leaving us with an $18 billion budget deficit."

Perry has defended his record on the border and budgetary matters, pointing to Texas having weathered the recession better than the United States as a whole.

Political scientist Bruce Buchanan, of the University of Texas at Austin, said of Perry's latest requirement, "So far, his imposition of random requirements has been cost-free to him" in terms of political support.

"He's apparently going to use this as a fig leaf for closing the matter down definitively. He can always re-open it ... if the pressure mounts to such a degree it's affecting his standing and his prospects for re-election," Buchanan said.

Incumbent's 2009 info

Perry, who received an extension for filing his 2009 income tax return, reported total income of $217,105 on the joint return with his wife, Anita Perry. That was largely from his salary as governor and her payment as a contract employee with the Texas Association Against Sexual Assault. It also included rental income, royalties, a partnership and dividends. The Perrys took a $3,000 capital loss, out of more than a half-million dollars in investment losses.

Perry claimed $5,299 in real estate taxes and $12,084 in mortgage interest on a College Station home. Perry's daughter, Sydney, lived in the house while attending Texas A&M University, but part of the house also was rented out. Perry reported $8,490 in rental income on the property.

At one time, Perry claimed a homestead exemption on the house, but he dropped it after it was disclosed by news media. The Texas Democratic Party has filed an ethics complaint against Perry on the house, claiming he did not properly disclose a mortgage loan.

The Perrys paid $39,757 in taxes and gave about $20,000 to charity - $5,000 to the Texas Association Against Sexual Assault and $15,000 to the Texas Governor's Mansion Restoration Fund.

Reporter R.G. Ratcliffe contributed to this report.

pfikac@express-news.net