A life in public gives Patrick boost in District 7 race ELECTION 2006

Patrick riding high on profile

A life in public gives him a boost in District 7 race

Dan Patrick has been a sportcaster, bar owner, radio talker and author. Now he wants to be a state senator.

During 25 years in Houston's public eye, he's painted his body to boost local teams as a television sports anchor and broadcast live on the radio during his vasectomy.

He also went bankrupt, walking away from debts of failed restaurants and other business endeavors. He made friends and enemies as a conservative voice. And he annoyed members of the Legislature he now seeks to join by leading a raucous group of tax protesters into a committee hearing.

His three opponents in the GOP primary for state Senate District 7 — state Reps. Peggy Hamric and Joe Nixon and former Houston City Councilman Mark Ellis — are all experienced politicians.

Yet they acknowledge that Patrick, 55, who has never run for office, is the front-runner. They say it's because of his years in broadcasting; he says it's because mainstream politicians are out of touch with the conservative district in north Harris County.

"There's no question that when you're on TV and radio, you get a higher profile," Patrick said. "The key is not that people know my name. People know what I stand for and what I've fought for."

Whether he makes it into office depends on whether people like what they know.

"If he was not taken seriously, all of the hours he spent on the radio would be meaningless," said Garth Jowett, a University of Houston communications professor. "The public is not going to fall for a show business personality that doesn't have the political acumen."

Patrick has attempted to acquire that credibility, re-creating himself from TV clown to conservative crusader.

"He would do absolute crazy things on the air," said Dave Wilson, who was an executive producer at KHOU (Channel 11) during Patrick's tenure there.

His critics suggest the manic persona of his TV days is manifest as political extremism now.

One of those is Republican Sen. Jon Lindsay, who is retiring in the district and has endorsed Hamric as his successor. "He's got a hard-core group out there that follows him. He plays to that group and incites them to his positions," Lindsay said.

Other conservative politicians have trod carefully, fearing Patrick's radio pulpit and fervent supporters.

In a rare exception, state Rep. Corbin Van Arsdale sent a letter to his constituents, saying Patrick turned on him when Van Arsdale endorsed Nixon.

"Now that I'm supporting someone else, he immediately begins speaking negatively of my legislative performance, attacking me and calling me a liar — as he does everyone who doesn't support him," Van Arsdale wrote via e-mail.

At a candidate forum Tuesday, Patrick called opponent Nixon a liar for suggesting that Patrick was connected to a series of attacks on Nixon.

Trial lawyer John Eddie Williams has funded mailers in Senate District 7 attacking Nixon, unloved by plaintiff's lawyers because of his legislation capping lawsuit awards.

Nixon said that Patrick's campaign media firm, which has offices in the same building as KSEV and Patrick campaign headquarters, also does public relations for Williams' law firm.

Van Arsdale said Patrick has broad support in the district, and that it is politically risky to attack him.

"People are scared to engage in a communications battle with him," Van Arsdale said. "One side has a bull horn and the other side has a kazoo. You are dealing with a person whose instinct is to attack. "

His friends characterize Patrick's passion differently, attributing it to fervent conviction.

"There's no posturing, there's no calculation in whether or not something plays to a crowd," said Steve Drake, host of a weekly personal finance show on KSEV who has known Patrick 12 years. "He's passionate about the things he cares about. He's pretty passionate about everything he does in his life," Drake said.

The things he does have varied, and some have changed — his name, for one.

Born Dannie Scott Goeb in Baltimore, he began using the more familiar name in 1978 as a sportscaster in Scranton, Pa..

He legally changed his name in the fall of 2003, as he was contemplating a political run, so he would be recognizable on the ballot.

After gaining notice and sometimes ridicule for his antics on television, Patrick left KHOU in 1984 and tried to parlay his name recognition into a sports-bar franchise.

That didn't work, and Patrick filed for personal bankruptcy in 1986, listing 67 creditors and more than $800,000 in debts against $100,000 in assets.

In bankruptcy documents, he listed possessions he said fell outside the assets designation, because they were being used as security for loans.

That way, Patrick protected assets while walking away from business and personal debts — including nearly $5,000 he owed to Buddy's Meats and $1,000 to H Discount Liquor.

During that time, Patrick began developing a radio career, starting with management of radio station KSEV-AM (700) in Tomball. When he joined the station in 1988 as a minority owner, its format was sports.

Soon after, he purchased KPRC-AM (950), which he sold to Clear Channel in 1995, although he stayed on as general manager and host until 2000.

In 1992, Patrick changed KSEV's format from sports to politics. More precisely, he used sports as an entré into politics.

He was key in bringing attention to the details and potential problems with a county-proposed horse racing track in 1992. But he was unable to kill the project, now Sam Houston Race Park.

Patrick went on to fight public funding of other sports venues, and was a vocal critic of the Metropolitan Transit Authority's rail proposals.

He lost those battles too — voters approved new major league baseball, football and basketball facilities and light rail — but he won the mantle of a conservative leader.

KSEV, now owned by Liberman Broadcasting and run by Patrick, has been central to that rise.

He signed off the air in December when he officially filed for office, though he remains a frequent guest on KSEV talk shows.

His radio commentary often included references to his evangelical Christian faith, and in 2002 he wrote The Second Most Important Book You Will Ever Read. He said it represented his divinely inspired mission to challenge readers to tackle the most important book, the Bible.

Patrick stepped up his political activism in 2003, taking aim at property taxes.

He formed a taxpayer's group called CLOUT (Citizens Lowering Our Unfair Taxes) to press the issue. When state Rep. Martha Wong, R-Houston, filed a tax relief bill in 2003, Patrick rallied his audience to head to Austin for a committee hearing.

The 100 Houstonians shouted down committee Chairman Fred Hill and stormed out after accusing the committee of favoring lobbyists. Hill said Patrick whipped the audience into a frenzy.

Later that year Patrick considered running for office in the newly created 10th Congressional District. He decided to pass on that one , and acknowledges he began polling in various districts to find an opportunity.

When he settled on District 7, Patrick purchased a condo to claim residency in the district.

The other candidates are taking a traditional political route — having served in one elected office, they're seeking a higher one.

Patrick says that's the point, and part of his reason for running.

"If we keep re-electing the same people, no matter how good their intentions are, things are not going to change," he said. He contends the Republican Party has strayed from its fundamental principles.

But his opponents suggest that Patrick has created enough enemies with his commentary and lobbying that his election could hurt the district.

"If Patrick is elected, he will be isolated and marginalized in the Texas Senate and every constituent in his district will be too," said Ellis.

Patrick says he's confident he can get beyond that.

"In politics fences are mended every day. I believe the people in Austin are going to want to tap into the base of people who are supporting me," he said. "We are going to have the weight of the radio station to keep focus on issues. If we win this election it will be a mandate for change."

kristen.mack@chron.com