Texas lawmakers sworn in and ready to wrangle Debate on how to use state's extra money is already in full swing

gallery_thumbnails_photo|photo-4002812|article-gallery-4177701|1 Photo: Eric Gay, STF Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close gallery_thumbnails_show|article-gallery-4177701|article-gallery-4177701|0 gallery_overlay_open|article-gallery-4177701|article-gallery-4177701|0 gallery_overlay_open_thumbs|article-gallery-4177701|article-gallery-4177701|0 Image 1 of 1 Rep. Charles "Doc" Anderson, center, R-Waco, and Rep. Joe Deshotel, D-Port Arthur, right, join fellow representatives and family members Tuesday for the Pledge of Allegiance during the opening session of the 83rd Texas Legislature in Austin. Photo: Eric Gay, STF Rep. Charles "Doc" Anderson, center, R-Waco, and Rep. Joe Deshotel,... Texas lawmakers sworn in and ready to wrangle 1 / 1 Back to Gallery gallery_thumbs_close|article-gallery-4177701|article-gallery-4177701|0 gallery_overlay_close|article-gallery-4177701|article-gallery-4177701|0

AUSTIN — Business mixed with pleasure Tuesday on the opening day of the 83rd Legislature, as lawmakers celebrated with family and friends, Speaker Joe Straus won another term as House leader and the debate heated up over how best to use billions more dollars put into state coffers by a rebounding economy.

"The debate's now not, 'Do we need to go spend all this money?' The debate is how's the best way to reduce the cost and effect of government on those that help create the wealth," Gov. Rick Perry said in an interview after calling for tax relief.

Perry suggested creation of a website for Texans to weigh in on taxes and government services, conceding that "you can have every kind of crazy idea in the world that's pitched up there" but, "I am a great believer that all good ideas don't emanate from Austin, Texas."

More Information Live updates from Austin: Go to our Texas Politics blog

Sen. Rodney Ellis, D-Houston, said tax relief could be achieved by closing loopholes.

"We ought to address the basic needs of middle-class Texans," Ellis said, citing public education, water and infrastructure. "In far too many areas, Texas ranks at the very bottom."

Perry and other Republicans also spoke of the need to invest in those key areas, while voicing support for conservative fiscal policies they say have allowed the state to come back from hard times.

Citing Texas' population growth, Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst said, "This session, we're going to be looking at solving infrastructure problems of the state for decades to come, improving public education, over time doubling our drinking water supplies, doubling our highway capacity, keeping Texas No. 1."

'Honest state budget'

Straus, R-San Antonio, outlined a list of priorities topped by education, water development, transportation and an "honest state budget."

He reminded a House chamber crowded with lawmakers, their families and friends that Texas' rapidly growing population includes more than 5 million public school children - a number that exceeds the populations of 29 states.

In a nod to the state's changing demographics, Straus noted more than 60 percent of the public school children come from low-income families and nearly 1 million speak limited English.

"The education of all our students will determine whether Texas is a land of prosperity or lost opportunities," he said.

After education, water likely will be one of the speaker's priority issues. The current drought has cost the state's agriculture industry $8 billion alone, Straus said, and businesses wonder whether Texas will have reliable water supplies to nurture economic growth in the coming decades.

"There is no single or easy answer to our water challenges. But we know a 50-year water plan without funding is not the solution," Straus declared.

The speaker avoided some of the issues pushed by Perry, including abortion and drug screening of applicants for public assistance.

Surplus reported

Speaking to reporters later, Straus emphasized that Texas' future will be defined by whether it remains a state of opportunity - and that will require better education, more jobs, reliable water and a modern road system. He called that list "the core function of government."

"That's my agenda. That's what I'm going to focus on," he said.

Straus won another term after challenger Rep. David Simpson, R-Longview, surrendered to spare his colleagues a public vote.

Lawmakers convened a day after getting good fiscal news from Comptroller Susan Combs, who reported that a rebounding economy will leave them with an $8.8 billion surplus this fiscal year and growth in the next two years.

However, lawmakers also must meet costly demands, including a $4.7 billion Medicaid IOU that lawmakers left hanging two years ago when they faced the forecast of a massive revenue shortfall. They also cut public education by $5.4 billion, compared to previous formulas.

Senate Education Committee Chairman Dan Patrick, R-Houston, after posing for a photo with a couple of members of the crowd in the Senate chamber, called it an exciting time.

"Last session was rather predictable. We were going to pass voter ID and cut the budget," Patrick said. "This session begins with less certainty, but an opportunity to do big and bold things for the future of Texas - school choice and major education reform being at the top of the list."

Reporter Kolten Parker contributed to this report.