Career switch imperils teacher's Social Security Teacher lured into loophole

Career switch imperils Social Security benefits

WASHINGTON -- Houston's Obie Thompson, public relations professional turned teacher, could be the role model for a new federal program to ease teacher shortages touted by political heavyweights such as Texas Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison.

The program is designed to lure professionals from other fields into the classroom, a switch Thompson made 22 years ago.

But not mentioned by program supporters such as Hutchison, New York Sen. Hillary Clinton and first lady Laura Bush is that his career switch could cost him hundreds of dollars a month in Social Security benefits when he retires.

The reason is a little-known Social Security regulation called the "windfall elimination provision," designed to prevent so-called double-dipping into government retirement funds.

Under the provision, benefits are reduced for many workers who move from a job where they pay into Social Security to one where they instead contribute to a state pension fund -- as is the case in most of Texas' public school districts.

A worker can lose as much as $300 a month as a result of the provision, said Mark Hinckle, a spokesman for the Social Security Administration.

The provision has received scant attention nationally, partly because Texas is one of only 15 states where government workers, including teachers, do not have Social Security taxes withheld from their paychecks.

The new program was introduced by Hutchison, who teamed with Clinton to include funding for a "Transitions to Teaching" initiative in the education bill signed by President Bush in January.

Congress committed $35 million to help states set up programs that allow qualified applicants to get a teaching credential without going back to school.

Gayle Fallon, president of the Houston Federation of Teachers, said she applauds the effort. But, she said, as would-be teachers begin to understand the effect on their Social Security benefits, they may change their minds about starting a second career.

"I think it will ultimately hurt recruitment," she said. "It would be more of a deterrent if more people coming in were aware of it. Instead it's like a blindside."

The 45-year-old Thompson, who now teaches language arts at Jane Long Middle School in Houston, was unaware of the problem until he recently pondered retirement.

"I feel it's unfair because I worked all those years in the private sector and I'm not going to be able to reap the benefits," said Thompson, who moved to teaching after the company he worked for went out of business.

Fallon said members of her organization are "appalled," when they find out about the rule. "The reaction of the teachers when they hear about it is just stunned."

She said no one tells teachers about the issue when they are hired.

"When the district needs teachers they're not going to say, `By the way, you're going to get screwed out of your Social Security benefits,' " Fallon said.

Ronnie Veselka, a human resources specialist in the Houston Independent School District, said new hires are given an introductory packet on the Texas Teacher Retirement System, but no mention is made of risks to their Social Security benefits.

"We don't get into it," he said.

But most teachers he dealt with in the past understood, Veselka said.

"They knew almost to a penny what was going on with their Social Security if they worked somewhere else before," he said.

Fallon's group, and the larger Texas Federation of Teachers, has recently begun holding informational sessions on Social Security for teachers around the state.

Congress created the windfall elimination provision in 1983 to close a perceived loophole in the Social Security system.

Under the complicated formula that determined monthly payouts to a retiree, those who paid into the system during only part of their careers were receiving more than they should have, said Hinckle, the spokesman for the Social Security Administration.

Then, as now, workers who earned relatively low wages got a higher percentage of their monthly earnings paid out in Social Security benefits than did higher paid workers.

But because benefits were calculated by averaging a worker's earnings over a 35-year period, people who had paid into Social Security for less than 35 years appeared on paper to have earned lower wages than they actually did.

Thus, under the old system, a person who made a mid-career switch to a job where he didn't pay into Social Security could earn a government pension while also getting the higher Social security benefits afforded to low-wage workers.

The windfall elimination provision addressed the problem by automatically cutting the benefits of any worker who has paid into Social Security for fewer than 30 years and has also contributed to a state pension fund.

Legislation pending in both houses of Congress would abolish the windfall elimination provision. Hutchison's office declined requests to comment on the senator's position.

Thompson, the Houston teacher, had planned to leave the classroom in three years, thinking his Social Security benefits, plus the pension he has amassed as a teacher, would set him up in his golden years. But now he says he is not so sure.

"At the rate I'm going now, I'm going to have to teach another eight to 10 years," he said.