Senator suggests raising sales tax for education

Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Senator suggests raising sales tax for education 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

State Sen. Dan Patrick, R-Houston, is suggesting a 2-cent sales tax increase as a way to restore state education funding "because we can't keep stretching the nickel."

Patrick, a member of the Senate Finance Committee, is meeting with constituents throughout Senate District 7 in northwest Houston and Harris County to provide an overview of the recent regular and special legislative sessions. On Sept. 1, he spoke to the Cy-Fair Houston Chamber of Commerce governmental affairs committee.

He acknowledged flaws in the school funding formula that now contribute to a broad gap in per-pupil spending by school districts, partly due to rapid growth since the formula was set. In his senate district, for example, Cy-Fair schools have $4,800 to spend per student, while Tomball has $6,200 to spend per student, he said.

Patrick said lawmakers are aware and beginning to address the issue.

Texas population is expected to reach 40 million in the 30 years, and the growth is putting "tremendous pressure" on state transportation, education and health care services, Patrick said.

According to the 2010 U.S. Census, Texas' population is more than 25 million.

Until recently, growth in property values of 8 to 10 percent a year helped fuel revenue growth for school districts. If it continued, he said tax bills would've doubled in a few years.

"Pretty soon, your house is paid for, but you can't afford to live in it," he said.

Patrick said 60 percent of state revenue derives from the state sales tax of 6.25 percent. Each cent raises about $2.5 billion, so a 2-cent increase would raise the $5 billion it would take to restore education funding that was cut this biennium, he said. Patrick said he wouldn't suggest more because if the rate goes too high, it begins to affect commerce in the border counties.

"Right now you have 4.5 million homeowners paying for education. I'd rather have all 21 million (residents) contributing to the cost of education," he said.

Cypress residents also pay a 1-cent sales tax to the Houston Metropolitan Transit Authority. City of Houston residents pay another 1-cent in sales tax.

Others have suggested legalized gambling, but Patrick called it "the big lie" and said it won't raise enough to restore education funding.

Other issues

Also needed is immigration reform, he said.

Patrick counted the photo voter ID bill he co-authored along with the sonogram law, Second Amendment bills that let gun owners store their guns in their cars while at work and speed-limit changes among the bills of which he was most proud.

"We can't continue to have an open border," Patrick said.

One in seven school children doesn't speak English, he said. The cost to bring a new seventh-grade non-English speaker up to grade level is too high, he said, especially if the child drops out after a few of years because he still can't master other skills.

"Let's take care of the people who are here, but close the border," he said.

Run for office?

Patrick hasn't ruled out a run for the U.S. Senate, although he said he might prefer to stay in Texas.

Still, he couched his comments about the Texas budget with a comparison to what is happening in Washington, D.C. Current federal spending totals $3.6 trillion per year, but revenue collections amount to only $2.4 trillion, he said. Of the amount spent, $3.1 trillion is for welfare, social security, the military and education, he said.

If the federal government taxed every American with income of $250,000 at 100 percent, it would not collect enough to bridge the gap, Patrick said.

"We can't grow it. We've got to figure out how to be more efficient and better at what we do," Patrick said.

He also took a jab at federal health-care reform, saying if the current plan is implemented, the state's health-care spending will go from 26 percent of revenues to at least 50 percent.

"We can't give health care to every person in America for free," he said.

robin.foster@chron.com