Fact-checking the Senate ads

Ad by Ted Cruz: "Mojave"

The ad: Highlights Ted Cruz's work on a case to preserve a cross placed as a memorial by the Veterans of Foreign Wars in 1934 in the Mojave National Preserve in California. It says, "Conservative fighter Ted Cruz has spent his life defending the Constitution and fighting for our religious liberty."

The message: Cruz is a conservative warrior.

The facts: The lawsuit over the cross was filed against the Interior Department by a former assistant superintendent of the park. The Liberty Institute and Ted Cruz, working for a private firm, filed an amicus brief in the case on behalf of groups including the VFW. The Supreme Court ruled 5-4 in favor of a land swap to allow the cross to stay and sent the case back to a district court. Hiram Sasser, of the Liberty Institute, said Cruz was the "lead mastermind" on the matter and still is involved in the case. He worked for free on the matter.

Ads by David Dewhurst: "Too Many" and "Trial Lawyer Ted"







window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-4', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 4', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});



Photo: Jay Janner, . Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 8/13/2011 - Jay Janner/AMERICAN-STATESMAN - Ted Cruz, former Solicitor General of Texas and Senate candidate, speaks at the RedState Gathering at the Francis Marion Hotel in Charleston, South Carolina, on Saturday August 13, 2011. less 8/13/2011 - Jay Janner/AMERICAN-STATESMAN - Ted Cruz, former Solicitor General of Texas and Senate candidate, speaks at the RedState Gathering at the Francis Marion Hotel in Charleston, South Carolina, on ... more Photo: Jay Janner, . Image 2 of 4 Texas Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst delivers the keynote address at the 109th Annual Meeting of the Wichita Falls Chamber of Commerce and Industry Thursday, Dec. 1, 2011 at the Wichita Falls Country Club in Wichita Falls, Texas. less Texas Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst delivers the keynote address at the 109th Annual Meeting of the Wichita Falls Chamber of Commerce and Industry Thursday, Dec. 1, 2011 at the Wichita Falls Country Club in Wichita ... more Photo: Torin Halsey, . Image 3 of 4 Tom Leppert, candidate for the U.S. Senate, speaking during the Texas Rally for Faith and Freedom at Sugar Creek Baptist Church, 13303 Southwest Freeway, Saturday, March 10, 2012, in Sugar Land. Tom Leppert, candidate for the U.S. Senate, speaking during the Texas Rally for Faith and Freedom at Sugar Creek Baptist Church, 13303 Southwest Freeway, Saturday, March 10, 2012, in Sugar Land. Photo: Melissa Phillip, . Image 4 of 4 Fact-checking the Senate ads 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

The ads: Accuse Ted Cruz of "helping this Chinese company put this American manufacturer out of business" by representing the company in court against a man who says it copied his tire designs. End with the businessman, Jordan Fishman, saying, "There's too many people like Ted Cruz in Washington today." The ads are similar.

The message: Cruz is a lawyer who helped a Chinese company at the expense of an American businessman - hardly the message he sells to his tea party supporters.

The facts: The Shandong Linglong tire company was sued by Fishman along with a distributor. A jury found in Fishman's favor and awarded him $26 million. The firm for which Cruz works was hired for the appeal, and he's listed as counsel on court documents. Cruz's campaign noted that while Dewhurst's first ad says "the Chinese" are "stalling" in court, an appeal is "an ordinary part of the legal process." Dewhurst's first ad calls Cruz a trial lawyer, but Cruz did not represent the company in its trial.

Ads by Tom Leppert: "Didn't Do" and "Empty Suits"

The ad: One ad casts Leppert as "the only businessman in this race" and one who has "created thousands of good jobs." It describes his opponents as "a career politician and a lawyer." The other is similar, with Leppert describing himself "a conservative businessman" and saying he's running against "a government lawyer, a career politician backed by lobbyists and a sportscaster." He also says he has balanced budgets and cut wasteful spending.

The message: Leppert's got the business background to be a job creator, and his opponents do not.

The facts: Leppert is a businessman and former Dallas mayor. His campaign highlights his time as chief executive officer of Turner Corp., saying the general building company's revenue more than doubled when he led it and that he helped create 2,300 jobs.

One ad is incorrect in referring to Leppert as the only businessman in the race, and both inaccurately cast Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst as a "career politician." Dewhurst made a fortune in the energy business as founder of Falcon Seaboard. One ad refers to Cruz as "a government lawyer," but his legal experience also includes private practice.

One of the ads says that Dewhurst is "backed by lobbyists." According to Texans for Public Justice, Dewhurst raised a total of $59.5 million between January 2000 and Oct. 20, 2011, for his state campaign accounts - including money he contributed to himself - with $1.4 million coming from lobbyists.

According to the Center for Responsive Politics, Dewhurst for the U.S. Senate race has raised about $5.8 million from individuals and political action committees, in addition to $2 million he has given himself. The group's breakdown by type of donor only goes through Dec. 31 so far, showing $63,750 from lobbyists. According to a source close to the Dewhurst campaign, about $155,600, or 2.6 percent, of the total given by others has come from lobbyists.

pfikac@express-news.net

twitter.com/@pfikac