STAAR a break, or waste, for non-testing students

While ninth-graders across Texas slogged through the new state English exam Tuesday morning, Bellaire High School senior Alejandro Botas caught up on sleep, homework and TV at home.

It was a school-sanctioned break. Upperclassmen at Bellaire didn't have to show up until about 12:30 p.m. Monday and Tuesday because of the testing.

"It's nice for me, but it's definitely a huge waste of time," said Botas, 18.

The state's testing program has expanded this year, with high schools spending up to 45 days testing and retesting students. The schedule is staggered, with students in different grades and courses taking exams on different days.

Most high school students will spend only five days a year taking the new end-of-course exams, but testing season - which began this week - can devolve into a series of disruptions, with principals calling off morning classes, rearranging 5schedules and moving teachers to different rooms.

"It's five dates of exams for students, but it doesn't mean that students' schedules and teachers' classes are disrupted for only five days," said Robert Bayard, the director of assessment in the Clear Creek Independent School District. "It's much more than that."

Clear Creek did not keep any students home during testing this week, Bayard said, but seniors will have late arrival in coming weeks when the state's schedule becomes more chaotic with students in two grade levels taking the exams.

'Very delicate balance'

Schools have taken various approaches. At Bellaire, seniors will have 10 days of late arrivals from March through May; other students will have five or six.

At Westbury High, only seniors came late this week. HISD's Sam Houston High required all students to come to school; those not taking the official state exams took practice ones. The Alief, Aldine, Cypress-Fairbanks and Spring districts required all students to come to school on time this week.

"As we increase testing, you get crunched for instructional time," said Orlando Riddick, who oversees high schools in HISD. "It becomes a very delicate balance between the kiddos that you're testing and the (other) kiddos."

Riddick said that as principals get used to the new testing program, called the State of Texas Assessments of Academic Readiness, they will figure out the best option for students who are not participating.

One idea, he said, is to send seniors to visit local colleges, though the cost of busing and staff to chaperone could be impediments.

Westbury's principal, Tim Wainright, said balancing the testing demands and engaging the other students is a challenge. But, he added, "We are always evaluating the way we operate to ensure that we continually improve the service we provide for our students."

Lunching off campus

Martha Jenkinson, the president of Bellaire's parent group, said parents agreed at a meeting that keeping non-testers off campus during the morning test time was the best option, as coordinating schedules at the 3,500-student campus is a challenge.

"It's easier for the school to not have everyone there," she said, adding that some teachers hold optional study sessions for the non-testing students.

Laura Almogabar, a Bellaire senior, said she appreciated the two days of late starts this week, allowing her to sleep in, finish homework for her Advanced Placement classes and meet friends for lunch off campus.

"It gives me a break to catch up on homework or finish projects and work on club activities," she said.

Debbie Ratcliffe, a spokeswoman for the Texas Education Agency, said it's common for schools to start late for students not testing.

"That way they don't have the kids there doing nothing or being disruptive while they need it quiet for the ones that are taking it," she said. "It just becomes a management issue for a lot of schools because sometimes they need the extra teachers to help the test administrators."

At Westbury High, seniors have come to school around noon this week. And they didn't learn much once they arrived Monday, said 18-year-old Adrianna Cook.

'It wasn't a whole lot'

"We sat in the auditorium for a little while," Cook said, estimating that the seniors listened to announcements about prom and other activities for about half an hour. "Then we went to lunch. Then we went to class for about 30 minutes and then we went to our next class. It wasn't a whole lot."

Mariah White, another Westbury senior, said she skipped school Monday, expecting she wouldn't miss much.

"I feel like I'm learning sometimes and sometimes I feel like it's a waste of time," she said.

ericka.mellon@chron.com

twitter.com/@e_mellon