Hart: Spring Branch board is fed up with testing monster
Monday night, the Spring Branch school board added its voice to some 420 other test-weary school districts in Texas who have cried out, "Enough!" Enough already with the No. 2 pencils, the drills and the top-secret security measures. Enough nervous ninth graders with pre-test nightmares. Enough teaching to the test, and only the test.

Adopting a resolution imploring the Texas Legislature to control the testing monster it created, Spring Branch joined a national movement of parents and educators who believe the benign idea of "accountability" has morphed into The Thing That Sucks Life Out of Public Schools.

From Alamo Heights to Anahuac, from Highland Park to Huntsville, from Katy to Karnes City, school boards representing a great swath of Texas have united behind a revolutionary concept: Making high school students spend 45 days of the 180-day school year penciling in little bubbles does not constitute a good education.

"It speaks to the level of frustration out there," said Jenny LaCoste-Caputo, communications director for the Texas Association of School Administrators. "No one is against accountability, but the pendulum has swung too far. Everything has become about the test."

In fact, the Spring Branch board tweaked its resolution to make it clear it favors testing, said Superintendent Duncan Klussman. But over the years, the state has created too many tests, with too much of an impact on a student's future. Now, a poor performance in any single area of the curriculum can keep a student out of a four-year college.

"This is bad for kids," Klussman said. "That's what has folks freaked out."

The resolution was conceived in February, after Texas Education Commissioner Robert Scott publicly acknowledged that testing has become a "perversion" of its intent.

'We've doubled down'

Speaking to a conference of school administrators, Scott opined that "simply regurgitating a mini-TAKS test or a mini-STAAR test every two weeks I don't believe is going to be ultimately effective and ultimately provide a quality education. … What we've done in the past decade, is we've doubled down on the test every couple of years, and used it for more and more things, to make it the end-all, be-all. … You've reached a point now of having this one thing that the entire system is dependent upon. It is the heart of the vampire, so to speak."

These were palliative words for stressed superintendents, but Texas Association of Business President Bill Hammond, a proponent of testing, accused Scott of being "a cheerleader for mediocrity." (Scott announced Tuesday he will resign in July. There's no indication the controversy contributed to his decision, but then, he obviously hasn't been having much fun lately, either.)

Re-examine testing

Stunned by the blowback to Scott, a group of North Texas superintendents began circulating a resolution thanking the TEA commissioner for recognizing the dangers of worshipping at the altar of the standardized tests:

"Whereas, imposing relentless test preparation and boring memorization of facts to enhance test performance is doing little more than stealing the love of learning from our students. … Resolved, that the board of trustees calls upon the Texas Legislature to reexamine the public school accountability system in Texas."

Similar resolutions have been adopted by school systems from Florida to New York to Washington state. And it's fitting that the national anti-testing movement has its origins in Texas, since our former governor, George W. Bush, enshrined the notion of "accountability" in his "No Child Left Behind" law.

Klussman believes the tests are working against his goal of seeing more Spring Branch students succeed in college: The tests are at odds with higher education requirements. And yet the tests crowd out instruction time.

'Out of control'

Expect the Houston Independent School District to join the movement soon. Board trustee Harvin Moore predicted Tuesday the board will adopt some version of the resolution within the month. "We support high standards, but it (testing) is out of control," he said.

Texas has spent a half a billion dollars creating its testing monster, and the companies who have profited are sure to mount a counter-offensive. They will claim that testing critics are covering up for mediocre educators. But Spring Branch president Susan Kellner said her board's action was motivated by concerned parents "who are sick and tired of all this testing." Politicians, take note. The anti-testing momentum is fueled not by whiney educators, but a far more formidable political force: Angry parents.

patti.hart@chron.com