Senate vote kicks off immigration-bill debate

Harris County Sheriff Adrian Garcia, right, and San Antonio Mayor Julian Castro, second from right, listen to AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka on Tuesday at the White House. Harris County Sheriff Adrian Garcia, right, and San Antonio Mayor Julian Castro, second from right, listen to AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka on Tuesday at the White House. Photo: Charles Dharapak, STF Photo: Charles Dharapak, STF Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Senate vote kicks off immigration-bill debate 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

WASHINGTON — As the U.S. Senate started to cast votes on a bill to overhaul the nation's immigration laws, President Barack Obama held a White House rally to build support for the proposals.

"Don't kick this problem down the road," said Obama, who was surrounded by a group of business, political and law enforcement leaders - including Harris County Sheriff Adrian Garcia and San Antonio Mayor Julian Castro.

"Do your job,'' the president said to Congress - "not only to fix a broken immigration system once and for all but to leave something better for all generations to come."

The bill would create a path for citizenship for 11 million undocumented immigrants. Obama said the legislation closes other gaps in an outdated U.S. immigration system that requires congressional attention.

The Senate voted overwhelmingly to proceed on the sweeping immigration reform bill. The first procedural vote passed 82-15. A second vote to proceed with debate and amendments passed 84-15.

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., said he hopes the Senate will vote on final passage of the legislation by the July 4th recess.

The chief architect of the bill, Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., praised the overwhelming bipartisan vote on the procedural hurdles "that starts this off on just the right foot."

Although Republican leaders in the Senate said they could not support the bill as written, they voted to move the legislation forward and allow lawmakers to change it through amendments.

'Gang of Eight'

The bill was written by four Democrats and four Republicans, known as the "Gang of Eight," and designed to attract a coalition of support in the politically divided Senate.

But even Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., a Gang of Eight member, said border security measures in the bill would still need to be strengthened to draw sufficient support from conservatives.

An amendment to tighten border security is being offered by Texas Sen. John Cornyn, the Senate minority whip.

The amendment would require 100 percent of the border be secured before legal status or citizenship can be offered to undocumented immigrants.

Cornyn voted to proceed on the bill so he could offer his amendment.

"The bottom line is that if border and national security cannot be guaranteed in this bill, I cannot and will not support it," Cornyn said.

Democrats, though, have dismissed Republican attempts to make citizenship contingent on border security.

Schumer said he would reject using border security as a "bargaining chip."

'Crash and burn'

Texas Sen. Ted Cruz said even with border security improvements, the bill was destined to fail in the House because of insistence by Democrats to include citizenship in the bill.

"Absent major revisions, this bill will crash and burn in the House, and it is designed to do so," Cruz said.

Cruz was one of the 15 senators who voted against proceeding on the immigration bill and allowing debates and amendments.

Immigration legislation faces stiff opposition in the Republican-controlled House where GOP leaders have vowed to take a more piecemeal approach to addressing reform measures.

Many House GOP lawmakers have rejected citizenship as an amnesty for lawbreakers and have suggested offering instead a permanent legal status for the 11 million undocumented immigrants.

House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, said he expects a version of an immigration reform bill to pass in the House this year.

Any differences in House and Senate versions of immigration legislation would then be ironed out in a conference committee.

In light of the congressional opposition, the White House event was designed to show the varied support across the public spectrum for bipartisan reform legislation.

"This bill represents the best opportunity we've had in quite a long time to fix our broken immigration system," said Castro, San Antonio's mayor.

Sheriff Garcia said the Senate bill as written provided the law enforcement measures needed to help secure the border and fight crime.

"If you want to fight the cartels, if you want to fight human trafficking, pass this bill," Garcia said.

The dignitaries standing behind Obama during the East Room ceremony included Tom Donahue, head of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and Richard Trumka, AFL-CIO president, as well as clergy, businessmen and minority rights advocates.

The group, Obama said, were Americans who "don't see eye-to-eye on just about any issue, but who are standing united in support of the legislation that is front and center in Congress this week."

'An amnesty proposal'

But others voiced criticism.

The conservative Heritage Foundation, a Washington-based think tank, launched an online advertising campaign to denounce the bill as an amnesty to undocumented immigrants.

"The bill is an amnesty proposal dressed up in feel-good 'pathway to citizenship' rhetoric," said Genevieve Wood, the Heritage Foundation's vice president of marketing.