Texas agriculture commissioner Sid Miller posts fake shot of Obama with Che tee

Late Tuesday night, Texas Agriculture Commissioner Sid Miller’s Facebook page posted a photo of President Barack Obama smiling, holding up a blue shirt emblazoned with the face of Ernesto "Che" Guevara, the Marxist revolutionary.

The caption states that Obama was holding the shirt during his historic trip to Cuba this week.

RELATED: President Obama comments on Brussels attacks at MLB exhibition in Cuba

“President Obama refuses to return to the United States in order to meet with European leaders to discuss a response to today's terror attacks in Brussels--attacks that severely injured a number of Americans. Instead, he remains in Cuba holding a shirt depicting the image of Che Guevara--one of the most reviled terrorists of the modern age--a murdering thug who was responsible for thousands of innocent deaths. President Obama is laughing at us. He understands the symbolism of this picture and yet he doesn't care. I believe his actions are disgraceful. Do you agree?”

Miller’s Facebook followers responded with much anger over the picture in the comments below the posting. A few, however, did some homework of their own and discovered the picture wasn’t all that it seemed.

The problem is that the photo was taken in late 2009 as Obama toured a research laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Mass. In the original, untouched photo the shirt actually shows a nerdy message, described here.

For those pressed for time, it's the Navier-Stokes equation coupled with the conservation-of-mass equation.

LEARN MORE: 7 things to know about Che Guevara

While it's true that Obama’s trip to Cuba, which included a very real photo of him with other delegates and Cuban President Raul Castro posing in front of an old Guevara mural in Havana, has caused a stir on both sides of the aisle, it's not over a T-shirt.

So far the Miller camp hasn’t responded to the commenters who have noticed that the photo is a hoax, nor has his office responded to phone calls or emails from the Houston Chronicle. We’ll keep you posted.

Miller’s Facebook page has been a flashpoint before, either for posting a light-hearted photo of rattlesnakes “nursing” which was quite funny, or equating refugees with poisonous snakes.

A Facebook post last August on Miller’s official page, featuring the detonation of an atomic bomb and a message suggesting "the Muslim world" should face the same fate, went viral on social media. It was removed nearly a day later.

RELATED: In Cuba, Obama calls for burying 'last remnant' of Cold War

"Japan has been at peace with the U.S. since August 9, 1945. It's time we made peace with the Muslim world," stated the original post, which features the hashtags #noislamknowpeace and #COMETAKE and what appears to be a photograph of the 1957 nuclear bomb tests in Nevada.

Miller's special assistant, Luke Bullock, later said the post was made without the commissioner's knowledge by a staffer in his campaign office who does not work for the state agency.

"It was an error by a staffer. The posting did not reflect the views of Commissioner Miller and, as a result, it's been removed," Bullock said.

Miller's latest controversy involves a taxpayer-funded trip to Oklahoma and a visit to a doctor who administers something called the "Jesus Shot" which is touted as a lifetime cure-all. Read more about the trip in Brian Rosenthal's investigation on HoustonChronicle.com.