Greg Abbott says Texas will not accept any refugees fleeing Syria

Texas will not accept any Syrian refugees fleeing their civil war-torn country, Gov. Greg Abbott said Monday, specifically citing the deadly terrorist attacks in Paris last week and a separate shooting in Texas earlier this year.

He has ordered the state's Health and Human Services Commission's Refugee Resettlement Program not to participate in any resettlement program for Syrian refugees, and pressed President Barack Obama to stop his plan to take in 10,000 refugees over the next year.

RELATED: Trump says he would consider closing certain mosques

"Neither you nor any federal official can guarantee that Syrian refugees will not be part of any terroristic activity," Abbott wrote in a letter to Obama. "As such, opening our door to them irresponsibly exposes our fellow Americans to unacceptable peril."

Abbott said the federal government does not have adequate background information that is necessary to effectively conduct proper security checks on Syrian nationals. He cited May's terrorist attack on a Garland event that hosted an art contest to draw the Prophet Mohammad, which ISIS took credit for.

RELATED: Belgian jihadi ID'd as mastermind of Paris attacks

"Given the tragic attacks in Paris and the threats we have already seen, Texas cannot participate in any program that will result in Syrian refugees - any one of whom could be connected to terrorism - being resettled in Texas," Abbott said.

Denise Gilman, director of the immigration clinic at The University of Texas' School of Law, said Abbott's decision to halt state funding for the effort is about all he can do.

"It sounds like what he's going to do is make the political point, but really all he can concretely say he's going to do is disallow state level funding for resettlement of this particular community," Gilman said. "I'm not sure if that'd be enough to prevent settlement of Syrians in Texas because there might be other funding sources that are anxious to have them settle here."

Read the full letter from Abbott above.

Alabama, Arkansas, Michigan have also declared that their states will not accept any Syrian refugees in the wake of the attacks.