Troisi: Measles outbreak may be difficult to stop







window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-4', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 4', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});



Photo: Justin Sullivan, Staff Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 In the face of a measles outbreak, health officials are urging ramped-up vaccinations. In the face of a measles outbreak, health officials are urging ramped-up vaccinations. Photo: Justin Sullivan, Staff Image 2 of 4 Nurse Bonnie Hardy gives McCall Messick a measles vaccination while Messick's mother, Amy, holds her at the Utah County Health Department in Provo on Wednesday, Jan. 7, 2015. (AP Photo/The Daily Herald, Ian Maule) less Nurse Bonnie Hardy gives McCall Messick a measles vaccination while Messick's mother, Amy, holds her at the Utah County Health Department in Provo on Wednesday, Jan. 7, 2015. (AP Photo/The Daily Herald, Ian ... more Photo: Ian Maule, MBO Image 3 of 4 The decision by parents not to immunize does not affect just their own children. Children who are not old enough to be vaccinated or others who cannot be vaccinated for medical reasons are at risk of disease through no fault of their own. less The decision by parents not to immunize does not affect just their own children. Children who are not old enough to be vaccinated or others who cannot be vaccinated for medical reasons are at risk of disease ... more Photo: Ian Maule, MBO Image 4 of 4 Troisi: Measles outbreak may be difficult to stop 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

Ebola's got nothing on our newest U.S. epidemic threat: measles. The maddening part of it for epidemiologists like me is that the rampant spread of this contagious, sometimes severe disease is entirely preventable. Ebola in the U.S. never was of grave concern in the medical community because of the remote likelihood that it would spread here as it has in parts of Africa. But measles, a disease we thought we had eliminated from the U.S., is now a public-health priority. And vaccination is back in the news.

As has been widely reported, the current outbreak started in Disneyland and has spread to six other states. So far, over 100 people have come down with this disease with more cases sure to follow as thousands have been exposed. Measles has come back with a vengeance and, because of misguided concerns about the safety of vaccines, we may not be able to stop it.

Measles is caused by the measles virus, one of the most transmittable pathogens we know. A person with measles, by coughing or sneezing, can infect, on average, 15 other people. (Contrast that with the contagion of someone with Ebola, who infects, on average, only two other people.) A person incubating measles can transmit it to others up to four days before they become sick themselves. The virus can last in the environment for a long time and you don't have to come into direct contact with an infected person to become infected yourself. Just being in the room where someone with measles has been 30 minutes earlier can expose you.

Measles is not a benign disease. Back in the 1990s (yes, 1990s, not 1890s), three out of 100 children infected died from the virus and three out of 10 survived with serious complications. We still do not have treatment - but we can prevent disease by using a safe, highly effective vaccine. In fact, the vaccine is so effective at preventing measles that the virus was declared eliminated from the United States in 2000. The only cases we saw were in people who contracted the virus while visiting other countries. So why is measles back in the news?

In some communities, measles (and other disease) immunization rates have dropped below the level needed to protect the community. Not all can be protected through immunization - children under age 15 months and those with certain medical conditions can't be vaccinated against measles and need to be protected by vaccinating others so that the virus can't circulate in the community. Why would parents chose not to protect their children and their community from this serious disease?

In 1998, a study that's since been thoroughly and soundly discredited was reported in England, purportedly showing an association between immunization and "leaky gut" in 12 children. These results have never been repeated and there have been numerous studies showing the measles vaccine is safe and effective.

Unfortunately, some parents still have concerns and do not immunize their children. In parts of California, up to a quarter of children are not immunized, making outbreaks of measles and other vaccine-preventable diseases inevitable. While we do not yet see those high unvaccinated rates in Texas, the number of unprotected children has been increasing each year.

Immunizations are required for childcare, preschool and school entry in Texas. But it is easy for parents to refuse. Not only religious and medical exemptions are allowed; there are exemptions for reasons of conscience. To get a medical exemption, parents need to have a doctor's statement. But for a "reason of conscience" exemption, all a parent has to submit is a one-page form listing their child's name and birth date and immunizations from which they wish to be exempted.

Immunizations are one of the top 10 public-health achievements of the 20th century and we've been incredibly successful in controlling many infectious diseases that at one time contributed to the death of one in four children under age 5. The effect of this increase in unvaccinated children, as we've seen with the Disneyland outbreak, is that diseases that we thought we had conquered will be reappearing.

The decision by parents not to immunize does not affect just their own children. Children who are not old enough to be vaccinated or others who cannot be vaccinated for medical reasons are at risk of disease through no fault of their own. There are also the economic costs to society of investigating the outbreak and medical treatment of preventable disease.

We need better parental education on the benefits of immunization, including valid scientific data. We need deliberations on the implications of not protecting children from diseases we thought we had conquered. We need discussions about the costs to society of these preventable outbreaks. This measles outbreak should be our wake-up call.

Troisi is an infectious disease epidemiologist at the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston School of Public Health.