Spicer: Some 'Professional Protesters' Showing Up at GOP Town Halls
During his press briefing Wednesday, White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer addressed the recent protests at town hall events hosted by Republican lawmakers during the Congressional recess.

"There's a hybrid there," he said. "I think some people are clearly upset, but there is a bit of professional protester manufactured base in there. ... It is not a representation of a member's district or an incident. It is a loud, small group of people disrupting something, for many cases for media attention.

"Just because they are loud doesn't necessarily mean they are many."

President Trump tweeted his own doubts about the legitimacy of the protesters yesterday.

The so-called angry crowds in home districts of some Republicans are actually, in numerous cases, planned out by liberal activists. Sad! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 21, 2017

Fox News correspondent Trace Gallagher reported on the continuing theme of activists storming these town hall events.

Schumer: GOP Lawmakers Have 'Real Problems' With Trump, Will 'Break' Away

Malkin: Let's Stop Calling Them Sanctuary Cities, 'They're Outlaw Cities'

Roginsky: There's No Place for Trump-Hitler Comparisons in Political Debate

Protesters are giving lawmakers an earful on issues relating to sanctuary cities, immigration, Obamacare and other items on President Donald Trump's agenda.

U.S. Rep. Tom McClintock (R-CA) had to be escorted out of a town hall event last week due to security concerns, but he was right back at it Tuesday night, Gallagher reported.

WATCH: Town hall attendees hurl attacks at Rep. McClintock (R-CA) pic.twitter.com/ADyG1J1kFZ — FOX & friends (@foxandfriends) February 22, 2017

McClintock has been adamant in his stance for the government to withhold federal funding to sanctuary cities, as well as to repeal and replace Obamacare.

Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-IA), Rep. Jason Chaffetz (R-UT) and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-KY) have also been the targets of such protests.

@wisgop Chuck Grassley in Iowa: “If it wasn’t for Obamacare, we wouldn’t be able to afford insurance!” pic.twitter.com/7MpZHWFxqG — Rooster Rambo (@Red_Rooster819) February 22, 2017

Rep. Jason Chaffetz believes these town hall attendees were paid protesters. Seems your constituents are just mad as hell, @JasonInTheHouse: pic.twitter.com/S6QFWkHJH0 — Fusion (@Fusion) February 11, 2017

Gallagher said that although some lawmakers feel these forums should be discontinued based on these protests, many Congressmen are under pressure to hear what their constituents have to say and thus will keep holding the town hall events.

Watch Gallagher's full report above, as well as the clips from the individual protests.

Immigration Activists Hang 'Refugees Welcome' Sign on Statue of Liberty

DETAILS: Canada Sees Spike in Border Crossings Since November

Maxine Waters on Trump's Cabinet: They're a 'Bunch of Scumbags'