Austin Public Library Card
Library Card Application Information for Adults

To Apply

To apply for a Library Card, complete an Austin Public Library Adult Star Card Application and present it in person at the circulation desk of any Austin Public Library location with a current photo I.D. and proof of your current residence address. For answers to the most frequent questions about Library Cards please see the Library Card FAQ. Adults applying for a new library card or renewing / replacing an existing card, will need to pay all fines owed on their own account and any accounts they've co-signed for.

Adult Star Card Application (PDF, Adobe Acrobat required)

For youth cards see APL Youth Card Application Information.

APL only accepts the following photo ID?s:

Texas Drivers License

Texas Department of Public Safety ID

Temporary Paper Texas Drivers License or Texas Department of Public Safety ID (Only acceptable with additional form of photo ID or if the temporary has a photo on it)

Non-Texas State Issued License or ID

Passport

Military ID

International Drivers License

Non-US Drivers License or permit

Credencial Para Votar ID (Mexico voter registration card)

Non-US Consular ID

Resident Alien Card

Austin Police Department ID

Texas Offender ID

U.S. Government issued ID with an identifying number.

Acceptable Proof of Current Address in Your Name

Driver's license, temporary Texas Driver's license or learner's permit

Texas Department of Public Safety ID

Personalized check, savings passbook, bank or credit union statement

Utility deposit receipt or utility bill

Current credit card bill

Voter's registration or notarized temporary voter's registration permit

Vehicle registration or liability insurance

Official rent receipt; rental agreement, contract or lease

Mail postmarked within the last 30 days (if none of the above is available)

Checking Out Materials

You may check out items when you first apply. This card should be presented each time materials are checked out. Please see our Austin Public Library Circulation Policies for additional information regarding loan policies.

Overdue Charges

The fine for any adult book, audio cassette, compact disc, recording, map, CD-ROM, or pamphlet is 25? per item per day. The fine for any youth book, audio cassette, compact disc, recording, or CD-ROM is 5? per item per day.

The fine for all videocassettes and DVDs is $1 per day.

The fine for any hold not picked up or canceled within the 10 calendar day hold period is $1.00 per item.

Note:

Adult Library Cards are free for those who live in Texas.

For those living outside of Texas there is a $60 annual fee. Nonresident cards are valid for one year from date of purchase. Nonresident cards are also available on a quarterly basis for $20 per quarter. Nonresident card information.

Austin Public Library cardholders, who have had their Austin Public Library Card for at least 6 months, and are in good standing are eligible to apply for a TexShare pass to borrow materials at other participating library systems.

Group Library Cards are available for educational, nonprofit, or service groups.

A Gold Card is available for a donation of $25 or more.

For more information call (512) 974-7400, Monday - Thursday, 10 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Friday & Saturday, 10?a.m. to 6 p.m.; and Sunday, 12 noon to 6 p.m.