Specific eligibility criteria – Federal skilled workers
A. Basic eligibility – Federal skilled workers

We can only process your application if you:

have one year of continuous full-time (or an equal amount of continuous part-time) paid work experience in one of the eligible occupations within the last ten years, OR

have a valid offer of arranged employment, OR

are an international student who is enrolled in a PhD program in Canada (or who graduated from a Canadian PhD program within the past 12 months) and meet the factors below.

Also, no matter which of the three groups above you apply under, you must:

include the results of your official language test showing that you meet the minimum language threshold (Canadian Language Benchmark 7) in all four language skill areas (speaking, listening, reading and writing) when you apply, and

include either a completed Canadian educational credential or a completed foreign educational credential with an Educational Credential Assessment from an approved organization, and

have at least one year of continuous full-time (or an equal amount in continuous part-time) paid work experience within the last ten years in the primary occupation you state in your application.

Remember that even if your application is eligible to be processed, you must meet all of the other Federal Skilled Worker Program requirements, such as meeting the pass mark on the selection grid and having enough money to support you and your family in Canada.

See the basic eligibility criteria for each of the three groups below.

1. Eligible occupations You must have one year of continuous, full-time (or an equal amount of part-time) paid work experience, in at least one of the occupations below within the last ten years. This affects you only if you applied on or after May 1, 2014. If we got your application before that date, we will process it using the rules that were in effect at that time. 0013 Senior managers – financial, communications and other business services

0015 Senior managers - trade, broadcasting and other services, n.e.c.

0111 Financial managers

0112 Human resources managers

0113 Purchasing managers

0121 Insurance, real estate and financial brokerage managers

0311 Managers in health care

0711 Construction managers

0712 Home building and renovation managers

0811 Managers in natural resources production and fishing

0911 Manufacturing managers

1111 Financial auditors and accountants

1112 Financial and investment analysts

1113 Securities agents, investment dealers and brokers

1114 Other financial officers

1123 Professional occupations in advertising, marketing and public relations

1212 Supervisors, finance and insurance office workers

1224 Property administrators

2113 Geoscientists and oceanographers

2131 Civil engineers

2132 Mechanical engineers

2133 Electrical and electronics engineers

2145 Petroleum engineers

2171 Information systems analysts and consultants

2172 Database analysts and data administrators

2173 Software engineers and designers

2174 Computer programmers and interactive media developers

2232 Mechanical engineering technologists and technicians

2234 Construction estimators

2241 Electrical and electronics engineering technologists and technicians

2243 Industrial instrument technicians and mechanics

2263 Inspectors in public and environmental health and occupational health and safety

2281 Computer network technicians

3011 Nursing co-ordinators and supervisors

3012 Registered nurses and registered psychiatric nurses

3111 Specialist physicians

3112 General practitioners and family physicians

3132 Dietitians and nutritionists

3141 Audiologists and speech-language pathologists

3142 Physiotherapists

3143 Occupational therapists

3214 Respiratory therapists, clinical perfusionists and cardiopulmonary technologists

3215 Medical radiation technologists

3216 Medical sonographers

3233 Licensed practical nurses

3234 Paramedical occupations

4011 University professors and lecturers

4151 Psychologists

4214 Early childhood educators and assistants

5125 Translators, terminologists and interpreters These occupations are either: Skill Type 0 (management occupations) or

Skill Level A (professional occupations) or

Skill Level B (technical occupations and skilled trades) on the Canadian National Occupational Classification list. About the application cap Due to the large number of applications we get, we can only consider a limited number of applications per year. As of May 1, 2014, there is an overall cap of 25,500 for new federal skilled worker applications. This includes a cap of 500 applications from PhD students. There are also sub-caps of 1,000 for each of the 50 eligible occupations. The caps do not affect people with a valid job offer. These are the last applications we will accept under the current system before Express Entry launches in January 2015.

2. Arranged employment A valid job offer has to be for permanent, full-time and not seasonal work in an NOC 0, A or B occupation. Depending on your case, there are different factors that make a job offer valid. 1. You currently work in Canada on a temporary work permit, and: your work permit is valid both when you apply and when the visa is issued (or you are authorized to work in Canada when your visa is issued), and

CIC issued your work permit based on a positive Labour Market Impact Assessment (LMIA) from Employment and Skills Development Canada (ESDC), and

you are working for an employer named on your work permit who has made a permanent job offer based on you being accepted as a federal skilled worker. 2. You currently work in Canada in a job that is exempt from the LMIA requirement under: an international agreement (such as, the North American Free Trade Agreement) or

a federal-provincial agreement. Also: your work permit must be valid both when you apply and when the visa is issued (or you are authorized to work in Canada when your visa is issued), and

your current employer has made a permanent job offer based on you being accepted as a skilled worker. 3. You currently: do not have a work permit, or

do not plan to work in Canada before you get a permanent resident visa. OR are working in Canada and a different employer has offered to give you a permanent full-time job, OR are working in Canada in a job that is exempt from a Labour Market Impact Assessment, but not under an international or federal-provincial agreement, and an employer has made you a permanent job offer based on you being accepted as a skilled worker, AND The employer has a positive Labour Market Impact Assessment from ESDC. Note: You cannot get a Labour Market Impact Assessment from ESDC. Your employer must do this for you.

ESDC will only confirm permanent job offers for occupations listed in skill type 0 or skill level A or B of the NOC. A CIC officer must be convinced that you are able to perform the job offered to you. If the occupation is regulated in Canada, the officer must also be convinced that you will be able to become licensed or certified when in Canada.

3. PhD students You must be either: an international student enrolled in a PhD program in Canada who: has finished at least two years of study toward a PhD, is in good academic standing at the time you apply, and did not get an award that requires you to return to your home country to apply your knowledge and skills.

OR a graduate of a PhD program in Canada who: graduated no more than 12 months before the date we get your application, and did not get an award which required you to return to your home country to apply your knowledge and skills (or did, but have already met the terms of the award).

PhD applicants must meet the same minimum requirements as any other Federal Skilled Worker Program applicant. You must: include the results of your official language test showing that you meet the minimum language threshold (Canadian Language Benchmark 7) in all four language skill areas (speaking, listening, reading and writing) when you apply, and

include either a completed Canadian educational credential or a completed foreign educational credential with an Educational Credential Assessment from an approved organization, and

have at least one year of continuous full-time (or an equal amount in continuous part-time) paid work experience, within the last ten years, in the primary occupation you state in your application. Note: If you got an Educational Credential Assessment, it does not guarantee you a job in your field or that you will be able to get a licence in Canada. If you plan to work in an occupation that is regulated in Canada, you should contact the regulatory authority in the province where you plan to live. They can give you important information about getting your licence, including any steps you can take before you leave your home country. We will not consider any more than 500 applications for processing each year in the PhD stream. These applications will not be included in the total for any other cap. We will consider applications in the order we get them. The last cap year began on May 4, 2013, and ended on April 30, 2014. The new cap year began on May 1, 2014. These are the last applications we will accept under the current system before Express Entry launches in January 2015.

There are many ways to immigrate to Canada. If you do not meet the criteria to apply under the Federal Skilled Worker Program, you may qualify under another category.