The mission of the Minneapolis Department of Civil Rights (MDCR) is to enforce Minneapolis Code of Ordinances Title 7 (non-discrimination); Title 9, Chapter 172 (police conduct oversight); Title 16, Chapter 423 (small and underutilized business programs); Title 2, Chapter 24 (prevailing wage); and to promote understanding of civil rights among residents, businesses and government. The Department will carry out this mission by:

Hate motivated speech and actions have no place in Minneapolis

A Message to the Minneapolis Community

By Velma Korbel, Director Minneapolis Department of Civil Rights

Since the general election, many of us have experienced, witnessed firsthand or heard of actions of: racism, xenophobia, sexism and bigotry directed at people here and in cities across the United States. In no uncertain terms, hate-motivated speech and actions have no place in Minneapolis nor will they be tolerated. Activities such as these are against the law. No one is above the law.

Minneapolis is committed to human rights and racial equity for anyone who lives, works, and visits our city. We want everyone to feel safe and welcome here. This department echoes Minneapolis mayor, Betsy Hodges’ resolve and commitment when she stated: “I will not compromise the public safety of the people of Minneapolis to satisfy Trump’s desire to put politics before public safety. Minneapolis is being built and strengthened by people from all over the world and I am grateful for their commitment to our city. I stand with them today and will continue to take that stand as the President-elect prepares to take office.”

The Minneapolis Department of Civil Rights upholds and enforces the city’s anti-discrimination and anti-harassment laws. We also investigate allegations of police misconduct. We are an important resource. If you, your family or someone you know experiences harassment or discrimination based on their race, religion, national origin, sex, LGBT status or other protected classes, or have been the victim of police misconduct, please contact us at (612) 673-3012 or visit www.minneapolismn.gov/civilrights/.