Mayor Jacob Frey's Office

Learn about what the Mayor and his team do for the people of Minneapolis.

Mayor Jacob Frey

From a record-setting investment in the city’s efforts to expand and preserve affordable housing to strengthening the Police Department’s body-worn camera policy, Mayor Jacob Frey is delivering results and laying a strong foundation for a stronger Minneapolis.

Mayor Frey believes housing is a right, and that conviction guided significant work during his first year in office. The Mayor has set an affordable housing agenda with four key corners: expanding access to housing, preserving existing affordable housing, standing up for tenants, and promoting homeownership. His 2019 budget proposal called for a historic $40 million in city funds – more than three times the city’s previous record – to support affordable housing work and leveraged an additional $10 million in outside contributions, bring the total to$50 million. He’s also working to engage more partners to confront the city’s affordable housing crisis. Built through collaboration with the Minneapolis Public School District, the Minneapolis Public Housing Authority and private partners, Mayor Frey’s Stable Homes, Stable Schools initiative is a first-in-the-nation pilot designed to curb homelessness for Minneapolis students and their families. The Mayor’s office is also spearheading innovative measures to prevent displacement and support tenants by expanding access to legal representation. Led by Mayor Frey’s office, More Representation Minneapolis -- a collaboration between tenant advocates the Volunteer Lawyers Network, Mid-Minnesota Legal Aid and Twin Cities law firms -- launched in November to provide a major boost in the number of Minneapolis households receiving pro-bono full service representation in housing court.

Mayor Frey also recognizes that the first and most fundamental responsibility of government is ensuring the safety of its residents. And the effectiveness of any sound public safety strategy rests on positive relations between police and the communities they serve. To enhance accountability within the MPD, Mayor Frey partnered with Chief Medaria Arradondo to strengthen the Department’s body-worn camera (BWC) policy. The revamped policy includes, for the first time in city history, disciplinary measures for failure to comply. Since the policy’s implementation, the rate of compliance has steadily increased among MPD officers, jumping from 55 percent in February 2018 to 90 percent just a year later. The Mayor’s 2019 budget proposal included funding for a variety of initiatives aimed at outreach and community policing, including an increase of $180,000 for the mental health co-responder program, and funding for officer wellness. Police officers have a difficult, and, at times, traumatic job. Making sure they are in the right frame of mind and their best versions of self is of the utmost importance. Every sworn MPD officer now receives 40 hours of crisis intervention training, another first for the Department. A shift toward public-health based approaches to curbing violence in Minneapolis has been central to Mayor Frey’s crime prevention efforts. To better combat the opioid epidemic, Mayor Frey and Chief Arradondo successfully pushed to equip every MPD officer in Minneapolis with Narcan, the lifesaving anti-overdose medicine. Formed in 2016, the city’s Group Violence Intervention (GVI) program that has effectively reduced shootings on the Northside. Frey’s 2019 budget includes funding to expand GVI to Southeast Minneapolis. To better serve new Americans and immigrants, the Mayor worked with the City Attorney to develop know-your-rights placards, which detail a person’s rights when interacting with immigration authorities. The placards are now outfitted in MPD squad cars.

And the relationship between the Mayor and Chief of Police is among the most important in the entire city. Mayor Frey has built a strong rapport and friendship with Police Chief Medaria Arradondo. Frey in 2017 nominated Chief Arradondo to his first full term as Chief of Police. The Chief’s leadership and integrity have generated trust in the community, the trust of City leaders, and the trust of his officers -- all of which led to his unanimous confirmation by the City Council.