Fact check: John Kasich’s speech
Buy Photo Governor John Kasich supporters wait for Kasich to announce his run for president at The Ohio State Student Union in Columbus Tuesday (Photo: The Enquirer/Cara Owsley)Buy Photo

COLUMBUS – Gov. John Kasich’s winding, 43-minute speech announcing his presidential bid Tuesday included references to an inscription on the statehouse Holocaust Memorial, a scripture verse and advice from his mother. But did it include the truth?

Here’s a rundown of the impressive truths and less-than-accurate exaggerations in Kasich’s first speech as a presidential candidate.

Statement: Kasich talked about Ohio’s economic improvements since he took over as governor, citing the growth in private-sector jobs and the surplus. “Now, today four-and-a-half years later, $8 billion in the hole – $2 billion surplus, a loss of 350,000 jobs—a gain of 350,000 jobs, and tax cuts of $5 billion – the largest in the country.

Ruling: Partially true. Ohio’s surplus, often called a rainy-day fund, recently surpassed $2 billion. It contained 89 cents when Kasich took office in 2011. Former Gov. Ted Strickland, a Democrat challenging U.S. Sen. Rob Portman for his seat, had used about $1 billion from the surplus to balance the state budget, leaving it nearly empty. Democrats argue the $2 billion is money that could be used to pay for education or local government needs.

The $8 billion claim is less accurate. That number was a projected deficit if the state kept taxes and spending at their current levels. But Ohio was never going to be $8 billion in the hole because the state constitution requires lawmakers to balance the budget.

On the jobs’ front, Ohio has about 57,000 fewer jobs, including both government and private sector positions, than during its pre-recession peak in early 2006. The state lost a total of 455,000 jobs before bottoming out in February 2010. Since Kasich took office in January 2011, the state has recouped about 350,000 non-government “private sector” jobs, but government employment is at a three-decade low.

It’s not clear how much credit the governor can take for Ohio’s employment trends. The state was buoyed by the national recovery, but economists say Kasich has championed policies that are making the state more business-friendly.

Ohio Department of Taxation estimates the state has cut nearly $5 billion in taxes through a combination of eliminating the estate tax and reducing the income tax. However, some of those cuts have been offset by increased sales and property taxes.

Statement: Kasich used Wilmington as an example of his efforts to improve dire economic situations. “I told them that the sun would rise again. It hasn’t reached its zenith, but the sun is rising, and the sun is going to rise to the zenith in America again.”

Ruling: Partially true. Wilmington has seen progress after the devastating loss of 8,000 jobs in 2009. International shipping giant DHL’s decision to close its air hub there affected about one in three families in the town of 12,000. Even Ohio’s House speaker, Clarksville Republican Cliff Rosenberger, felt the cuts: His mother was laid off when DHL left town.

The city is doing better but unemployment in Clinton County still surpasses state and national rates. Democrats pointed out that Strickland helped Wilmington after the cuts, too.

Statement: Kasich won an impressive race in 1982, beating Democratic incumbent Bob Shamansky, while Republicans lost 26 seats. “In 1982, I was the only Republican to beat an incumbent Democrat all across this country.”

Ruling: Mostly true. Three incumbent Democrats lost congressional seats in 1982, but the other two were going up against Republican incumbents after district lines were redrawn. Twenty-six Republicans lost their seats in Congress that year.

Statement: Kasich touted his ability to work with Democrats. “I went on to chair the Health Committee where I learned to work across the aisle because the House was run by Democrats, and that’s where I learned that policy is far more important than politics, ideology, or any of the other nonsense we see.”

Ruling: Depends on the situation. Kasich worked with state Democrats to expand Medicaid to more lower income Ohioans and tackle anti-human trafficking laws. However, he became the enemy of public unions during his attempt to limit collective bargaining, and Democrats don’t thank the governor for restrictions he has helped place on access to abortions.

Statement: Kasich reminisced about his time at the Ohio State University and his dorm. “I came here to Ohio State. I found myself on the 19th floor of one of those towers – you can hit it with a stone from here.”

Ruling: Probably false. All 19-story towers were more than a stone’s throw from the Ohio Union, unless you have a really excellent arm.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1RO3frE