Donald Trump wins Ohio on the way to presidency
CLOSE President-elect Donald Trump delivered his victory speech after a historic upset, pledging to be a president for 'every citizen of our land.'

President-elect Donald Trump greets supporters on election night. (Photo: Robert Deutsch, USA TODAY)

Donald Trump has secured the presidency, propelled by a win in swing-state Ohio, the state every Republican has needed to reach the White House.

With nearly all Ohio precincts reporting, Trump had 52 percent to Democrat Hillary Clinton’s 43 percent – the largest margin of victory in Ohio since 1988.

The loss is the first by a Clinton in Ohio, in any election. Clinton had a path to the White House without the Buckeye State's 18 electoral votes, but lost too many states that had appeared close before Election Day. The Associated Press called Pennsylvania for Trump early Wednesday morning, cementing his victory.

When networks called Ohio for Trump, supporters gathered at his victory party in Columbus screamed and jumped up and down for minutes like they were cheering at a sporting event.

"This is a wake-up call to the Washington establishment," said Richard Snead, 31, of Columbus. In the past two elections, when Ohio voted for President Barack Obama, "Republicans have had very somber parties here. Now we have something to celebrate."

Trump didn’t just win Ohio. Clinton lost. Trump stole some votes away from Clinton in the blue-collar bellwether of Mahoning County – typically a Democratic stronghold. In 2012, Barack Obama easily won the county, 63 to 36 percent. Clinton won the county by only 3 percentage points. Trump added support from rural counties and suburban areas, while Democratic turnout in urban areas simply wasn't enough to make up the difference.

“I voted for Trump. I didn’t really want to vote for Trump, but I didn’t want Hillary in office,” said Sarah Geil, 33, of Delhi Township.

Democrats were despondent at a results-watching gathering at Lachey's Bar in Over-the-Rhine. "It's hugely disappointing to work hard to get a state and lose it," said Wesley Olser, of Mount Auburn, who had spent the week canvassing for Clinton.

"If Trump wins, it's gonna be four crazy years, believe me," Olser said.

Still, Clinton won Hamilton County – a bellwether for Ohio in recent elections. With 96 percent of precincts reporting, Clinton was leading 52.1 percent to Trump’s 43.4 percent.

NEWSLETTERS Get the News Alerts newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Be the first to be informed of important news as it happens in Greater Cincinnati. Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-876-4500. Delivery: Varies Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for News Alerts Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

In securing Ohio, Trump capitalized on his appeal to working-class white voters, who backed his opposition to free trade and believe U.S. immigration trends have threatened their job security . That group – white people who lack a bachelor's degree – makes up 63 percent of the Ohio electorate over the age of 25, nearly the top percentage among swing states. Those voters often vote Democratic and historically liked President Bill Clinton, but backed Trump in droves this year.

In Ohio, Trump also had fewer Latinos to offend with his comments about Mexican immigrants, talk of a deportation force and a wall on the Mexican border. The Buckeye State's Latino population – about 3 percent of the state's residents – also ranks in the bottom 10 in the nation.

Clinton failed to energize the groups in Ohio who were inclined to vote for her. African-Americans and millennials who had helped President Barack Obama win Ohio in 2008 and 2012 found Clinton uninspiring. Then, the FBI gave notice 11 days before the election that it was reviewing emails that could be relevant to an investigation into her private server . The news solidified Trump's edge in the campaign's last days.

In winning Ohio, Trump finally won over a group that had been wary of supporting him: his fellow Republicans.

In March, Ohio Gov. John Kasich won Ohio , boosted by both Republicans and Democrats who saw the state's primary as a chance to stop Trump's momentum. Most of the state's top Republican officials and operatives were aligned with Kasich. When he finally dropped out of the primary in May, it took a few months for Ohio Republican Party officials to line up staffers willing to work for Trump in Ohio .

Even then, Kasich and his allies continued to have doubts about Trump. Their candor prompted Trump and his aides to lash out at Kasich during the Republican National Convention in Cleveland and to break ties last month with Ohio GOP Chairman Matt Borges – moves that likely felt good in the moment but cast doubt on Trump's ability to deliver Ohio.

In the end, Republicans came together in an effort to stop Clinton. In the quiet of the voting booth, many held their noses and voted for Trump, despite his crude comments about women and allegations that he had sexually assaulted several women.

Trump's feud with the Kasich team extended even to his victory party in Columbus, where his campaign held a separate event from that of the Ohio Republican Party.

At the state party event, a few dozen people sipped drinks and chatted as each national news outlet announced Donald Trump had won Ohio. No one seemed to notice.

Finally, Fox News announced Trump had won Ohio. Some Ohio Republican faithful applauded and cheered. A woman gave her friend a high five. Not present: Ohio’s top Republicans, Kasich and Sen. Rob Portman, who rescinded his endorsement of Trump last month and was hosting his own victory party a block away.

One person was wearing a “Make America Great Again” hat – white, not the traditional red.

“I just wanted to report that a few minutes ago, I called Donald Trump and congratulated him on winning Ohio,” Borges said. Some people cheered and clapped. But Borges was quick to move on to discussing Republicans' victories in legislative races.

Adrian Burns, Jessie Balmert, Mixie Mechley and Huy Nguyen contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/2fBqA0b