CNN's Jake Tapper: 'Allahu Akbar' Can Be Said Under 'Most Beautiful' of Circumstances
President Trump Asks Congress to Terminate 'Diversity Lottery' Program

Gen. Jack Keane: NYC Terror Attack Shows Radical Islam Is 'Thriving, Growing'

Ingraham: We Demand Our Elected Officials Keep America Safe

CNN anchor Jake Tapper said the Islamic phrase "Allahu akbar" can be said "under the most beautiful of circumstances" just minutes after a terrorist attack in New York City.

Suspect Sayfullo Saipov allegedly slammed a truck into bikers and pedestrians Tuesday afternoon near lower Manhattan's West Side Highway, killing 8 and injuring at least 11.

Saipov reportedly yelled "Allahu akbar" - Arabic for "God is great" - after crashing the truck before an NYPD officer was able to shoot him.

“The Arabic chant 'Allahu Akbar,' God is great, sometimes is said under the most beautiful of circumstances. And too often, we hear it being said in moments like this,” Tapper said on "The Lead."

On "The Five," Jason Chaffetz said the overwhelming majority of Muslims do not commit acts of terror, but it is important to acknowledge that there is an element of radical jihadists in the Islamic faith.

"And we have to be honest about who they are and what they're doing," Chaffetz said.

Update: After the “Five” segment aired, Chaffetz offered an apology to Tapper on Twitter.

In retrospect I don't think I gave @jaketapper a fair shake tonight. My bad,” Chaffetz wrote.

In retrospect I don't think I gave @jaketapper a fair shake tonight. My bad. — Jason Chaffetz (@jasoninthehouse) November 1, 2017

Greg Gutfeld said many in the mainstream media are paralyzed by "Islamophobia-phobia."

He said that can lead to prioritizing potential reactionary anger at Muslims over the actual terror attack and the victims.

Dana Perino said she thinks Tapper was trying to make a point about how terrorists like Saipov are perverting the religion of Islam.

"I do think it's important that we don't talk about the suspect as deranged or mentally ill. He is evil," Perino said. "And this is about good vs. evil. It's not about religions vs. religions."

Watch more above.

Tony Shaffer: We Must Not 'Import Europe's Terror Problem'

Graham: NYC Terrorist Must Be Declared an 'Enemy Combatant'

De Blasio, Schumer, Scarborough Blast Trump for 'Politicizing' NYC Terror Attack

Gorka on NYC Terror Attack: 'Political Correctness Can Get People Killed'