Criminal Justice Policy Foundation
Click here for printer-friendly version





Applicable Form of Executive Clemency: Commutation of Sentence

The Arkansas Constitution establishes the authority of the Governor to grant executive clemency, which includes commutations. The purpose of a commutation is to reduce a sentence imposed by the court to a lesser term or to time served. Arkansas law and the policies of the Governor and the Post Prison Transfer Board regulate the manner in which executive clemency applications are considered.

Eligibility: All inmates are eligible to apply.

The Governor of Arkansas can grant executive clemency only for convictions received in Arkansas courts.

The Board will not consider your application if you have not obtained the form for your application from the Governor's office, if your case is currently being appealed, or if a Rule 37 petition or other petition for post-conviction relief is pending in a court.

Application Process: Applications must be requested from:

Robyne Culver, Assistant for Executive Clemency

Office of the Governor

State Capitol Building

Little Rock, AR

Tel: 501.682.8184

Fax: 501.682.1382

Email: Robyne Culver

Click here to preview the clemency form that you must obtain from the Office of the Governor, before you complete and submit it.

Send completed clemency application forms to:

Post Prison Transfer Board

c/o Institutional Parole Services

Arkansas Department of Community Punishment

Post Office Box 8707

Pine Bluff, AR 71611

The Governor and/or the Post Prison Transfer Board will contact the State Police, the FBI, the sentencing court, the prosecuting attorney, and others to verify the information you provide. Incorrect information is grounds for denial. All supporting documentation must be available when the Board considers your application. After reviewing your case, the Board will forward it to the Governor for final action. The entire process can take from six to eight months.

In accordance with Arkansas law, the Governor must give notice of his intent to grant executive clemency to assure an opportunity for public comment before his final decision is made. The notice will be furnished to the media. The notice does not preclude the Governor from later denying your application.

If your application is based on your belief that your sentence is excessive or that your institutional adjustment had been exemplary and the ends of justice have been achieved, the application will ordinarily be denied if you have not served the following portion of your sentence indicated by the following table:

Life Sentence: 12 years

Over 30 years: 7 years

25-30 years: 6 years

22-24 years: 5 years

19-21 years: 4 years

16-18 years: 3 years

11-15 years: 2 years

Below 11 years: 1 year

Every effort has been made to make this information accurate and up-to-date. Errors are inevitable and changes occur frequently. We would appreciate learning of any errors or inaccuracies regarding any information on this Webpage as soon as possible. Please write to info@cjpf.org