Coalition of Immokalee Workers
Hitov: “I would challenge each of you to ask this simple question. Will what I am about to do create meaningful and sustainable change, or will it just be words on paper? If it won’t improve the day to day reality of the people whose lives and rights you are concerned about, in a way that can be proven, then do something else, or do more.”

Last Wednesday’s Gwynne Skinner Human Rights Award ceremony at the International Corporate Accountability Roundtable (ICAR) annual meeting in DC was a night to remember. When we first wrote about ICAR’s selection of the CIW’s longtime general counsel, Steve Hitov, as the inaugural recipient of the award earlier this month, we were looking forward to an all-too-rare opportunity to celebrate Steve’s remarkable career and his many contributions to the CIW’s decades-long struggle for farm labor justice and universal human rights. And when the big night finally arrived, we were not disappointed.

The evening began with a series of truly moving tributes to Gwynne Skinner’s lifelong fight for corporate accountability, as colleagues and family members took turns speaking about her tireless commitment to justice for those whose lives are conscribed by the harsh conditions at the bottom of corporate supply chains. The speakers’ words, and their tears, made one thing perfectly clear: The idea to celebrate Gwynne Skinner’s life with an annual award for human rights was a brilliant one.

As was the idea to present the inaugural award to Steve Hitov.

In our first post on the award, we explained some of the reasons why we were so pleased to receive the news of Steve’s selection. But today we’d like to step back and let Steve do the talking, to give you a fuller sense of our longtime colleague, and of his personal philosophy of social change, in his own words. So, without further ado, what follows is the transcript of Steve’s comments from last week’s ceremony. We hope – and trust – you will enjoy them as much as we did: