The Victims 'Aren't Dancing': PA Rep Blasts Philadelphia Mayor for Celebrating Sanctuary City Win
A Pennsylvania Republican congressman who is running for the U.S. Senate ripped Philadelphia's mayor and his own Democratic opponent for their support of sanctuary cities.

Mayor James Kenney (D) was recorded dancing and high-fiving his chief of staff after a Bush-appointed federal judge blocked the Trump administration from withholding grant money from Philadelphia over its sanctuary status.

'A Sanctuary City': Philadelphia Mayor Kenney Dances to Celebrate Court Win Against @realDonaldTrump https://t.co/3P4qVPd5bp — FoxNewsInsider (@FoxNewsInsider) June 7, 2018

"That's really a sad video to watch," Rep. Lou Barletta of Hazleton told Stuart Varney on FBN. "Especially for me."

'A Sanctuary City': Philadelphia Mayor Dances to Celebrate Court Win Against Trump

Philadelphia Mayor Unloads on 'Bully, Punk' Trump: 'His Family Didn't Do a Great Job Raising the Guy'

Barletta said that, prior to being elected to Congress, he served as Hazleton's mayor and was one of the first such officials in the country to try to "stop illegal immigration in my city."

"I don't think the families of the victims in Philadelphia who were victims of illegal immigrants... I don't think they're dancing," Barletta said.

We took on the federal government and won. Today, a federal judge upheld our right to welcome immigrants regardless of their status. Philadelphia will always be a welcoming city for all. pic.twitter.com/ZkmbJN5FnX — Jim Kenney (@PhillyMayor) June 6, 2018

Barletta said the family of a child who was allegedly raped by an illegal immigrant in Kenney's city is not dancing.

He said he is challenging Sen. Bob Casey Jr. (D-Pa.) in November, and that he and Casey -- the son of a former Pennsylvania governor -- are "on opposite ends" of the sanctuary city and illegal immigration issue.

"That's going to be a big issue in this election," Barletta said.

Casey Jr. addressed the illegal immigration issue in a February statement:

"It is long past time that Washington get serious about real immigration reform. That's not amnesty. And that's not deporting all eleven million undocumented immigrants. My Republican colleagues and President Trump seem to think that the best way to deal with immigration is to just deport everyone. That's unworkable, and they know it. So let's stop playing political games and get to work," he said.

Gutfeld: Trump Could Propose 'Donald DACA' and 'Totally Destroy the Democratic Party'

'Take the Man's Microphone!': 'Outnumbered' on Rudy's Shocking Trump-Kim Claim