Donald Trump Wins "Hair Match" At Wrestlemania Against Vince McMahon - Cleveland 19 News Cleveland, OH
DETROIT (AP) - One of the world's most famous 'do's - considered

by many to be a fashion don't - remains intact after its owner,

Donald Trump, prevailed in Sunday night's "hair match" at

Wrestlemania.

Trump trumped World Wrestling Entertainment owner Vince McMahon

in the "Battle of the Billionaires" at the WWE's largest annual

pay-per-view event. After the real estate mogul and reality TV star

triumphed, he gleefully took the shears to Mr. McMahon's head.

Trump and McMahon didn't actually battle it out in the ring, but

instead had WWE wrestlers representing them grapple to see who

would go bald. The winner, Trump's guy Bobby Lashley, bested

McMahon's chosen wrestler, Umaga.

Trump wasn't just a cheerleader during the match, however - he

leaped off his feet at one point and drove McMahon into the ground,

then pummeled him with some closed-fisted punches.

The "sports entertainment" event was held fittingly on April

Fool's Day and was filled with loud music, pyrotechnics and

screeching, flashbulb-snapping fans.

Lashley's pinfall victory over the 300-plus-pound "Samoan

Bulldozer" meant that McMahon had to yield to Trump's razor and

the locks fell. Wrestling legend and action film actor "Stone

Cold" Steve Austin served as the special guest referee for the

match at Ford Field, home of the NFL's Detroit Lions.

It wasn't all laughs for Trump, though.

After celebrating in the ring with a cold beer - Austin's

preferred post-victory beverage - an unsuspecting Trump was given a

"Stunner" by Austin - he had his head driven into Austin's

shoulder. Lashley tended to Trump while Austin jogged toward the

dressing room to the roaring approval of the crowd.

The Trump-McMahon showdown was one of the featured matches at

the 23rd edition of the professional wrestling extravaganza. It

drew 80,103 fans, a new Ford Field record, breaking the previous

record of 78,129 set during the December 2003 college BasketBowl

between Michigan State and Kentucky.