Barack Obama, Democrats call the auto bailouts a success, but did they work?
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- The $62 billion government bailout of General Motors and Chrysler accomplished its goals to protect the U.S. auto industry, preserve jobs and save taxpayer dollars.

President Barack Obama plans to celebrate those accomplishments Friday in Toledo with a visit to Chrysler's Jeep plant. On Wednesday, his administration released a report that projects the government only will lose about $14 billion on the bailouts of GM, Chrysler and auto lender GMAC. In 2009, the Treasury Department projected a $48 billion loss.

For Obama, that's enough to call the bailouts as unqualified successes. Critics are more skeptical, saying the impact of automotive failures have been exaggerated and the long-term economic damage from the bailouts could take years to be realized.

What could have been

Some critics agree that the bailouts achieved their goals of job protection and limited losses to taxpayers. But they said many jobs could have been saved without government intervention.

Obama has said failing to save the companies would have cost more than 100,000 jobs at the automakers and as many as 1 million at plants that supply parts to automakers.

If GM and Chrysler had gone through privately funded bankruptcies, new investors could have demanded bigger cuts in worker pay and benefits while saving tens of thousands of jobs, said Hans Bader, senior attorney for the conservative Competitive Enterprise Institute think tank in Washington.

In U.S. bankruptcy court filings, GM said it tried to find private investors but failed because lenders were not willing to take a risk on a damaged automaker amid a financial meltdown. Without funding, the company would have had to liquidate, selling off all of its factories and equipment.

"Even if GM's factories had ceased to operate in any form, which I think is unlikely, I assume that some of the slack would have been picked up by" foreign-owned automakers, Bader said in an email. So, he said even in the worst-case scenario, Obama's claims of 1 million jobs saved is too high.

The big question is how long that would have taken and how much damage would have been done to the Midwest economy while competitors filled a void left by GM and Chrysler.

Bader and others have suggested that competitors or entrepreneurs could have created jobs by buying old GM and Chrysler plants and car designs. Buying that property at fire-sale prices would have given investors an instant entry into the U.S. auto market.

In 2009, those theoretical investors had that chance when GM tried to sell its Saab, Saturn and Hummer brands.

Automotive insider Roger Penske failed to put together a viable business plan for Saturn, an agreement to sell Hummer to a Chinese automaker failed, leaving Saab the only success story. And Saab's purchase only took place when the Swedish government put up most of the money needed.

On the equipment side, Chrysler's former plant in Twinsburg sold for scrap with many of its large stamping presses shipped overseas.

Kristen Dziczek, an economist at the Center for Automotive Research in Ann Arbor, Mich., said Obama and his predecessor George W. Bush didn't have the luxury to taking such theoretical job gains into account when deciding what to do about the auto industry in 2008 and 2009.

At the time, job losses were growing rapidly. Allowing automakers to fail would have swollen the ranks of the unemployed at a time that the economy couldn't have handled the strain, Dziczek said.

"This is one of the most successful things that was done during the economic downturn," Dziczek said. She said failing to act would have meant a much deeper economic recession without any of the gains posted in recent quarters.

Judging the bailouts

To date, GM and Chrysler have repaid more than half of the amounts loaned in 2008 and 2009. The White House's loss estimates assume not only the successful sale of the government's remaining 500 million shares of GM stock but an almost complete repayment of the $16 billion loaned Ally Financial, the former GMAC. So far, Ally has repaid about $5 billion of its loans.

If the government had let the companies go out of business, it would have had to spend $14.5 billion to take over the two companies' pension plans. Federal spending on unemployment benefits for the 129,500 workers at the two companies also would have dwarfed the loss that taxpayers now face.

"Inaction was not free," Dziczek said. "Doing nothing was still going to cost us a lot of money with no chance at all of recovery."

Still, the government's action had its price as well.

The two automakers employ 16,500 fewer people than they did in 2009.

Since 2009, GM has added about 2,000 jobs in Ohio, mainly at its Lordstown plant where it makes the Chevrolet Cruze. GM has also expanded its Parma Metal Center and Chrysler has added jobs at its Jeep complex in Toledo.

That net gain in jobs in Ohio provides little comfort to Twinsburg where Chrysler closed a stamping plant or in Mansfield where GM shuttered a metal center.

James Gattuso, a research fellow at the conservative Heritage Foundation think tank, called the bailouts far more successful than he and other opponents feared they would be.

"We took a roll of the dice. There could have been tremendously bad consequences if the dice had rolled the wrong way," Gattuso said.

Gattuso added that the country got lucky. Just because things worked out well with GM and Chrysler doesn't mean it was a good idea to rescue them.

"It reminds me of the first Iraq war. It was completed in a number of hours. It left the feeling that this was easy," Gattuso said.