Ohio loses 20,400 jobs in March, leading the nation in monthly job loss
Ohio lost 20,400 jobs in March, more than any other state, the U.S. Labor Department reported Friday.

The decrease comes a month after Ohio reported a healthy 16,100 gain in jobs in February.

The last time Ohio lost more jobs in a month was April 2009, when the state's employment fell by 44,000. That was during the recession, a time of peak job loss in the state and nationally.

George Zeller of Cleveland, an economic research analyst, said posting such a large job loss now is alarming.

"This is not only a bad number -- this is disastrous," he said.

Other states posting steep job losses for March were Illinois, with a 17,800 decrease, and Indiana at 12,400.

Despite leading the nation in job loss in March, Ohio's unemployment rate remained at 7.1 percent. (The February jobless rate was initially reported at 7.0 percent, but it revised upward after more information became available.)

One reason Ohio didn't see rising unemployment is because of the way the unemployment rate is calculated. The rate is based on a national survey of people who say they are unemployed and actively looking for work. Ohio, like every state, is sampled in the survey, but a separate survey of each state is not done. Zeller said this can lead to an unemployment rate that doesn't truly reflect job losses or gains in an individual state.

Industries posting big losses in March included leisure and hospitality, which lost 6,000 jobs; professional and business services, down 4,300 jobs; and construction, with a 3,300 decrease. Even the category including health services posted a 2,500 decline.

"That is extremely unusual," Zeller said. "That has been our best growth sector for decades."

A bright spot was manufacturing, which has fueled the recovery in Ohio and gained 1,800 jobs.

Despite the steep job losses in March, Ohio has an unemployment rate lower than the national average. The U.S. jobless rate for March was 7.6 percent.

Still, the latest decline represents a potentially disturbing trend about job growth in Ohio, which began leveling off in the second half of 2012, said Hannah Halbert, work force researcher for Policy Matters Ohio. Ohio has gained only 1,900 jobs this year and 2,700 jobs over the past year, growing at a "very weak" 0.1 percent, the group said in a news release.

"Ohio job growth has been volatile for the last nine months," Halbert said.

Since the end of the recession, Ohio has added 133,700 jobs, growing at a rate of 2.7 percent, she said. Zeller said Ohio lost 241,300, or 4.5 percent of its jobs, during the recession, which officially ran from December 2007 to June 2009. Even though Ohio's jobless rate remains below the national average, the state's job growth has lagged the national average, Zeller said. Between March 2012 and March 2013, the national job growth rate was nearly 1.5 percent, compared with 0.1 percent in Ohio.

"At that rate, it is going to take us 82 years to recover from the recession," Zeller said.

Rob Nichols, Gov. John Kaisch's press secretary, said the jobless figures should be taken in context.

"It is a reminder that we are not out of the woods yet," he said. "We're up 110,000 jobs since January 2011, but there is a whole lot more work to do."

Nichols said the governor's opponents have hampered his job-creation efforts. He chastised "those who try to throw marbles under the feet of JobsOhio," the private, nonprofit development corporation created by the administration to promote economic growth in Ohio. The constitutionality of JobsOhio has been challenged, and the issue is still in the courts.

Nichols also cited tax cuts as a frustration. Republican House leaders scrapped much of the governor's tax-cut plan in their own budget proposal.