$15 minimum wage hike option if gradual, says Cleveland councilman: wants meeting
CLEVELAND, Ohio - Councilman Zack Reed wants City Council to meet with the group petitioning to get a one-step $15 minimum wage hike on the ballot, saying that such a pay increase should be phased-in.

"I am not opposed to raising the minimum wage in the city of Cleveland, but if we are going to do it, I would like to use the gradual tiered approach," said Reed of Mount Pleasant, who represents Ward 2 on the city's East Side.

Reed said he would ask Council leadership at tonight's meeting to meet with the group petitioning for the pay hike in crafting legislation based on a gradual increase in the minimum wage.

The newly formed Raise Up Cleveland is petitioning to get a $15 minimum wage on the ballot. The proposal calls for increasing Cleveland's minimum wage to $15 in January. Beginning in January 2018, increases would be indexed to inflation, which would make future raises automatic. Most minimum wage hike measures, including those recently passed in California and New York, call for raises to be phased-in over several years. Cleveland currently does not have a minimum wage. Ohio's minimum wage is $8.10.

Read: $15 minimum wage could get on Cleveland ballot

Reed believes a cross-section of entities, including the Council, the petitioners and the business community, should meet to decide on a minimum wage increase that works for both workers and employers.

"The City Council, the Mayor's Office, the circulators of the Fight for $15 petition and the business community need to get around the table to see what that number should be," he said of a minimum wage hike. "I think we all should agree that $8.10 is a number that is too low.

"I am open to $15, but any increase should be done gradually," Reed said. "I don't care what that increase would be.

Read: $12 vs. $15 minimum wage debate continues between economists, experts, politicians

Raise Up Cleveland, which is part the national Fight for $15 movement for a $15 minimum wage, points to a recent poll it ordered, which has nearly 80 percent of residents supporting immediately going to $15.

Carol Ford, a nursing home worker in Reed's ward and a member of the Raise Up Cleveland petition committee, said the group didn't intend to back off its proposal.

"Working people in our community have struggled for far too long because of poverty wages and that's why now - not later - is the time to raise up Cleveland to a $15 minimum wage," she said in an email. "People in our community spend too much time working to survive, its time that we start paying a living wage so we can make poverty history in Cleveland."

Joe Roman, president and chief executive officer of the Greater Cleveland Partnership, said passing the $15 minimum wage proposal Raise Up Cleveland is supporting could be harmful.

"We have serious concerns about a Cleveland-only wage hike that could put the city in a competitive disadvantage in the region and state," he said in an email. "As proposed, the hike is the most aggressive minimum wage increase in the country."

Members of the Service Employees International Union, which has been a major supporter of the Fight for $15 nationally, recently met with council members. All agreed the minimum wage should be raised, but many expressed concerns similar to those of Reed and Roman.

Earlier this month, the newly formed Raise Up Cleveland began petitioning for the hefty pay hike that would cover workers at businesses in Cleveland with more than 25 employees, including those in fast food, retail and other sectors employing many low-wage workers.

If the proposal's backers succeed at submitting at least 5,000 valid signatures, the issue may not have to go to the voters. City council has the option of approving it as an ordinance. If council rejects the proposal or "passes it in a different form," the committee petitioning for it may require the proposal be put to the voters.

Council could pass a minimum wage ordinance independent of the petition. Such an ordinance wouldn't be required to include an option for voters to decide the issue.

Follow @OPinfo