FBI Agent Oliver leaves Cleveland after co-leading five-year Cuyahoga County corruption case
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- FBI Agent Christine Oliver's introduction to Cleveland, where she would play a significant role in the biggest public corruption case in Ohio history, began inauspiciously.

Before graduating from the FBI Academy in Quantico, Va., Oliver and the rest of the class of 1997 participated in the traditional listing of preferences for their first assignments, ranking the nation's FBI offices from one to 56. A lifelong resident of the East Coast, Oliver ranked the Cleveland office 39th. No classmate received a lower-ranked assignment.

"The only thing I knew about Cleveland was that it was cold and I had never been there," Oliver recalled last week. "I wanted to work closer to home."

Oliver feels much differently about the city now as she prepares for an out-of-state transfer. This past week, her last in the Cleveland office, she agreed to talk about her 15 years in Northeast Ohio and her work on the region's highest-profile investigations of corruption in Cuyahoga County government and elsewhere.

She initially declined requests to be interviewed, but changed her mind at the encouragement of Assistant U.S. Attorney Ann Rowland, the lead prosecutor in the county corruption case.

Rowland pointed out the opportunity to shine a light on the prominent role women played in the corruption case. Two of the three lead FBI agents were women, and a three-woman team successfully prosecuted former county Commissioner Jimmy Dimora.

"If one mother reads this story and encourages her daughter to pursue a career as a federal law enforcement agent it will have been worth it," Rowland said she told Oliver.

Oliver was the original agent on the Nate Gray case, the Cleveland businessman convicted of bribing politicians and officials in Cleveland, Houston and New Orleans. He is serving 15 years in prison.

She also had a lead role in the gambling case that resulted in the conviction of sports personality Bruce Drennan, who served five months in prison for failing to report his winnings on tax returns. And she participated in the arrest of Imam Fawaz Damra and the search of his Strongsville home in 2004.

But the case that would define her career is the ongoing investigation of corruption in county government. In the five years since its inception, the investigation has resulted in the convictions of the two primary targets -- Dimora and former Auditor Frank Russo -- as well as more than 60 other public officials, government employees, and contractors.

Oliver and agent Mike Massie, her partner on the investigation, recalled how the case began in unspectacular fashion in 2007 with cryptic tips from confidential informants.

"We were gathering intelligence through other investigations and kept hearing that there was a massive amount of corruption in Cuyahoga County," Massie said. "There wasn't one defining moment in the case, but more like a snowball effect where it kept getting bigger and bigger, expanding and expanding."

A turning point came in April 2008 when Dimora and Russo took off to Las Vegas with seven friends. The gambling junket was bankrolled by Berea contractor Ferris Kleem, who was seeking $45 million in county construction contracts.

The trip amounted to four days of decadence and debauchery, limousines, luxury hotel suites, prostitutes, a topless "bare pool" at the Mirage Hotel and Casino, a $2,000 dinner, and hours of gambling with Kleem's money.

Through it all, Oliver and Massie followed and watched from the cover of baseball caps, Hawaiian shirts and Bermuda shorts.

Another breakthrough came in May 2008, when they discovered that Dimora's wife, Lori, had written a flurry of checks to contractors for work done at the couple's $430,000 home in Independence.

All five of the checks were dated May 23 -- the same day other FBI agents caught Steven Pumper, a contractor and friend of Dimora's, passing a $2,000 bribe to a Cleveland building inspector.

The checks were a frantic attempt by the Dimoras to conceal thousands of dollars worth of appliances, gifts and home improvements, and provided a road map for the agents to track the sources of the bribes. Some of the contractors were unknown to the agents before they discovered the checks, Oliver testified at Dimora's trial.

The probe became public on July 28, 2008, when about 200 federal agents fanned across the county to search dozens of homes, businesses and offices, including those of Dimora and Russo.

In accordance with FBI policy, the teams of agents were not given their assignments until they reported to FBI headquarters before dawn. Oliver and Massie orchestrated the synchronized maneuvers, visiting every targeted location and staying in touch via cell phones, she said.

"That was really cool to see," Massie said. "The effort that day was phenomenal. I've never seen anything like it."

The agents and the prosecutors worked every weekend, every holiday and most evenings for nearly five years. Operating out of a warehouse, the location of which remains a secret, they sifted through millions of pages of documents and listened to thousands of hours of recorded phone conversations.

"Chris has an amazing knack of paying attention to the minutia needed to build a case," Rowland said. "At the same time she has the broad vision that's necessary in such large investigations. You can't make a case of this magnitude without both attributes."

The crowning achievement came March 9 with the racketeering conviction of Dimora following a two-month trial in federal court in Akron. One of the key prosecution witnesses was Russo, who testified against his former best friend and political sidekick in an attempt to trim time off his nearly 22-year prison sentence.

"Christine, Mike and the entire investigative team represent the best the government has to offer -- integrity and an unwavering commitment to seek truth and justice," said Stephen Anthony, the agent in charge of the FBI's Cleveland office. "Their dogged determination, sacrifices and selfless service over the past almost five years stands in stark contrast to those who so egregiously violated the public trust."

In May, Dimora was sentenced to 28 years in prison. Still defiant, he denied having committed a single crime, and accused the FBI and federal prosecutors of creating "a mountain out of a molehill" to justify the expensive investigation.

As the shackled Dimora shuffled past the agents and the prosecutors on his way out of the courtroom he snarled at them: "Hope you guys are happy. You're story-tellers."

The memory barely brought a shrug from Oliver.

"You don't derive joy from the fact that somebody's going to jail, that's not the way we're made," Oliver said. "We felt a sense of responsibility to the citizens of Cuyahoga County. There were people in public office who were corrupt and had to be removed."