Cuyahoga County lays off 33 employees, many of them holdovers from the office of corrupt former Auditor Frank Russo
UPDATED AT 6:13 P.M.

CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald on Wednesday laid off 33 employees, many of them holdovers from the office of corrupt former Auditor Frank Russo.

Among those losing their jobs were a daughter of disgraced former Sheriff Gerald McFaul and a sister of Parma Mayor Dean DePiero, both of whom worked for Russo before he resigned last year and pleaded guilty to bribery and other crimes.

FitzGerald, who took office in January as chief of a new charter government, promised during his campaign to rid the county workforce of unneeded and unqualified employees.

"We couldn't keep things going the way they were," he said in a Wednesday news conference.

The latest purge will save $1.7 million in salaries and benefits, atop $17.6 million the county has already cut from payroll this year, as more than 300 employees resigned, retired, were laid off or fired.

FitzGerald said the positions eliminated Wednesday were redundant because a new fiscal office consolidated the offices of recorder and auditor.

In determining the number of cuts, county administrators analyzed workloads and compared staffing levels in other counties. The layoffs were made based on seniority in each job classification.

FitzGerald expects more layoffs in the fiscal office and human resources later this year, once County Council approves new civil service classifications.

FitzGerald and the 11-member council inherited a jumble of employees overseen by Russo and other independently elected officials, who created their own hiring processes and pay scales.

A state audit last year found that Russo's office was overstaffed and overpaid, that he had no hiring process and no formal plan for establishing salaries.

Among the senior clerks laid off on Wednesday, salaries ranged from $21,000 to $49,000.

The 33 employees had worked for Russo and former Recorder Lillian Greene. Officials could not provide a breakdown by office.

"We're trying to correct the poor management decisions of prior administrations," said Fiscal Officer Wade Steen.

To get a handle on the mess -- and to merge the offices of auditor and recorder as required by the county charter -- FitzGerald hired South Carolina-based Archer Co., which analyzed employee questionnaires and job descriptions in an 18-week study.

County Council gave initial approval last week to new job classifications, which will also be used to standardize wages.

A number of employees will have their pay cut as they are slotted into the system and placed in categories appropriate to their skills, education and experience, FitzGerald said. How much more money the county will save is unclear.

Among those who lost their jobs Wednesday were:

• Colleen McFaul-Vincelli, a $36,000-a-year senior clerk, who is the daughter of former Sheriff McFaul, who pleaded guilty last year to two felony theft-in-office convictions and a misdemeanor ethics violation.

• Lisa DePiero, a $65,000-a-year senior public information officer, who is the sister of Parma Mayor Dean DePiero.

• Gregory Urbanek, an $62,000-a-year examiner, who was described in the federal corruption investigation as receiving the job because of a bribe his brother-in-law paid to Russo. He has not been charged with a crime.

None of the workers could be reached for comment. McFaul-Vincelli may be able to exercise seniority rights and get another job in the county, FitzGerald said.

FitzGerald said politics did not figure into the layoffs. "You can't pick and choose," he said.

Employees can protest their pay cuts or lost jobs to a newly created Human Resource Commission.

So far, 24 former employees have filed appeals, including 10 for layoffs. Hearings have not yet begun.