Cuyahoga County 'Sin tax' renewal headed to May ballot; would pay for sports stadiums
CLEVELAND, Ohio – It’s now up to Cuyahoga County voters to decide whether a countywide tax on alcohol and cigarettes will continue to pay for professional sports in Cleveland for another 20 years.

County Council voted unanimously on Tuesday to send to the May ballot a measure that would renew the county's 'sin tax' to pay for stadium maintenance through 2035. The measure authorizing the ballot issue is expected to get a signature from County Executive Ed FitzGerald, who came out in qualified support of the campaign shortly before the vote.

“As flawed as the sin tax may be, at least the revenue from the sin tax is not where we are cutting human services to fund the upkeep of these stadiums,” FitzGerald said.

Council members said renewing the sin tax, a proposal backed by the teams and the Greater Cleveland Partnership, would help keep professional sports in downtown Cleveland, along with the economic development they attract. FirstEnergy Stadium, Quicken Loans Arena and Progressive Field, are ultimately owned by taxpayers, they said.

They also said moving the request along leaves the matter in the hands of the voters.



“This is not the teams’ property we’re protecting,” said Councilman Jack Schron, a Republican who is running for county executive in 2014. “It’s our property.”

Councilwoman Sunny Simon, a Democrat, said keeping the teams will help maintain downtown Cleveland’s positive momentum.

“The synergy that we’re currently experiencing is critical,” she said.

Meanwhile, critics have contended that the sin tax disproportionately impacts the poor, and amounts to sending tax dollars to to millionaire professional athletes and the billionaire team owners.



“People are tapped out, and I think now is not the right time to ask for handouts for people who don’t need them," South Euclid Councilman Marty Gelfand said earlier this month.



Based on collections over the past several years, a 20-year extension of the sin tax would raise at least $260 million for major capital repairs to FirstEnergy Stadium, Progressive Field and Quicken Loans Arena, which taxpayers are obligated to finance under the terms of leases negotiated with the teams.

The county's sin tax is assessed at 4.5 cents per pack of cigarettes, 1.5 cents per 12-ounce bottle of beer, 6 cents per 750-milliliter bottle of wine, 32 cents per gallon of mixed beverages, 24 cents per gallon of cider and $3 per gallon of hard liquor.

The Cavs and Indians have submitted an estimated $135 million worth of fixes -- including $23.9 million for scoreboard-related upgrades -- they are expected to request over the next decade. The Browns, via the city, have requested $23.7 million in sin tax revenue to repair FirstEnergy Stadium over the next 10 years.



FitzGerald said he has misgivings about spending tax money on professional sports teams, but he added that it would be up to the sin-tax campaign to get the sports teams to communicate how investing in the stadiums will benefit the public.

He said an important question is whether the teams will follow Cleveland’s practice of “inclusion” – making sure a certain amount of maintenance and construction funded by the sin tax work is awarded to minorities and women.

“I hope that council doesn’t view your action today… as the final word, because I think there’s a chance to complete the community conversation and consensus, which needs to happen, and hasn’t happened yet,” said FitzGerald, a Democrat who is challenging Republican Gov. John Kasich in November. “If I can play a productive role in that, whatever the political consequences may be, I don’t care. Because this is a big issue.”