Ken Lanci rides personal wealth, $1 salary pledge in colorful campaign for Cuyahoga County executive
CLEVELAND, Ohio --When Ken Lanci was 13, his father purchased a Cleveland printing company for the bargain-basement price of $1.

"Nobody," Lanci recalled thinking at the time, "sells anything good for a buck."

Sure enough, unbeknownst to his dad, the business came with a $25,000 tax lien.

Fast-forward nearly five decades. Lanci, today a successful printing mogul whose first taste of the industry came in those teenage years, drives a luxury car worth more than most homes. He lives in a suburban mansion valued at nearly $2 million. He keeps an orange glow -- a distinguishing contrast to his snow-white hair -- with the help of a personal tanning bed.

Lanci, 60, also has mounted an independent, win-at-all-costs bid to be the first Cuyahoga County executive. The powerful new job of leading a reorganized government would entitle him to $175,000 in annual pay, but Lanci has vowed to work for $1 a year if he is elected Nov. 2

"I'm offering to do it for a dollar because I think it's what I have to do," said Lanci, who failed to see the potential parallel with the man who sold his father a failing business.

The self-made millionaire hopes his intention to refuse a six-figure salary resonates with those tired of the corruption and greed that for years fueled county politics. He has cast himself in the mold of Michael Bloomberg, another businessman who nine years ago famously rode his personal wealth and a $1-a-year pledge to become the mayor of New York City.

Lanci's personality and background make him among the most colorful candidates in a general election that features an entrenched Democrat, a well-funded Republican and at least one other viable independent. But like others who have attempted the transition from the corporate world to public office, he finds his controversial practices and partnerships under more scrutiny.

"I think he's crazy," joked Lee Seidman, the retired founder of the Motorcars Group and a longtime friend who praised Lanci's financial savvy. "Why does he want to do this?"

Asked recently if he was concerned that his record, never before picked apart by voters, was being closely examined, Lanci replied: "It's the reason no one wants to be in politics."

Even so, on his campaign website, in an area headlined Fact v. Fiction, Lanci has highlighted nine of the juicier bits that reporters or opponents might dig up on him. Lanci characterizes the online effort as a commitment to transparency.

While some have painted him as anti-union, Lanci downplays his battles with labor and boasts that the county "has never had a more pro-jobs and pro-worker candidate." To counter suggestions that he flaunts his wealth, he notes an early childhood spent in public housing.

Other subjects he addresses on the site hit much closer to home. Lanci's older brother was convicted for his role in the 1977 bombing that killed notorious Cleveland mobster Danny Greene. Lanci was not involved and "resents any accusations of being a part of organized crime."

Lanci also tackles the revelation several months ago that FBI agents asked for his campaign finance records. He maintains he is not under investigation and theorizes their interest is because of his ties to attorney Anthony O. Calabrese III, who did legal work for his charities. Calabrese has been implicated, but not charged, in the federal probe of corruption in county government.

Nowhere among Lanci's online missive are three businessmen with criminal pasts.

Over the years, records show, Lanci has forged friendships or partnerships with Joseph E. LoConti, convicted of two tax-related misdemeanors in 1991; Andrew Shission, a felon and former Hell's Angel who today lives in one of Lanci's former homes; and Paul Monea, a one-time infomercial huckster who is serving a prison sentence for money-laundering.

Lanci acknowledged but downplayed his relationships with each.

"A loser looks at a good man and tries to find the bad in him," said Lanci, who has no criminal record. "A winner looks at a bad man and tries to find the good. Sometimes people are bad and can't be helped in spite of themselves, but I will never stop trying to help people."

A turnaround specialist is born

Lanci was the last of three children, the son of an artist and homemaker in Cleveland's East Side neighborhoods near Woodland Avenue and, later, in Maple Heights.

In the biography he shares on his website, he recalled bill collectors pounding on his parents' door. The family of five relied on public assistance in Lanci's early years; his father didn't take a "real job" until the late 1950s, when he went to work for his first printing company.

Lanci got his start in the business at age 13 by sweeping floors on weekends at his father's soon-to-be-bankrupt print shop. He also sold shoes at local retail stores and cleaned up trash at a Federal Department Store, where he met his future wife, Linda, who was a clerk.

By the time Lanci graduated from high school, his father had launched a new printing venture but was struggling to keep it afloat. When his mother was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis, Lanci put aside college and dreams of becoming a doctor to take over the company.

"I couldn't leave," he said. "My father had been bankrupt once and was in trouble again."

The turnaround at Offset Color is a story Lanci loves to tout as he promotes his candidacy. Working with his father's associate, he offered to settle debts immediately at a fraction of what was owed and avoid another bankruptcy that would keep the creditors from being paid at all.

"We negotiated every $1 down to 20 cents," Lanci recalled.

A 19-year-old had saved a company on the brink of financial ruin. His next challenge was to increase sales, and within years, Lanci said, Offset Color reached the $1 million mark. As the reorganized business flourished, Lanci pursued other interests. He estimates that he has helped launch or run at least two dozen other companies in his career -- and not just in printing.

Lanci ventured into entertainment in 1980 by buying a stake in Sensations, a Euclid nightclub. The deal was a flop. Lanci said he was misled about terms of the agreement, which he thought would enable a sale of the club for a quick profit. When that didn't happen, Lanci said, he reached out to the LoConti family, which owned Agora concert hall in Cleveland.

Eventually, Lanci and Joseph E. LoConti turned Sensations into the Euclid Comedy Theater. But on its opening weekend, the refashioned club burned to the ground in a suspected arson.

"I said then that I would never own a restaurant or bar again," Lanci recalled.

Through LoConti, Lanci made friends with Shission, a member of the Hell's Angels whom federal authorities once believed to be a former national treasurer for the motorcycle gang.

Shission, who in 1983 was acquitted twice of aggravated murder charges in Northeast Ohio, was convicted on a felony count of obstructing justice and four misdemeanor tax charges in 1991. LoConti was a co-defendant in the case, which stemmed from their joint business dealings, and was acquitted on two felony counts but convicted of two misdemeanor tax charges.

(PD Extra: 1991 story on Shission and LoConti's case)

LoConti did not respond to a telephone call to his home or to an e-mail sent through an associate. A message left at a phone number listed for Shission was not returned.

Lanci remains friendly with both.

He said he and LoConti contribute to each other's charitable interests and that he recently attended the wedding of LoConti's daughter. Lanci also confirmed that Shission rents his former Northfield home, which is owned by Lanci's son and campaign manager, Wally Lanci.

Printing remains the core business

Over time, Ken Lanci's business holdings grew to include a wine distributor and a paint and adhesives company.

Lanci also earned a reputation as a philanthropist. In 2007, he and his wife began sponsoring OneSight Cleveland, which provides free eye exams and glasses to underprivileged school children. The Lancis have donated about $125,000 and raised another $75,000 for the cause.

In three years, about 3,000 children have received the eyeglasses, Lanci said. They are able to choose from higher-end brands -- a perk that ensures they'll actually wear them.

Successful businesses and stock investments also have allowed Lanci to spoil himself. Besides owning a Gates Mills mansion and tanning bed, Lanci drives a black 2008 Maybach 57 S, a car for which he paid close to $400,000. It's often parked outside his Cleveland office.

In defense of the indulgence, Lanci said: "I don't own a boat or belong to a country club."

Printing has endured as Lanci's core business. In 1994, convinced it was costing him too much money to operate, Lanci sold Offset Color. But less than two years later, presented with an opportunity to buy a Cleveland printer for relative pocket change, Lanci made a comeback.

Lanci's deal for Emerson Press has stoked some of the whispers that he is anti-labor. With the help of a Boston lawyer, Lanci acquired the company from owner David Emerson, who had been diagnosed with cancer and was willing to sell for $150,000. Union workers refused to accept concessions that Lanci said were ordered by a bank, and the company soon folded.

Nonetheless, the transaction was not a loss. Lanci said the collapse of Emerson Press enabled him to swing a separate deal for a nonunion printing subsidiary of Emerson.

Consolidated Graphics Group was born. Nearly 15 years later, the company, located at East 40th Street between Payne and Superior avenues, has annual sales of $25 million, Lanci said.

"The new company was much healthier, more profitable," David Emerson, who beat cancer, said by telephone. "Most of our competitors have gone out of business -- union and nonunion. I'm surprised he's been able to run and grow a successful printing company for this long."

Going 12 rounds with an infomercial mogul

In 2000, eager to branch out, Lanci went Hollywood.

Or, more accurately, Youngstown.

Paul Monea, an Akron infomercial magnate who struck it rich by selling gas-grill igniters modified to be pain-relief devices, recruited Lanci to help him make "Turn of Faith."

The straight-to-video movie, filmed in the Mahoning Valley, starred Northeast Ohio boxing great Ray "Boom Boom" Mancini and Charles Durning. Lanci, who is credited as an executive producer but denies putting up money for the project, briefly appears in the role of a Mafia bodyguard.

"It is what it is," Lanci said in March when asked if he feared the imagery might come back to haunt him in an election where voters are concerned about corruption. "It was 10 years ago."

But Lanci's relationship with Monea raises another question. Why didn't Lanci, who said he met Monea in 1999 and agreed to become his financial adviser, do more thorough research on his future business partner? If he had, Lanci would have learned that Monea was tangled in a controversy surrounding the Stimulator, the gadget marketed as a pain-reliever.

In 1997, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration persuaded a judge to ban the Stimulator because it was never proven effective and was never approved by federal regulators.

Monea and his son were later ordered to refund customers. By the time he met Lanci, Monea was again riding high, this time on the success of the Tae-Bo fitness videos his company distributed. The Stimulator debacle had received considerable media coverage, but Lanci said all he knew about the product was that his father owned one -- "and he swore by it."

When Lanci learned of Monea's troubles, he defended him publicly. Regarding rumors in 2002 that Monea was about to be indicted for tax evasion, Lanci retorted to the Cleveland Scene alternative weekly: "If the government was going to indict him, they would have indicted him."

In 2003, the government did. Monea pleaded guilty to failing to report more than $4 million in personal and corporate income and failing to pay another $1.3 million. He received a 30-month prison sentence. When he got out, it wasn't long before he was in trouble again.

Monea had long coveted the Stark County home that Lanci owned at the time. Before going to prison, he paid Lanci a $1 million up front and a $25,000 a month to rent the place, even though he already owned boxer Mike Tyson's former mansion in Trumbull County.

Lanci said Monea was eager to buy his home outright in 2006, when an undercover FBI agent posing as a drug dealer arranged a cash deal to buy the former Tyson estate and a 43-carat diamond from Monea. Had it not been a sting, Lanci believes Monea would have used some of the $19.5 million proceeds to purchase his home. Monea was convicted and sent back to prison.

Monea and Lanci are now tussling over the home, which Lanci sold for $2.6 million in 2007. Monea contends in a lawsuit that he had a deal to buy the house. Given his incarceration and Lanci's campaign, a judge has agreed to stall the case until next year, Lanci said.

Monea's attorney in the case did not return a telephone call seeking comment.

"This guy is like flypaper," Lanci said of Monea in March. "I can't get rid of him."

Near-death experience inspires political campaign

Lanci could have sat on his millions, driven his Maybach without explaining himself and kept the stories about his brother and associates from resurfacing.

What on earth possessed a successful businessman to wade into politics at age 60?

"I died," Lanci said when announcing his candidacy in January.

"It's true," he added, after pausing for dramatic effect. "Out of the blue I had a massive heart attack. My heart stopped, and just like in the movies, I saw the bright white light."

Lanci survived and said he felt obligated to do "something more" with his life. When voters last fall approved a county reform measure that replaced the three traditional commissioners with a single executive, Lanci said he realized the new job was tailor-made for someone like him.

"He's a self-made millionaire," said Tony George, a politically active restaurateur who once ran a financial consulting business with Lanci. "I think he feels like he's done everything he can do in business, and now he wants to use experience to put this county back on the map.

There was one problem: No one knew who Ken Lanci was.

His only elected experience was a brief stint as a Northfield village councilman -- in Summit County -- in the 1970s. "I left for obvious reasons," Lanci said in a recent interview.

"If you want the opportunity to make money, you shouldn't be in politics."

As Lanci would learn over time, money buys a lot of things. Including name-recognition. He recalls political powerbrokers early on dismissing his interest in the county executive job and warning him he would have to spend at least $1 million to have any chance of winning.

The figure didn't faze Lanci. By April, his name and face were plastered across billboards and public buses as part of an aggressive, six-figure advertising push. In May, he bought time on local networks to promote himself in hourlong radio programs and half-hour television shows.

The TV show, mixed with infomercial-like testimonials and pleas for donations, chronicles Lanci as he travels the campaign trail. Lanci proclaims it reality TV, and dramatic moments -- will Ken be allowed to stay the night at the homeless shelter? -- are played to full effect.

According to Lanci's first campaign finance report, he spent nearly $400,000 of his own money to launch his candidacy. Though he has plenty of wealthy friends, he limited contributions to $250 and hoped his populist message and $1 pledge would generate smaller donations.

But money is only half his battle. As he is fond of saying at candidate forums, "I only know what I don't know." It's Lanci's way of conceding that, when it comes to running a government with a billion-dollar budget that is tied up largely in social services, he has much to learn.

So Lanci, by his count, has taken more than 60 meetings with directors of county offices in an attempt to learn how they operate, how they can improve and what challenges they face.

For example, after meeting with the Department of Children and Family Services, Lanci said he came away dismayed to learn that workers there lack technology to more efficiently file reports. He believes Deborah Forkas, the agency's embattled chief, "is a strong and compassionate leader" who needs a larger budget to make improvements.

"If we have to float a bond issue," Lanci said, "then that's what we have to do."

Some of Lanci's other ideas have been criticized as publicity stunts. In June, he called for an end to sheriff sales of foreclosed homes. At the time, housing advocates liked that a county executive candidate was paying attention to the foreclosure crisis but expressed skepticism.

"To say you are going to put a stop to all foreclosures is irresponsible," Cleveland City Councilman Tony Brancatelli, a Democrat, wrote in a June e-mail. "Just imagine the number of people who will say, 'Let's just stop paying our mortgage, and Lanci will bail us out.' "

Lanci defended the proposal. He said he hopes he can convince judges to halt foreclosures of homes occupied by employed families. Separation of powers is not a concern, he added.

"Middle America is getting killed," Lanci said.

Heartfelt words from the man who drives the Maybach?

"I worked very, very hard," Lanci said. "I care about you because I was you.

"And because I was you, I never forget about you."

Plain Dealer news researcher Jo Ellen Corrigan contributed to this story.