Geauga County tops latest national health rankings; Cuyahoga struggles
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- How healthy you are depends on where you live, and in Northeast Ohio some of the healthiest places are next door to the least healthy.

A national study released Wednesday ranked Geauga County 1st in overall health of Ohio's 88 counties. Cuyahoga County, however, remained in the bottom third of the state in the fourth year of the rankings, at 67th.

Medina (4th) and Lake (17th) counties fared well again this year in the University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation's rankings. Lorain (29th), Summit (41st), and Ashtabula (60th) were all down one spot from last year.

Don't give too much weight to changes in yearly rankings, advised Amy Bush Stevens, research, evaluation and policy analyst for the Health Policy Institute of Ohio, part of the statewide team that coordinates the rankings roll-out.

"The rankings are relative to one another, so a county that fell a couple spots may have actually stayed the same while most other counties improved."

The County Health Rankings & Roadmaps Report examines a wide range of different factors affecting community health. These include the physical environment; education and employment; crime; access to health care and quality food; and individual health behaviors such as smoking and drinking.

Many of the problems that plague Cuyahoga County are the same that challenge most urban counties, said Cuyahoga County Health Commissioner Terry Allan.

They include a high rate of violent crime and premature death, and higher than average rates of low-birthweight infants, sexually transmitted infections, teen births, adult smoking, obesity and excessive drinking.

Cuyahoga ranked in the middle of Ohio's urban counties. Franklin (Columbus) ranked 58th; Hamilton (Cincinnati), 65th; Lucas (Toledo), 68th; and Mahoning (Youngstown), 75th. Cuyahoga has not ranked above 65th since the report was first released.

"If we're going to move the needle on these problems we need to really focus on the health outcomes that have a disproportionate impact on minority populations," Allan said.

To that end, the County Board of Health has teamed up with Cleveland Department of Public Health and Shaker Heights Department of Health in a county-wide initiative called Health Improvement Plan-Cuyahoga (HIP-C) designed to identify these causes and their solutions.

Tomorrow the group will meet to discuss their first community health assessment, the result of thousands of resident surveys completed online and in public housing and social service settings. Allan said the group's plan is to identify three or four core areas to improve over the next two years.

All seven Northeast Ohio counties had a high percentage of fast food restaurants and too many low income people without access to healthy foods.

There were bright spots, however. Cuyahoga, with its major health centers, performed well again on access to primary care. Geauga continues to boast low rates of crime and mortality, as well as fewer low birthweight infants.

Medina County matched or exceeded national benchmarks for teen birth rates, uninsured residents, crime rate and drinking water safety, among others.