Cuyahoga County precinct map shows areas where Obama beat Romney unanimously (database)
CLEVELAND, Ohio - Cuyahoga County, the most Democratic of all counties in Ohio in each of the last three presidential elections, offered Barack Obama pockets of support from Solon to Bay Village and from Olmsted Falls to Euclid

But it's hard to imagine many regions more reliably in Obama's corner than the east side of Cleveland.

Obama won 96 percent of the vote in the city precincts east of the Cuyahoga River as he collected 94,088 votes there to Mitt Romney's 3,879, an analysis of unofficial data from Tuesday's election shows.

Update: See full update with the official results released later, including an analysis of voter turnout for places where Romney and Obama did well.

The vote, incredibly, was unanimous in Obama's favor in nine Cleveland precincts.

The largest of those voted 542-0 in favor of Obama. In seven other Cleveland precincts and one in East Cleveland, Romney didn't pick up a single vote, though votes for third-party candidates stopped the president short of unanimous victories.

On Cleveland's West Side, Obama won 76 percent. And he carried 69 percent countywide.

In the suburbs, Obama won 62 percent of the vote. This was helped, in part, by winning 98 percent in both Warrensville Heights and East Cleveland, but those towns and Cleveland alone did not provide the countywide margin.

Cities where Obama won every precinct stretched from Lakewood and Brook Park to Cleveland Heights and Orange.

Meanwhile, the only citywide precinct sweeps for Romney were in Brecksville, Highland Heights and Independence, though Romney also did so in a handful of villages on the eastern side of the county.

Romney's strongest area was the precinct covering the portion of Hunting Valley in Cuyahoga County. The Republican won there with 75 percent of the vote.

In comparison, Obama carried at least 75 percent of the vote in nearly half of the precincts countywide (489 of 1,063).

Romney also ran strong in the four adjacent cities on the southern end of Cuyahoga County -- Strongsville, North Royalton, Broadview Heights and Brecksville. He picked up 56 percent of the vote there, though some precincts did vote Democrat.

So put altogether, how important was Cleveland and the rest of Cuyahoga County in the 2012 election?

The unofficial tally shows that Obama won Cuyahoga County by 236,478 votes.

In Ohio's other 87 counties combined, Romney won by 129,219 votes.

In other words, without Cuyahoga County, Romney was the winner in Ohio.

Rich Exner is The Plain Dealer's data analysis editor

Also: