Ex-Rep. Dennis Kucinich discusses his latest trip to Syria and meeting with President Bashar al-Assad
WASHINGTON, D. C. - Though he's no longer in Congress, former Cleveland Democratic Rep. Dennis Kucinich still views himself as an emissary for peace.

That's why the longtime sponsor of legislation to create a cabinet-level Department of Peace visited Lebanon and Syria last week on a fact-finding tour that included meetings with Syrian president Bashar al-Assad, Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri and its president, Michel Aoun, and Iraq's foreign minister.

Related story: Former Rep. Dennis Kucinich again meets with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad

"We were there to gather facts on where things stand now and how they see their situation," said Kucinich. "The one thing we weren't there to do was make policy."

Kucinich made the trip with current U.S. Rep. Tulsi Gabbard, a Hawaii Democrat, their spouses, and representatives of Cleveland's Arab American Community Center for Economic and Social Services, which paid for the visit.

The organization has paid for prior Middle East trips for Kucinich, including one where the legislator met with Palestinian and Israeli officials. The decades-old social group also assists with immigration issues and helps immigrants integrate into the community, says board member Sam Khawam, who was part of the delegation.

He said his organization is nonpartisan and includes Christians and Muslims. Khawam - an immigrant from Beirut - estimates there are around 80,000 Arab Americans in Northeast Ohio who were attracted by the area's friendliness and ethnic diversity.

Khawam said he hopes "something good will come out of it after Gabbard gives her report to Congress and shares her experiences with her colleagues." He said his group would like "to stop the carnage" in Syria.

He said it was "eye opening" to visit Syria and try to understand "their suffering and what they're going through and how the whole world is playing games with them. It is becoming a proxy war for everyone who has interests in that part of the world. It is sad."

"The only way you can learn about other people is by meeting other people," Khawam added. "The only way you can achieve peace is by talking to other people."

Our interview w/ Dennis Kucinich who travelled with Cong Tulsi Gabbard to meet with Bashar Assad. @TuckerCarlson https://t.co/elaoxqr2kc -- Jennifer Griffin (@JenGriffinFNC) January 26, 2017

Kucinich said the trip's real impact was humanitarian. It included a visit to the hard-hit city of Aleppo, where the group met with refugees and learned of the efforts being made to bring about reconciliation.

"We met with opposition people who were telling us about their concerns," said Kucinich. "They certainly don't favor Assad. They also don't want ISIS coming in and taking over their country."

The delegation has taken flak for meeting with Assad, who some regard as a tyrannical dictator responsible for hundreds of thousands of deaths.

Kucinich said Assad did most of the talking during their meeting, which was part of an effort to get diverse perspectives on the country's problems.

"The fact that people are able to stay together as a country is really a testimony to the resilience of the Syrian people, who really don't see themselves in terms of Christians or Muslims, they see themselves as Syrians trying to hold their country together while forces from the outside are devastating them," Kucinich said.

GOP lawmaker calls Gabbard meeting Assad "a disgrace" https://t.co/pKGvDSYNK1 pic.twitter.com/MyuXltykv1 -- The Hill (@thehill) January 26, 2017

Kucinich said he was shocked to learn there were 93 different jihadi groups in Syria from over 100 different countries, including Uyghurs from China. He said billions of dollars in Syrian oil has been stolen, and more than 1,000 factories have been plundered and had their equipment shipped to Turkey.

"This goes way beyond regime change," said Kucinich. "It is destruction of an entire culture. It is mind boggling when you see it ... This is really being engineered by people with no interest in a pluralistic society at all. Their interest is destroying it."

Kucinich said the group traveled to Lebanon first, not knowing whether it could get into Syria given safety considerations. He said there was no guarantee any meetings would take place, and many of them "came together at the last minute."

He said Lebanon - which has a population of 4 million - has absorbed 1.5 million refugees without really knowing who entered the country.

"If just one percent of these people are jihadis, we have a problem," he said. "It's a real concern in the region. The U.S. military is suporting Lebanon's military. The U.S. does have an interest there and is very concerned about the stability of Lebanon."