Gov. John Kasich's budget gives colleges more money, allows tuition increase of 2 percent for one of two years
CLEVELAND, Ohio - State funding for two- and four-year colleges would increase 2 percent each year under Gov. John Kasich's proposed budget.

Kasich is also proposing that tuition increases be capped at two percent for the first fiscal year and frozen for the second year.

According to the budget proposal, operational funds for fiscal year 2016 would be $1.85 billion (or a two percent increase from fiscal year 2015). Proposed funding for fiscal year 2017 is $1.89 billion. Details for higher education are on page 372.

Cleveland State University will receive about $70 million from the state this fiscal year, which covers about 30 percent of its operating costs. Five years ago, state funds covered about 38 percent.

But any increase is welcome, compared to what is occurring in other states, CSU President Ronald Berkman said.

Wisconsin's governor is proposing a $300 million, or 13 percent, cut for public higher education over the next two years. No new funding is expected in Minnesota. And higher education support in Louisiana may be cut by as much as $400 million for the next fiscal year.

Berkman said university officials had hoped for an increase in state funding.

"But I don't think that anyone was expecting it was going to be much more (than the two percent)," he said.

The funding will be based on retention and graduation. The funding formula was devised by the presidents, who also collaborated to determine how funds for capital projects should be distributed.

"I think without question we have a higher education governor and he has been focused on it," Berkman said. "He has approached the whole issue with creativity and consultation. There are not many states in which a governor is willing to empower a group of presidents to make recommendations on the formula side and on the capital side. Ohio is way ahead of other states. He allowed the presidents to be at the table for every major decision."

Tuition increases have been capped at two percent each of the last two years.

And while it would be nice to have an option to increase tuition the second fiscal year of the budget, Berkman said, the the focus should be on making sure students take a full course load of 30 credit hours a year, know their career path and graduate in four years. That would save them thousands in tuition.

CSU has offered an innovative tuition credit program for eligible students who complete 30 credit hours a semester. CSU and other universities and community colleges are working closely with students to ensure they remain in school and graduate.

Other budget proposals for higher education were released last week. They include allowing community colleges to offer affordable bachelor's degrees if a university is unable to offer training that meets the needs of local businesses.

Berkman said universities agreed to that proposal.

"It doesn't offer the opportunity for community colleges to give four-year degrees across the board at will," he said. "I think it was a very fair agreement."

Other proposals are:

Relieving College Debt: The budget includes a $120 million college debt relief fund. Details will be finalized with the higher education community and prioritize low income, in-demand jobs and those who work in Ohio for five years.

Examining New Ways to Reduce Costs: A nine-member Task Force on Affordability and Efficiency will examine ways for public colleges to hold down costs. Following the work of the task force, board of trustees will conduct an efficiency review to identify ways to improve efficiencies and reduce costs.

Making Campuses Safer: Ways to prevent and respond to campus sexual assaults will be identified by September 1 the state will allocate $2 million to implement these new strategies.

Awarding degrees and certificates based on competency instead of just classroom time: College presidents will be asked to develop a model in which students can receive competency-based credit for a limited number of courses based on their demonstrated competencies instead of just the amount of time spent in the classroom.

The state will also allocate $500,000 to work with Ohio businesses to develop a competency-based training program for workers who wish to learn the skills necessary to gain employment for certain in-demand jobs.

Helping more high school students get college credit: The proposed budget expands on the College Credit Plus program that promotes dual enrollment programs that allow high school students to earn college credit at no cost.

Ohio will dedicate $13.5 million over the next two years for economically disadvantaged high schools to hire and train more teachers for college-level courses.

Schools that increase the number of students participating in College Credit Plus and advanced-placement courses will share in $6.5 million in new funding in FY17.

Using campuses during summer to help low-income students: To help low-income community college and regional campus students who want to attend college during the summer, funds from the Ohio College Opportunity Grant will be used to fill a gap in the federal Pell Grant, which does not fund year-round studies.