2016 was Cleveland's deadliest year in a decade; violence rocked suburbs too
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- The deadliest year in Cleveland's recent history has come to a close but not before at least 136 people saw their lives cut down by violence.

The number of people killed bested 2015's number by more than 13 percent, according to cleveland.com's unofficial tally. City and county officials will release their numbers in the coming days after making final rulings on suspicious deaths.

Cleveland's uptick in homicides was particularly significant but continued an upward trend that began in 2014 an intensified the following year.

The city contributed the lion's share of homicides in Cuyahoga County, which recorded at least 168 homicides in 2016, according to the Cuyahoga County Medical Examiner's Office. The latest statistics released by the medical examiner's office only included deaths ruled on by Dec. 13 so the number will grow when final numbers are released.

Gun violence and the heroin epidemic dominated headlines in 2016 as the number of lives claimed by each jumped significantly. More than 500 people died in Cuyahoga County from opioid overdoses.

Related coverage: Cuyahoga Co. heroin, fentanyl deaths soar in 2016

But, as is almost always the case, it was violence inflicted upon innocent victims that garnered the most attention.

Death comes in an instant

Heartbreaking stories of senseless violence happen every year. Few caused more disquiet than the slaying of Deborah Pearl. The 53-year-old Twinsburg mother was driving to work on a Saturday morning in August when her car was blindsided by another vehicle.

The other driver emerged from his car with a rifle and shot Pearl dead, according to witnesses. The accused, 30-year-old Matthew Desha, is a Marine Corps veteran with no apparent connection to Pearl. He is charged with aggravated murder and the court is awaiting results of a psychiatric evaluation before his case can proceed.

Pearl was a victim of simply being caught at the wrong place at the wrong time. As was Sunny Ravi Patel. The 15-year-old Mayfield boy was working in his family's Mr. Hero restaurant when a robber with a gun burst in. Sunny was shot dead.

The 20-year-old gunman, Daveion Perry, pleaded guilty to aggravated murder and was sentenced to life in prison without parole.

Shocking examples of violence did not limit themselves to the county's borders.

In January, two girls - Alyson Mather, 12, and Ruthie Mather, 9 - died when their Northfield Center home was intentional set afire and exploded. Their father, Jeffrey Mather, set the house ablaze and died as well, authorities concluded. Their mother, 43-year-old Cynthia Mather, died of a drug overdose but it was a mystery as to whether it was intentional or she was poisoned.

A closer look at the numbers

Cuyahoga County saw a significant number of gun-involved killings. One hundred thirty-nine of the 168 confirmed homicides involved gunshot wounds, the medical examiner's office reports.

Eighteen homicides were the result of stabbings.

The violence in Cleveland alone during 2016 proves noteworthy against the backdrop of national statistics highlighted in a study published in June by the National Institute of Justice that noted rising homicide rates over the past few years.

Crime data collected by the FBI shows the country's homicide rate rose 11 percent in 2015, "jumping more (that) year than it had in nearly half a century," the New York Times reported.

Cleveland is one of just seven major U.S. cities -- the others being Baltimore, Chicago, Houston, Milwaukee, Nashville and Washington -- that drove approximately 50 percent of that staggering nationwide increase, according to the Times.

Other NE Ohio counties saw violence as well

Lorain County saw a homicide rate nearly double its average, according to its coroner. The county had 18 homicides in 2016.

Lake County reported five, and there were two in Medina County, according to area coroners' offices.

Portage County reported two confirmed homicides and expects to issue two more after homicide rulings are made on the deaths of Sara Marsh and LaShaun Sanders, who police say were killed Nov. 30 at a Ravenna Township home. The suspect, David Calhoun Jr., remains at large.

The Summit County Coroner's Office reported 22 homicides but the office is still working on issuing rulings on additional cases.

If you'd like to comment on this story, please visit Sunday's crime and courts section.