Kasich signs transportation bill; higher tolls will pay for road building
WARRENSVILLE HEIGHTS, Ohio -- Gov. John Kasich hinted Monday that Opportunity Corridor , the highly sought link from Interstate 490 to University Circle through struggling Cleveland neighborhoods, could be among projects to benefit from toll hikes at the Ohio Turnpike.

A smiling Kasich gathered with state legislators to sign a two-year, $7.6 billion transportation and public safety budget bill.

The historic bill allows the state, for the first time, to use toll revenue from the Ohio Turnpike for projects beyond the 241-mile toll road's borders.

The signing capped Kasich's push to raise turnpike tolls for each of the next 10 years, allowing Ohio to issue $1.5 billion in bonds and close a funding gap that threatens to delay road-and-bridge projects across the state by a decade or more.

Ninety percent of the turnpike money must be spent within 75 miles of the turnpike, under the bill.

That means projects from across northern Ohio will vie for the money. But Opportunity Corridor, estimated at $220 million, was the only project Kasich mentioned during his prepared remarks.

"We believe (this bill) now provides a real opportunity for projects like that to get done," the governor said, responding to questions later.

The turnpike, under Kasich's plan, intends to raise tolls at no more than the rate of inflation. The Kasich administration believes the bond money can leverage an equal amount of federal and local cash, building $3 billion for roads and bridges in the coming years.

The work will generate 65,000 jobs, Kasich said.

While other states are raising gas taxes to bolster failing infrastructure, Ohio unlocked the value of its only toll road, Kasich said.

"The question is, 'Why didn't we do this 50 years ago?' " Kasich asked a crowd of elected leaders, business people and media gathered at Tendon Manufacturing Inc. in Warrensville Heights. "We'll have better roads, more people working and a competitive advantage for the state."

Critics, mostly Democrats, have said the toll increases will be a burden for drivers. And the turnpike risks a strong credit rating -- and maybe its financial future -- by quadrupling its debt to pay for projects elsewhere, critics said.

But a number of Democratic legislators supported Kasich's plan and voted for the transportation bill, which also raised speed limits to 70 mph from 65 mph on rural stretches of interstates.

That 5 mph boost "means a lot" to manufacturers like Tendon, a sheet-metal fabricator producing and delivering a wide array of parts, said Ohio Sen. Tom Patton, a Republican from Strongsville.

Kasich vetoed one item in the bill. It would have paid railroads $7.5 million a year to maintain roads within rights of way they own or control.



The two-year transportation budget will supply about $4 billion in state and federal cash for road and bridge contracts. That includes about $500 million from the Ohio Turnpike.

In response to questions after the bill signing, Ohio Department of Transportation Director Jerry Wray said the turnpike money would add to the funding mix for the Opportunity Corridor project.

"It gives us more flexibility and more options as we look at how we put this package together," Wray said. "State money, federal money, private money and now this puts in additional funds."

So far on Opportunity Corridor, ODOT has spent $4.5 million for preliminary engineering and committed $11 million more in 2014 for detailed design.

But a viable financing plan has yet to emerge for the 23/4-mile route.

Plans call for a 35 mph boulevard that would move thousands of commuters and visitors from south and west more quickly to Cleveland Clinic, University Hospitals and other medical, educational and cultural destinations in University Circle.

Just as important, advocates say, is the boulevard's potential to spur development in downtrodden neighborhoods, including parts of Central, Slavic Village, Kinsman, Fairfax and Buckeye.

Business and community leaders have made the project a top priority. Opportunity Corridor has not drawn organized opposition, despite the fact that dozens of homes and commercial buildings would be razed for the work.

Deb Janik, a top development official with the Greater Cleveland Partnership, said she was glad to hear Kasich's interest in the project. She's part of a project steering committee that includes Terrance C. Z. Egger, publisher of The Plain Dealer, as a co-chairman.

"It's no secret we've been advocating for it," said Janik, who oversees the project's steering committee.

Janik said she's working with city, county and state officials, including an ODOT division that focuses on drawing private investment to public projects.

She said ODOT and local officials should have a key environmental document ready later this year that would draw federal highway approval of the project.

"We're excited," Janik said. "We think it's terrific the governor is talking about it."