Ohio House bill targets discrimination against gays, transgender people; Budish promises vote
COLUMBUS — If House Speaker Armond Budish gets his way, legislation making it illegal to discriminate against Ohioans because of their sexual orientation or gender identity soon will become state law.

Budish said this week that he will bring the anti-discrimination measure for a vote on the House floor when state lawmakers return from summer break in September. House Bill 176 adds sexual orientation and gender identity to the list of classifications for which it is illegal to discriminate for housing, employment and public-accommodation purposes.

It is already illegal in Ohio to discriminate against a person on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, age and ancestry.

"It's important to make sure that all Ohioans have equal rights when it comes to employment and it comes to housing," said Budish, a Beachwood Democrat. "Right now, Ohio law does not make it illegal to fire someone based on their sexual orientation, nor does not make it illegal to refuse housing or refuse an apartment based on it."

If it does pass the Democratic-controlled Ohio House, the bill faces an uncertain future in the Republican-controlled Senate.

The legislation -- sponsored by 27 Democrats and two Republicans in the 99-member House -- cleared the House State Government Committee by an 8-5 vote on June 17 with a lone Republican joining the Democrats to pass it.

Supporters who testified in front of the committee included representatives from Cardinal Health, the Cleveland Clinic, the Ohio Civil Rights Commission and Warren Copeland, the mayor of Springfield. Also pushing for the change in state law is Equality Ohio, a nonpartisan advocacy group that supports equal treatment for gays, lesbians, bisexuals and transgender people.

A few conservative and religious groups testified against the bill, saying it is unneeded and would create chaos for small businesses forced to comply.

Chris Long, executive director of the Ohio Christian Alliance, said full civil rights protections should not be extended to gays, lesbians and transgender people. "We have long said it's a chosen behavior and it should not be given protected status under the civil rights code," he said.

Long said transgender people are an "ambiguous identity and expression" and that many people would feel uncomfortable about being forced to share a work restroom with a "cross-dresser" of a different gender.

But Budish said the bill is needed to signal to business owners and "innovators" that Ohio is open-minded and treats everyone the same.

"I think this is a matter of fairness and equity and should not be a partisan issue," he said. The legislation does not affect a constitutional amendment passed in 2006 that banned same-sex marriage, he said.

It's not clear how much support the bill has among Senate Republicans, who control the 33-member chamber.

Maggie Ostrowski, spokeswoman for Senate President Bill Harris, an Ashland Republican, said that Harris didn't support an earlier version of the bill but that exemptions added for nonprofit religious groups and certain small businesses might have changed his mind.

"Since the exemptions have been made, he hasn't had a chance to look at it," she said. "If it came to us, we would treat it the same as any other bill" by scheduling it for committee hearings, she said.

Rep. Dan Stewart, a Columbus Democrat who is the bill's chief sponsor, said the bill was tweaked so that businesses would not be forced to add restroom facilities for transgender employees or customers. Also added were exemptions for small businesses with fewer than 15 employees -- which is in line with federal law -- and for nonprofit religious-based businesses.