Former Rep. James Traficant to be released from prison on Sept. 2
Video: Vintage Traficant -- comments before the U.S. House Ethics Committee

WASHINGTON, D.C. — Look out, Youngstown.

On Sept. 2, maverick former congressman Jim Traficant, known for his spiky gray hairdo, eccentric oratory and polyester bell-bottomed suits, is scheduled to beam out of the Minnesota prison where he's served the final years of his eight-year prison sentence for official corruption.

Traficant's Mahoning Valley fans have scheduled a Sept. 6 "welcome home" party for the ex-congressman at a banquet facility in Boardman. Its organizers told the Vindicator newspaper the honoree may or may not be present.

Former Traficant congressional staffer Linda Kovachik of Boardman, who is coordinating the event, says she expects all 1,200 tickets will sell out.

"A lot of people are grateful for all he did as a member of Congress," said Kovachik, who believes Traficant was innocent of the crimes he was accused of committing, and hopes he decides to seek his old job in Congress. "He did for us, now we'll do for him."

Traficant's congressional seat is currently held by Niles Democratic Rep. Tim Ryan, who once served as an aide to Traficant. Traficant ran a write-in re-election campaign from prison in 2002, and lost in a landslide to Ryan.

Traficant's wife, Tish, declined comment on her or her husband's plans after his release.

"When he comes home, it's up to him, whatever he wants to do," she said Friday.

A Bureau of Prisons spokeswoman had no information on Traficant's plans, but said he'll be on probation for three years after he's released.

A Cleveland jury found the nine-term congressman guilty of 10 charges that he traded political favors for cash, gifts and work on his horse farm. Traficant claimed he was innocent and that his prosecution was a result of a government vendetta against him. After his conviction, he was ejected from the U.S. House of Representatives.

Traficant took up art in prison, where he painted watercolors and acrylics of horses and barns. Kovachik said Traficant has also spent his time in prison working out and playing guitar.

In Congress, the 68-year-old Youngstown Democrat was known for his diatribes on the House of Representatives floor that often featured the colorful exclamation: "Beam Me Up!"

Here's a speech that Traficant delivered in the House of Representatives on Sept. 26, 2000:

"Mr. Speaker, the Pentagon wants to buy combat ships from foreign shipbuilders. Now, if that is not enough to sink your rubber ducky, check this out: We give billions to Russia and billions to China in tax breaks, and, even though the American worker builds the best ships in the world, the Pentagon now wants to buy ships from Russia and China.

Beam me up. Who is running the Pentagon, Monte Hall? I think it is time to tell the Pentagon that we can hire generals and admirals a hell of a lot cheaper from Korea too.

I yield back the fact that American jobs are literally being shipped overseas."