Auditor Mary Taylor says she's always on the job, no matter where she is
COLUMBUS, Ohio - Almost from the time she took office in January 2007, Mary Taylor has been dogged by rumors that she skips out on work about as often as she puts in hours as Ohio's auditor.

The fact that she admittedly spends as much time working away from her main Columbus office as she is there has only fueled speculation that Ohioans had elected a slacker.

She doesn't document her work hours. She doesn't ask for mileage reimbursement from the state. And she can't tell you how much time she spends working here or there. Her work schedule is almost untraceable, and that's how Taylor seems to like it.

But Taylor insists she's on the job 24 hours a day, seven days a week.

"I work either out the Canton office or out of the Columbus office based on my schedule," explained Taylor, whose home is in Summit County. "It's really hard to say when or how often do I work out of my Columbus office versus how often I work out of the Canton office versus how often I am on the road traveling."

Taylor, a Republican candidate to be Ohio's next lieutenant governor, deflects criticism that she spends too much time away from work as nothing more than political sniping.

"If there is an issue, and I'll put quotes around the word issue," Taylor said, using her fingers to signify quote marks, "the only person I've heard raise it is the Ohio Democratic Party chairman. And quite frankly, that's his job."

Indeed, Chris Redfern, the Democratic leader, has accused the auditor of lying down on the job despite having no proof to the substantiate the claim. He has said it enough, though, that it has caught Taylor's attention and lured her into responding to questions she once ignored.

"She's a likeable person, but she has a terrible voting record in the legislature and has been an absentee auditor," Redfern said in January. He likened Taylor to Sarah Palin, the 2008 Republican vice presidential candidate who sometimes drew unflattering attention for former presidential hopeful Sen. John McCain.

Taylor is a former state representative, so she knows her way around Capitol Square. But her lack of presence there since taking office as auditor was whispered about long before she first flirted a year ago with running for the U.S. Senate before eventually being wooed by Republican gubernatorial hopeful John Kasich to be his running mate.

Taylor has a clear retort. She prefers to use one of her seven regional offices around the state -- the one about 10 minutes from her doorstep in Canton -- rather than traveling to Columbus. It saves her office money, saves her time and keeps her close to her family and friends.

She also says she spends a lot of time on the road promoting the work of her office. But Taylor, the first certified public accountant elected auditor in Ohio, does not spend time conducting audits herself. She has staff for that duty, she says.

And while Taylor prefers to fly under the radar while hoping the work of her office speaks volumes in her favor, she has on occasion staked out a high-profile position for herself. Those moments typically involve attacking Democrats, who in turn have accused Taylor of politicizing her office.

When Democratic Gov. Ted Strickland last year offered up a state budget proposal, it was Taylor who challenged the governor's use of one-time federal stimulus money and predicted Ohio would face a significant deficit within three years when the federal handout was gone.

Many observers have agreed with Taylor's conclusion but supported Strickland's use of stimulus money.

More recently, Taylor has launched an unusual audit into the operations of the Ohio Lottery Commission, which the Strickland administration feels is unnecessary and a waste of taxpayer money.

If Kasich is elected governor, Taylor could be appointed to head a state agency, as is customary for the lieutenant governor.

But should that occur, don't expect her to change her style or to necessarily be any more visible than she is now as state auditor.

"I am envisioning that I will handle my job the same way that I have," Taylor said.

"I will on a regular basis look at my schedule, look at my calendar, look at what is necessary to be done and make a decision on where I need to be to do my job," she said.