Ohio Gov. John Kasich proposes 6 gun policy changes
COLUMBUS, Ohio -- Tightening background checks for gun buyers and allowing "red flag" protection orders were among six gun violence policy recommendations made Thursday by a bipartisan panel assembled by Gov. John Kasich.

Four other recommendations would put federal restrictions into state law so Ohio law enforcement officials could pursue charges that otherwise would go unprosecuted by federal officials.

The policy proposals come on the heels of a shooting at a Florida high school that left 17 people dead and sparked a national debate about gun control and school safety.

Kasich said he hopes the recommendations pass the GOP-controlled General Assembly as a package.

The proposed policy changes:

Gun violence protection orders: Allow friends and family members to petition a court to remove firearms from people who pose a threat to themselves or others. A handful of states including Indiana have passed such "red flag" laws.

Domestic violence: Mirror federal law prohibiting anyone convicted of a domestic violence crime or subject to a domestic violence protection order from buying or owning a firearm.

Background checks: Enforce requirements that courts submit conviction information to the state's background check database in a timely manner. A Cincinnati Enquirer investigation found many courts do not routinely update information, which might allow someone to illegally buy a gun.

"Strawman" purchases: Ban purchases of firearms for third parties, except as a gift. Current state law bans these purchases only if the buyer should have known the third party is prohibited from buying a gun.

Armor-piercing ammunition: Update Ohio law to mirror federal law banning body armor-piercing bullets, which would allow Ohio officers to pursue charges that federal officials might not.

Bump stocks: If federal officials ban bump stocks, which increase a weapon's firing rate, Ohio law should be automatically changed to ban them as well.

Who made the recommendations?

Kasich emphasized Thursday that the recommendations were agreed upon by the eight members of Kasich's gun policy group, which will continue to meet to discuss other measures such as raising the minimum age to buy a firearm.

"No one is interested in some slippery slope and trying to grab everybody's guns," Kasich said at a news conference.

The members include several former elected officials: state Rep. Ron Maag, Senate President Tom Niehaus, state Sen. Doug White, Ohio Attorney General Betty Montgomery and Congresswoman Deborah Pryce, all Republicans and Sen. Nina Turner, a Cleveland Democrat. The other two members are Toby Wagner, chief of law enforcement for the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, and Jim Tobin of the Catholic Conference of Ohio.

Kasich formed the group in November, after a gunman killed 58 people attending an outdoor concert in Las Vegas. In a November cleveland.com op-ed, Kasich called for "common sense" solutions and for people on all sides of the issue to come together.

That was a departure from Kasich's past positions. He was endorsed by the NRA in 2014 and has signed every bill expanding access to guns and places Ohioans can carry concealed handguns since he took office in 2011. His website previously touted his work "defending the Second Amendment."

Kasich now supports banning bump stocks, used in the Las Vegas shooting to increase firing rate, and indicated on national political talk shows he again supports a ban on "assault weapons." (He voted for the 1994 ban but distanced himself from that vote while running for governor in 2010 and president in 2016.)

Kasich has said he would veto a "stand your ground" bill, which would expand Ohio's Castle Doctrine and eliminate a person's duty to retreat before using deadly force in self defense.

What do lawmakers think?

Republican legislative leaders said Wednesday they were open to discussing the proposals but their initial responses to Kasich's announcement Thursday were not full-throated endorsements.

"As with any issue our members are open to dialogue," John Fortney, a spokesman for Senate President Larry Obhof, said Thursday. "Right now, we are acting to build on our investments in school security upgrades which have already funded nearly $16 million in grant money to make Ohio's schools safer for our students and teachers."

House Speaker Cliff Rosenberger said he appreciated the governor's work.

"The Ohio House is open and eager to taking a holistic look at finding ways to keep our schools and communities safe, while continuing to defend and protect Ohioans' Second Amendment rights," Rosenberger, a Clinton County Republican, said in a statement. "Any potential policy changes will only occur after thorough vetting in the legislature and extensive conversations with the caucus."

Both Obhof and Rosenberger said Wednesday they weren't interested in banning semi-automatic or assault-style guns, but they were willing to consider a red flag law.

Democrats have introduced bills to ban bump stocks, prohibit domestic abusers from having guns and establish gun violence protection orders -- all ideas endorsed by Kasich's working group. But none have moved past an initial hearing.

Democratic lawmakers on Thursday expressed a willingness to work with Kasich and other Republicans on the issue.

"There is growing consensus in Ohio and our nation that we need to act now to save lives and make our communities safer," Senate Minority Leader Kenny Yuko, a Richmond Heights Democrat, said in a statement.