Rob Portman has a record on trade, and Democrats are eager to seize on it
Updated at 2:48 p.m.

Washington -- Ohio Democrats who say that free trade has cost good-paying factory jobs are about to get personal, and their target is a clean-cut Cincinnati attorney named Rob Portman.

He's the Republican U.S. Senate candidate in the race to succeed George Voinovich, and he represents a rare opportunity for Democrats who blame factory closings on GOP trade practices. Portman, 54, has a record -- not just of votes from his days in Congress, but also of decisions made when he was trade ambassador in President George W. Bush's White House in 2005 and 2006.

There's no need for a faceless bogeyman or amorphous "they" in this year's Senate race when opponents say that "they" took our jobs.

"Congressman Portman supported Chinese government-backed steel companies over Ohio workers," says John Collins, spokesman for Democratic U.S. Senate candidate Lee Fisher. Fisher is currently Ohio's lieutenant governor. "Simply put," Collins says, "if you want to see the jobs Congressman Portman created after spending 20 years in Washington, you'd have to go to China."

Yet a Plain Dealer examination of trade cases and practices, including key cases that Democrats have also pored over, shows the rap against Portman is as political as it is substantive. Still, Portman faces a challenge making his case, because the issue of trade and lost jobs is nuanced and emotional, especially in a state where everyone knows someone who's out of work.

Saying no to steel

Two trade matters, both involving Chinese steel, show why.

The first occurred after Bush left office. In a series of rulings starting last December, the U.S. International Trade Commission voted to impose tariffs on Chinese companies whose unfair trade practices made it hard for certain steel pipe makers in this country to compete. One of those companies was V&M Star, which soon after the ruling announced it would expand its Youngstown plant. French-owned V&M bought the Youngstown mill in 2002.

The tariff ruling marked a reversal of fortunes for many in the steel industry, and Democrats were so pleased that even President Barack Obama flew to Youngstown last Tuesday to praise the $650 million expansion, which got a boost from Obama's economic stimulus plan as well. Just about every Ohio Democrat, from Congressman Tim Ryan to Gov. Ted Strickland, has hailed the expansion -- and the trade decision -- as proof that under their party, the working man can finally catch a break.

Portman had nothing to do with this steel industry victory, but he was involved in another matter that Democrats say contributed to the downturn in Ohio's steel industry that the V&M victory helped reverse. In 2005, Bush -- with Portman as his trade adviser -- refused to impose quotas when Chinese imports of steel pipe were flooding this country. The U.S. International Trade Commission, a quasi-judicial body, had recommended the quotas.

Bush said that it wasn't in this country's economic interests to penalize the Chinese. Users of steel pipe, among others, had wanted the steady supply to continue. The case involved steel pipe used for plumbing and fence posts, as opposed to the steel pipe that V&M makes for the oil and energy industry.

"Decisions on whether to take action against another country involve a wide range of considerations, including the impact on end-users of raw materials manufactured in the U.S. or other countries," says Portman spokeswoman Jessica Towhey.

China then kept shipping its circular welded pipe, sometimes with subsidies from the Chinese government, and American steel makers laid off workers in plants around northern Ohio. The American steel industry lost a reported $150 million in profits from 2005 to 2007.

Was this Portman's fault -- and did it take a new administration in the White House to help working Ohioans, as Democrats from Strickland to Sen. Sherrod Brown say?

The answer is more complex than any of this year's campaign commercials will have time to show.

Portman cites trade toughness

As U.S. trade representative in 2005 and 2006, Portman, previously a congressman and later Bush's budget chief, voiced concern about unfair practices from China and other countries. In a 2006 annual report on foreign barriers, Portman's trade office dedicated 71 pages to China alone, although the report also cited Chinese improvements.

He hauled China before the World Trade Organization -- a global trade court -- after it put up hurdles to keep out U.S.-made auto parts. He threatened China again after it put up duties against kraft linerboard, a pulp product used for shipping cartons, and China backed down.

His work led to another WTO case against China over copyright protection. He limited the quantities of textile imports from China five times to protect the domestic industry against import surges.

Portman also filed the biggest case ever in the WTO. It was to prove that a French aircraft manufacturer, Airbus, had an unfair advantage against American rival Boeing because the European Union provided subsidies to Airbus. A ruling favored Boeing in part -- but trade complaints often flow in two directions, and the Europeans are now awaiting a ruling on their own claim that Boeing got improper subsidies from the United States.

"When Portman was U.S. Trade Representative, he initiated several actions against China to protect American workers and products," says Towhey. "When Portman saw American workers or products being treated unfairly, he took decisive action, including initiating the first-ever case against China in international court, which ultimately ruled against China and in favor of American workers and goods."

But for these examples, there is no question that Portman, like his boss in the White House, took a more conciliatory view toward enforcement than labor leaders and laid-off steelworkers wanted. The 2005 case marked the fourth time (though the first with Portman as counsel) that Bush used his authority to turn down requests from companies to stop Chinese exports from squeezing domestic supply.

Some of these decisions had support from manufacturers that relied on a cheap and uninterrupted supply of materials for consumer products.

To the steelworkers, however, the decisions amounted to surrender.

"Bush's refusal to stop China's predatory and protectionist trade practices, based on the advice of his trade representative, helped China at the expense of jobs here in the U.S.," says Michael Wessel, a former ranking Democratic U.S. House aide who is on a congressional commission that monitors the trade relationship with China. Wessel's clients as a lobbyist have included companies such as Canton-based Timken as well as the United Steelworkers Union.

Fisher now is poised to cite these trade cases in his campaign against Portman.

"Ohio voters will be troubled to learn that Congressman Portman spent 20 years in Washington supporting trade policies that shipped Ohio jobs overseas and allowed cheap Chinese goods to undermine our manufacturers.," Collins, Fisher's spokesman, says.

Trade goes two ways

Yet Fisher as well as Gov. Strickland have embraced trade, too. Despite their complaints about trade treaties and presidential decisions, their own Department of Development and budget office consistently state that exports help Ohio. Exports were down during the recent recession, the first time in 11 years, but they still were one of the few bright spots in the governor's monthly budget reports.

Strickland and Fisher respond that they don't want to end trade -- they just want to better balance the imports against the exports. But is their criticism of Portman fair?

At a detailed level, it is not, say free trade supporters including analysts at the Cato Institute, a libertarian-leaning think tank. That's because the Portman-Bush decision not to impose quotas in 2005 had nothing to do with illegal Chinese subsidies or dumping. It wasn't even about whether China was playing fairly. Trade proponents, trade critics and the International Trade Commission agree on that.

It was simply a question of whether Chinese steel pipe for plumbing and fencing was coming into the United States so rapidly that it jeopardized American steel pipe makers. In signing a treaty to trade freely with China, the United States had won the right to call a time-out if so many Chinese products were coming in that they might disrupt this country's manufacturers. When that started happening, American steel pipe makers asked the ITC to restrict the flow by issuing quotas. The case was strictly about volume -- an attempt to keep an equilibrium between the two countries -- but not abuse.

But the trade treaty with China gave the president extraordinary authority in this kind of case, and Bush could reject the quotas if he believed they were not in this country's economic interest. Chinese imports accounted for about one-third of all U.S. circular-steel pipe at the time, and demand in construction was building. The Bush administration believed the imports would merely have been replaced by other foreign producers.

Subsequently, the ITC ruled in a different case, this time in 2008, that China was now dumping this kind of pipe at prices impossible to beat -- because China was subsidizing its manufacturers. That never was the claim in 2005, however, nor was it the recent case with V&M Star's oil-industry pipe -- involving a different product, a different case and a different legal standard, one that did not allow for presidential action.

"Democrats," says Towhey, the Portman spokeswoman, "are comparing apples to oranges in an attempt to score cheap political points."

The Fisher campaign and critics of Bush's trade policies agree that in a narrow sense, these cases are different. But pipe makers fuse different products for different customers, and much of the steel comes from the same companies, creating an overlap that affects the entire industry, says Scott Paul, executive director of the Alliance for American Manufacturing, a nonpartisan group with ties to the steel industry.

The 2005 Portman-Bush decision may not have involved abuses, but it put American steel at a disadvantage and signaled to China the door was open, inviting the abuses that followed -- or so Democrats and some in the steel industry say.

"Is it a different pipe? Yes, it's a different pipe," Paul allows. "But the market fundamentals are the same."