House Ethics Committee rules Rep. Jean Schmidt must repay lawyers
The House Ethics Committee ruled today that a Turkish-American group improperly paid roughly $500,000 in legal bills that U.S. Rep. Jean Schmidt amassed in lawsuits against a political rival and ordered the Cincinnati area Republican to repay the lawyers herself.

The committee determined that Schmidt didn't knowingly violate House ethics rules because she had no idea that the Turkish Coalition of America paid bills she accrued in disputes with an independent candidate who ran against her in 2008.

David Krikorian, who is of Armenian descent, distributed campaign literature in 2008 which alleged the Turkish government bribed Schmidt to deny the genocide of Armenians in Turkey during World War I. Lawyers paid by the Turkish group subsequently filed lawsuits on Schmidt's behalf that claimed Krikorian made false statements and defamed her.

Last year, Krikorian filed complaints against Schmidt with the Office of Congressional Ethics, which questioned whether Schmidt's improperly accepted legal services from the Turkish group.

The Ethics Committee found the lawyers hadn't sent Schmidt any bills and didn't tell her they were being paid by the Turkish group. Because Schmidt didn't know she was receiving a gift from TCA, the Committee decided not to sanction her. It suggested she create a legal expense fund to pay the bills, and ordered that she amend her financial disclosure reports to disclose the past gifts.

Schmidt and Kirkorian each released statements that claimed the decision vindicated them.

"As I've stated publicly before, I neither sought nor intended to accept free legal services," Schmidt's statement said. "I have been waiting for the Ethics Committee's advice as to the best way to pay these bills. Now that I have that advice, I look forward to continuing to work cooperatively with the Committee to ensure that these bills are paid appropriately."

Krikorian's statement said the decision proved he was "right all along." He said he finds it "laughable" that Schmidt "did not know the facts regarding her own attorneys in legal actions which she commenced in her own name."

"The American people are tired of Congressmen and women who break the rules and get away with it by blaming someone else," said Krikorian.