Matt Borges named Ohio Republican Party executive director (updated)
COLUMBUS, Ohio -- The Ohio Republican Party today announced Matt Borges, a veteran GOP operative in Ohio, as its new executive director.

The party also hired a new communications director, Izzy Santa, who previously served in that role for Republican Congressman Bob Latta.

The shakeup at the Ohio GOP stems from a bitter campaign to oust former party Chairman Kevin DeWine, who resigned last month after allies of Republican Gov. John Kasich worked for weeks to rally support for a new chairman.

Bob Bennett, who led the party from 1988 to 2009, replaced DeWine as the party’s chairman. Shortly after, former Executive Director Darren Bearson and former Communications Director Chris Maloney left the party.

“I'm excited to bring such a dynamic duo to the ORP,” Bennett said in a statement released today. “Both will help lead the Party’s statewide efforts for the 2012 election cycle and beyond.”

For Borges, the new job marks another step forward since he was embroiled in a pay-to-play scandal in 2004. He pleaded guilty in Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court to a misdemeanor count of unauthorized use of a public office for giving preferential treatment to certain brokers who contributed to Republican Ohio Treasurer Joe Deters’ re-election campaign. He paid a $1,000 fine. He later cleared his misdemeanor record when he was granted an expungement.

Borges was director of Kasich’s Inaugural Committee. He also headed the 2010 campaign of Ohio Auditor Dave Yost.

While working last year as government relations director of the law firm Roetzel and Andress, Borges told The Plain Dealer he has “worked extremely hard for the better part of a decade to regain trust” and would not do anything to jeopardize that as a lobbyist.

Borges on Monday criticized Cuyahoga County Prosecutor Bill Mason's investigation that led to his legal issues.

"I'm proud of how I've lived my life against the headwind of having been railroaded by Bill Mason - the same guy who couldn't detect any corruption in Cuyahoga County," Borges said in a statement. "My path has been very different from his over the past eight years. I'm confident my future will be too."