Gridlock in Congress prompts U.S. Rep. Steve LaTourette to retire (video)
PAINESVILLE, Ohio -- Frustration with partisan gridlock in Congress that has blocked enactment of everything from a deficit reduction package to a long term transportation bill prompted Bainbridge Township GOP Rep. Steve LaTourette's decision to leave office when his ninth term ends in January.

"For a long time now, words like compromise have been considered to be dirty words, "he told a crowd of reporters and supporters Tuesday at his Painesville congressional office. "I've always believed. . . that the art of being a legislator is finding common ground."

LaTourette did not anoint a preferred successor or say what his plans will be after leaving Congress.

The former Lake County prosecutor's departure will diminish Ohio's clout in Congress and add to the ranks of moderate politicians, like Maine Republican Sen. Olympia Snowe, who are fleeing Washington's hostile political climate.

It will also set up jockeying within the Republican party for a chance to fill LaTourette's spot on the November ballot. GOP leaders in his district's seven counties -- Ashtabula, Lake, Geauga, Cuyahoga, Summit, Portage and Trumbull -- will meet in August to select his replacement on the ballot.

LaTourette said he filed his re-election petitions this year fully intending to run and win a 10th term. But his frustration has been festering. He was particularly upset that the House failed to pass a new highway infrastructure bill and that the two parties have been unable to reach a deal on deficit reduction, a reality he said "propelled" his decision to retire.

"We are a hiccup away from being Europe," he said. "We're a hiccup away from being Greece." He said now was a time when politicians should stand up and say, "I may lose this next election, but we gotta get this right."



LaTourette through the years 1988: Elected Lake County prosecutor, a job he held for six years. Gains recognition in 1990 as the prosecutor in the Kirtland cult killings case. Jeffrey Lundgren, the self-professed prophet who killed five people in 1989 what he said was a sacrifice demanded by a higher power, is convicted and sentenced to death. November 1994: Elected to his first term in Congress in a wave that swept Republicans into power for the first time in decades, defeating freshman Democrat Eric Fingerhut in what then was the 19th District. Has been re-elected eight times since. March 1995: Allows humor columnist Dave Barry to moonlight for a week as his press secretary. Barry comes up with several innovative ideas to drum up interest in the freshman congressman, including informing the media that the first constituents to show up at LaTourette's town meetings in Ashtabula and Eastlake would get million-dollar grants from the federal government. 1998: Authors a successful bill that allows more people to join credit unions. 2004 and 2006: Votes to amend the Constitution to outlaw gay marriage. 2005: Plays a major role in helping save more than 1,000 Defense Finance and Accounting Service jobs that were slated to be shifted from Cleveland to three other cities. The campaign to save DFAS, which involved business and city leaders and members of Congress, convinced the Base Realignment and Closure Commission that Cleveland was the best location in the nation for the DFAS office not only to remain, but also to grow by hundreds of jobs. October 2006: Witnesses the execution of Jeffrey Lundgren. LaTourette said the killings were a cowardly act committed to silence those who began to doubt Lundgren's status as a deity. "Even after 16 years, I still can't get the vision out of my head of 7-year-old Karen Avery," LaTourette said, referring to one of the children who died at Lundgren's behest. October 2008: Votes against the $700 billion financial industry bailout bill and later criticizes how the program was administered. 2010: Crosses party lines and votes in favor of extending unemployment benefits; helps General Motors dealers to remain open by crafting legislation that forced GM and Chrysler to go into arbitration with them; opposes repeal of statutory ban on homosexuals serving openly in the military. March 2011: Is one of seven Republicans to oppose a House-passed measure to cut off federal funding for NPR. November 2011: Says the anti-tax pledge he signed in 1994 has expired "like milk in the refrigerator." The "taxpayer protection pledge" was sponsored by influential conservative activist Grover Norquist's group, Americans for Tax Reform. LaTourette ended up at odds with Norquist by joining a bipartisan group of 100 lawmakers who sent a letter to a congressional "supercommittee" saying that all options – including tax increases – should be on the table in drafting a plan to cut the federal budget deficit. No other GOP members of Congress from Ohio publicly stated they would be willing to back a tax increase as part of deficit reduction. July 31, 2012: Announces that he won't seek re-election, citing frustration with the gridlock in Congress.

Those expecting fireworks from a congressman known for an irreverent streak were treated instead to a somber, reflective tone. But the underlying message had the unmistakable feel of a moderate politician eulogizing political pragmatism in Washington.

"The time has come for not only good politics but good policy," said LaTourette, who spoke softly even as he delivered some biting critiques. "And I have reached a conclusion – that the atmosphere today and the reality in the House of Representatives no longer encourages the finding of common ground. So here's the thing. For a guy like me, and I think any elected official at any level, the balance always has to be between the privilege of the job you have been entrusted with and the cost on the personal side.

"And as long as the privilege and your ability to make a difference outweigh missing a soccer game, missing a concert, not being there when someone takes a first step, as long as that balance tilts in the favor of having the chance to do those things, you continue to serve."

LaTourette said he was disappointed that word of his retirement leaked in advance. He stressed that he isn't ill, and disputed media reports that said he was upset with his committee assignments or feuding with House Speaker John Boehner, with whom he remains close.

But he was critical of the partisan tone in Congress.

"The expectation is if you want to go up in the ranks of either party, you have to give them your wallet or your voting card," he said. "The overwhelming criticism of me over the years is sometimes I vote funny, according to my party. And I'm not interested in giving them my wallet or my voting card."

Boehner released a statement that called LaTourette "a close friend and an effective legislator who has served the people of Ohio with passion and unrivaled wit for nearly 20 years," and said Republicans are "in good position" to retain his seat.

"As dean of the Ohio delegation and a key voice on matters of spending and infrastructure, Steve has fought for common-sense reforms to eliminate duplicative programs, cut red tape and help create a better environment for private-sector job growth," Boehner said.

Warrensville Heights Democratic Rep. Marcia Fudge, whose district adjoins LaTourette's, called him a "champion for his district and all of Northeast Ohio," and said he preferred common sense and meeting the needs of his constituents to party politics.

"We need more people like Steve who are gracious and willing to reach across the aisle," said Fudge. "I will miss his wit and ability to get things done. His departure from Congress will be a loss to the Ohio delegation. I wish him well in his future plans."

LaTourette's departure means that Northeast Ohio will lose three of its representatives next year. Democrat Dennis Kucinich of Cleveland lost his March primary to Toledo's Marcy Kaptur, and Democrat Betty Sutton of Copley Township will oppose Wadsworth Republican Jim Renacci in November. The races between incumbents were set up by a redistricting plan that pared down the number of Ohio's congressional seats because its population growth hasn't kept up with other states.

Because LaTourette is a member of the powerful House Appropriations Committee – which makes government spending decisions – his departure will significantly diminish Ohio's congressional clout. Congressional redistricting prompted the only other Ohio Republican on that committee – Beavercreek Rep. Steve Austria – to retire at the end of his term instead of facing off in a primary against incumbent Dayton-area Rep. Mike Turner.

Unless others from the state are appointed to the committee to replace Austria and LaTourette, that leaves Toledo Democratic Rep. Marcy Kaptur as its only Ohio member.

"I will need some Cleveland Browns shoulder pads to handle the weight of this," said Kaptur.

Kaptur said she jokingly tried to recruit LaTourette as a Democrat last week, but he turned her down. She said that she and many other members of Congress, in addition to LaTourette, are upset by its inability to pass "cornerstone" legislation like transportation and farm bills.

"When members of Congress like Steve LaTourette and Olympia Snowe leave, these are very important signals to the country that something is very seriously amiss," said Kaptur.

Norman Ornstein, a scholar at the conservative American Enterprise Institute think tank who has authored a book on Washington's political polarization, said the Republican party has moved sharply to the right, diminishing opportunities for overlap between the parties.

"The biggest problem is that problem solving is a no-no now, replaced by strategic obstructionism," Ornstein said. "Couple that with ideology and the drive for money, and you have an atmosphere that makes a reasonable institutionalist like LaTourette feel out of place."

Former Rep. Ralph Regula, a moderate Navarre Republican who retired from Congress in 2009 after 18 terms in office, agrees that heightened partisanship in Congress has made it harder to get things done.

"A lot of what we were able to achieve during my tenure was done because we could get agreement between the parties on a compromise," said Regula. " This is what frustrates Steve. Moderates are a smaller and smaller number, and it is more and more difficult to govern effectively."

With Henry J. Gomez