Rep. Steve LaTourette to head the Republican Main Street Partnership
WASHINGTON, D.C. -- Bainbridge Township GOP Rep. Steve LaTourette will become president of the centrist Republican Main Street Partnership when he leaves Congress in January.

LaTourette says he plans to help the group launch a Super PAC that would support "centrists that try to do the right thing and solve the nation's problems and protect them from well-funded attacks, whether they come from the left or the right."

The organization also runs seminars between the business community and members of Congress on committees that oversee those businesses. A congressional caucus aligned with the group has roughly 50 members, including Ohioans Bill Johnson of Marietta, Jim Renacci of Wadsworth, Mike Turner of the Dayton area, and Columbus area Republicans Patrick Tiberi and Steve Stivers.

Renacci said LaTourette has always "made it a point to work toward building consensus and to reach decisions through pragmatism and common sense, not partisan ideologies."

"While we don't always agree on every policy, I certainly wish him the best as he transitions to the presidency of the Republican Main Street Partnership," Renacci said in an emailed statement. "As a member of the group, I know I can count on Steve to provide solid leadership and guidance for the organization, and I look forward to working with him in his new role."

For the past three years, the coalition has been headed by another moderate former GOP congressman, Virginia's Tom Davis. LaTourette says he also plans to spend three years in the unpaid position "as long as I don't screw it up." He says is still working on finding paid employment for when he leaves Congress.

LaTourette, 58, said his new outfit may drop the word "Republican" from its name and promote a "center-right" agenda without respect for partisan labels.

"If you have the courage to stand up to the extremes of your party and vote for the good of the country, we may protect you," he said.

In preparation for his new gig, LaTourette has made a series of media appearances in which he has urged moderation for his party.

LaTourette cited frustration with partisan gridlock in Congress when he announced his retirement from Congress this summer. He has argues that ultra-conservative GOP special interest groups are promoting the election of bitterly partisan candidates whose unwillingness to compromise is paralyzing Washington.

"If Republicans are going to build the coalitions necessary to win all across this country, if we are to restore the American people’s faith in our party and in our ability to govern, then it is time we start nominating serious people," LaTourette recently wrote in POLITICO. "It is time our party stops nominating Manchurian candidates, and start nominating people who are committed to coming to Washington to make this city work for the people of this country."