Kasich signs budget, keeps abortion restrictions, leaves door open for Medicaid expansion
The Republican governor used his line-item veto to ditch a provision that would bar the state from expanding Medicaid, but held on to the legislature’s tax reform cornerstones and volley against abortion.





“The governor is pro-life,” said Scott Milburn, Kasich’s communications director.





Kasich delivered remarks for about five minutes before signing the state’s new two-year budget, touching on the successes of his previous budget and Ohio’s road ahead.





“Ohio is healing without any doubt,” Kasich said. “We still have too many Ohioans out of work.”





Kasich made no mention of his 22 vetoes or the contentious anti-abortion measures kept in the plan.





He quickly left his Statehouse office after signing the document, not allowing reporters to ask questions.





The budget goes into effect Monday.





Under the new budget, Ohioans will receive a 10 percent income tax cut phased in over three years, and will pay an increased sales tax rate of 5.75 percent -- up from 5.5 percent.





The ratified plan also includes a 50 percent tax break for small-business owners on up to $250,000 of yearly net income claimed on personal tax filings.





“We’re proud of our tax cuts because we think this is another installment in Ohio’s comeback,” Kasich said. “It’s going to continue to give us great momentum.”





Kasich did away with a measure that would stop his plan to expand Medicaid to cover nearly 275,000 of Ohio’s working poor, leaving the possibility for further debate in the Republican-controlled legislature.





Kasich left in place provisions in HB 59 that will strip funds from Planned Parenthood, bar abortion providers from entering into emergency transfer agreements with public hospitals, and force women seeking abortions to undergo an ultrasound.





The budget reprioritizes how federal dollars are distributed among the state's family-planning centers, effectively placing Planned Parenthood at the end of the list, the group says.





HB 59 also requires abortion providers to find private hospitals, which are often religious, willing to enter into transfer agreements to comply with the state's requirements.





A last-minute addition demands that abortion providers give women seeking abortions information on family planning and adoption services if a heartbeat can be detected through the use of a trans-abdominal ultrasound.





It also compels doctors to inform those women "of the probable anatomical and physiological characteristics" of a fetus during various stages of its development.





“These provisions in the Ohio state budget are part of an orchestrated effort to roll back women’s rights and access to health care in Ohio,” Stephanie Kight, president of Planned Parenthood of Greater Ohio, said in a statement. “The budget is only the latest in a series of restrictive laws signed by John Kasich that have hurt the women in our state who need more access to health care, not less.”





Ohio Right to Life applauded Kasich’s decision to keep the budget’s anti-abortion measures.





“It took great compassion and courage for our governor and pro-life legislature to stand up to the abortion industry that blatantly pressured them," Mike Gonidakis, president of Ohio Right to Life, said in a statement.





The budget’s income tax cut is deeper than the one initially proposed by the House, but falls short of the 20 percent income tax cut Kasich introduced in February when he unveiled what he called his "Jobs Budget 2.0.”





Kasich’s proposal also intended to give small-business owners a break on their first $750,000 in yearly net income.





After months of toiling on the budget, the Republican-controlled legislature decided to ditch the 12.5 percent property tax rollback for new taxes, which could make new school levies harder to sell to voters. For example, without the rollback, last year's 15-mill Cleveland school levy would have cost $263 a year instead of $230 for the owner of a $50,000 home.





Seniors who get the homestead exemption will continue to qualify for it under the new plan, but future seniors who earn $30,000 or more will not receive the benefit.





Also in the budget are provisions GOP lawmakers say would close tax loopholes by taxing cigarillos in the same way Ohio taxes cigarettes, and barring taxpayers from claiming gambling losses on tax filings.





Kasich intended to reduce the sales tax to 5 percent while expanding the sales tax base to include previously untaxed services. He also wanted draw more money from large oil and gas drillers. The legislature scuttled those proposals during their months-long budget process.

COLUMBUS, Ohio -- Ohio’s next two-year budget is a done deal.