Republican 'Workplace Freedom' legislation re-ignites SB 5 debate
COLUMBUS, Ohio -- Two Statehouse Republicans are poised to propose legislation that would make Ohio a "right-to-work" state.

Representatives Ron Maag and Kristina Roegner on Tuesday sent separate letters to House lawmakers soliciting co-sponsorship for a pair of bills the duo calls "Workplace Freedom" legislation. The moves re-ignited dormant fervor over a similar effort to restrict collective bargaining -- Senate Bill 5.

The sister bills, which are expected to be introduced Wednesday, would ban public and private employers from forcing workers to join or pay dues to unions or other employee organizations, according to the letters. Maag, a Lebanon Republican, targets the public sector, and Roegner, a Hudson Republican, homes in on the private sector. The lawmakers said they want to make Ohio the 25th right-to-work state.

Democrats and labor groups in 2011 triumphed over SB 5 by successfully petitioning to repeal the legislation that would have scaled back collective bargaining for public employees.

Voters overwhelmingly rejected the GOP-backed legislation, and Gov. John Kasich, who strongly supported SB 5, moved to other issues after the defeat and distanced himself from the collective-bargaining debate.

"There have been 300 bills introduced so far this year. We don't weigh in on all of them, and it would be premature to do so on these," Rob Nichols, a spokesman for Kasich, said Tuesday. "The governor has a big agenda that's moving through the legislature and he continues to work on it."

Mike Dittoe, a spokesman for House Speaker William G. Batchelder of Medina, said the Republican speaker is supportive of members who introduce legislation that fits the needs of their district, but had not reviewed the legislation.

Republican reticence was not shared by Democrats, who expressed outrage over the proposals.

"Clearly the extremists in the Republican Party didn't get the message when Ohioans overwhelmingly rejected these attacks on workers' rights in 2011," House Minority Leader Armond Budish of Beachwood said in a statement. "We stand ready to fight these attacks on Ohio's middle class again. So-called right to work means fewer rights, not more, for working Ohioans."

Supporters of SB 5 said the changes would help employers control labor costs. Opponents called it a union-busting attack on middle-class workers.

Rep. Chris Redfern, chairman of the Ohio Democratic Party, said the Republican "broadside against the rights of Ohio workers" has little chance of survival in the Statehouse.

"We expect this unnecessary sideshow, which will do nothing to create more good-paying jobs, to fail," Redfern said. "We intend to hold Gov. Kasich accountable for choosing to focus on distractions over Ohio's middle class. If Kasich doesn't want this attack on working families to move, he should say so immediately."

At least six House Democrats released statements on Tuesday lambasting the "Workplace Freedom" legislation.

Maag remained quiet, declining to answer questions about his controversial move. The lawmaker's aide said Maag would discuss the bill with the media Wednesday afternoon. A call placed to Roegner's office was not returned.

Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald, who recently announced his candidacy for governor, weighed in on the legislation.

"My promise to Ohio's working- and middle-class families is that they will never have to fear these kinds of attacks if I am their governor," FitzGerald, a Democrat, said in a statement.

Both letters said those willing to co-sponsor the "Workplace Freedom" legislation must notify Maag or Roegner by 9 a.m. Wednesday.