Are Sen. Sherrod Brown and Rep. Marcy Kaptur communists? Tea Party website says so
Conservative author (and East Cleveland native ) Jerome Corsi - who is perhaps best known for co-writing a book that torpedoed the military record of former Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry - is back on the attack against Democratic members of Congress.

On Sunday, he took to a Tea Party website to tout "an encyclopedic new 689-page volume, “The Enemies Within: Communists, Socialists and Progressives in the U.S. Congress,” by New Zealander Trevor Loudon."

According to Corsi, the new book "documents how extensively communists, socialists and progressives have penetrated the U.S. Congress, running on the Democratic Party ticket," describing "radical, leftist ties in the backgrounds" of Democratic legislators including U.S. Sen. Sherrod Brown of Ohio, and Rep. Marcy Kaptur of Toledo.

According to Corsi: "The goal of these radicals in Congress, Loudon demonstrates, is the same goal Obama announced when running for president in 2008, to transform the United States from the constitutional republic established by its Founding Fathers into a radical socialist state. The aim is to be achieved through passing extensive social welfare legislation designed to bankrupt a government adhering to concepts of private property and private enterprise."

Kaptur spokesman Steve Fought called any allegation that his boss is a radical, leftist, communist "absurd."

"She is a Polish-American Roman Catholic," said Fought. "That pretty much proves them wrong, now doesn't it?"

When we asked whether Sen. Brown thinks Corsi & Co. have been drinking something a bit stronger than tea, his press secretary, Meghan Dubyak, replied:

"Would Mr. Corsi consider Sen. Brown's bipartisan bill that cracks down on the Chinese communist party for cheating trade laws a communist effort? How about his work to overhaul the corporate tax rate to encourage domestic investment and job creation in the U.S.? Unfortunately we'll never know because Mr. Corsi eschews substance and resorts to mindless name calling that's not worthy of discussion on cleveland.com."