Ohio sorts out impact of same-sex marriage decisions (slideshow)
Even though Wednesday's U.S. Supreme Court decisions won't allow gay couples to marry in Ohio, same-sex marriage advocates viewed the rulings as a victory that will boost their chances to eventually legalize gay marriage here.

One advocacy group vowed to continue its push to put the issue before Ohio voters next year.

The high court overturned parts of a 1996 law that banned the federal government from recognizing same-sex marriages performed in states where they're legal, and also let stand a lower court ruling that struck down a California gay marriage ban.

"The court really focused on the fact that this was the federal government trying to define marriage when marriage is something that is typically defined by states," said Case Western Reserve University law professor Jonathan Adler, who said the decisions' effects on Ohio law would not be large.

The DOMA decision will provide federal marriage rights – like the ability to file joint tax returns and collect their partners' Social Security benefits – to Ohio same-sex couples who marry in other states that allow it. But such couples won't get spousal rights granted under state law, like the ability to make health care decisions for an incapacitated partner.

"To have married couples in Ohio treated one way by the state and another way by the federal government is patently unfair," says Lakewood attorney Joan Burda, who married her partner, Betsy Ashley, in Vermont in 2010.

Burda said Ohio's ban on gay marriage, passed as a constitutional amendment in 2004, could make married same-sex couples with kids think twice about relocating to Ohio because a state that doesn't recognize their marriages wouldn't recognize the parental rights of the children's non-biological parents. The state also could prevent married gay couples who live in Ohio from getting a divorce, she said.

"This decision today says we've got the marriage part down, but what about other things like family law issues, adoption, and custody that are part of state law," she said.

The decision also creates questions for the Ohio Department of Taxation, which will have to review its impact on same-sex couples who live in Ohio but were legally married elsewhere.

Current law says state taxes must be filed with the same status claimed on federal tax filings, said Ohio Department of Taxation spokesman Gary Gudmundson said Wednesday.

"Given that the ruling just came out today, we can't say with any sort of clarity how it will affect tax filings in Ohio," he said.

Ohio State University constitutional law professor Marc Spindelman said the court's rejection of the Defense of Marriage law contained language that will provide fodder to both proponents and opponents of same-sex marriage.

While the court opinion said allowing same-sex marriage is a state decision, Spindelman said the equal protection argument the court used to overturn DOMA could "be mobilized in such a way as to cast doubt on the constitutionality of not only DOMA, but state bans on same sex marriage."

FreedomOhio, a group pushing to overturn Ohio's same-sex marriage ban, said the decisions give more momentum to the effort to get the issue on the November 2014 ballot.

"Our resolve has been doubled to collect signatures," FreedomOhio co-founder Ian James said. "The journey continues."

The proposed constitutional amendment, called the "Freedom to Marry and Religious Freedom Amendment," aims to make same-sex marriage legal in the state while allowing religious groups to determine for themselves whether to perform the unions.

The group needs to gather nearly 386,000 signatures to place its measure on the ballot.

James said Wednesday's decisions marked an "important moment," but they don't "change the reality that Ohio still has a constitutional amendment banning same-gender marriage. Ohio voters can address the civil rights issue of our generation by voting for the Freedom to Marry and Religious Freedom amendment."

Elyzabeth Holford, executive director of Equality Ohio, shared in James' excitement over the Supreme Court's decision, but would not endorse the timing of the "Freedom to Marry" initiative.

"It's appropriate to go forward when the time is right," Holford said, adding that gathering the required signatures is only part of the equation. A consistent public approval rating of more than 51 percent for same-sex marriage would be among the factors necessary to launch such an initiative, she said.

Placing such a measure on the ballot "is not an arbitrary decision," Holford said. "It's our rights for marriage equality on the line."

Could November 2014 end up being the right time to put the marriage question in the hands of Ohio voters?

"Anything is possible," Holford said.

Some same-sex marriage advocates criticized James earlier this month when he said he hoped to have a measure on the ballot in 2014.

Some advocates say the 2016 presidential election would likely draw more supporters of same-sex marriage to the polls than next year's gubernatorial race.

In March, Phil Burress, president of Citizens for Community Values, a Cincinnati-based conservative group that championed the 2004 constitutional ban, said legalizing same-sex marriage in Ohio is unlikely.

"I can't look into the future, but I just don't ever see it happening," Burress said. "This nation was founded on Judeo-Christian principles, and, like Judeo-Christian beliefs, every major religion is opposed to same-sex marriage. You can't allow same-sex marriage until you destroy all religions."

The group said it was ready to fight measures that would bring same-sex marriage to the state.

"We're prepared to defend marriage this year or next year or in 2016, whenever it ends up on the ballot," Charles Tassel, a spokesman for CCV, said Wednesday.

The CCV website says its motivation "stems from the fact that research has proven time and time again that children do best when raised with both a mother and a father and our children deserve the best, whenever possible."

Ohio same sex couples reveled in the high court's decisions, and said they hope they foreshadow the eventual recognition of gay marriage in Ohio.

"When I found out, I burst into tears of joy," said Melissa Soto-Schwartz, a Women's Studies Professor at Cuyahoga Community College. She and her partner, Meryl, were married by a local rabbi in 1997, and were legally married in New York two years ago.

The Rev. Tracey Lind of Cleveland's Trinity Cathedral hugged her spouse, Emily Ingalls, when they heard the Supreme Court news. The pair were married three years ago in New Hampshire, on their tenth anniversary together.

Lind said that people throughout the country were "celebrating the decision to strike discrimination from federal laws and ensure that all married couples have rights and protections."

"I am hopeful and excited and I know it is only a matter of time before gay marriage is recognized in Ohio and the rest of the country," Lind said.

The Rev. J. Bennett Guess of the United Church of Christ headquartered in Cleveland said religious views on same-sex marriage are not monolithic.

"My understanding of Jesus is that he stretched the religious understandings of his day and stretched them toward greater inclusion," Guess said.

Guess, who has lived in Cleveland since 2000, legally married his same-sex spouse in Massachusetts in 2008. He said they have been a couple for 12 years.

Guess said the Supreme Court's rulings are a major step in the right direction even if they do not have a an immediate impact on same-sex marriage in Ohio.

"This is a fantastic day for marriage equality for all couples because the Supreme Court has underscored that marriage is a deep commitment between two people who love each other," Guess said.

The United Church of Christ, which has more than 1 million members in the U.S. and ordained the first openly gay minister in 1972, would do everything it could to help pass a same-sex marriage initiative like the one proposed by FreedomOhio, Guess said.



With Plain Dealer Reporter Brandon Blackwell