Does the RGA's pro-John Kasich ad measure up? Truth in Numbers
COLUMBUS, Ohio -- A campaign advertisement paid for by the Republican Governors Association bills Gov. John Kasich as guy who gets things done.

The 30-second spot, which began airing right after the primary election, lays out stats to show the troubled condition of Ohio’s economy and the state government’s finances when Kasich took office. It then follows with a listing of the Republican governor’s accomplishments, proclaiming “John Kasich works.”

Northeast Ohio Media Group measured the ad’s accuracy with Truth in Numbers, a new fact-checking feature. We began our analysis Wednesday, the same day we invited readers to come up with their own scores using our form.

Here’s what we found and what readers decided:

Scoring

Our score Reader score Are the words literally accurate? (0-3 points) 3 1.83 Is the message accurate? (0-3 points) 2 1.50 Is the message fair? (0-2 points) 1 1.00 Does the message have substance? (0-2 points) 2 1.17 Total score (10 points): 8 5.50

And here is the script from the ad:

“John Kasich Works” -- Paid for by the Republican Governors Association

Narrator: Four years ago, Ohio was in free fall. An $8 billion deficit. Only 89 cents in Ohio’s rainy day fund. High unemployment, 350,000 jobs lost. It was ugly.

Then John Kasich stepped in. Went to work. Erased the deficit without raising taxes. Kasich filled the Rainy Day fund, protecting Ohio’s future. Unemployment dropped 33 percent. Nearly a quarter million new jobs.

Gov. Kasich is building Ohio’s future. There’s still work to do, and John Kasich works.

Our Analysis

Are the words literally accurate? (0 to 3 points)

The ad begins with several points to illustrate that Ohio faced troubled times when Kasich took office, followed by others meant to show his successes. Most are accompanied by text that appears on the screen citing a source to reinforce the point.

We’ll go through them.

The point about an $8 billion deficit refers to a projected shortfall the state faced for its 2012-13 biennial budget. The ad cites The Columbus Dispatch as a source, saying the deficit was left by the Strickland administration.

Is that reference literally true? Substantially.

A report in The Plain Dealer in 2011 explains that the figure comes from projections made in January 2011 as the Kasich administration began to prepare for a new budget which had to be in place by July. The projections confirmed estimates made months earlier that anticipated revenues would fall about $8 billion short of covering expenses as federal stimulus money and other “one time” dollars expired.

But by May, revenue growth was expected and tax dollars were coming in faster than anticipated.

The Kasich administration projected about $800 million in revenue growth in its new budget. And by May, the revenue for 2011’s fiscal year was on pace to be about $1.03 billion higher than what had been expected.

The state’s budget director, Tim Keen, acknowledged then that the so-called "structural imbalance" was turning out to be something in the $6 billion range. But he also noted then that extra revenue coming in would likely go toward unpaid bills left from Strickland’s administration and would not be a windfall.

Either way, it is true the state was facing a significant shortfall, and over time, the $8 billion figure has stuck.

The remaining points all deal with either the state’s budget or employment in Ohio and all are on the money.

The state approved a balanced budget for 2012-13, covering the projected shortfall without raising taxes.

The state’s Budget Stabilization Fund, commonly called the rainy day fund, did have just 89 cents in it when Kasich came into office. Over two budget cycles it has been refilled to $1.48 billion, the maximum allowed.

BLS data confirms the state lost 350,000 private sector jobs during the Strickland years, which spanned the recession. Unemployment was at 9.1 percent when Kasich took office, among the highest monthly rates since 2004. By March 2014, the most current statistics available when the ad first appeared, unemployment had fallen 33 percent to 6.1 percent. It dropped again to 5.7 percent in April.

Through March, the state had added about 248,500 jobs since the beginning of 2011.

Score: 3 points.

Is the message accurate? (0 to 3 points)

This part of the assessment examines whether the facts spin a message or paint a complete picture.

First, the rhetorical claim that the economy was in free fall paints a bleaker picture of Ohio’s economy than what existed when Kasich took office. The ad cites The Columbus Dispatch as a reference. And to be sure, Ohio’s economy was challenged. But the state’s economy had been improving for several months.

Then there is the claim that credits Kasich with refilling the rainy day fund. He certainly pushed for that, but it also required support from the legislature to get it done.

Finally, there are those who also would take issue with the ad’s contention that Kasich did not raise taxes, saying that funding cuts to school districts and aid to local governments forced communities to raise local taxes.

The two-year budget that Kasich signed last summer increased the state's sales-tax rate, ended a property-tax discount on future school levies and scaled back the homestead exemption, a separate property-tax break for senior citizens.

But while it's true Kasich signed into law a higher sales tax and other measures that shifted tax burdens, he also has championed reductions to the state's income-tax rate. A Plain Dealer's analysis from last year determined that when factoring in the changes to the income- and sales- tax rates, most Ohioans would see a smaller overall annual tax bill.

Score: 2 points

Is the message fair? (0 to 2 points)

The ad is meant to make viewers feel good about the governor’s performance. As such, it doesn’t take any shots at his Democratic opponent, Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald.

Rather, it tries to use data to create a positive message, citing facts to buttress the argument that Kasich has done a good job and that Ohio is better for it. That approach, though, does raise some fairness issues.

Political leaders historically take credit for the good times and get blamed for the bad. The truth is that the economy is complex, influenced by many factors, and one governor does not have total control over it.

But while it's impossible to assign credit or blame to Kasich for every job gained or lost, it's not debatable that Ohio's unemployment rate has fallen on his watch. A shrinking labor force also has played a role.

Further, by describing the economy as in free fall when Kasich took office, the ad ignores that Ohio was already starting to rebound from the recession when Kasich took office.

From February 2010 through the end of Strickland’s term, the state gained 67,600 private sector jobs, according to BLS.

Lastly, by carefully confining the no-new-taxes claim to the state’s 2011 budget, the ad glosses over any impact budget cuts may have had on local communities. And, it ignores tax increases that were approved in the current budget.

Score: 1 point

Does the message have substance? (0 to 2 points)

It’s pretty clear that the economy is going to be a significant part of the debate in the gubernatorial election. Kasich’s Democratic opponent, Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald, has criticized the governor for not doing enough for the middle class while approving tax cuts that he argues most-benefited the wealthy.

With that in mind, the message uses several statements that are quantifiable and provides some comparison of the state’s finances and Ohio’s economy then and now.

Score: 2 points

Overall score: 8 out of 10 points