Ohio House Republicans propose more abortion restrictions
COLUMBUS, Ohio - A group of Ohio Republican lawmakers has introduced a bill that would require women seeking abortions to wait at least 48 hours and undergo an ultrasound examination.

Those requirements are among an extensive list of abortion restrictions in House Bill 200, introduced by Rep. Ron Hood of Southeast Ohio and backed by 34 of his GOP colleagues.

Among other things, the bill would:

• Require doctors to give women a verbal description of the ultrasound, including an audible heartbeat, if available. (The bill notes, however, that a woman can refuse to view ultrasound images or listen to the sounds detected by a fetal heart monitor.)

• Compel abortion providers to tell patients that fetuses and embryos can feel pain, and that a woman who has an abortion increases her risk of breast cancer.

• Extend the waiting period for abortions to 48 hours instead of 24.

• Require doctors to tell patients seeking abortions in writing how much money they earn and how much income they would lose by not performing abortions.

• Eliminate "medical necessity" as a reason to waive the waiting period. Medical necessity had been defined as a medical condition that complicates the pregnancy so that it warrants an immediate abortion.

• Allow a waiver for a "medical emergency," which is redefined in the bill as a condition that would result in the woman's death without an abortion, as opposed to one that presents a serious risk to her life or physical health.

Doctors who do not follow the rules could be charged with a first-degree felony and fined up to $1 million.

Hood, several cosponsors and the GOP leadership in the House did not respond to requests for comment Wednesday on the bill.

"Ohio politicians continue to violate women," said Celeste Glasgow Ribbins, a spokeswoman for Planned Parenthood of Greater Ohio. "They are violating our trust by introducing one extreme bill after another. They are stripping away our rights at every turn."

Reps. Kristina Roegner and Marilyn Slaby, both of Summit County, are the only women in the House to attach their names to the bill. Multiple calls placed to Roegner and Slaby were not returned.

According to the legislation, women seeking an abortion would have to undergo an "obstetric ultrasound."

Typical ultrasounds scan over the abdomen with a transducer to gather images of the uterus. Another method is a transvaginal ultrasound, which is invasive but can provide a better look at pelvic organs and fetuses, according to the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, or ACOG.

The bill does not specify which type of ultrasound would be required, but says it must portray "the entire body of the embryo or fetus."

A patient could receive a photo of the fetus or embryo at no extra charge, but would have to pay out of pocket for the ultrasound.

Planned Parenthood argues the required ultrasounds aim to further distress women in crisis.

"Information about a woman's pregnancy should support a woman," Ribbins said. "This information should not be provided with the intent of shaming her or coercing her."

ACOG opposes mandated ultrasounds, saying they would do nothing to enhance a woman's health or safety and would add unnecessary emotional and financial stress.

"State legislators should not be determining the conversation between a woman and her doctor, regardless of the issue," according to ACOG's website.

The group also says multiple studies have shown that women who receive abortions do not have an increased risk of breast cancer.

Ohio Right to Life would not comment on the legislation and said it was currently focused on anti-abortion measures included in the state's budget.

The budget, which must be signed by Gov. John Kasich no later than June 30, contains an amendment that would strip funding from Planned Parenthood by altering the current system of divvying federal funds the state receives for family planning. The bill also contains language that would stop surgical facilities that perform or induce abortions from having transfer agreements with public hospitals.

Surgical facilities in the state are required to have a transfer agreements with a hospital, Ribbins said, adding that barring Planned Parenthood from drafting agreements with public hospitals would force the health care provider to seek agreements with private hospitals, which are often affiliated with religious groups that oppose abortion.

On Twitter: @BlackwellTweets