Gender identity bill stuck in House: editorial
An Ohio House committee chaired by Lake County legislator Ron Young needs to get moving on a bipartisan bill to ban employment and housing discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity.

House Bill 335 has languished since being introduced last fall, but the need for the bill is plain. In 21st-century Ohio, it is indefensible that, by failing to forbid discrimination based on sexual identity, state law in effect permits it.

In September 2009, the Democrat-controlled House passed a similar bill co-sponsored by Republican Ross W. McGregor of Springfield and Democrat Dan Stewart, then a Columbus representative, but it was never brought up for a vote in the Senate.

McGregor and Nickie J. Antonio, a Lakewood Democrat, introduced the current bill last Sept. 27.

With control of the House now in Republican hands, Speaker William Batchelder of Medina and his GOP colleagues took six weeks (until Nov. 9) to refer the bill to a House committee.

Then the Commerce, Labor and Technology Committee, chaired by Young, a Leroy Township Republican, took 20 weeks (until March 28) to hold its first and only hearing on the bill. (House rules require at least one hearing on every bill.)

As to employment discrimination, the bill would apply only to employers with at least 15 employees. And according to the nonpartisan Legislative Service Commission, the bill wouldn't limit the rights that religious organizations now have in Ohio "with respect to education, employment, housing, and real property, or use of facilities" regarding sexual orientation and

About our editorials Plain Dealer editorials express the view of The Plain Dealer's editorial board -- the publisher, editor and editorial-writing staff. As is traditional, editorials are unsigned and intended to be seen as the voice of the newspaper. • Talk about the topic of this editorial in the comments below. • Send a letter to the editor, which will be considered for print publication. • Email general questions or comments about the editorial board to Elizabeth Sullivan, editor of the editorial page.

gender identity.

It has been almost a dozen weeks since Young held that one hearing on the bill. As Antonio said in a statement accompanying a June 5 letter she and McGregor sent to Young, asking for more hearings, "It's time for Ohio to join with the 21 states and over 650 Fortune 500 companies . . . who know that banning . . . discrimination [based on gender identity] is good for employees and good for business."

It's way past time for Young, who did not return a call seeking comment on Antonio's and McGregor's request, to get to work on the bill.