A train that Ohioans were lucky to miss: Brent Larkin
During his classless exit from office, Gov. Ted Strickland has constantly whined of the "tragic" decision by Gov.-elect John Kasich to kill a passenger rail plan for Ohio, labeling it perhaps the saddest event of Strickland's one term as governor.

Strickland's decency has long been considered his strongest attribute. But by spending the last two months desperately rewriting history, he stands in real danger of being remembered more for anger and bitterness. In any case, his stubborn support for the train proves that being a good man doesn't guarantee good decisions.

While the outgoing governor may have been saddened by Kasich's decision to return a $400 million federal grant to build a train system linking Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati, the decision should have cheered Ohioans.

By telling the federal government to keep its $400 million, Kasich probably saved the state's taxpayers at least that much.

Critics, including Strickland, have depicted Kasich's decision as a jobs-killer. Actually, proceeding with this boondoggle would have caused far more economic pain. Over time, the train project would have blown such a gigantic hole in the state budget it would have adversely impacted state spending for schools, children, the poor, the aged and the ill.

Voters never warmed to the idea of spending hundreds of millions on a passenger rail project that would have taken riders from Cleveland to Cincinnati over a period an hour and 15 minutes longer than it would have taken on a New York Central train in 1935. A Columbus Dispatch poll in September showed that far more Ohioans opposed the train plan than supported it.

Nevertheless, in a vain attempt to sell this project to the public, state officials changed their story so often it made the head swim. Truth is, one needn't be Nostradamus to project cost overruns totaling hundreds of millions of dollars -- with the money to cover those overruns coming directly from the pockets of Ohio taxpayers.

When the Obama administration offered Ohio $400 million for the rail project, Strickland administration officials essentially said, "Sure, that should cover it." But just months earlier, as part of the state's application to the feds, the administration placed the startup cost at $563.7 million.

It gets worse.

A Government Accounting Office study of transportation projects, requested by Congress, concluded in March 2009 that passenger rail projects "had the highest cost escalation out of all the transportation modes studied -- averaging 45 percent higher than estimated."

ODOT's ridership predictions called for an annual taxpayer subsidy of $17 million over 20 years. But that same GAO report cited a study of 27 rail projects that found ridership forecasts for 90 percent of the projects were overestimated, with 67 percent overestimated by more than two-thirds.

Last month, Strickland said the train plan would have created 16,000 jobs, a figure that doubled the state's earlier estimates of 8,000 jobs. ODOT's own website claims 8,000 jobs -- and even that figure is wildly inflated. Think about it: Aside from the temporary work to upgrade existing railroad track, how many people does it take to run three or four trains a day up and down the state? A few hundred sounds about right.

A Time magazine story published just last week concluded that Ohio's "pitiful" rail plan"did not make sense" and actually had the potential to "destroy momentum for investments" in legitimate high-speed rail.

A far better use of the rail money would have been to build a new system with 120-mph train service linking the Cleveland and Akron airports. Or to begin a real high-speed system in growth areas of southwest Ohio.

Those types of wise and creative investments in rail -- in trains that travel faster than the ones in the 1800s did -- actually might have created meaningful jobs and grown Ohio's economy.

The project Kasich killed was neither wise nor creative.

And sending $400 million back to the federal government wasn't the least bit sad.

Goodbye, and thank you Cuyahoga County Commissioner Tim Hagan left office last week; county Treasurer Jim Rokakis will leave in a week or two -- departures mandated by the county government reform approved by voters in 2009.

Together, the two served more than six decades in elected life. Rokakis was treasurer for nearly 14 years after earlier spending nearly two decades on Cleveland City Council. Hagan served two stints as commissioner totaling 24 years.

Rokakis was perhaps the most gifted and creative county official of the past quarter-century. Hagan's initial, 16-year run as commissioner, from 1982 to 1998, was clearly his best work. But throughout his long career in elected life, Hagan's reputation for integrity remained intact and he never wavered from a genuine commitment to the county's less fortunate citizens.

In recent years, Rokakis and Hagan weren't always treated fairly in news coverage. Like all of us, both have flaws. Rokakis can be notoriously thin-skinned and Hagan's demeanor can at times be mistaken for arrogance.

But over the long haul, both made significant contributions and served this community well.