Rob Portman, Ted Strickland hit with questionable attacks over their private-sector work
COLUMBUS, Ohio--The Ohio Democratic Party and Republican U.S. Sen. Rob Portman's campaign are trading questionable claims about private-sector work done by Portman and Democratic rival Ted Strickland.

Ohio Democrats have renewed attacks against the Republican incumbent that insinuate -- incorrectly -- that he worked for former Haitian dictator Jean-Claude "Baby Doc" Duvalier while at a Washington, D.C. law firm in the 1980s.

Portman's campaign shot back with a disputed allegation that Strickland "mediated against" the victims of Fair Finance, an Akron financial services company whose leaders were convicted of defrauding some 5,200 investors of more than $200 million.

Let's examine these attacks one at a time.

Portman and Haiti

In a public memo and web video released this week, the Ohio Democratic Party highlights that Portman, while working for the Patton Boggs law firm in 1985, listed "Republic of Haiti" on his lobbying registration form as a client for whom he "may be engaged in performance of legal and related services."

Lobbyists at firms with foreign clients frequently list such clients on their registration forms, just in case they end up working on the account. But in Portman's case, he "never billed a millisecond of time" to Haiti, according to Stuart Pape, Portman's supervisor at Patton Boggs.

In 2005, shortly before Portman was named U.S. trade representative, Pape signed an affidavit attesting that "at no time did Mr. Portman do any work for any foreign government or entity of a foreign government."

Portman has been dogged by similar accusations throughout his political career that he was a "lobbyist" for the governments of Haiti and Oman, another Patton Boggs client. The newest Democratic attack is carefully worded to try and tie Portman to the brutal Haitian dictator - and portray him as a "D.C. insider" - without specifically claiming that Portman actually did anything to help Duvalier out.

"Senator Portman can string together all of the Washington-insider excuses he wants to try to distract from his D.C. lobbying career, but the fact remains: Portman was a registered foreign agent for the brutal Haitian dictator 'Baby Doc' Duvalier," said Ohio Democratic Party spokesman Daniel van Hoogstraten in a statement. "It begs one simple question: why would Rob Portman sign up to represent a brutal dictator?"

Portman campaign spokeswoman Michawn Rich stated in an email that "the level of desperation coming from Ted Strickland and his allies is embarrassing.

"Ted has nothing left to do except recycle disproven personal attacks because his campaign has no traction, no money, and no grassroots support," she wrote.

Van Hoogstraten defended the party's criticism of Portman, saying the senator shouldn't have even opened himself up to the possibility that he might do work for Duvalier, who brutally oppressed political opponents during his 15-year rule over one of the world's poorest countries.

Strickland and Fair Finance

Portman's campaign, in a release, claims that Strickland "took money to represent the benefactors" of Fair Finance, whose leaders were handed prison sentences for operating a Ponzi scheme.

But that claim was disputed by Michael Wager, a Cleveland attorney for Taft Stettinius & Hollister who served as legal counsel for Fortress. (Wager is currently a Democratic congressional candidate who previously worked with Portman at the law firm Squire Sanders).

Strickland didn't play a direct role in the scandal itself. Rather, Wager said, Strickland was brought in to help resolve a side dispute between Fortress Investment Group (whose subsidiary, Fortress Credit Corp., provided financing to Fair Finance) and Fair Finance's bankruptcy trustee about how much money Fortress should recoup from the Fair Finance estate.

Fortress, in an unusual move, suggested avoiding a court battle by bringing in a high-profile public figure to act as an "honest broker" between the two sides, Wager said.

Strickland agreed to serve in that role, attending meetings and researching the case, according to Wager.

But after a few months, the Fair Finance trustee, Cleveland attorney Brian Bash, rejected the idea of alternative dispute resolution, and the case went to court, according to Wager.

Strickland was paid $25,000 for his efforts by Fortress, which routed the money through Wager's law firm.

Wager strongly disputed the Portman campaign's characterization of Strickland's role in the case, calling their allegations "a complete distortion.

"He had nothing to do with the people who propagated, perpetuated the Ponzi scheme," Wager said of Strickland. "I think you're talking to a lot of people, perhaps, in Portman's camp who either are so politically charged that they don't really see this - or don't want to see it -- for what it is, but also probably don't understand it."

Bash didn't return a phone call Wednesday seeking comment.

Bergstein confirmed in an email that "Ted was hired by a law firm to potentially serve as an impartial mediator, but mediation never actually happened." The spokesman declined to confirm or deny further details of Wager's account about what happened.

"This is a pathetic attempt by Senator Portman to distract from his record as a registered 'foreign agent' for a Haitian dictator," Bergstein said.

Rich, Portman's spokeswoman, cast doubt on Wager's reliability, noting that the Democrat donated money to Strickland's campaign. She also stated in an email that Strickland has refused to talk about his role in the case for months.

"The facts could not be more clear: Ted Strickland pocketed more than $25,000 from a New York City hedge fund who didn't want to repay Ohioans burnt by a Ponzi scheme they financed," Rich stated. "Ohioans who lost their life savings deserve more than excuses from both of these politicians."