Jimmy Dimora's fender bender won't cost taxpayers a dime: Michael K. McIntyre's Tipoff
CLEVELAND, Ohio — It appears Cuyahoga County Commissionerwon't stick taxpayers with the bill to repair a county-owned car he damaged Tuesday during a parking lot mishap.

Dimora, who is determined to continue reporting to work after hepleaded not guilty to a number of federal corruption charges, was driving his personal Chevrolet Tahoe when it struck a county-owned Chevrolet Impala used by fellow Commissioner Tim Hagan, who was not in the car at the time. Dimora, who was not cited, blamed the crash on an aggressive TV cameraman.

The county sought two damage estimates for the Impala, which suffered a small dent and scrapes on a rear side panel, said Jay Ross, director of Central Services. The lowest was $668.

"Commissioner Dimora's insurance company is reviewing the estimate and has given the County indications that they will pay this cost," Ross said in an e-mail.

No word on whether Dimora will use his time during the next commissioner's meeting to proclaim that his actions haven't cost the taxpayers one dime.

Numbers game: It didn't take long for Matt Dolan, Republican candidate of Cuyahoga County executive, to pin a number on his opponent, Democrat Ed Fitzgerald, who is noted – but not named or implicated – in the corruption case against Commissioner Jimmy Dimora.

"Public Official 1," a narrator intones as headlines of Dimora, who has pleaded not guilty to dozens of charges, flashes on the screen. "Public official 2," he says as headlines of Coutny Auditor Frank Russo appear. Russo pleaded guilty to 21 counts and will do 22 years in federal prison.

"Public Official 14," the narrator continues, this time with a photograph of Fitzgerald, the Lakewood mayor who said he did nothing wrong by answering the phone when Dimora called saying he had a friend who wanted to meet with him regarding leasing of the city-owned ice rink.

"What do they all have in common? They're all named in the FBI investigation. They all gave money to Ed FitzGerald. And they did not support county reform...And now Ed FitzGerald wants to be county executive?"

FitzGerald responded with a campaign mailer showing a man watching TV, covered in mud, to illustrate what he calls a dirty campaign tactic.

"It's swift boating, basically. It turns reality on its head," said FitzGerald, who sparred with Dolan over the issue at a candidate's forum this week. "I expected it from the get-go. ... I guess he thinks this is the only way he can win."

FitzGerald said there are many people listed in investigations as "witnesses or bystanders" and said he did nothing wrong.

"The implication of the ad is I'm being investigated. That's what's borderline slanderous,' he said. "It's carefully crafted so I can't sue them."

And you are? Cleveland City Councilwoman Mamie Mitchell was chairing a hearing last week on urban agriculture legislation. After Planning Director Bob Brown laid out the legislation, audience members were invited to comment. Among those who came to the table was Andrew Watterson, the city's chief of sustainability.

The committee chairwoman asked him a most insightful question:

"Who are you?"

Wall of sound: The Roger Waters concert was a special thrill Tuesday for about 20 kids involved in the Roots of American Music program, which teaches kids mostly from disadvantaged communities the beauty and significance of traditional American music.

The kids were chosen to sing during the Pink Floyd hit "Another Brick in the Wall" in the concert. Taking the place of a bunch of British school kids – "We don't need no education.." – isn't exactly American roots music, but it was a thrill.

The kids got two weeks to practice before the concert – each was sent a video and mp3 file to study. At ages 10 to 15, it's not hard to believe many had never heard the song. They got the thrill of entertaining a crowd and learned a bit about the hard work it takes to put on a concert.

"It was all business," said ROAM's Executive Director Kevin Richards.