Club for Growth
News

Club for Growth President David McIntosh appeared on CNBC’s Squawk Box on May 22 to discuss tariffs and trade negotiations with China. McIntosh said tariffs are taxes, and “There’s a real cost to this type of negotiations and it is borne by the American people.” But he added that President Trump is using the tariffs […]

Pennsylvania State Representative Fred Keller, who the Club for Growth PAC endorsed on April 10, easily beat Democrat Marc Friedenberg to win the seat representing the 12th Congressional District of Pennsylvania. “With Fred Keller, Pennsylvania has elected a true and principled conservative to the House of Representatives,” said Club for Growth PAC President David McIntosh. “Keller has a […]

The Club for Growth announced the new “Big Spender Wall” highlighting Members of Congress who support a federal discretionary spending deal that exceeds caps set in the 2011 Budget Control Act. This follows the release of the “Fiscal Conservative Wall of Fame” on May 10. Both the “Big Spender Wall” and the “Fiscal Conservative Wall […]

The Club for Growth issued the following statement after the announcement of the removal of import taxes on Canadian and Mexican aluminum and steel as well as delay the implementation of auto tariffs on the European Union and Japan. “Free trade benefits everyone, and President Trump deserves a lot of credit for his tough and smart negotiations […]

Federal spending is out of control and Rep. Chip Roy (R-TX) is leading the way on fiscal responsibility and pushing Congress to #HoldToTheCaps. Find out if your elected officials are on the Club for Growth’s “Fiscal Responsibility Wall of Fame” here.

Today, Club for Growth PAC released poll results that show Virginia Delegate Nick Freitas has a significant lead in the Republican primary for Virginia’s 7th Congressional District, should he decide to seek the nomination. “Nick Freitas is well-positioned to win the Republican nomination in Virginia’s 7th Congressional District,” said Club for Growth PAC President David […]

North Carolina State Senator Dan Bishop, who the Club for Growth PAC endorsed on April 22, easily won the Republican primary in North Carolina’s 9th Congressional District. Bishop will face Dan McCready in the special election to be held on September 10, 2019. “Primary voters in North Carolina’s 9th Congressional District made the right choice in voting […]

McIntosh Discusses the 2020 Election & Biden’s Rise in the Polls on FOX News Club for Growth President David McIntosh appeared on FOX News on Saturday, May 11 to discuss the 2020 election and former Vice President Joe Biden’s recent rise in the polls. McIntosh compared Biden’s support to former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s […]

The following is a summary of What They Are Saying about the Republican primary in North Carolina’s 9th Congressional District with election day next week. Both the National Journal’s Hotline and The Daily Haymaker reported that Stony Rushing, “who ran a distant second in all three polls, confirmed he will not request a runoff if […]

Club for Growth Action has released a television advertisement, “Who,” and a website, AntiTrumpRealtor.com, focused on Leigh Brown’s liberal record ahead of the May 14 Republican primary in North Carolina’s 9th Congressional District. Brown has been outspoken against President Trump and the Trump Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, she has worked for and donated to […]

Club for Growth opposes the nominations of Spencer Baucus III, Kimberly Reed, and Judith Pryor to be Members of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank and urges all Senators to vote NO on them. A vote on each of these nominations is expected soon in the Senate. The results of each of these […]

The Club for Growth opposes the Climate Action Now Act, H.R. 9 and urges all Representatives to vote NO on it. A vote is expected soon in the House. The results of this vote will be included in the Club for Growth Foundation’s 2019 congressional scorecard. The Climate Action Now Act is legislative attempt to […]

The Club for Growth, along with FreedomWorks and 11 other major conservative organizations, co-signed a letter to Senate Majority Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) and House Minority Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) urging them not to exceed spending limits set in the 2011 Budget Control Act (BCA) in a potential deal to increase discretionary spending. Club for Growth President […]

For over 1,000 days, the Export-Import Bank has been prohibited from financing loans in excess of $10 million because it has been operating without a quorum on the Board of Directors. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and the GOP Senate Majority should be commended for resisting voting on nominations to Ex-Im Board of Directors. Had […]

Club for Growth PAC endorsed State Senator Dan Bishop in the special election in North Carolina’s 9th Congressional District. Sen. Bishop is a principled fiscal conservative with a proven track record in the state legislature. Since his election in 2014, Sen. Bishop has fought for tax cuts, including sales tax relief, personal income tax cuts, […]

Club for Growth PAC endorsed Celeste Cairns, an emerging star in the crowded 17-candidate field to fill Rep. Walter Jones’ seat in North Carolina’s 3rd Congressional District. “Celeste Cairns’ background in the private sector gives her insight into how the economy works and the burden government regulations place on businesses and families,” said Club for […]

Club for Growth President David McIntosh published an op-ed in The Daily Caller today, highlighting the economic benefits of President Trump’s tax reform and reminding people that Washington’s spending addiction is a massive tax increase waiting to happen. Read the op-ed here or below. McIntosh: Tax Day – A Reminder that Government Spending is a Tax on Our Kids […]

Club for Growth PAC endorsed State Rep. Fred Keller in the special election to fill Pennsylvania’s 12th Congressional District. The general election will be held on May 21, 2019. This is Club for Growth PAC’s first non-incumbent endorsement of the 2020 cycle. Rep. Keller is a conservative reformer and has a proven record of putting […]

“Club for Growth is encouraged that top officials from the Trump Administration spent time over the weekend at Camp David to focus on the issue of restoring health care freedom. President Trump and his administration are leading on this issue, while most Members of Congress beg to sit on the sideline to see how the […]