Mitchell: State employees want to sit down with Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker – In the Arena
ONLY ON THE BLOG: Answering today’s five OFF-SET questions is Mahlon Mitchell, a firefighter for 13 years with the Madison Fire Department and president of the Professional Firefighters of Wisconsin. (http://pffw.org/)

The Wisconsin Assembly has passed a Republican bill that would strip most state workers of the bulk of their collective-bargaining rights. Among other things, the measure would require workers - with the exception of police and firefighters - to cover more of their health care premiums and pension contributions. Collective bargaining would be limited to wages, though any pay increases beyond the inflation rate would be subject to voter approval.

The fight over the Wisconsin bill appears far from over. It still must clear the Wisconsin Senate, a step that is likely to prove far more contentious. Since the beginning firefighters have been showing their support of other state workers.

Are the state workers and Governor Scott Walker–along with Republican state lawmakers–any closer to resolving the situation?

Currently, no. Right now, Governor Walker is being somewhat unreasonable—we haven’t been able to sit down with the governor and come to a conclusion. We’d like to do that. I mean, the labor leaders have reached out to the governor’s office to reach a compromsie—with no avail. We haven’t had any luck with that.

Fourteen Democratic state senators fled to neighboring Illinois to prevent a quorum from voting on the issue. Do you have any idea how long they will stay away?

I think they will stay until the job is done and the people’s voices are heard.

Those protesting the governor’s legislation say the real goal is to kill unions in the state. The governor has said that “"Collective bargaining is a fiscal matter," and that the state is facing a $137 million budget shortfall by June 30 and a $3.6 billion gap by 2013. It seems that taxpayers are now fighting union workers—as if there’s a difference. From your point of view, what is really going on?

First all—number one—union workers are taxpayers. We are taxpayers. If you look at the fiscal matters of the budget–the health care insurance premium and and the 5.8 per cent that he’s asking for in pensions–state employees have conceded to those demands. I’m not talking about firefighters and police officers, because we’re exempt, but all the state employees have said that they don’t like it, but they’ll pay the 12.4 percent in health insurance premiums and 5.8 percent to pensions.

Now the workers have all conceded that—so he’s getting the fiscal matters that he wants/ All of the collective bargaining provisions in the bill have nothing to do with the budget or fiscal matters. So if the governor wants to help balance the budget, he has won that. W

hat people are protesting out here are workers’ rights and collective bargaining is how to maintain workers’ rights.

He’s already received concessions from public employees-that will save millions of dollars of dollars for the state government as well as local municipalities.

What will likely happen if the Republican bill eventually passes?

I think you’ll see a lot more civil unrest. Over 100,000 people came to the State Capitol in Madison. I think you will see a lot more of the same.

On Jan. 12, you became the first-ever African-American firefighters’ union state president in Wisconsin. Do you think it took a long time for that to happen? (If so, why?) And how will you attract more African-Americans into service?

For a long time, there haven’t been a lot of minorities involved in the union work, much less the union leadership. I think that’s starting to turn. Every state has a state association to represent the local unions in the state, to help advance legislation on behalf of firefighters–maintaining bargaining laws, pensions, health benefits–that’s our job.

(Being the first African-American state president) means a lot to me. I felt like it was a great opportunity, and I’m going to use the best of my abilities to get the job done. I’m also the youngest president, too. (He’s 33.)

Here is Mitchell, along with Richard Trumka of the AFL-CIO, on the show of 2-23-11.