Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
Medicare Advantage: Stronger Under the Affordable Care Act

Date 2014-03-21 Title Medicare Advantage: Stronger Under the Affordable Care Act For Immediate Release Friday, March 21, 2014 Contact press@cms.hhs.gov

Medicare Advantage: Stronger Under the Affordable Care Act

On the fourth Anniversary of the signing of the Affordable Care Act into Law, the continuing implementation of the health care law’s reforms is making Medicare stronger by improving quality, providing greater protections for beneficiaries, and ensuring better value for taxpayers.

Since the Affordable Care Act was passed:

Medicare Advantage premiums have fallen by nearly 10 percent.

Medicare Advantage enrollment has increased by 38 percent to an all-time high of over15 million beneficiaries, or nearly 30 percent of all Medicare beneficiaries.

Over half of Medicare Advantage enrollees are now in plans with 4 or more stars.

99.1 percent of beneficiaries have access to a Medicare Advantage plan in their area.

The average number of plan choices remains consistent in 2014, compared to 2013, and access to supplemental benefits, such as dental or vision, remains stable.

Over 90 percent of Medicare beneficiaries have access to a $0 premium Medicare Advantage plan.

Approximately 80 percent of Medicare beneficiaries have access to a Medicare Advantage plan with Part D drug coverage, with a yearly maximum out-of- pocket limit of $3,400 or less. All Medicare Advantage enrollees are in plans that will have a maximum out-of-pocket limit for all Medicare covered services of $6,700 or lower.

100 percent of Medicare beneficiaries have access to Medicare-covered preventive services at zero cost sharing.

CMS has taken other steps to strengthen the Medicare Advantage program that include: Allowing Medicare beneficiaries a special enrollment period (SEP) to enroll in a 5-star MA plan or Part D plan in their area anytime during the year. (SEP can be used one time each year.) Continuing the inclusion of a low performing icon to the Medicare.gov website so it’s clear to beneficiaries which plans are not performing well.



# # #