NCS Pearson, Inc.: Private Company Information
Company Overview

NCS Pearson, Inc. provides educational assessment and information solutions in the United States. The company offers assessment, instruction, and digital technology to create products and services that support educators in personalizing learning for each student; provides clinical assessment in the areas of personality, behavior, ability, achievement, speech and language, and career interests; publishes scientific assessments to hire and develop workforce; and provides standards-based teacher certification testing programs. It also provides automated solutions for text analysis and speech assessment; student information management, reporting, and analysis for K-12 education; educational asse...

NCS Pearson, Inc. provides educational assessment and information solutions in the United States. The company offers assessment, instruction, and digital technology to create products and services that support educators in personalizing learning for each student; provides clinical assessment in the areas of personality, behavior, ability, achievement, speech and language, and career interests; publishes scientific assessments to hire and develop workforce; and provides standards-based teacher certification testing programs. It also provides automated solutions for text analysis and speech assessment; student information management, reporting, and analysis for K-12 education; educational assessment products, services, and solutions for states, large school districts, and national assessments; and digital and online learning solutions. In addition, the company offers computer-based testing for information technology, academic, government, and professional; and solutions for state education agencies, PK-12 school districts, higher education, and learners and parents. NCS Pearson, Inc. was formerly known as National Computer Systems, Inc. and changed its name to NCS Pearson, Inc. in September 2000. The company was founded in 1962 and is based in Bloomington, Minnesota. As of September 20, 2000, NCS Pearson, Inc. operates as a subsidiary of Pearson Education, Inc.