Transcripts
Return to Transcripts main page

CNN NEWSROOM

President Donald Trump Rallied In Moon Township Pennsylvania To Campaign For Republican Congressional Candidate Rick Saccone. Aired 7- 8p ET

Aired March 10, 2018 - 19:00 ET

THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



[19:00:36] RYAN NOBLES, CNN HOST: And you are live in the CNN NEWSROOM. I'm Ryan Nobles in tonight for Ana Cabrera.



And that breaking news, is President Trump taking no chances? You are looking live at Moon Township, Pennsylvania where the President will rally a crowd ahead of the latest special election which is a test of his influence. Remember, it was just three months ago that Republicans suffered embarrassing defeat in Ruby Red, Alabama. And now there is a chance it could happen again. This time in rust belt district that Trump easily carried by nearly 20 points.



Republicans have poured millions of dollars into this one congressional race, but it is still a dead heat. And now it's up to President Trump to rev up the base.



We will bring you his remarks live. One thing everyone will be addressing for, will the President address the scandal involving this woman, porn Stormy Daniels. Just before he left for Pennsylvania, her name did come up.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Mr. President, did you have a relationship with the woman named stormy Daniels?



(END VIDEO CLIP)



NOBLES: That's the President ignoring a question from our White House producer Liz Landers. Daniels is suing him, of course, over a nondisclosure agreement related to alleged affair between the two of them. She spoke exclusively to CNN about the controversy. And here's just a taste.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



NICK VALENCIA, CNN CORRESPONDENT: You have gotten a lot of attention, some of it negative attention. How are you handling everything?



STORMY DANIELS, PORN STAR: I have been in the adult business for 17 years. So to make if that long in that business, you have to have a really tough skin. And so most of it rolls off my shoulders because it's an opinion, like, oh, you think I'm a whore, or you think I'm ugly or I'm old or I'm fat or my bobs are too big or too small, whatever. There's nothing along those lines that someone could say to me that I haven't heard. And so, when someone says, hey, you are a whore, I'm like that is successful whore to you.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



NOBLES: CNN's Nick Valencia will bring us more of that exclusive interview in just a moment.



But I want to begin with CNN's Jason Carroll. He is inside that airport hanger in Moon Township, Pennsylvania.



Jason, what is at stake here for Republicans and the President?



JASON CARROLL, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Well, if President knows that this race is much about him as it is the man who is actually running, Rick Saccone, that's why you have seen so much money and effort poured into this race.



President Trump has already been here to visit and endorse and pay his respects to Rick Saccone once. He is back here tonight for a second time. He will be talking tax breaks. He will be talking tariffs. Obviously, very popular here in still country.



But you know what this race really comes down to? It comes down to this is a referendum on this President. When you look at Rick Saccone, who ran on platform of being more Trump than Trump, you look at the fact that Trump carried this district by more than 20 points. But you see where the polls are now too close for comfort for the GOP, Rick Saccone, at 49 percent, challenger -- Democrat challenger Conor Lamb at 46 percent. That is just too close for comfort for a number of Republicans and that's why we have Donald Trump here again tonight. And from looking at the crowd, it is still very obvious, he can still draw a crowd. It's packed here tonight. There are still hundreds of people outside waiting to get in.



Ryan, what will come down to, on Tuesday, the night of the special election, which party can bring out more of their base? Which party is more energized? If you look at what's happening here tonight, it looks like the Republicans. But Democrats feel just as energized as well -- Ryan.



NOBLES: Yes. And Jason, I think it's worth pointing out that there isn't a whole lot of evidence that the President's popularity and support necessarily transfers to these candidates, right. He tried to do this in Alabama with his preferred candidate Luther Strange and it didn't really work out all that way.



Are Republicans on the ground concerned that even though the President may be popular, that may not be enough for Rick Saccone?



CARROLL: And exactly. If you look at the polling, I mean, it might suggest just did that. Because if you look at what Trump was able to do, carry the district by 20 percent, but you look at how tight the race is now, the question is then why is the race so tight at this point? Con Lamb's people will say because they are doing the old- fashioned type of campaigning, door to door, door knocking, whereas they say Rick Saccone has been focused more on event type of campaigning. And they say that's why the race is so close.



They also say, well, looks like might be getting an announcement right now. Donald Trump is about to take the stage. I'm going to turn it over to that. We will talk on the back (INAUDIBLE).



[19:05:18] NOBLES: Thank you, Jason Carroll.



Let's listen in now to the President Trump of the United States campaigning on behalf of Rick Saccone.



(MUSIC PLAYING)



(APPLAUSE)



(CROWD CHANTING)



DONALD TRUMP, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: I love this place. Hello Pittsburgh. Hello Pittsburgh.



You know what, do me a favor, get out on Tuesday, vote for Rick Saccone, and we can leave right now. Come on.



We don't have to spend any time. Great guy. I'm thrilled to be back in Pennsylvania where I want to school, went to college, with so many hard working American patriots. You are great people. Great.



Pennsylvania is the state that gave us American independence, American freedom. And what else? American steel. American steel.



They have been talking a little bit about steel over the last little while, haven't they? And we are saving the steel. And a lot of steel mills are now opening up because of what I did. And not all of my friends on Wall Street love it, but we love it because we know what it does.



Many plants have just announced, over the last few days, that they are expanding, opening. Steel is back. It's going to be back, too. Steel is back. And aluminum is back. Going to be back. And on November 8th, Pennsylvania is the state that gave us the 45th President of the United States.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: And I think we are doing a good job for you. I hope so. We are working hard. Not easy. That Washington D.C., have a lot of evil there, but we are getting it out, step by step. A lot of evil. A lot of bad people. A lot of fake media. Look at them. A lot of fake media. Fake, fake media.



You know it's funny, I don't know if you saw it, but we have had a problem for years with North Korea. In fact, President Obama said it was the biggest problem we had. And South Korea went there. We put very, very strong sanctions and lots of other things we have been doing right from the first day I was in office. And South Korea came to my office after having gone to North Korea, and seeing Kim Jong-un. And -- no, it's very positive. After the meeting you may do that, but now we have to be very nice, because let's see what happens because let's see what happens. Let's see what happens.



So the South Korean top people, top representatives, they walked out to the White House to a throng of these characters, big, big group. And everybody wanted to find out what happened. And they had just left North Korea.



Look, North Korea is tough. They are testing nuclear weapons. They are doing a lot of things. This should have been handled, by the way, over the last 30 years, not now. That's what it should have been handled. This should have handled and everybody will say it, too. But that's OK. Because that's what we do. We handle things. And these guys came out, and they said that your President has done a great job, I might say.



But -- well, I'll tell you we did a great job on the Olympics. President Moon of South Korea said without Donald Trump the Olympics would have been a total failure. That's true. True, you know. Might as well say it. Nobody else is going to say it, right? Might as well say it.



Now, it's a little hard to sell tickets when you think you are going to be nuked. But when North Korea called and said we would like to be in the Olympics, everybody said let's buy tickets. Let's go. I would have gone. And it became a very, very successful Olympics. Honestly, South Korea did a great job. And it was great to see North Korea going and participating. And it was a nice unity. It was a really nice thing.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: But when the South Korean representatives who just left North Korea came outside, big throng of press, they announced that North Korea, Kim Jong-un would like to meet with President Trump. This doesn't happen, you know. They say well, Obama could have done that. Trust me, he wouldn't have done it. And by the way, neither would Bush and neither would Clinton. And they had their shot and all they did was nothing.



Well, Clinton gave away billions and billions of dollars. And as soon as they made the deal, the following day they started working on making more nukes. OK. So that is not the great deal.



Ever see the story where it's 1999, I'm on "MEET THE PRESS" a show now headed by sleepy eyes Chuck Todd, he has a sleepy son of a bitch, I tell you. And they showed it this morning, 1999, and I'm talking about North Korea, you have to take them out now. And then they have Clinton saying we are pleased to announce that we have made a deal with North Korea. Well, you know how that deal turned out, right? We gave billions and billions of dollars and lots of other things. And we got nothing.



But they show me young, handsome. I say why county look like -- why county look like that today? I should have run back then, right? I should have run back then. I would have done this earlier. So -- but they had me, literally saying, I don't know if any one saw it, they played a lot. But literally saying to a very good guy, actually, but saying that we have to do something about North Korea. That was when it wasn't in vogue (ph). And then they have Clinton giving everything away. And then they show and here we are today with a man who was nuked up all over the place.



But we have been very strong and very vigilant. And now lots of good things, I think, are going to happen. But we will see. But the funny thing, so they announce that he is not going send missiles up anymore through the meetings. Well, think about that. You know, we were losing a lot of missiles sent. I wouldn't say Japan was thrilled missiles flying over Japan. They are very happy with what I'm doing. And who else could do it? I mean, honestly, when you think, they are not going to send missiles up. Think about that. They are not sending missiles up. And I believe that. I believe that. I really do. I think they want to do something. I think they want to make peace. I think it's time. And I think we have shown great strength. I think that's also important, right?



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: And I must tell you, President Xi of China has really helped us a lot. They have really helped us. And because 93 percent of the goods come in through China going into Korea, North Korea, 93 percent. So that's pretty powerful. And they have been very good. They could have done more, but that's OK. I say to them, you have been great. You could you done more. But they have done a lot. They have done more. China has done more for us than they have ever done for any other President or every done for this country, and I respect that.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: Because you need that. Stopping the flow of goods, very important. And we put sanctions on them. So they come out White House, many of these same characters, I see those places. I see those faces. And for the first two hours, it was unbelievable. This is amazing. This is incredible. I can't believe this is happening. You know, because we go like, look, a lot of people thought we were going to war, and all of a sudden they come in and they say we are going to have a meeting and there is no more missiles going off. And they want to denuclearize, nobody had heard that. Nobody thought -- but they said they are thinking about that. Who knows what's going to happen? Hey, who knows?



If it happens, if it doesn't happen, I may live fast or we may sit down and make the greatest deal for the world and for all of these countries, including, frankly, North Korea. That's what I hope happens. But the press for two hours is going, this is fantastic. This is amazing. A certain anchor on CNN fake as hell CNN, the, fake as hell CNN, the worst, so fake. Fake news.



(APPLAUSE)



[19:18:04] TRUMP: And their ratings are lousy by the way. And compared to FOX their ratings. (APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: And a certain anchor, female, said this is really something. He would go down as a truly great President if this happened. OK. But all of them are saying this is amazing. This is incredible. Did you hear what they just said? They just said de-nuke. They just said all of these things. They just said no more missiles. They said they want to meet with President Trump. They couldn't believe it, the worst of them, CNN, MSNBC, which is worse.



I think MSNBC, third grade and NBC, which is horrible. Their newscasts by the way is not doing well on NBC Network, heading down the tubes.



But listen to this, I did "the Apprentice" on NBC for 14 seasons. I made a lot of money for them. We had a big successful show. Arnold Schwarzenegger failed when he did "the Apprentice" and he was a movie star. Martha Steward failed when she did "the Apprentice." And I just kept jogging along, every year it was a big hit.



I mean, I did "the Apprentice." Made them a lot of money. Gave them good ratings when they were absolutely dying. And they do nothing but kill me. NBC is perhaps worse than CNN, I have to tell you. And MSNBC is horrible.



So here they are, they are outside. These wonderful representatives, very high level from South Korea are saying all of these things, de- nuke. And all of the things that they can't believe, because it's like five years ahead of schedule. Before this, they were saying, well that will never happen, and this will never happen, and you will never get them to stop, you know, with the missiles. They are saying all of this. Now they say they want to stop the missiles. They want to denuclearize. They want to do all of these things. And all of these people are like I can't believe it. It's unbelievable.



I said to my wife, I said, you know, it is amazing. They are really nice tonight. It's really amazing. They are all saying this is an incredible achievement. This is -- OK. Then I get up in the morning. Some time goes --. Right.



Same people, they are saying not that big of a deal. Anybody could have done it. Obama could have done it. Obama had his chance. No, no, they are saying Obama. Obama. Obama. Obama was driving you down. You take a look at those numbers before we took over. They were heading down.



So just let me say, so I wake up, so it's so nice and I'm looking forward to watching in the morning. And I go, I mean literally, they are saying, well Clinton could have met. Clinton gave away the house. They got nothing.



And Bush, Bush, Bush, another great Republican. He got us into the Middle East. That was great. We spent $7 trillion in the Middle East over 17-year period. $7 trillion as of three months ago. OK. You know what they did, that was like taking a big stone and throwing it into a hornet's nest. But we are bringing it back. ISIS, we have 98 percent of the



caliphate's land back, 98.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: So I woke up and saw all these reports that, you know, anybody could have done it. Oh, yes, sure. Anybody could have gotten President Xi, President for life. That was another one. So he is President for life. It happened two days ago.



And I was joking. I was at a roast, actually, but I was joking. And I said, President for life. That's sounds good. Maybe we are going to have to try it.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: But I'm joking. And they I was -- everybody in the room is laughing. Everybody is having a great time. I'm joking about being President for life. A couple went back, Donald Trump with his dictatorial attitude now wants to be President for life. You know, fake news. Fake. Horrible.



But you know what's going to happen, did you see the other day, 96 percent of what they do, all I do is good stuff. The economy is the best it's ever been. Your coal -- by the way, folks, some of you are in the coal world, your coal is coming back big, big, big. Your steel is coming back. Your steel is coming back.



Those plants are going to be opening. And what we have done with the 25 percent tariff can for those guys who come in and dump their steel all over the place, by the way, it's not good steel, you guys know what I mean, it is crap. But your steel is coming back. It's all coming back.



And six months prior to the election in 2020, every one of those guys, we really endorse Donald Trump. We think he has to. You know why? Because if I don't win the election, their ratings are going to go so far down, they are going to be out of business, every one of them.



Can you imagine? Can you imagine covering Bernie or Pocahontas? Pocahontas, how about that? Can you imagine these guys, some of them are actually smiling, but some of them can't stand it, honestly. Some of them, they can't take it. Can you imagine having to cover Elizabeth Warren for four years?



You know, I was watching, during the campaign, and Hillary was sitting right there, and Pocahontas was up, she was so angry - look, we love each other, the women, the men, we love each other. Everybody loves - she was so angry. I said, you know, I think she is losing the entire male audience and many of the women. She was going at it and Hillary said these things, oh my. What did I do? This is --.



But can you imagine if they had to cover some of these people that were running? I think any of them, to be honest with you. I think any of them. I would love Oprah to win. I would love to beat Oprah. I know her



weakness. No, no. I know her weakness. I know. You know, I know her very well. I was on her last show, or one of the last, I guess the last week. She had Donald Trump, and Donald Trump's family. My, my, my, we have come down a long way, haven't we?



I'm now President, and probably, you know. But think of it, I know her weakness. Wouldn't we run to run against Oprah. I would love it. I would love it. That would be a painful experience for her. So we have created three million -- thank you, darling. They are positive. I thought they were negative. They are positive.



That's always the problem. We have a room that's packed. If we have one person, and that's actually a fan. By the way, that's a fan over there, folks. But if we have one person that speaks, it's like a big deal the next day.



So we have created three million jobs since Election Day. Nobody thought that was possible. We passed the largest tax cuts and reform in American history. We have created more than 300,000 new jobs alone last month. And you saw the numbers yesterday. Yesterday's numbers, job reports was among the best numbers ever produced in the history of our country, in the history of our country.



In fact, my guys --



(CROWD CHANTING)



[19:26:39] TRUMP: In fact, my guys came into my office and they gave me the number. Because if you add the previous month, which was adjusted upward by 52,000 jobs, they were low last month, it adjusted upwards. So we are like over 360,000 jobs. And I said, let me ask you. Is that a mistake? I don't think I have seen that. If you get 160 it's good. We were at 360.



So I looked at my guys and I said is that a typographical error? What is that? But you saw it. It was one of the best reports. And you know the amazing thing? Wages went up a little bit. You haven't had wages go up in 19 years. Wages are starting to go up. Think of it, wages. I mean, how good is that, wages starting to go up.



African-American unemployment has reached the lowest level in history. The lowest.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: You know, African Americans -- and I'm very proud of that. African-American unemployment two months ago reached the lowest level in history. And then last month, it went up a little bit, right. And I made the mistake because I didn't know it went up. And it wasn't quite as good, but it wasn't historic.



So I was in a different month, and I said African unemployment is the lowest level in history. They killed me because it was the previous month. But here's the good news. The new month brought it down to the lowest level. So now it's the lowest level. (APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: Hispanic unemployment is the lowest level, think of that, Hispanic unemployment is the lowest level in history. Women, women, we love you, we love you. Hey, didn't we surprise them with women during the election? Remember, women won't like Donald Trump. I said have I really had that kind of a problem? I don't think so.



But women won't like Donald Trump. It will be a rough night for Donald Trump because the women won't come out. We got 52 percent, right, 52, right.



(CROWD CHANTING)



TRUMP: And I'm running against a woman. You know, that's not that easy. A hundred and fifty-five million people are now employed. That is -- came out this morning, that is the highest level of employment in the history of our country, 155 million. Think of that.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: While the Obama administration in its final year was losing 1,000 manufacturing jobs a month, we have created almost 300,000 new manufacturing jobs. Think of that. Think of that.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: The task for all of us, for everyone here tonight, is to make sure that this great American come-back continues full speed ahead. We are doing things that are amazing. You know, make America great again, right? Make America again, right.



So you know what the new slogan is going to be. I won't tell you. We have to keep it secret. Except did you ever see so much press, wow? You know what the new slogan will be. Because I can't use it in three years from now. I can't -- very good. I can't use it. I can't go like in four years and say here is my slogan, which is now two and a half years we have to start thinking, right. It's getting close. We can't say great America great again because I already did that. Right? Right?



(APPLAUSE)



[19:30:51] TRUMP: So, right? So our, not my slogan, our slogan, this is a team, our new slogan will be -- and you know, this is on the assumption it happens, which I'm almost positive, you can never be 100 percent sure. I never like to go too far in advance. But let's assume it's going like it is going. By the way, if we coasted for two and a half years, we did a hell of a job. You know that.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: In fact, I was telling some of the guys let's just coast because the stock market is up almost 40 percent since Election Day. Think of that, almost 40 percent. Think of that. And, by the way, that's not rich people. That's for everyone. I



mean, you have your 401(k) which are up 42 percent, 38 percent. I tell it all the time. I take pictures back with the policeman. I love the policeman. I love the fireman. They are great. And they are always coming up and saying, sir, thank you very much. My 401(k) is up 41 percent. My wife thinks I'm a genius. They think they are great investors, OK. But they up way, way up and that is good. That is really good. That's what we want. That's what we have to have. We are so proud of this country.



But our new slogan when we start running in, can you believe it, two years from now, is going to be keep America great! Keep America great!



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: But we can only do that if we elect people who are going to back our agenda and fight for our values. And that is why we have to defeat Nancy Pelosi. And Maxine Waters, a very low IQ individual. Did you ever see her? Did you ever see her? We will impeach him. We will impeach the President. But he hasn't done anything wrong. It doesn't matter, we will impeach him. She is a low IQ individual. You can't help it. She really is. We will impeach him.



But you have Maxine Waters and you have plenty of others. And I mean, Nancy Pelosi, you can't have that. And Conor Lamb, Lamb the sham, right, lamb the sham. He is trying to act like a Republican so he gets - he won't give me one vote. Look, I don't know him. Looks like a nice guy. I hear he is nice looking. I think I'm better looking than him. I do. I do. And he is slightly younger than me. Slightly. No, I heard that then I saw him. He is OK. He is all right.



Personally, I like Rick Saccone. I think he is handsome. And you did a great job on television today. I watched you, Rick. That was a great interview. That was a great interview. I appreciate it too. But he is really good.



Here is the thing. We are dealing with people that want to obstruct. They want to stop us from doing things. We put an infrastructure bill in for $1.7 billion and I hear they want to stop it. They want to stop DACA. DACA is their issue. But I'm willing to go along and get it done. We got to get it done, right? Get it done.



And besides that, you know, honestly, we need good, great workers in our country. Because I'm bringing in a lot of companies into this country. We are not going to have workers for them. We have to bring them in.



But DACA, they are here. They are good people. And the Democrats are trying to not do that. I offered a deal that was so good you can't refuse, right, like the mob pictures. I will give you a deal that is so good, you can't refuse. I made a deal. I gave a deal so good, they could not refused. And I did it because I thought they were going to refuse. And they did. And they are getting killed now by the DACA recipients. They are getting killed. But somebody like Lamb, he is never going to vote for us. He is now



saying -- and I appreciate his nice words about me. This is Trump country, right, so he has to say nice. OK. Smart. So he is saying nice things.



Here's the problem. As soon as he gets in, he is not going to vote for us. He is going to vote the party line. He has to. And if he doesn't, he has never going to chairman of a committee, you know, it's a whole crazy system. But he is going to vote the party line. He don't care about us.



But for getting your votes, he is talking about how much he likes tariffs, which is my baby, and I took a lot of heat over that. But let me tell you. All these countries now are calling up. We don't want the tariffs. What do we have to do?



European Union, they kill us. Sounds good. A lot of us came from the European Union, different countries, right? Sounds niece, they kill us on trade. So we put on tariffs and the European Unions out here. We are going to put -- you can't go higher than you are anyway. And they have trade barriers. We can't sell our farming goods in there. They totally restrict us.



So then they say we want those tariffs taken off. I said, good. Open up the barriers and get rid of the tariffs. And if you don't do that, we are going to tax Mercedes-Benz, we are going to tax BMW. You want to have money? You want to have money come into our country?



(APPLAUSE)



[19:36:42] TRUMP: And you know, the cars are really the big item. That's the big money item. So when I said that, all of a sudden, I say, wow, let's stop talking with this guy. You know, with the European Union, we are like $100 billion down because we have stupid politicians doing stupid thing, right. Think of $100 billion?



By the way, we are really - I have always said $71 billion, but Mexico, where were $130 million. That's a real number because nobody knows includes the vat tax. Nobody even knows what a vat tax is, but Mexico charge 16 percent vat tax. So nobody ever talks about it. You know, they into it.



That deal was bad the day they made it because they had a tax and we didn't. So they have a 16 percent vat tax. Nobody ever talks about it. But I talk about it. So we are either going to renegotiate NAFTA. And I said we won't put the tariffs on Mexico and Canada. And Canada is brutal. Canada is really tough. They - you know, we have a big deficit with Canada too. They send in timber. They send in steel. They send in a lot of things. But our farmers in Wisconsin are not treated well when we want to send things to them.



Hey, and I don't blame them. Why should I blame them? Because they just out smarted our politicians for decades. And I don't mean Obama. I mean all of them. Since Bush the first, and that includes - I mean, that includes a lot of territory. Frankly, Ronald Reagan, you remember, I didn't love his -- I thought



he was great. I loved his style, his attitude. He was a great cheerleader for the country. But not great on the trade. For many, many years they have been out smarted.



You know, we used to be a nation of tariffs. When other countries would come to the United States, they had to pay for the privilege of taking our product, of taking our jobs. They had to pay. They wanted to come in and sell their product, they had to pay.



Today, in China, they sell a car to us. They pay 2.5 percent. We sell a car in China, which by the way is almost impossible to do despite the tax, it's 25 percent. So why is that 25 and we are 2.5? And that's why we have a trade deficit with China of $500 billion a year. It's no good. But we are changing it. And it takes a little while. I'm there a year. A little more than a year. We are changing it.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: We have to. We have a trade deficit with all countries of the world. Listen to this number. If there are any children in this room, please closure ears. We have a trade deficit of almost $800 billion a year. Now, who makes these deals? So with Mexico -- he says Obama. Honestly, in all fairness to Obama, it's more than Obama, it's plenty of people, believe me. Plenty of Presidents allowed that to happen and people that worked for the President.



So we are going to get a lot of things straightened away. NAFTA is under work right now. And I think they are going to be very good. And you saw what I did with the tariffs. They said we don't want to pay tariffs. I said let's make a deal on NAFTA. And if you make a decent deal, a fair deal for the American worker, the American people, we will - you will have no problem with the tariff.



I said the same thing to the European Union. I said, look, you are killing us. We are losing $100 billion a years. You are not accepting our product. They are not accepting our farm product. I want to help the farmers and they don't accept it. And I said open up your countries, that's countries, they banded together. Why did they band together? To screw the United States on trade. That's OK. They are allowed, you know.



Actually, here it would be called a monopoly. Wouldn't be allowed. But all those countries got together in order to do well on trade with the United States. People don't know that. You know, European Union, sounds the European Union, sound so innocent. It's not innocent. They are very tough. They are very smart. We lose $100 billion a year. They sell stuff into us, we charge them practically nothing. We sell things into them, number one you can't get it through the barriers. They have artificial barrier, that's not a monetary barrier. That's other things. Environmental, they come up with things you wouldn't believe. But we can't get our product in there. So I said open up your barriers, get rid of your tariffs and we will do this. We will have a nice, fair open. And if you don't do that, that's OK, and that's where the cars come in. So we have a lot of work to do. But I need people that can help me.



Tan this guy can really help me. This guy can really help me.



(APPLAUSE)



[19:41:42] TRUMP: Rick Saccone. And I have him -- and he has a tough race. And he has got a tough race. I think we won by 22 points.



And, Rick, you know, look. It's a crazy time out there. It's crazy. But I think the Republicans, you know, you never hear this, so I have been, in fact I think she is here, Karen Handle. Where is Karen? Was she here? She was here. Where is she? Did I do a good job in Atlanta?



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: So, Karen, is this sort of like around us -- Karen was down. She started off with a whole group of people. It's different voting. She had running for Congress in Atlanta, the Atlanta area, right. So they had a guy, a young guy who spent $34 million, that's still the all-time world record, right, running to be a congressman. They make $150,000 a year. They spent $34 million. There is something going on, right.



So - I didn't know you were here. Somebody said you would be here. That's so great, Karen.



So Karen was running with many Republicans. It was like 14, 13 Republicans, which is crazy. And Karen was the one I wanted, but that's a lot of Republicans. So Karen ended up with about 14 or 15. This guy ended up -- he was 58, 58, which meant he would have won the election. There was no more runoff, right.



And we came after him, right. We came after that guy. And we found out a couple of like minor things. He didn't live in the district, I heard. They said, sir, he doesn't live in the district but no one cares about that. I said really? Let's try it on the voter.



So anyway, you have to get 50 in which case the election is over. If you get less than 50 you have a runoff and you take the top two. So Karen was fantastic. But she was with so many Republicans, and he was essentially the only Democrat. So, I brought him down in a period of four days, I got no credit for this from these guys, brought him down from 58 to 48. So now he is in a runoff with Karen.



So think of it, he's at 48. She is at 15. By the time Karen and I finish with this guy, $32 million he spent. And she spent slightly less than that. OK. She spent like about $29 million less, right. She spent $29 million less. But by the time we finished the winner easily by five points was Karen Handle.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: And they loved the job she is doing. And I think you are going to have a good victory now. But the people have gotten to know you and they love you in your area. And hope I don't have to make speeches all over the place like last night.



But we need Karen and we need our congressman Saccone. We have to have him. We have to have him. Nancy Pelosi, Maxine Waters, the only chance she has got to become speaker is electing Democrats. And, you know, we don't have a big margin. It's just a very small. But if you -- I mean, they are doing a number in your state. You see what they are doing with the congressional districts? They are doing a number. And hopefully the United States Supreme Court will take this place, because this is horrible what they have done.



They had state judges that are Democrats change your voting districts. What kind of stuff is that? What kind of stuff?



(CROWD CHANTING)



[19:45:08] TRUMP: And it's going to make it very hard for Republicans that are great Republicans that would easily win. And now it's all changed. And it's very unfair. Let's see what happens. It's litigation. It's in court. Let's see what happens. But it's very unfair.



The people of Pittsburgh cannot be conned by this guy Lamb. Just can't do it. Because he is, again, he has never going to vote for us. He can say I love President Trump. I agree with everything he says. You know what, I don't want to meet him. Because anybody that says that I might like him and then Rick is going to be very angry at me, right.



No, he is going around saying that. But he is not going to do that stuff. He is not going to do it. There is no way he is going for the things that --. He says I'm not going to vote for Nancy Pelosi. He is not. Now, that could be possible. But most people are. Most people are. But he says he's not going to do that. He is going to do this for steel. He is going to do that.



Well, the Democrats are opposed to those things. He is weak on crime. He is weak on the border. He is weak on the second amendment. But all of a sudden he got strong. And, by the way, in terms of abortion, take a look at his record. Take a look. It's amazing. He has come back. Take a look at his record. Because where his record is, that's where he is going.



So Pelosi's party in Congress is full of people who tell their voters one thing during the election and they go to Washington and vote lock step. You know, the one thing I noticed about them, and I have been there now for 14 months. Fourteen months, can you believe --? Have we done a lot?



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: We have done more than any first term administration in the history of our country. We have. You take a look at what we have done - regulation, tax cuts, federal judges, a great, great Supreme Court. Justice Gorsuch, great.



Look what we have done. Look what we have done. And you know what, we passed the biggest tax cut in the history of our



country. Didn't get one Democrat vote. Didn't get one. And by the way, how good is that kicking in? Remember? Remember? We passed it. We didn't get one Democrat vote. Think of that. Not one. And now they are all a little nervous, that's OK. But we didn't get one.



And you know what helped, when AT&T; and the big companies came this started paying thousands and thousands of dollars in bonuses to, you know, millions of people. I think it's up to five million people now. And that wasn't in the schedule, but they are paying the money out and the people are getting the money. And I will tell you what? We are so proud of that.



But we also got rid of the individual mandate from Obamacare which basically guts out Obamacare. That will be next. That will be next. That's where you pay a lot of money for the privilege of not getting healthcare. OK. How do you like that one? How that one made it through court, I will made it through twice.



But you pay a lot of money for the privilege. So we get rid of the individual mandate. Nobody even talks about that. Because the tax bill was so massive, bigger than Reagan, bigger than -- biggest one ever done. And you know, we are calling it tax reform. This is where a nonpolitician like me is good because they had a name. And for 40 years they couldn't pass anything. And I kept saying, how is it possible to not pass tax cuts?



Sir, I don't know. We just can't pass. It has been Reagan was last one that did a big bill and we just can't pass.



I said, well, what's the problem? Well, sir, the tax reform is not easy.



I said wait a minute. Do you call it tax reform or do you call it tax cuts?



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: Right? And he said, no, sir, we call it tax reform because we are doing a lot of reforming.



I said, look, people don't know what reform is, neither do I. People want tax cuts. They don't know? They don't know. They want tax cuts.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: They want tax cuts. And, honestly, the word reform, it could mean you are going to triple your taxes. We are going to reform taxes and -- I said nobody knows what it means. It could be really bad.



So they said, you know, we never thought of that. This is after 40 years. Nobody ever thought of it. So they said could you come up with a name? And I did. You know what it was called, it was called the tax cut, cut, cut bill. But I must tell you, and on this I think they were right, the politicians thought that was a little hockey, so we call it the tax U.S. tax cut and jobs bill, which is nice.



(APPLAUSE)



[19:50:16] TRUMP: And we got it passed! We had unanimous, unanimous in the Republican Party and unanimous for the Democrats. And, by the way, you are going to have a great man running as a Republican for this Senate.



While we are here, Rick, we should say it, right? Sweet Lou, right? He is going to be great. He has got a chance. He is with you all the way. He loves this state. He loves the people. And we will be out fighting for him very, very hard. OK? You know who that is. You know. But he is going to be running and he is running already. He is running very hard. He is going to be fantastic. So we passed the tax cut. We didn't have one Democrat vote. Think of that. So I think they are going to have the problem.



Now, historically, after a Presidential election the other side like always wins. And I have told you, you have heard the story because people become complacent. You had a victory. You elected your President. You like it but you like me? I think so, right? I like you, too. I love you.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: I love you.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: So is there any more fun than in a Trump rally?



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: You know, a lot of times I have to do like readings. We will pass an environmental bill and they want me to go to a - I'm very spoiled, you know. If I go to a small place and they have 2,000 people it is like, why don't we open a stadium or something? You know, we are spoiled.



Other guys, they go out, they get 50 people and they are satisfied. We need crowds like this. In fact, the fire marshal was fantastic. You know, they had a lot of people out. And he is a great guy. I don't want to get him in trouble. But he opened up those doors and he has got guys and said, and he let most of the people that were for, you know, they were sent away. He got - look at those corners. Now, those cameras are never going to cover those corners. They are never going to cover the corners.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: They never going to cover. They never show the crowds. They never like to show the crowds, ever. You know, the only thing is the noise because you can't -- it sounds like a Penn State football game. IT sounds like an Ohio State football game, right. You can't --.



(CROWD CHANTING) TRUMP: I will say to friends - I will say to friends, did you see my speech last night? And first, I have to say, how good was I? How good? And they say, good. I say, did they show the crowd? No, they didn't. He said, but you know what, I could tell by the noise that crowd was big. You can't hide that. You can't hide that.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: Thank you.



So the Democrats are the party of sanctuary cities. Explain that one, right? They like to protect criminals. They like to protect MS-13. This is the party -- how about that? How about that? How about ICE? These ICE guys are tough as hell. They go in and they are not playing games.



You know, the only thing, I hate to say this, not to so politically correct, but the only thing these gang members understand is toughness. I hate to say it. They are not interested in genius. They are not interested - they are interested in somebody that's tougher than them. That's what - and we have the toughest people you have ever seen. And they went out to Long Island. And they grabbed them by the neck and threw them into the patty wagon. We are cleaning out. We are doing it.



CROWD: Build that wall! Build that wall! Build that wall! Build that wall!



TRUMP: We are building the wall, 100 percent, 100 percent, 100 percent.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: You know, the President of the Mexico, who I think is a really nice guy. Because, you know, it had been build a wall. And I can't get through his speech without somebody - because I was all set to say build a wall and then these guys start screaming build a wall. Well, we are building it.



But the President of Mexico calls. And you now, I told you, we are in the midst of negotiating NAFTA. So we have a little ticking point. He called up and respectfully because he really is a high quality guy. And he called up. He goes, Mr. President, we would like you to make a statement that Mexico will not pay for the wall. I said, are you crazy? Do you think I'm going to be --? I'm not making that statement. He said, well, you have to. I said, is it a deal breaker? He said, yes. I said bye, bye. We are not making a deal. There is no way I'm making that.



Now, what I will say, and when I told him is, President, don't worry, it all comes out in the wash. We are going to put it into the NAFTA agreement. Nobody is going to be talking too much about it. It will - because we are going to make a much better NAFTA, do we have to?



When we lose $130 billion with Mexico, I think we can do a little better than that, right? The wall. You know what the wall is? It is this. You don't even notice it. It's like a little asterisk on the bottom. OK.



So he said to me that. And I said, no. We can't do that. We actually broke it up. He was going to come to Washington. No way I'm going to say anything like that. But I will say we will build it. We have to build the wall. We have to build the wall. And the Democrats are holding it back.



You know, we had a deal, $25 billion. And by the way, if I get $25 billion for the wall, you are going to have a lot of change. You are going to have a lot of change.



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: I have got - I have got all the big builders, the best ones in the world. I know the best builders, you know. We want to use the good builders, not the bad ones. Save a lot of money on the airplanes. We save a lot of money on Air Force One. $1.4 billion we saved, $1.4 billion. Still too expensive. It's crazy. It's crazy. But we saved a lot of money. I got Boeing in and we had - we saved $1.4 billion. OK? I mean, that's worth a ten-minute meeting, right? I don't care how big the United States is. But we are going to build the wall and we have to build the wall for people, for gangs, for drugs.



The drugs, there has never been a problem like we have right now. And by the way, like the world has with drugs. And you know what? We fill up these councils. They all want to be on councils. They call them blue ribbon councils where we take Melania -- great, great first lady. She's great. She's great



(APPLAUSE)



TRUMP: She is great. You think her life is so easy, folks? Not so easy. She is a great first lady. But we put Melania and other people on this blue ribbon committee.



Do you think the drug dealers that kill thousands of people during their lifetime, do you think they care who is on a blue ribbon committee? The only way to solve the drug problem is through toughness. When you catch a drug dealer, you got to -- you got to put him away for a long time.



When I was in China and other places, by the way, I said, Mr. President, do you have a drug problem? No, no, no, we do not. I said, huh. Big country, 1.4 billion people, right. Not much of a drug problem. I said what do you attribute that to? Well, the death penalty.



Hey, if you are a drug dealer and you know you are going to get caught and you know that you are going to kill people. You are killing our kids. They are killing our kids. They are killing our kids. They are killing our families. They are killing our workers. You know, we have a hard time of the 100 million people, the special people, they are great people. They want to work. We have a hard time. A lot of them can't qualify to work in these factories. Chrysler is coming back in. You saw that. From Mexico to Michigan,



we have companies coming back to the United States. You haven't seen that. I used to tell that was going to happen. But now it's happening.



But a problem, a lot of people can't qualify because of drugs. But I said to the President, I said, so, you don't have much of a problem? No. And they had a problem. You know, if you go back 200 years ago and they know all about drugs. It was devastating to China, the opium. Devastating. It destroyed China.



And I'm not going to let it destroy us. And there was an article in one of the main papers. Maybe it was the failing "New York Times." (INAUDIBLE). And I don't know where they get it. Because honestly, I don't know that the United States frankly is ready for it. They should be ready for it. But at a minimum you have to give long, tough sentences.



But if you go to Singapore, I said, Mr. President, what happens with your drugs? No. We don't have a problem, President. I said, really? We have a zero tolerance. And he is not playing games. These guys don't play games. You know, we have a different type of people. They don't play games. I said, how are you doing on drugs? No problem.



I said what do you mean, no problem? That's entertainment, you know, lot of things are happening. So what do you mean no problem? We have a zero tolerance policy?



What does that mean?