Transcripts
Return to Transcripts main page

STATE OF THE UNION

Constitutional Crisis?; Interview With Sen. Kamala Harris (D- CA); The Trump Administration Faces Escalating Threats From Global Hot Spots; Democrats Say Trump Is Triggering A "Constitutional Crisis"; Life Imitates Art in Final Season Of "Veep". Aired 9-10a ET

Aired May 12, 2019 - 09:00 ET

THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED.



[09:00:23]



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



JAKE TAPPER, CNN ANCHOR (voice-over): On the brink? Defying President Trump, North Korea test-fires more missiles.



DONALD TRUMP, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: We will see what happens.



TAPPER: Iran signals it will return to nuclear production. And the president follows through on a threat to escalate a trade war.



TRUMP: I want to get along with China, because I'm smart.



TAPPER: Is the Trump doctrine helping or hurting the U.S.?



And prosecutor power. The president expects to face Joe Biden on the 2020 debate stage, but another top candidate says she will be the one debating President Trump, and she will use her courtroom skills to make her case against him.



SEN. KAMALA HARRIS (D-CA), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: I know how to fight, and I know how to win.



TAPPER: My exclusive sit-down with California Senator Kamala Harris next.



Plus: constitutional crisis? Democrats widen their probes into the president and his associates. But, in response to their subpoenas, the Trump administration says, no.



REP. NANCY PELOSI (D-CA): Trump is goading us to impeach him.



TAPPER: What's next in the stalemate between two branches of government?



(END VIDEOTAPE)



TAPPER: Hello, and happy Mother's Day.



I'm Jake Tapper in Washington, where the state of our union is wondering how this is all going to play out. President Trump is in Washington this morning. And he's facing



standoffs at home and abroad. On the international stage, the president is confronting escalating crises in four global hot spots, Iran, North Korea, Venezuela, and with China, after negotiators failed to reach a deal Friday to avert a potential trade war.



Back at home, the president is up and tweeting about the Russia investigation already today after a week in which his standoff with Democrats in Congress seemed to reach a new level, as the White House looks to block Democratic oversight at every turn.



Both the speaker of the House and chairman of the House Judiciary Committee are openly calling this a constitutional crisis.



But the White House appears to be betting that stonewalling Congress will not hurt the president politically, all this as the president is clearly feeling the pressure on 2020.



And, this morning, we're bringing you a special exclusive interview with one of the top Democratic presidential candidates.



We went to Oakland, California, and sat down with Senator Kamala Harris to talk about her White House run.



(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)



TAPPER: House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, Jerry Nadler, they say that we're in a constitutional crisis...



HARRIS: Yes.



TAPPER: ... because the justice Department is not turning over the full unredacted Mueller report and the underlying materials.



HARRIS: Mm-hmm.



TAPPER: Do you agree? Are we in a constitutional crisis?



HARRIS: I think we probably are.



I mean, listen, a constitutional crisis is defined as generally when the system that we set up with checks and balances, when each of the independent co-equal branches of the government fails to perform its duties.



And I think that we are seeing a breakdown of responsibilities. We saw it last week in the Barr hearing. We're seeing it in terms of a failure to compile its subpoenas.



You know, now, being a member of the United States Congress in the Senate, I am seeing up close where the -- there is a failure to respect the significance of Congress' duty to perform a role of oversight over the administration, over the agencies.



I'm seeing a failure to appreciate the importance of testifying before Congress in a way that is straightforward and truthful.



So I think, yes, I think it is fair to say that we are looking at a crisis, not only of confidence, but potentially a constitutional crisis, yes.



TAPPER: President Trump, as you know, slapped higher tariffs on Chinese exports on Friday morning, dialing up pressure for a trade deal with the Chinese.



HARRIS: Yes.



TAPPER: Now, your leader, Chuck Schumer, tweeted earlier this week saying -- quote -- "Hang tough on China, President Trump. Don't back down."



Do you agree with Leader Schumer that President Trump is doing the right thing when it comes to the Chinese?



HARRIS: I think that part of the failure of this administration on foreign policy as general matter is that this president and this administration have failed to understand that we are stronger when we work with our allies on every issue, China included.



TAPPER: China is an ally?



HARRIS: No, meaning working with our allies to address China, in terms of the threat that it presents to our economy, the threat it presents to American workers and American industries.



But we -- but, instead, this president seems to believe and has a preference for conducting trade policy, economic policy, foreign policy by tweet. And that's irresponsible. It is a display of a president who thinks that -- apparently, that unilateral action is better than working with the friends to address issues that not only impact our country, but impact the globe.



[09:05:00]



And I think it puts us in a weaker position.



TAPPER: As a more broad manner, President Trump, on the campaign trail 2015-'16 and as president, says, trade deals in this country, by Democrat presidents and by Republican presidents, have been too tilted towards helping corporations and helping Wall Street and too tilted against the middle class and the manufacturing sector.



Do you disagree with that premise?



HARRIS: I believe that there is no question that, over many decades, the rules have been written in a way that have been to the exclusion of lifting up the middle class and working people in America and working families in America.



And, in fact, that's why I'm proposing that one of the things that we do to address that is that we reform the tax code in a way that we'll give middle-class working families that are making less than $100,000 a year a $6,000 tax credit that they can receive it up to $500 a month.



TAPPER: But on the subject of trade, it doesn't sound like you disagree with the president on his premise, on his general argument that the middle class keeps getting screwed by these trade deals, and he's trying to renegotiate better deals.



HARRIS: I believe that we have got to have policy that better protects American workers and American industries.



I believe very strongly that we have to have policies that understand that, as it relates to the issue of trade, as it relates to the issue of various countries, including China, which we just talked about, that we have to supply and equip the American worker with the skills and the resources that they need to thrive, not only survive, but thrive.



TAPPER: Trade has been drawing some dividing lines in the Democratic field, when it comes to NAFTA, for example.



Bernie Sanders, one of your opponents, attacked Joe Biden, another one of your opponents, last week, saying -- quote -- "I helped lead the fight against NAFTA. Biden voted for NAFTA."



Who is right on NAFTA, Biden or Sanders?



HARRIS: Well, I'm not going to choose between the two of them.



(LAUGHTER)



HARRIS: But I will tell you...



TAPPER: Well, would you have voted for NAFTA?



HARRIS: I would not have voted for NAFTA, and because I believe that we can do a better job to protect American workers.



I also believe that we need to do a better job in terms of thinking about the priorities that should be more apparent now perhaps than they were there, which are issues like climate, the climate crisis, and what we need to do to build into these trade agreements.



TAPPER: We saw another deadly school shooting this week...



HARRIS: Yes.



TAPPER: ... in Colorado.



Cory Booker has called for creating federal gun licenses, which would require fingerprints, an interview and a gun safety course. Opponents of this say it would essentially create a way for the government to -- to track gun owners.



Would you support a federal gun license?



HARRIS: I like the idea. But, you know Jake, I'm going to tell you, on this issue of the need



for gun safety laws, we're not at any loss for good ideas. People have been having good ideas for decades on this issue.



What we're at a loss is for people in Congress to have the courage to do something. We -- and, you know, I'm going to tell you, on this subject, we're not waiting for the worst tragedy, because we've seen the worst of tragedies, including what just happened this week, and seen the heroism of a child, who we now mourn his loss, his parents' only child.



We're not waiting for tragedies, and we are not waiting for good ideas. Universal background checks, check, really good idea. You might want to know if someone has been proven to be a danger to themselves or others before they can buy a lethal weapon.



What we're waiting for is Congress to have the courage to act. And so let me tell you what I'm proposing. I'm proposing, one, that if, by my 100th day in office when elected president of the United States, the United States Congress fails to put a bill on my desk to sign with all of the good ideas or any of the good ideas, then I'm prepared to take executive action, because that's what's needed, action.



TAPPER: Executive action to do what?



HARRIS: To do, specifically, for anyone who sells more than five guns a year, they will be required to perform background checks on the people they sell them to.



And this will be the most comprehensive background check policy that has ever been had in our country thus far. I am prepared...



TAPPER: Can that be done by executive order?



HARRIS: Yes. Yes, it can.



I'm also prepared to say and to direct the ATF to remove and take away the licenses of gun dealers who fail to follow the law.



And, Jake, 90 percent of the guns that are associated with crime have been sold by 5 percent of the gun dealers. We need to take their licenses away.



TAPPER: I think the last time I saw you was the town hall.



HARRIS: Mm-hmm.



TAPPER: I want to ask you about something you said that night.



You said on stage with me in January that, when it comes to private insurance -- quote -- "Let's eliminate all of that. Let's move on."



HARRIS: Yes.



TAPPER: Now, you later said we don't need to get rid of all private insurance. So...



HARRIS: But let's clear that up. Wait. Jake, OK.



[09:10:00]



TAPPER: Which is -- which is it, exactly?



HARRIS: When we were together...



TAPPER: Yes.



HARRIS: And you will remember -- and roll the tape, please.



(LAUGHTER)



TAPPER: Yes, we can roll the tape.



HARRIS: That...



TAPPER: Well, you support the Bernie Sanders bill, which essentially gets rid of insurance.



HARRIS: I support Medicare for all, but I really do need to clear up what happened on that stage.



TAPPER: Yes, OK.



HARRIS: It was in the context of saying, let's get rid of all the bureaucracy. Let's get all of the waste...



TAPPER: Oh, not the insurance companies?



HARRIS: No. That's not what I meant. I know it was interpreted that way.



If you watch the tape, I think you'll see that there are obviously many interpretations of what I said. What I meant is, let's get rid of the bureaucracy.



As it relates to Medicare...



TAPPER: But the bill gets rid of insurance.



HARRIS: But -- no, no, no, no, it does not get rid of insurance. It does not get rid of insurance.



And, listen -- and let me just tell you where I am. Let's tell you where I am.



TAPPER: OK. All right.



HARRIS: I support Medicare for all. It is my preferred policy.



TAPPER: As a principle, you mean, not Bernie Sanders' bill?



HARRIS: I support the bill.



TAPPER: OK.



HARRIS: I support the bill. I...



TAPPER: Well, because the bill gets rid of private insurance for everything that...



HARRIS: It doesn't get rid of supplemental insurance for...



TAPPER: Right, for cosmetic surgery, but for all...



HARRIS: So, it doesn't get rid of all insurance.



TAPPER: OK. It doesn't get rid of all insurance.



HARRIS: OK. Right.



TAPPER: ... but for all essential health care benefits.



HARRIS: But -- but why? Ask the question, why?



The question -- the answer to that question is because Medicare for all and the vision of what it will be includes an expansion of coverage. So, Medicare for all will include vision. It will include dental. It will include hearing aids.



TAPPER: There are a lot of members of unions, for example, who like their private insurance...



HARRIS: Right. Right.



TAPPER: ... and the plans that have been negotiated on their behalf and don't want that replaced.



HARRIS: Right.



Well, listen, let me just tell you something. I completely agree with those members of organized labor who have negotiated for plans and have, in those negotiation processes -- processes, often give enough what could have been higher wages in exchange for a higher coverage for health care.



TAPPER: Right.



HARRIS: And we have got to -- we have to address that. It's a legitimate concern which must be addressed.



TAPPER: The bill also says -- quote -- "Every individual who's a resident of the United States is entitled to benefits for health care services under the Senate," not every individual who's a citizen, but every individual who's a resident.



HARRIS: Mm-hmm.



TAPPER: So you support giving universal health care and Medicare for all to people who are on this country illegally?



HARRIS: Let me just be very clear about this. I'm opposed to any policy that would deny in our country any human being from access to public safety, public education, or public health, period.



(END VIDEOTAPE)



TAPPER: Stay right there.



We have more of our exclusive interview with Democratic presidential candidate Senator Kamala Harris, including why she says this:



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



HARRIS: I'm going to win. And I fully intend to win.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



[09:16:25]



TAPPER: Welcome back to STATE OF THE UNION. I'm Jake Tapper.



We are back with more of my exclusive interview with presidential candidate Senator Kamala Harris and her response to questions some progressive voters are raising about her record.



(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)



TAPPER: Let me ask you about your record as a prosecutor.



HARRIS: Sure.



TAPPER: This -- the truancy initiative is something that you have had to answer some questions about...



HARRIS: Yes.



TAPPER: ... which threatened prosecution for parents of students who miss too much school.



You told a story in a 2010 speech...



HARRIS: Uh-huh.



TAPPER: ... about a homeless single mother with three kids working two jobs. You said, under your truancy initiative, her children's attendance improved. And you dismissed charges that you had filed against her.



HARRIS: Yes, that's right.



TAPPER: Now, can you explain to people who are skeptical...



HARRIS: Yes. TAPPER: ... why threatening her with jail time was the right way to



handle that problem?



HARRIS: Well, it was more about getting her the services that she need that she didn't know was -- that she needed and didn't know was available. It was more about putting pressure on the school district to do its job.



I learned that over 80 percent of the prisoners in the United States are high school dropouts. I learned that a black man between the age of, I think it's 20 and 25, if a high school dropout was two-thirds likely to be in jail, have been in jail or dead.



And so, looking at the issue, I realized that there is a very direct connection between the issue of truancy and who will end up in the criminal justice system.



So, the first thing we did is go to the school district and say, what are you doing to get these parents the support they need, to get their children to school every day? What are we doing as a community?



And it is because we put those resources into this initiative and put the spotlight that I was able to bring to it, frankly, we were able to improve attendance by over 30 percent. Not one parent was sent to jail.



TAPPER: Well, you pushed for a statewide law, right, a statewide truancy law.



HARRIS: And the state...



TAPPER: And people were thrown into jail under that law.



HARRIS: Not by me.



TAPPER: Not by you, but you supported the law.



HARRIS: I supported the law that -- this is what I supported, and our initiative was that in the -- and here's -- we're going to get in the weeds, but give me the patience of time to explain it.



When I was looking at the issue of truancy, I realized that, when we define truancy, we defined it as three or four unexcused absences, you're truant.



I was seeing kids that were missing up to 80 days of a 180-day school year. So, my point was, why isn't the education code recognizing that?



What ended up happening is, by changing the education code, it also changed -- it, by reference then, was in the penal code. And then that was an unintended consequence.



And if I could do it over again, I would have made sure that it would not have increased penalties or the ability to prosecute anywhere in the state to prosecute parents, because that was never the intention. And it was never anything that I did.



TAPPER: Do you think that -- I mean, you hear this more than I do, but I hear from Democratic voters, progressives out there, they say -- they learn a little bit. They like you. They hear about you. They like you. They learn more.



And then they say, she's a cop.



HARRIS: Look...



TAPPER: And, now, look, where I come from, that is not pejorative, but, in some communities, it is.



HARRIS: Well, I -- listen, this is how I feel about it.



I'm acutely aware of the impact of the criminal justice system on communities, both in terms of what the criminal justice system can do to rightly make sure there is consequence and accountability when a woman is raped, when a child is molested, when one human being kills another human being.



And I will never apologize for prosecuting people for those crimes.



I am also acutely aware that we have a criminal justice system in America that is deeply flawed, has often been informed by bias, and is in need of severe reform, which is why my entire career, I have worked to do both.



[09:20:05]



TAPPER: We're just 30 miles away from the Facebook headquarters.



HARRIS: Yes.



TAPPER: Chris Hughes, the co-founder of Facebook, published an op-ed in the "Times" this week calling for the tech giant to be broken up because it's a -- quote -- "leviathan that crowds out entrepreneurship and restricts our consumer choice."



Do you think Facebook is a monopoly? Should it be broken up?



HARRIS: I think that Facebook has experienced massive growth and has prioritized its growth over the best interests of its consumers, especially on the issue of privacy.



There is no question in my mind that there needs to be serious regulation, and that that has not been happening. There needs to be more oversight. That has not been happening.



My -- especially during my years as attorney general of California, one of my greatest areas of focus on this issue has been on consumer privacy. They have not been adequately informing consumers about where they are relinquishing their privacy.



TAPPER: So, they're -- they haven't been a great corporate model, but does that mean... HARRIS: But it's not just that they haven't been a great corporate model. They...



TAPPER: Do you think they should be broken up, is my question.



HARRIS: Yes, I think we have to seriously take a look at that, yes.



I mean, when you look at the issue, they're essentially a utility. Like, there are very few people that can actually get by and be involved in their communities or society or in whatever their profession without somehow, somewhere using Facebook.



There -- it's very difficult for people to be engaged in any level of commerce without -- so, we have to recognize it for what it is. It is essentially a utility that has gone unregulated. And as far as I'm concerned, that's got to stop.



TAPPER: Anita Hill wrote in a new opinion piece this week that -- quote -- "If the Senate Judiciary Committee, led then by Mr. Biden, had done its job, the cultural shift we saw in 2017 after MeToo might have begun in 1991."



I know MeToo has been an animating issue for you.



HARRIS: Yes.



TAPPER: We've talked about it before.



HARRIS: Yes.



TAPPER: Do you agree that Biden didn't do his job and, if he had done it properly, maybe we would have had this reckoning whenever -- 25 years ago?



HARRIS: I think there is no question that that committee did not do right by Anita Hill or any of the other women who were...



(CROSSTALK)



TAPPER: That committee led by Joe Biden.



HARRIS: ... who were prepared to come forward. He said it himself. And I agree with him.



TAPPER: Let me ask you a question.



I've been speaking to a lot of your supporters and a lot of your would-be supporters who like you, people who like you.



And do you want to hear a criticism, a constructive criticism?



HARRIS: Sure. I...



(CROSSTALK)



TAPPER: ... that they have offered? HARRIS: Yes, of course I...



TAPPER: You don't really have a choice. You're in front -- you have a camera in front of you.



HARRIS: Well, but I -- right, but the whole nation is watching.



(LAUGHTER)



HARRIS: But of course I do. Well, I will.



TAPPER: They like the prosecution -- these are Democrats.



They like the prosecution you offer of President Trump.



HARRIS: Mm-hmm.



TAPPER: They don't know that you have the satisfactory answer for why you. Why should you be the nominee?



HARRIS: Mm-hmm.



TAPPER: Yes, we get it, Trump shouldn't be the president.



HARRIS: Yes.



TAPPER: But why should Kamala Harris, Senator Kamala Harris, be the nominee?



HARRIS: Right.



TAPPER: Why should you be the nominee?



HARRIS: Well, let's start with the fact that I love my country. I love my country. And we are better than this.



But let's be more specific. We need on that stage someone who has a proven track record of leadership. And I say what I'm about to say not as a criticism of any of my colleagues and friends who are also running, but we need someone on that stage who has a proven track record of leadership.



I have served as a leader in local government, in state government, and in federal government. And this has to be more than somebody who can just give a beautiful speech. It has to be somebody who knows how to lead.



TAPPER: You've been critical of the pundits who have been talking about electability. And maybe some people think it's a code word for, we need a white man.



I don't -- you haven't come out and said it that directly, but -- but some people think that way.



Why are you more electable than the others? Why will you have a more -- a stronger likelihood of beating Donald Trump? As you know, when you go out there, the one thing Democrats want more than anything is somebody who will win.



HARRIS: I'm going to win. And I fully intend to win.



And I will tell you that the voters, in my experience, are smarter than a lot of folks given them credit for. The voters -- and I know this in my experience, having run for the offices I've run for, when I was the first in every one of those positions, when there was no one like me who had done the job.



And people would say, oh, they're not ready for that. Oh, no one like her has done it before. Oh, it's not your time. Oh, it's going to be a lot of hard work.



And I didn't listen.



And, as far as I'm concerned, my track record on this issue tells me the voters are smarter than hearing and listening to all that noise. What they want is, they want somebody who has a genuine interest in representing them, as opposed to self-interest.



(END VIDEOTAPE)



[09:25:03]



TAPPER: CNN polled potential Democratic voters about which candidate they want to hear more about.



Their top answer was Senator Kamala Harris. Harris will open up about her family and her mom next.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



TAPPER: Welcome back to STATE OF THE UNION. I'm Jake Tapper.



More now from our exclusive interview with presidential candidate Senator Kamala Harris.



We met the California senator in Oakland, where she was born. And, given that today is Mother's Day week, we asked her about the influence of her mother, who passed away in 2009.



(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)



TAPPER: This Mother's Day weekend, when you're back in Oakland, you must think a lot about your mom...



HARRIS: Yes, I do.



TAPPER: ... and miss her.



HARRIS: I do a lot, a lot.



TAPPER: How did she inform how you see the world, how you live?



HARRIS: Oh, my mother had the strongest influence on my life of anybody. [09:30:01]



And, you know, my mother was -- she was all of 5 feet tall.



(LAUGHTER)



HARRIS: But if you ever met her, you would have she was 7 feet tall.



And she was the most loving and nurturing and tough...



(LAUGHTER)



HARRIS: All of that in one.



TAPPER: Right.



HARRIS: She was someone who -- she had two goals in her life. She was a breast cancer researcher. And her goals in life were just two.



They very direct, to raise her two daughters and breast cancer.



TAPPER: Now you're a mom, a stepmom.



HARRIS: Yes, I am.



TAPPER: And what do they call you, Momala?



HARRIS: Momala.



TAPPER: You wrote an essay about this, about the stuff -- your stepchildren.



HARRIS: Yes. Yes. I love those kids.



Yes, we decided that -- it was a collective decision that the word stepmother has been adapted by Disney and others...



TAPPER: Right, not necessarily a positive.



HARRIS: ... in a way that is not necessarily a great word.



TAPPER: Yes.



HARRIS: And so they call me Momala.



And we have -- and so we will be together for Mother's Day. And they are so spectacular. And they're just -- they -- they're now -- Cole is now working. He graduated college. Ella is still in college.



And during these moments of the campaign, it's just always wonderful to step out of the campaign and step back into real life. And the thing I enjoy to do most of anything is cook Sunday family dinner and just have everybody around.



TAPPER: And you get along well with your husband's ex-wife? You...



HARRIS: I do. We have a very modern family. We joke that it's almost too functional.



(LAUGHTER)



HARRIS: Kerstin, who is my husband's ex-wife, but my friend, we joke that it might be a little bit more comfortable if it were slightly dysfunctional.



TAPPER: Right.



HARRIS: But it's actually highly functional.



In fact, for Thanksgiving dinner, she came to Thanksgiving dinner with her mother and my family. And there we were, one big old family and a very long table.



TAPPER: That's nice.



HARRIS: And it was great.



TAPPER: And your campaign is something of a family affair too.



HARRIS: Yes.



TAPPER: Your sister is the campaign manager?



HARRIS: She is. Well, she is the chair.



TAPPER: The campaign chair?



HARRIS: She's the chair of the campaign.



TAPPER: So would there be a position for Maya...



HARRIS: Yes.



TAPPER: ... in the -- in a Harris administration?



HARRIS: We got to get elected first. And...



TAPPER: I know. But it's happened before.



HARRIS: And she's actually volunteering on the campaign.



And I think that you got to first do what's right in front of you before you plan that kind of stuff.



So...



TAPPER: Let me ask you a question about...



HARRIS: But I think she -- given how hard she's been working on the campaign and is probably one of the most -- one of the smartest people on the campaign, and certainly the most hardworking, I think she would probably want a break after the campaign, yes.



TAPPER: Oh, so, no. OK. (LAUGHTER)



TAPPER: Or maybe ambassador to the Bahamas or something like that.



(LAUGHTER)



TAPPER: Something a little bit more restful.



HARRIS: We shall see, yes, yes.



TAPPER: Or Jamaica, I guess. That would make more sense.



HARRIS: Yes. Uh-huh.



TAPPER: Let me just ask you about California, because we're in your beautiful state right now.



HARRIS: Yes. Isn't it gorgeous?



TAPPER: Obviously, you're going to face some competition. We have Joe Biden campaigning here, going to fund-raisers. Pete Buttigieg was just here, going to fund-raisers. They're on your turf. I mean, I know Congressman Swalwell is also running for president too, but -- from California.



HARRIS: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.



TAPPER: But do you -- I mean, are they interlopers, or is this state locked up for you, do you think?



HARRIS: Oh, no, nothing's locked up for me.



And I'm going to work hard to earn every vote everywhere. It's a big state of 40 million people. I have been privileged to have been elected by the people of this state three times statewide, for attorney general, reelection as attorney general, and the United States Senate is the third one.



And I am competing for every vote, just like I always have, because, as far as I'm concerned, you got to earn the votes.



(END VIDEOTAPE)



TAPPER: What do former staffers of President Obama think about Vice President Joe Biden's 2020 run? Well, it's complicated. That's next.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



[09:38:06]



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



HARRIS: We cannot put our arms and embrace this North Korean dictator in the way that this president has done. This unilateral approach to foreign policy that includes embracing a dictator and taking his word over the American intelligence community is not smart and I believe is not in the best interest of our nation.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



TAPPER: It's more from our exclusive interview with Democratic presidential candidate Kamala Harris. There she is criticizing President Trump over North Korea and rising tensions. We'll put that section up online.



But let's discuss. Congressman Waltz, let me start with you. The president has put a lot of stock in his personal style, in his personal relationship, for instance, with Kim Jong-un. This has been a rough week, the U.S. seizing North Korean cargo ship, North Koreans -- Kim Jong-un firing a second missile test. Is it working?



REP. MICHAEL WALTZ (R), FLORIDA: Well, I certainly supported the president in the summit. I think we needed to try something unconventional. I was in the White House in the past when years after years after years that -- what we've done in the past has failed. That said, I do think we need to draw a line in the sand going forward.



The North Koreans need to come forward with full disclosure and a timeline for denuclearization or we need to go back to maximum pressure. But the president needs to be able to come to the Congress. He needs to be able to go to the American people.



At the end of the day, if we do have to go to a military option which would be horrific and say I tried everything. I opened the door for diplomacy, I opened the door for economic progress for North Korea and they simply didn't step through it. But at the end of the day, we also need to realize North Korean nuclear engineers and missile engineers are not on holiday right now.



TAPPER: Yes.



WALTZ: They are progressing that program and at some point we have to say we tried enough and go back to fully choking the regime economically.



TAPPER: Governor?



JENNIFER GRANHOLM, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: The problem is is that there doesn't appear to be any consistency across the administration.



[09:40:04]



You've got Bolton and Pompeo pressing for more sanctions on North Korea and the president tweeting out, I'm with him, which means, I'm with Kim Jong-un. It's not working.



So you have no consistency. Nor do you have a long-term strategy. Now I grant you these are difficult issues, right?



But it's true not just in North Korea, it's true in Venezuela. What's the long term strategy besides regime change? And if you're not going to get regime change, what are you going to do? What's the long-term strategy in Iran? Regime change or what? I mean, it just doesn't appear this administration has a strategy beyond loud bluster.



TAPPER: You were on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, I believe. Were you not?



RICK SANTORUM, CNN SENIOR POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: I was -- no. I was on armed services.



TAPPER: Armed services. What do you make of all this? Is there a Trump doctrine that you can understand?



SANTORUM: Yes, I think there is. I mean, I think the president in almost all of these cases has started out based on his campaign promise to try to reach out to people and do things differently and try to develop good relationships. But you have to give him credit.



I mean, he walked away from the summit in North Korea when it was a bad deal.



TAPPER: That's right.



SANTORUM: He sees the shift. He's saying maybe this guy isn't the guy we can negotiate with. He's --



GRANHOLM: He's not saying that.



SANTORUM: He did. He said it this week that maybe he's not going to follow through with this (ph). He's giving people the chance to do the right thing and he's learned.



He didn't, like Barack Obama, want a deal so bad that he gave everything away like he did in Iran. He's stepped away. And he's done the same thing in the China trade deal.



He said I want to be friends with China. I want to do -- make this work, but he's willing to say no if they don't follow through. And that's -- that's a pretty good doctrine in my opinion.



TAPPER: What do you make of it, Mayor?



STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE, FORMER DNC SECRETARY: I think you are describing what you hope he would say and what you hope he would mean, not actually what he's done. What he's done is take the side of a dictator repeatedly. What he's done is turn his back on lifelong people in the State Department, people in the military that are giving him advice and taken the word of Putin, taken the word of Kim. That doesn't seem strong to me.



That being said, I was all for out-of-the-box foreign policy, out-of- the-box thinking, but it has to work, it has to work in reality, not in the imagined reality that we -- that we wished we had from this president.



TAPPER: Meanwhile -- so those are the tensions going on in the international stage. The president facing a lot of pressure domestically. Speaker Pelosi and the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, Jerry Nadler, saying that we're in a constitutional crisis. Take a listen.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



REP. JERROLD NADLER (D-NY), CHAIRMAN, JUDICIARY COMMITTEE: Certainly it's a constitutional crisis. We're in one because the president is disobeying the law, is refusing all information to Congress --



REP. NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE: Trump is goading us to impeach him. He knows that it would be very divisive in the country.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



TAPPER: Madam mayor, if the president is disobeying the law according to Jerry Nadler, shouldn't Democrats begin impeachment proceedings? I mean, isn't that their obligation if that's what they believe?



RAWLINGS-BLAKE: I think impeachment -- I think Pelosi is right. She's a Baltimore gal so I always have her back. I think she's right, he's goading us, he's goading the Democrats towards impeachment, but I don't think it's constructive.



I think the Democrats have much more work to do to put issues on the table that are important to the American people this close to the election. I think if the Democrats were going to hold this president accountable, we would be doing more than just talking about the fact that it's a crisis. We would be acting.



And I also think that if we had a Congress across the board, both sides of the aisles that actually believed in American ideals of democracy, of transparency, that we would be helped by Republicans. And that's not (INAUDIBLE) -- that's not happening.



TAPPER: Congressman, let me ask you, does it bother you at all -- I know you don't favor impeachment -- but does it bother you at all that the White House is not complying with subpoenas just as a matter of principle?



WALTZ: Jake, I certainly don't -- wouldn't describe the executive branch and the legislative branch disagreeing over document production as a constitutional crisis. I just spent two weeks at home in north Florida, no one is talking impeachment, no one is talking Russia, Russia, Russia. They are talking health care, they are talking infrastructure, they're talking these big national security issues. And they're frustrated that, once again, it's such a bubble here that everybody is at loggerheads and not dealing with the issues they want dealt with.



So I think the Democrats have a real choice. Do they in 2020 want to look back at accomplishments like bringing the new NAFTA deal to the table and to the floor which they refuse to do right now, or do they want to continue to tear -- try to tear the president down when the investigation that we all so breathlessly waited on for so many years was very clear about no collusion?



[09:45:05]



And just one more point, we do have to draw a bright line between no collusion and -- from the campaign to the Russians versus the Russians attacking our constitutional system and attacking our electoral system which they absolutely are doing. I led a bipartisan letter asking for the investigation -- asking for the FBI to brief us, the Florida delegation on --



(CROSSTALK)



WALTZ: -- on the penetration -- on the penetration into our electoral system. And we have to stay focused on that because that is our democracy under attack.



GRANHOLM: I notice though that you did not answer the original question which is you've got to be troubled as a member of Congress that the president is lawless in not responding to not just subpoenas, but bringing his people before him or the tax returns that under law are required to be produced. I'm saying about this because turnabout is going to happen. And Congress do you have a responsibility constitutionally --



WALTZ: I don't expect the president the door to the executive branch and allow his political opponents to go --



(CROSSTALK)



GRANHOLM: So you expect it to be OK -- OK with being lawless. It's OK to --



WALTZ: No, it's not lawless. That's hyperbole. It really is.



GRANHOLM: It is not --



(CROSSTALK)



RAWLINGS-BLAKE: It's OK to be committed to the words of the constitution as long as --



(CROSSTALK)



WALTZ: We have these fights --



GRANHOLM: Exactly.



WALTZ: -- every single -- we have these fights every single administration whether you're holder or whether it's now but that is not a constitutional --



(CROSSTALK)



SANTORUM: Yes. I mean, who is goading who?



WALTZ: Yes. SANTORUM: I mean, the Democrats are the ones goading the president. It's not the president -- the president is reacting to the Democrats' over the top not doing what the congressman just said --



RAWLINGS-BLAKE: There's no Democrat goading him at 3:00 in the morning when he's furiously tweeting.



SANTORUM: They're goading him by making these requests and by keeping up --



(CROSSTALK)



SANTORUM: -- by keeping up this focus on --



(CROSSTALK)



RAWLINGS-BLAKE: By doing their job. By doing their constitutional --



(CROSSTALK)



SANTORUM: This is no constitutional crisis. It's a constitutional crisis -- it's a constitutional crisis if they take it to court and the court says, Mr. President, you have to turn them over and he doesn't. Then it's a crisis.



But right now this is --



(CROSSTALK)



WALTZ: I do -- I do want to say though -- I mean, I'm four months into this. I'm on the armed services and on the space committee. If you close your eyes in those hearings, you would not know which side of the aisle that the questions are coming from. It's very bipartisan, it's very focused.



I do want to give some sense of positivity that not everything that's going on --



TAPPER: Right.



WALTZ: -- in Congress is judicially oversight, that we are going to doing -- trying to do the work, particularly the work involved in defending this country.



GRANHOLM: I will say though. I agree with you on this. Is that people out in the country want us to fix the problems of the opioid addiction and of health care --



(CROSSTALK)



WALTZ: And this is sucking the oxygen out --



(CROSSTALK)



GRANHOLM: Well, I think you can do two things at once. I think you can walk and chew gum. I do because that is what is Congress is built to do.



SANTORUM: It's not walking and chewing gum. It's chewing gum and poking someone in the eye. You can't do that at the same time.



GRANHOLM: And let's just say the president is the poker-in-chief.



TAPPER: What do you hear -- what do you hear in Baltimore? What do people in Baltimore want from Congress?



RAWLINGS-BLAKE: We want what -- it's interesting. We were talking about the election earlier. We want what mayors are doing, getting things done.



On the ground we say that there's no Republican way to pick up trash. It has to be done. There's no democratic way to fix a pothole. We want government to work for the people it serves.



So when we see Congress constantly fighting these constant debates as if that is something, it's frustrating. So that's what I'm hearing. Again, we're not hearing impeach, impeach, impeach.



(CROSSTALK)



WALTZ: -- bring an infrastructure bill, should bring --



(CROSSTALK)



RAWLINGS-BLAKE: I'm all for it.



TAPPER: Before we go let me say, happy mother's day to you. Happy mother's day to you.



RAWLINGS-BLAKE: Thank you.



GRANHOLM: Thank you so much. And to you, mom.



TAPPER: Imagine being a writer on a political comedy show trying to come up with the most outrageous presidential plot lines you can imagine. And then imagine seeing those things actually happening at a rally. The cast of "Veep" on their series finale tonight, next.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



[09:53:13]



TAPPER: Tonight, HBO series, "Veep" perhaps the sharpest, funniest, political satire of our time is saying good-bye after seven seasons and if you've been noticing some similarities between "Veep " world and the real world, well, you're not alone.



(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)



TAPPER (voice-over): It started as a far-fetched political satire.



JULIA LOUIS-DREYFUS AS SELINA MEYER: Oh, my God. That is so great for me. ANNA CHLUMSKY AS AMY BROOKHEIMER: And the country?



LOUIS-DREYFUS: Yes, yes, yes. That's what I meant.



TAPPER: But now that it's in the final season, HBO's "Veep" has started to feel a lot more like the most prescient show on television, take this moment from last Sunday's episode.



TIMOTHY SIMONS AS JONAH RYAN: How do these diseases get into America?



UNIDENTIFIED MALE: How?



SIMONS: Immigrants.



UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Kill them.



SIMONS: Yes. Well, I mean, we don't have to kill all of them.



TAPPER: And then on Wednesday, President Trump almost seemed to be reading from Jonah Ryan's script at an event in Florida.



TRUMP: How do you stop these people? You can't.



CROWD MEMBER: Shoot them.



TRUMP: There is -- that the only in the panhandle you can get away with that stuff.



TAPPER: As the cast and creators of "Veep" told me at the 92nd Street Y in New York City this week, this is a trend they find concerning.



SIMONS: Even Jonah Ryan has the good sense, not all of them. Like somehow dumbest to do it on television is smarter than what's happening.



TAPPER: In May 2016 before Donald Trump was even the Republican nominee, "Veep" envisioned the president turning the world upside down with an errant and reckless tweet.



DAVID MANDEL, EXECUTIVE PRODUCER, "VEEP": We did a president tweet story at which point you went running down the hall like with your hair on fire.



UNIDENTIFIED MALE: The president is tweeting.



UNIDENTIFIED MALE: She's tweeting?



MANDEL: And it was funny and shocking and unheard of.



[09:55:02]



TAPPER: These days measles cases are hitting their highest levels in 25 years. While around the same time on the show Jonah Ryan has an anti vax campaign platform and there is an outbreak of chickenpox.



(on camera): There literally was a headline on CNN yesterday about a kid who was suing so he didn't have to get the chickenpox vaccine, catches the chickenpox.



SIMONS: We don't want these things to come true.



MANDEL: We sit in a room trying to think of what's the craziest, stupidest thing that could ever happen that we don't have to worry will never happen.



SIMONS: Yes.



MANDEL: And they are coming true hourly.



(END VIDEOTAPE)



TAPPER: Congratulations to the cast and creators of "Veep." Thank you so much.



I should note that CNN shares the same parent company as HBO.



Happy mother's day to the moms out there, especially to the ones in my life. I love you.



Up next, an interview with a former Facebook co-founder who now says, the company needs to be broken up. Stay with us.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



[10:00:00]