Coos County > Departments > Public Health > Tobacco Prevention and Education > Tobacco Use in Coos County
In 2009, figures released by the DHS Tobacco Prevention and Education Program, revealed that 27%, or more than 13,000 of Coos County adults smoke tobacco. Statewide the rate is under 19%.

Each year on average, 226 people die from tobacco use in Coos County. More than one out of four county deaths in the county are tobacco related.

Each year, 4,378 county residents suffer from a serious illness caused by tobacco use.

The economic burden due to tobacco use disorder alone is substantial. Each year, over $35 million is spent on medical care for tobacco-related illnesses and over $37 million in productivity is lost due to tobacco-related deaths.

Tobacco use harms every tissue and organ in the body, contributing to a wide range of chronic diseases.

Tobacco use is the single greatest preventable risk factor for chronic disease. The greatest impact on chronic disease from tobacco is due to its contribution to cardiovascular disease. Tobacco smokers have 2 to 4 times the rate of coronary artery disease, the leading cause of death, and about twice the risk of stroke.

Cancer is the second leading cause of death. Coos County has the highest age adjusted rate of tobacco related cancers in the state of Oregon. Tobacco use causes cancers of the oral cavity, pharynx, larynx (voice box), esophagus, cervix, kidney, lung, pancreas, bladder, colon, rectum, and stomach, and causes acute myeloid leukemia. Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths. Ninety percent of lung cancer in women, and greater than 80% of lung cancer in men is attributable to tobacco use.

Cigarette smoking is associated with a tenfold increase in the risk of dying from chronic obstructive lung disease, and accounts for about 90% of these deaths.

Tobacco use is the single greatest cause of adverse pregnancy outcomes. Coos County’s prevalence of smoking during pregnancy is twice the state level. Nearly one in four women smoke during pregnancy in Coos County.