Colorado Department of Human Services
Food Assistance Application

Get an Application

Pick up an application at your local County Department of Human or Social Services office, download the application by clicking on the appropriate selection below, or apply on-line by clicking here . You can also call your County office to have an application mailed or faxed to you.

Applications are in Adobe Reader's PDF format. You MUST Have Adobe Acrobat Reader to access these forms. To download the latest version, click here.



Fill Out the Application

Please fill out as much of the application as you can. If you need help or don't understand a question, a staff member can help you complete your application. To start the process, put your name, street address, and social security number on the application and sign it.

Return the application to the County Department of Human or Social Services Food Assistance Office.

Bring, mail or fax your completed application to your local Food Assistance Office.

Make an Appointment for an Interview

Make an appointment for an interview at the Food Assistance Office when you return the application. In some counties, the Food Assistance worker will interview you the same day you return your application. If you return your application by mail, the food assistance office will contact you to schedule an appointment. Your appointment may be conducted in person or over the telephone. To save time and to help the process go faster, please bring all the necessary paperwork with you. Examples of verification that you might need to bring to your interview: Birth Certificate

Drivers License

Child Support - court order or cancelled checks

Pay Stubs

Unemployment Compensation

Pensions

Letter from Social Security, Veteran's Assistance

Rental Agreement

Mortgage Statement

Utility Bills - telephone, electricity, gas, oil, water, sewerage, garbage

Child Care Expenses - cancelled checks

Medical Bills that you pay (if 60 years or older or disabled)



The Interview

If you have an office interview, bring your verification with you to the interview. You keep the originals and the Food Assistance worker will make copies. If you have a telephone interview, your worker will explain how you can submit your documents. Your worker will also tell you if any additional information is need. You will be assigned a Food Assistance worker. This is the person to call if you have questions about your case or you need to provide new documentation in the future. After your interview, you will receive a notice in the mail regarding your eligibility.

If You are Eligible

You will get a notice that will explain how many months you can get food assistance benefits and the amount of food assistance you are eligible for. Every month you are eligible, your food assistance benefits will be deposited into an account. You will be issued on an electronic benefit transfer (EBT) card called a Colorado Quest card and will pick a personal identification number (PIN) to access this account. This card acts as a debit card and can be used in any grocery store or retail location anywhere in the United States that has been authorized by the USDA and displays the Quest logo. Food assistance benefits can be used to buy most foods but may not be used to purchase food that can be eaten in the store or hot foods. Also you may not purchase any nonfood items, such as: Beer, wine, liquor, cigarettes, tobacco Pet foods Soaps, paper products, household supplies Vitamins, medicines For information on nutrition, meal planning and smart shopping, click here.

If You are Not Eligible