Governor Doyle Welcomes Abbott to Wisconsin Makes $12.5 Million Available to Kenosha Area Business Alliance to Support Development PLEASANT PRAIRIE—Governor Jim Doyle today announced his administration is investing up to $12.5 million through the Kenosha Area Business Alliance (KABA) to support the development of approximately 500 acres of land acquired by Abbott in the Village of Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County. "I am delighted to welcome Abbott to Wisconsin," Governor Doyle said. "Wisconsin is excited to build a long-term partnership with Abbott, a company with a strong record of innovation and bright prospects for continued growth. I want to especially recognize Rep. John Steinbrink (D-Pleasant Prairie), Pleasant Prairie Village Administrator Mike Pollocoff and Pleasant Prairie Community Development Director Jean Werbie who have worked with my administration for over a year on this project." "Abbott's expansion in our area marks the culmination of years of successful efforts to transform this important corridor into a real source of pride for our area and state, and I want to thank Governor Doyle, Secretary Burke and her staff for their strong support," said Rep. John Steinbrink. "Commerce has been working with Abbott for over a year to identify a suitable site large enough for a potential Abbott campus," said Secretary Burke. "We’re delighted that they have completed their acquisition of 500 acres and are proud to support this project." Governor Doyle’s $12.5 million award to the Kenosha Area Business Alliance will support the development in the area. The award, the largest in Commerce history, is performance-based and will be used for land acquisition and infrastructure development tied to job creation. The award is structured as a loan to the Kenosha Area Business Alliance with a forgiveness provision triggered after 2,400 new jobs are created on the site. The site is envisioned to potentially house multiple buildings with a variety of uses including office, laboratory, light manufacturing and support facilities. While the development timeline will depend on future growth and market factors, the land is expected to be zoned to accommodate up to 12,000 employees. "Abbott has purchased this land in Wisconsin in anticipation of future growth and expansion," said Dale Johnson, divisional vice president, State Government Affairs, Abbott. "We are pleased to have worked with the Governor, his staff, the Village of Pleasant Prairie and the Kenosha Area Business Alliance." -- Tony Hozeny (Commerce) and Anne Lupardus (Office of the Governor)

The newsletter is issued electronically every other month. Please send comments or questions to Barbro McGinn, editor. Subscribe to Newsletter Email: Links Current Newsletter Newsletter Archive Commerce Home