The Final Tally: How Congress Voted on Iran
Leadership Minority Leader Harry Reid “The Senate has spoken with a clarion voice and declared that the historic agreement to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon will stand.” —Sept. 10, 2015, according to the press

Any future attempts to re-litigate this issue in the Senate will meet the same outcome and will be nothing more than wasted time. — Senator Harry Reid (@SenatorReid) September 10, 2015 "The Republicans have lost...we should move on to something else." —Sept. 16, 2015, according to the press

Minority Whip Dick Durbin (D-IL) Our nation has the chance to try tough diplomacy w/#IranDeal without ruling out other options should diplomacy fail pic.twitter.com/B42AyEZtkN — Senator Dick Durbin (@SenatorDurbin) September 10, 2015

Committees Chris Murphy (D-CT) “There’s a cost to the international credibility of the country and this president if a motion of disapproval passes the House and the Senate. There is some harm to the country’s standing if we have to go through the charade of the veto.” —Aug. 27, 2015, according to the press Bernie Sanders (I-VT) “I voted to support the Iran nuclear deal today because it is my firm belief that the test of a great nation is not how many wars we can engage in, but how we can use our strength and our capabilities to resolve international conflicts in a peaceful way.” —Sept. 10, 2015, in a statement Claire McCaskill (D-MO) "They are not willing to do a vote on the merits because they’re gonna lose a vote on the merits. So they’d rather hide behind this silly argument that somehow this is a filibuster." —Sept. 10, 2015, according to the press Gary Peters (D-MI) "This is one of those votes of conscience where you have to look in the mirror and feel comfortable with what you're doing and have no regrets…This is one you will remember the rest of your life." —Sept. 10, 2015, according to the press

Leadership Majority Leader Mitch McConnell .@SenateDems voted to filibuster and block American people from having a real vote on one of most consequential issues of our age #IranDeal — Leader McConnell (@SenateMajLdr) September 10, 2015

“The Senate should not hide behind procedure...The American people were led to believe that negotiations with Iran would be about stopping its nuclear program, but that’s not what the deal before us would do.” —Sept. 8, 2015, in a floor statement "At the very least we should be able to provide some protection to Israel and long-overdue relief to Americans who've languished in Iranian custody for years," in reference to McConnell's amendments proposed on September 16 —Sept. 16, 2015, according to the press

Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-TX) pic.twitter.com/H1IwToPpaD — JohnCornyn (@JohnCornyn) September 10, 2015

Committees Bob Corker (R-TN) Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee “[Voting on a resolution of disapproval] opens the door for the next president to look at this in a very different way. Bipartisan majorities in the House and Senate will have disapproved of what was negotiated” —Sept. 9, 2015, according to the press

Chuck Schumer (D-NY) "While I came to a different conclusion than many in my own caucus, I recognize for them, this is a vote of conscience…Just, as it is, for me." —Sept. 10, 2015, according to the press Lindsay Graham (R-SC) "Sen. [Harry] Reid has come out of nowhere to change what was the common understanding of how we would proceed…We're more worried about protecting Barack Obama from having to veto this than you are about having a debate on the floor of the Senate." —Sept. 10, 2015, according to the press



Ted Cruz (R-TX) "If this deal goes through, we know to an absolute certainty people will die. Americans will die, Israelis will die, Europeans will die.” —Sept. 9, 2015, at an anti-deal rally with Donald Trump Dan Coats (R-IN) “Moving forward is a violation of the law...That will be tested in the courts.”

—Sept. 15, 2015, according to the press