Defining 'reasonable compensation'
State House

When Andy Sanborn started his first company, he recalls sleeping on the floor on an air mattress eating ramen noodles. Now, Sanborn owns The Draft in Concord, along with a couple of real estate companies. He won't say how much money he makes, but he is outraged at the thought of the government telling him what salary is considered "reasonable."

"Should government have the right and authority to tell people how much money they can make?" Sanborn said. "It's insulting. If my wife works at Concord Hospital and makes $300,000 a year, no one blinks. If I make $300,000, I have to justify it to New Hampshire."

For decades, business owners have been required to calculate "reasonable compensation" for federal and state tax purposes. But as state legislators work to clarify those laws, the discussion about what is reasonable compensation has come to the forefront. To the chagrin of those involved in the technicalities of tax law, the discussion is intimately tied to the controversial expansion of the state's interest and dividends tax to limited liability companies. Tax practitioners and politicians must walk a fine line between reforming the standards for calculating the tax deduction while not trampling on free market values.

"It's a very personal and emotional issue," said David Heath, tax director at the Nashua accounting firm Melanson Heath, who supports pending legislation to clarify the laws. "The bottom line is the determination of compensation for an individual is best determined by the business's customers and the business environment in which they're in, not by some governmental agency."

When the business profits tax was created in New Hampshire in the early 1970s, the law said corporations had to pay taxes on their profits but could deduct the amount the owners reasonably took as compensation. The Supreme Court soon ruled that the "reasonable compensation" deduction must also apply to limited liability companies, which are set up under a different tax structure. The law fits with the general New Hampshire principle that "active" or earned income, is not taxed, while "passive" income from investments or profit is.

The standard of "reasonable" compensation was established to ensure that company owners do not pay themselves all of the company's profits to avoid paying the business profits tax. (The 0.75 percent business enterprise tax, which taxes businesses' total wage and interest payments, was also an attempt to create fairness.)

The question of reasonable compensation is also part of the interest and dividends tax rules. When a corporation pays its shareholders money, that money is taxed as a dividend. But when an owner takes money out of a company, is that money a salary - and not taxed - or a profit and then a dividend, subject to both those taxes? The answer centers on whether the owner is performing work for the company, or just investing money. And that judgment has increasingly been the subject of Department of Revenue audits.

Decision by audit

In 2004, the Legislature started providing more staff to the Department of Revenue Administration to do more audits, said Revenue Commissioner Kevin Clougherty. Last year, the state audited 6,000 taxpayers, up from 5,000 the previous two years. In 2006, the state did 1,000 business tax audits, though it is unclear how many total audits were done. Clougherty said in 2004 the state collected about $74 million from audits, and that number has gradually declined to about $40 million a year.

Clougherty said the department does not specifically target companies or their owners to examine whether the owner's compensation is reasonable. Instead, it samples a variety of taxpayers, big and small, and examines their entire tax return. Clougherty could not say how many audits found problems with compensation. Phil Blatsos, Clougherty's predecessor who served from 2003 to 2008, said under his leadership the department typically looked at compensation for about 200 to 250 taxpayers a year. (next page »)