Editorial: Clinton is Democrats’ best choice
Only one Democratic candidate for president is truly qualified to hold the job: Hillary Clinton.

No contender’s resume can come within miles of matching Clinton’s. She’s ready to take up the nation’s top job on day one and her knowledge of domestic issues and foreign policy is encyclopedic. There is also a strong chance, should Clinton become president, that the poisonous partisanship that’s paralyzed Washington will be diminished rather than increased. Why? During her eight years as a senator from New York, she proved her ability to find common ground with Republicans, accords that allowed needed legislation to advance.

Clinton’s performance during her four years as President Obama’s secretary of state during tumultuous times and terrorist attacks led former secretary of state Henry Kissinger to say that she “ran the State Department in the most effective way I’ve ever seen.” He was not the only senior Republican with foreign policy experience to feel that way. In contrast, Clinton’s chief rival, Sen. Bernie Sanders, despite his quarter-century in Congress, is a foreign policy naif, albeit one who made the right call in opposing the war in Iraq.

Clinton has visited the Monitor many times over the years and we’ve come to know her pretty well. Sure, she’s tough as nails when she needs to be, but we’ve found her to be warm, funny and without the arrogance displayed by so many high-level politicians.

She is a centrist, but one who has campaigned for social justice since early adulthood. Clinton began her political life as a Republican like her parents, but a speech Martin Luther King gave in her hometown of Chicago changed her life and drew her to public service. She became a Democrat, and as a law student at Yale worked to prevent child abuse and promote child welfare. Her first Washington job was as a researcher on then Minnesota Sen. Walter Mondale’s committee investigating the living conditions of migrant workers.

Clinton’s concern for the downtrodden has been unwavering.

In the 1970s, she became the first woman to chair the board of the Legal Services Corporation, which was created to increase access to legal services for the poor. As first lady, and the lead proponent of a failed attempt to provide access to health care for all that’s not unlike the Affordable Care Act, she learned how Washington, and the special interests that fight to get their hands on the levers of government, work. In the process, she played a key role in the creation of what became the Children’s Health Insurance Program operated by the states.

The plans Clinton has put forward – whether on foreign policy, making college more affordable, addressing climate change or increasing access to health care – display her knowledge of the issues. They are not pie-in-the sky, but achievable. Her health plan, for example, builds on the success of Obamacare. By contrast, Sanders’s health plan, such as it is, was described by Vox founder and health care analyst Ezra Klein as offering voters “puppies and rainbows.” Virtually none of what he has pledged to do is achievable.

Clinton was the first first lady in history to run for elected office and the first female senator from New York. If elected, she would become the first female president. She knows how to get things done in a country with many needs and many threats, the greatest of which is the political dysfunction that has prevented their being addressed. She gets our strongest possible endorsement for the Democratic nomination.

(An earlier version of this editorial stated that Sen. Bernie Sanders has served in the Senate for a quarter of a century. He has served in Congress for a quarter of a century.)