Hoeven-Corker Border Security Amendment
The Hoeven-Corker border security amendment has been incorporated into the full text of the immigration bill, which is available here. Text of the 114 page amendment can be found here. A Myth vs. Fact document explaining various provisions is also available here. The key areas that the amendment strengthens and improves are outlined below, and pages where the new language is found in the bill are indicated in parenthesis.

UNPRECEDENTED SURGE OF SECURITY AT THE SOUTHERN BORDER (PP. 3-8, 14-36)

The amendment contains tangible, concrete triggers which ensure that Registered Provisional Immigrants (RPIs) cannot receive Green Cards until at least 10 years after the enactment of the bill, AND the Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Attorney General, the Secretary of Defense, the Inspector General, and GAO, certifies that:

An unprecedented surge of an additional 20,000 Border Patrol agents are deployed, maintained and stationed along the southern border, more than doubling the current force.

The Comprehensive Southern Border Security Strategy is deployed and operational, which includes, at a minimum, full implementation and activation of the $4.5 billion in specific technology and equipment requested by the Border Patrol to achieve full surveillance of the border.

The Southern Border Fencing Strategy has been implemented, and at least 700 miles of fencing has been completed along the southern border. (There are 350 miles of pedestrian fencing already deployed along the southern border. This amendment would double that and ensure a total of 700 miles of fencing along the border.)

The mandated electronic visa entry/exit system has been fully implemented at all air and sea ports of entry where U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers are currently deployed, which will improve the identification of those who overstay their visas.

E-Verify is being used by all employers in the country, making it virtually impossible to work in the United States illegally.

Only after ALL FIVE of these requirements have been fully implemented AND at least 10 YEARS have passed can RPIs apply for a green card.

TOUGH INTERIOR ENFORCEMENT THAT CURBS DE FACTO AMNESTY (PP. 121 – 124)

Visa overstays currently account for 40% of those unlawfully present in our country. This problem goes largely unaddressed because individuals identified as unlawfully present are not systematically removed. The administration has not considered their removal a priority, and in many cases, has established policies to delay their removal. The underlying bill improves the identification of overstays through a fully implemented entry/exit system. The Hoeven-Corker amendment goes a step further by mandating the initiation of removal proceedings for at least 90% of visa overstays – holding DHS accountable for failing to enforce the law and targeting an issue that is at the core of a policy of de facto amnesty.

PREVENTING ABUSE OF FEDERAL BENEFITS

The amendment would prevent immigrants who used a fraudulent or false Social Security number while they were unlawfully present from getting Social Security credits for that period. (PP. 218-221)

The amendment would restrict certain non-immigrant visa holders, such as tourists and foreign students, from accessing Medicaid, State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP), and Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA – the president’s health care law) benefits. (PP. 996-997)

The amendment would provide that the Department of Health and Human Services may not grant waivers to states to allow them to use Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) dollars to give cash assistance benefits to people in RPI status. (PP. 460-462)

###