2011 Bond Election
2011 Travis County Bond Election

Travis County will hold a bond election on Tuesday, November 8, 2011, in conjunction with the scheduled Texas constitutional amendment election.

Why do we have bond elections?

Bond elections allow voters to approve or reject long-term financing for major capital improvement projects in Travis County. Financing projects through bond authorizations allows the County to pay for improvements over 20 years rather than funding the projects with current funds. This method of financing allows for current and future citizens of Travis County to share the cost of improvements that benefit residents County-wide.

What are bonds?

Bonds are sold to borrow money to pay for needed major projects such as improvements to roadways, bridges and park infrastructure. The proposed bonds are general obligation bonds and will be repaid over the next twenty years from property taxes.

How and when do I vote?

Early voting will begin on Monday, October 24th, and end on Friday, November 4, 2011. For additional information about Early Voting or Election Day polling locations and hours, contact the Travis County Clerk’s Election Division at 854-4996 or visit the Elections division website.

How would a Travis County Bond package affect your property taxes?

Check out the 2011 Bond Property Tax Impact Calculator and find out!

Proposition 1: Roadway, Drainage, Bridge, Bike/Pedestrian Projects

Projects in Proposition 1 are intended to improve mobility, decrease congestion and improve safety for vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian users on Travis County roads.

Get more detailed information about Proposition 1 and the specific projects...

Proposition 2: Parks and Land Conservation Projects

Projects in Proposition 2 are intended to add to the quality of life of Travis County residents and visitors by providing recreational infrastructure in County metro and greenway parks.

Get more detailed information about Proposition 2 and the specific projects...

2011 Travis County Bond Information Resources

Other information pages on this website:

Would you like to share this information?

All web pages on this site are available in a “printer-friendly” version. Look for the link on each webpage. We also have 2011 Travis County Bond information resources available on this webpage for printing:

You can also request this pre-printed material for distribution to groups and organizations by calling the 2011 Travis County Bond Hotline at 854-4899 or through email at 2011BondProposition@traviscountytx.gov.

Citizens can always email their questions or comments about the Propositions, individual projects, the selection process, etc., to 2011BondPropostion@traviscountytx.gov or call the CBAC Hotline at 854-4899. Inquires will be forwarded to the appropriate TNR Staff member for a timely response.

All comments will be shared with the Commissioners Court for their information and all submissions will be archived for the public record.