INSANITY: Two things the EPA wants to regulate in your life
Ladies and gents, I just cannot ascertain when the absurdity of this current administration will cease. The weather is finally warming up and one of the rituals of spring and summer is the family BBQ. Well, it is for now until the Environmental Protection Agency has its way.

As reported by Fox News, “the EPA is funding a $15,000 University of California-Riverside study to look at the particulate emissions you breathe when grilling over an open flame. Along with the drip tray, the emission removal system includes the use of a “secondary air filtration system is composed of a single pipe duct system which contains a specialized metal filter, a metal fan blade, a drive shaft, and an accompanying power system with either a motorized or manual method,” according to study. ”

Why is the EPA concerned about BBQ grill emissions? Who are these people and why are they using one single dime of American taxpayer dollars for this tomfoolery?

The EPA has responded by stating, “that it doesn’t regulate people’s backyard barbecues and that the grant is part of the EPA’s “National Student Design Competition for Sustainability Focusing on People, Prosperity and the Planet (2014)”, which is a student-designed competition for sustainability” — sustainability of exactly what may I ask?

This is yet another example of how the administrative bureaucratic state is far out of control. I would like to know the name of the person who signed off on this grant. One thing is for sure, some folks aren’t taking this lying down.

Earlier this week, “State Senator Eric Schmitt (R) from St. Louis kicked off a #porksteakrebellion after he discovered the EPA is funding a study on propane grill emissions that suggest pit masters use a special tray to catch grease drippings and a “catalytic” filtration system to reduce air pollution, reports Fox News KTVI.”

So imagine what “King of the Hill” star Hank Hill would say to all of this? I believe he would be absolutely flabbergasted — even Peggy Hill would probably go nuts over this one, along with Bobby. And their neighbor Dale would certainly see this as a government surveillance conspiracy.

Folks, we can laugh bt this is very disturbing and serious — consider this EPA insanity also reported by Fox News, “The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) wants hotels to monitor how much time its guests spend in the shower. The agency is spending $15,000 to create a wireless system that will track how much water a hotel guest uses to get them to “modify their behavior.” “Hotels consume a significant amount of water in the U.S. and around the world,” an EPA grant to the University of Tulsa reads. “Most hotels do not monitor individual guest water usage and as a result, millions of gallons of potable water are wasted every year by hotel guests.” “The proposed work aims to develop a novel low cost wireless device for monitoring water use from hotel guest room showers,” it said. “This device will be designed to fit most new and existing hotel shower fixtures and will wirelessly transmit hotel guest water usage data to a central hotel accounting system.”

And here’s how the EPA tries to explain this one: “This technology will provide hotel guests with the ability to monitor their daily water online or using a smartphone app and will assist hotel guest in modifying their behavior to help conserve water,” the grant said.

This reminds me of those words President Reagan warned us about, “I’m from the government and I’m here to help.”

Notice those eerie words, “modifying their behavior?” That’s the progressive socialist way, executed by coercion, intimidation and taxation.

So get this: if you’re at home and burn the BBQ meat because your new EPA catalytic converter failed, everyone gets mad at you. And when everyone at the BBQ gets mad at you, your self-esteem is hurt. When your self-esteem is hurt, you withdraw to a local hotel room. At the local hotel room you use too much water violating EPA mandates and are put in jail. When you are put in jail you find a new friend name Leroy. Don’t find a new friend name Leroy, don’t buy an EPA catalytic converter for your BBQ grill.

Someone signed off on this and allocated your taxpayer dollars. But someone out there could have used this $30,000 far more wisely.