Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.)
Link to Profile Archives:

May 2013 | April 2013 | January 2013 | December 2012 | April 2011 (PIA) | December 2010 (PIA) | May 2009 (PIA) | November 2008 | April 2007 (PIA) | November 2006 | November 2006 | October 2006 | 109th Congress | 108th Congress | 107th Congress | 106th Congress | 105th Congress | 104th Congress

McConnell had already achieved a lifelong goal of becoming the Senate majority leader, but the stunning election of Donald Trump gave McConnell a Republican in the White House to work with as well.

And even as the Republican from Kentucky has been criticized by Trump for the Senate's inability to pass legislation repealing and replacing the 2010 health care law, their ability to work together is critical.

Stylistically, they couldn't be more different, but they speak regularly on the weekends and McConnell has come to live with the idea that the president is going to Tweet more than he might like.

"Mitch, get back to work and put Repeal & Replace, Tax Reform & Cuts and a great Infrastructure Bill on my desk for signing," Trump Tweeted from his golf club in Bedminster, N.J., during August.

That came after McConnell's gamble that he could muster 50 Republican votes to support a "skinny" repeal of the health care law did not pay off. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., joined other critics in voting down the "skinny" amendment -- shelving the effort.

Many of McConnell's past gambles have paid off, though.

The biggest of all might have come within hours of Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia's death in early 2016. McConnell said that the Senate would not consider any nominee that President Barack Obama might propose to fill the vacancy on the high court.

"The American people should have a voice in the selection of their next Supreme Court Justice," said McConnell, who was just beginning his second year as Majority Leader. "Therefore, this vacancy should not be filled until we have a new President."

Almost all Republican senators supported his decision. But the gamble was viewed as putting McConnell's Senate majority at risk as Democrats assailed GOP senators up for re-election in 2016, such as Pennsylvania's Patrick J. Toomey and Ohio's Rob Portman, for backing McConnell's decision to block any Obama nominee.

On the morning after the 2016 election, the gamble seemed to have paid off, as McConnell kept his Senate majority, and a Republican won the presidential election.

The winner was not the candidate McConnell or most other Republican senators would have predicted at the outset or would have preferred - McConnell himself had endorsed fellow Kentuckian Rand Paul prior to the GOP presidential primaries. But the Supreme Court vacancy remained unfilled and President Donald Trump nominated appeals court judge Neil Gorsuch on Jan. 31, 2017 to fill it.

"If we end up with that gridlock, I would say, 'If you can, Mitch, go nuclear,' " Trump said. "Because that would be an absolute shame if a man of this quality was put up to that neglect. I would say it's up to Mitch, but I would say, 'Go for it.' "

By "go nuclear" Trump meant that if Democrats filibustered the Gorsuch nomination, McConnell should move to scrap the filibuster for Supreme Court nominees in the same way that former Majority Leader Harry Reid, D- Nevada, had done for all other nominations in 2013: not by following Senate Rule XXII which requires a two-thirds vote to change Senate rules, but through a simple majority vote.

But it was McConnell, a Senate traditionalist par excellence, who in 2013 had argued for adhering to Rule XXII. Rising to a level of animation rare for him, McConnell repeatedly and angrily accused Reid of "breaking the rules of the Senate in order to change the rules of the Senate."

McConnell ultimately deployed the "nuclear" strategy to get Gorsuch confirmed to the bench, expanding the applicability of the 2013 changes to Supreme Court vacancies, but saying there was no appetite for doing the same for the administration.

While Trump's election stunned pollsters and analysts, McConnell reminded people in Washington that the Senate elections represented a kind of continuity. "Everybody looks at last year's election and says it was a change election. Well, it was in the presidential race, but in the Senate races, it was not a change election. Republican incumbents got reelected and we held the majority," he said.

McConnell also on occasion has chided Trump. After the president castigated U.S. District Judge James Robart who'd blocked his Jan. 27 moratorium on people from seven countries entering the United States, McConnell said "criticizing members of the judiciary individually is not a good idea."

After the Trump administration proposed cutting State Department funding by about a third, McConnell - a member of the Appropriations Committee - told reporters, "I for one, just speaking for myself, think the diplomatic portion of the federal budget is very important, and you get results a lot cheaper, frequently, than you do on the defense side."

McConnell has one personal tie to the Trump administration: his wife, Elaine L. Chao, is secretary of Transportation, just as she was secretary of Labor in the George W. Bush administration.

Although McConnell joined most other Republican senators in voting against a bipartisan immigration overhaul in 2013, he said in early 2017 that he was looking for a way to help young people born in foreign countries who had been brought by their parents illegally into the United States as infants.

"I'm very sympathetic with this situation," he said. "I mean, these are young people who were brought here at a tender age and who have grown up here or in the process of growing up here. I'm very sympathetic to that situation. I'm anxious to see what the president decides to do," he told reporters.

In replacing the health care law, which the Obama administration called the Affordable Care Act, McConnell did not propose his own all-encompassing bill, but did suggest a few specific changes.

"I think the way to handle pre-existing condition Americans is in state-based risk pools. There were a number of them already up and running before Obamacare that were functioning quite well," he said, "a place where people with pre-existing conditions could go and get coverage."

"They ought to be done at the state level, was already being done at the state level, before the Obamacare wiped them all out. So we're sensitive to that and we're sensitive to things like young people being able to stay on the policy until they're 27."

Since arriving in the Senate in 1985, McConnell has developed a reputation as a deal maker who could accept less than a full loaf to get a job done.

But during Obama's presidency, McConnell showed that he could be equally adept at standing his ground. In the 2014 elections, the strategy helped Republicans win the Senate and made McConnell a majority leader.

The largest piece of legislation enacted in Obama's presidency, the health care law, passed without a single Republican senator in favor. The next two, the 2009 stimulus and 2010 Dodd-Frank financial regulatory laws, each had just three Republican supporters.

Meanwhile, Republicans set new records for delaying the confirmation of federal judges and executive branch officials. In 2011, they nearly forced the government to default on the federal debt in a showdown over the deficit, and they shut down the government over the health care law two years later.

McConnell was only a bit player in those two confrontations, which were pushed mainly by House Republicans, and he said the latter was a "tactical error." But the boldness of the Republican rank-and-file can be traced to McConnell's own attitude toward Obama. In 2010, McConnell famously said his foremost goal was to make Obama a one-term president.

McConnell's pragmatic ways sometimes did emerge during his years in the minority. For instance, he was an eleventh-hour architect of the "fiscal cliff" deal enacted in January 2013. Spending cuts put in place by the 2011 debt limit deal were about to take hold, and tax cuts enacted in the George W. Bush era were about to expire.

McConnell and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. devised a deal to delay the automatic cuts and to allow tax rates to increase, but only on earnings over $400,000.

An only child, McConnell was born in Alabama. He lived in Georgia for part of his childhood and moved to Kentucky at age 13. His father, an Army officer who fought in World War II, became a civilian Army employee after the war and then a human resources director for DuPont in Louisville.

While the family was living in Alabama, McConnell, at age 2, was stricken with polio. His mother administered a physical therapy regimen and took him to specialists in Warm Springs, Ga. At their urging, she kept her child from walking until he was 4, a seemingly impossible task that saved him from permanent damage to his afflicted left leg. "She was a true saint," McConnell says. The episode taught him the value of "tenacity and discipline," he says, and though he still has trouble walking down flights of stairs, he has no other lasting effects.

He was a student body president in high school and college. At the University of Kentucky, he was president of his law school class. After law school he worked for GOP Sen. Marlow W. Cook of Kentucky, then as a deputy assistant attorney general in the Ford administration.

He served two terms as the chief executive of Jefferson County, essentially metropolitan Louisville, before ousting two-term Democratic Sen. Walter D. Huddleston in a close race in 1984.

In his bid for a sixth term in 2014, McConnell faced a two-front attack.

Tea party groups backed a challenger in the primaries, businessman Matt Bevin. McConnell hammered Bevin for his muddled answers to questions about how he would have responded to the 2008 financial crisis. McConnell trounced Bevin by 25 percentage points. The following year, Bevin won election as Kentucky's governor.

Democrats thought that their 2014 candidate, Kentucky Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes, could use her youth and a change message to topple McConnell. But Obama's unpopularity and Grimes' refusal to say whether she voted for him sank her. McConnell won in a landslide.