Senate Minority Leader Reid Holds Media Availability After Closed Policy Luncheon

REID:

We have to be quick today. We've got a picture. Maybe they'll wait for us.

We had a terrific caucus. Senator Sanders took time to talk to us about his experiences. It was really very, very moving.

Our nation was shaken this weekend by the worst mass shooting in modern American history: 49 dead, scores injured, some of them very, very critically. This was an attack on the LGBT community, the Latino community, and America. Everyone in America was attacked.

And it demands action. The people of Orlando responded to this unimaginable tragedy with unity, course and generosity. They came together in a time of crisis to get things done that had to get done.

Here in Congress, we must react the same way. That starts with closing the terrorist gun loophole. According to the Government Accountability Office, more than 2,000 suspected terrorists were able to buy guns from 2004 to 2014, in that 10-year period. Terrorists have urged home wolfs -- lone wolfs, I'm sorry, to take advantage of America's lax gun laws.

A spokesman for Al Qaida said, and I quote, "America's is absolutely awash with easily obtainable firearms, so what are you waiting for?," close quote, Al Qaida. And we have a Republican who said the problem is not guns.

What is the response of the Republicans? More guns, of course. It's shameful Republicans care more about the NRA and the fight they're having with the gun-owners (ph) of America, and each driving the other further into radicalism, than protecting American citizens -- absolutely shameful.

Why did they run for office in the first place if the Republicans are following the NRA more than their own constituents? Democrats are going to force a vote on this terrorist loophole. And we'll do it on the CGS appropriation bill. There's no excuse for allowing suspected terrorists to buy guns.

And that's not going to be our only amendment. We've got other things to do. How about funding the FBI? They complain about the FBI, the Republicans, they're not doing enough. Well, because they always short-change them on the resources they have. Republicans voted against this common sense proposal last December. It was a terrible mistake and they have a chance to make it right.

We're also going to force a vote to, I repeat, fully fund the FBI. Republicans are short-changing the funding President Obama requested for the FBI by more than $100 million. Both of these amendments are germane and deserve an up or down vote.

So I hope Republicans will find the courage to help us pass meaningful legislation to protect the American people. Certainly, they're doing a good job of protecting Donald Trump.

DURBIN:

I guess the lesson of Orlando, the lesson of San Bernardino, the lessons that we've learned all across America with these horrible mass shootings, we need to do a better job in America of keeping guns out of the hands of those who would misuse them. Felons, mentally unstable, and people with a terrorist connection have no business owning guns in America.

If that is what this election is going to be about, a referendum on that question, I'll stand by the American people. Common sense dictates that we as a Congress listen to the pleas across America to stop this gun violence. What happened in Orlando was heartbreaking. But what has happened in the city of Chicago since the first of the year is heartbreaking, too -- over 1,000 gun violence incidents, over 200 people killed in that great city.

It breaks my heart. I love that city. It breaks my heart to have people in neighborhoods all across that city scared to death of firearms and what they're doing. Do we have the guts to stand up and do something as a Congress? Or are we going to cower, afraid of the National Rifle Association? I hope we have the courage to do something.

I'd like to make another statement about an issue that is directly related. In times of crisis, our nation expects leadership grounded in American values. President George W. Bush, after the epic tragedy of 9/11, made it clear that those responsible would be held accountable, but he warned America not to hold all Muslims responsible for the radical views of a few.

After Orlando, the worst mass shooting in our nation's history, President Obama condemned this act of hate and terror and promised to dedicate every resource to investigate and hold accountable those responsible for this tragedy.

Contrast this bipartisan leadership with Donald Trump. Trump, the man who would be the Republican president, in the wake of the Orlando tragedy, congratulated himself for his bigotry toward Muslims, and wasted no time blaming President Obama for the deaths. The questions facing Republican leaders again this week is whether they will ignore the fact that their candidate for the presidency is totally unsuited to lead this nation.

His emotional rants, his serial insults, his bizarre conspiracy theories, and his divisive singling out enemies to be loathed and feared distinguish him from any other candidate in modern American political history. To hear the Republican speaker and the Republican Senate majority leader endorse Trump and characterize his outrageous comments as only being off-message and unscripted is to dismiss the toxic rhetoric of Donald Trump as only a product of poor political coaching.

It is more. His hateful rants are a window on his character and his soul. How many of these same congressional leaders are making plans to attend the Republican convention in Cleveland? How many are going to bring their families, their children, their friends to join them in a standing ovation to honor the lethal rage of their unhinged nominee?

History will remember them as willing participants at the scene of this political crime perpetrated on Mr. Lincoln's grand old party.

REID:

Senator Schumer?

SCHUMER:

Thank you.

Well, last year, 244 people on the terror watch list tried to purchase guns; 244 suspected terrorists walked into gun shops and attempted to purchase a firearm; 223 were able to get the firearm. Only 21 went empty-handed. That is 91 percent of terrorists when they -- 91 percent of suspected terrorists when they sought to purchase a gun last year were successful, according to GAO.

SCHUMER:

Let our Republican colleagues contemplate that. They want to fight terrorism, but they say they're going to continue a situation where 91 percent of suspected terrorists can get a gun. Who are they kidding? I have a simple question for Republican senators and for the NRA. When the senators voted against the terror gap last year, why is that acceptable?

Why should suspected terrorists be able to purchase a firearm? Why? Why? Why? No reason. No reason.

The answer is obvious. And the American people agree, Republicans, Democrats, independents all agree it's absurd to allow terror suspects to purchase guns.

But the NRA is the tail that wags the Republican dog when it comes to Congress and guns. The NRA is more concerned with the rights of suspected terrorists than they are with the victims of gun violence, and our Republicans bow down to that NRA -- horrible, horrible value choice in America.

If they continue to oppose the Terror Gap, the NRA, the NRA itself, will be in part responsible in every terror attack that involves a gun in this country. Plain and simple.

There's no other way to avoid that fact. So, on this upcoming bill, we're going to try yet again to close this dangerous loophole once and for all, when the Senate considers the next appropriation bill. Can we win?

We'll win, sooner or later. We'll keep trying. We're not giving up. Reporters come over and say, "Well, you can't win. Why do it?" Every time we have a vote, hopefully we can win. Hopefully they'll change their minds out there.

But if not, they will face the consequences, and that makes progress move forward.

The moment of soul searching for our Republican colleagues is now. What's it going to be? Are they going to side with the extremists and the NRA, or the vast majority of their constituents and all Americans who simply don't believe terror suspects should have access to guns? The only people who seem to believe it are the Republican senators on the floor of that House -- of that body.

REID:

(Inaudible) Senator Murray.

MURRAY:

Since Sunday night, tens of thousands of people around the country, from L.A. to Boston, from Charleston, South Carolina, to Fort Worth, Texas, from Seattle to Spokane have turned out for vigils to mourn the heinous act of terror that erupted over the weekend in Orlando.

That was an attack on our values, an attack on the LGBT community that has endured so much violence and hate over the years, and an attack on every single family across the country.

The question these families are asking around their kitchen tables is, what will it take for this Congress to enact common sense reforms to keep our communities safe? It is mind-boggling. Every state in this country, including my home state of Washington, has been affected by horrific gun violence.

And it is far past time for Congress to have a vigorous debate about what we can do to stem the tide.

Now, Republicans continue to block us at every turn. They are so adamant that we do nothing. They blocked us on the most obvious amendment of all, to prevent people who are on the Terror Watch List from being allowed to buy a gun.

When you have politicians so beholden to the gun lobby that they can't even support the idea that potentially dangerous criminals and terrorists shouldn't be allowed to walk out of a store with a gun, there is a serious problem with our priorities.

But that is not going to stop us from pushing this amendment. Not to mention the other common sense reforms, like expanding background checks, something 90 percent of Americans want. Like so many Americans, I'm tired of hearing the thoughts and prayers of my colleagues with zero follow-up.

It's time for action. We cannot wait for another mass shooting, and I hope that our colleagues on the other side of the aisle will finally wake up to the problem at hand, and work with us to make progress on a crisis that is hurting us all every single day.

REID:

I'm always pretty good at answering questions, but we do have 98 senators -- well, how many? Ninety -- 96, I guess, waiting for us. So I'll take a couple of quick questions.

QUESTION:

Senator Reid, would you support an assault weapons ban?

REID:

Do I?

QUESTION:

Yes.

REID:

Yes.

(CROSSTALK)

QUESTION:

... gun sales to American citizens on the watch list without showing probable cause to a judge? Should the government be able to listen to phone calls to people on the Terror Watch List without their...

REID:

You've been taking too many cues from the NRA. The answer is, that's foolishness, OK?

Yeah, last question. Last question.

QUESTION:

Are you pushing to get energy tax extenders on an FAA bill if it comes back to you, it's going to most likely...

REID:

You know, that the fact is we would love to get it extended. We shouldn't do it on a short-term basis. But we're a long ways from that.

SEN. HARRY REID, D-NEV., SENATE MINORITY LEADER

SEN. RICHARD J. DURBIN, D-ILL., SENATE MINORITY WHIP

SEN. CHARLES E. SCHUMER, D-N.Y.,

VICE CHAIRMAN OF THE CONFERENCE,

AND CHAIRMAN, DEMOCRATIC POLICY AND COMMUNICATIONS CENTER

SEN. PATTY MURRAY, D-WASH., SECRETARY OF THE CONFERENCE