Senate Republican Leaders and Sen. Murkowski Hold Media Availability After Party Policy Luncheon

MCCONNELL:

Well, good afternoon everyone. I think we're moving forward on the Keystone Pipeline. I asked Chairman Murkowski to join us today to give you a rundown on where we are. We are hoping to be able to finish that bill by the end of the week. And then, once Keystone is completed, we'll go to DHS, will be the next in the lineup in the Senate.

MURKOWSKI:

I think I can report fairly that we have been having very constructive discussions about a path forward, identifying the universe of amendments that we will be able to move through. The talks have been constructive. I think both sides are in agreement that we want to finish this bill and we want to do it in relatively short order. So, the discussions will continue. My hope is that we'll be able to advance some amendments to votes later this afternoon, or possibly early evening. But, the good news is we're moving through Keystone. We're going to take this bipartisan bill that's good for jobs, good for the country, and good for our energy security, and move it through the floor of the Senate.

CORNYN:

While most Americans are going to be getting prepared for the Seahawks and the Patriots to tee off in the Super Bowl, the dirty little secret is that the Super Bowl actually is one of the highest levels of human sex trafficking activity of any event in the country. And in, for example, Dallas in 2011 we saw a 300 per cent increase in ads for sex, sexual acts related to human trafficking. The average age of the victims is roughly 13 years of age.

Thankfully, the House is passing some important legislation today dealing with this terrible human scourge, but there's also some important legislation that, hopefully, will get an early opportunity here in the United States Senate. It will actual create victims' support programs with tens of millions of dollars of additional funds, financed entirely by fines. And, of course I applaud the House for taking this action during National Slavery and Human Trafficking Prevention Month. And, there will be an opportunity soon, I trust, for the Senate to follow the House in taking a strong stand against modern-day human slavery.

THUNE:

Last week in the State of the Union address, the President basically admitted that the middle class has not been helped by his policies for the past six years. And, if you look at the statistics and the data, they really kind of bear that out. Household income is down by $2,000; healthcare costs are up by $3,500. And those are the two things that, in a Gallup poll last week, the American people stated were the most important financial concerns they had. Health care costs and better wages.

And we agree that the President's policies have not helped the middle class in this country, and that's why we think it's time for a change. The President's focused in his speech, the State of the Union, and subsequent campaign-style speeches on the government and how the government can help you. We want to put policies in place that embrace and fight for people. And that starts with the vote that we're going to have this week. The Keystone Pipeline vote is about jobs, it's about opportunity, it's about a better future for the American people. And we hope that the President will decide not to veto that bill and come to the conclusion that it's the right thing to do for the American people and for jobs.

BARRASSO:

And continuing with getting America back to work and getting the Senate back to work under Senator Murkowski's leadership on the floor, we've had more votes on amendments in just this past week or two than they did in the entire last year under Harry Reid's - as Majority Leader.

Then, what we've seen just this this past week is the total number of amendments voted on, even by the Democrats, far exceeded the numbers from a whole year ago. Some of the Democrats, Senator Schatz and Senator Markey, had votes, roll call votes, on their amendments and they didn't have - they never had a vote on an amendment with their name on it in the United States Senate before.

And, if a little later today you see Dan Sullivan from Alaska having a vote, a roll call vote, on his amendment, his predecessor, Senator Begich, in six years didn't have a single roll call vote on any one of his amendments. Which is about getting the Senate back to work, which is what Senator McConnell has promised through the last election cycle, to say put the Republicans back in charge.

We want to get the American public back to work. Part of it is the Keystone bill but, from the standpoint of energy, we'll be having hearings later this week on liquefied natural gas export. Again, in Senator Murkowski's energy committee, bi-partisan legislation. Five Republicans, five Democrats, co-sponsors. It's an opportunity to export an American product, help with our balance of trade, help get people back to work in this country, undermine Vladimir Putin, allow our friends overseas to buy our product, and we're hoping that the President will sign that.

And it's critically important when you take a look at the CBO report that just came out yesterday. Very low growth in the economy over the next 10 years. Very disappointing numbers in terms of the potential. We're a better country than that. We have greater opportunities and, under Republican leadership, we're going to continue to focus on jobs and getting the economy moving again.

BLUNT:

On the next order of business, the Homeland Security Funding Bill, the House has sent over to the Senate a bill that deals with a very important issue. Does the law matter or not? The President said on 22 separate occasions he didn't have the authority to do what he now has done and what the Congress should object to. This is an important fight to have. I think we should do everything we can to persuade at least a half a dozen Democrats that they should join us to get this done. Sometimes you don't know how these legislative battles go if you don't have them, and we intend to have this one.

QUESTION:

(inaudible) potential decision by House Republicans to file a lawsuit. (inaudible)

MCCONNELL:

Well, look, all I can tell you right now is we're going to the DHS bill after we finish Keystone. The procedure by which we deal with that will be determined later.

QUESTION:

Mr. Leader, (inaudible) have you decided whether you're going to run that bill (inaudible)?

MCCONNELL:

Yes, yes. We got a House pass bill coming over and we'll turn to it as soon as we finish Keystone.

QUESTION:

Senator McConnell on Iran sanctions, Senator Menendez and some other Democrats said earlier today they don't want to move forward until March 24th or later. What's your view on when the Kirk- Menendez bill will come to the Senate floor?

MCCONNELL:

Yes, well we're hoping to get a bill out of the Banking Committee and, when that happens, it will be on the calendar and we'll make a decision later about the actual timing of it. But my understanding is that Chairman Shelby hopes to move that measure out of the Committee sometime very soon.

QUESTION:

Senator McConnell, what would you like to see Congress (inaudible)?

QUESTION:

(inaudible) Murkowski would like to answer. (inaudible) the Chair. This is for the protection (inaudible).

MURKOWSKI:

Well, regardless of what the Congress does, and I can assure you that this will not move forward to place ANWR in a wilderness designation, as this President is requesting. But regardless of that, what this administration is doing is moving forward into essentially de facto wilderness by managing, not only the 1002 area, but 12 million acres of additional area in the north slope of Alaska, manage that as wilderness.

This is in violation of ANILCA, the law that was passed in 1980, that said there will be no more wilderness in the State of Alaska, no more studies of wilderness. So, what the President is doing is not unlike what we are seeing with the selective interpretation of the Affordable Care Act or immigration, where he is unilaterally action. He is ignoring the law from 1980, ANILCA. So this is an area where Alaskans are going to be fighting back, and I would imagine that I would be joined by many of my colleagues here in the Senate who fear that the actions taken by this President in advancing towards wilderness would be replicated in their states as well. Unacceptable.

MCCONNELL:

Thank you. Thank you very much.

SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL, R-KY., SENATE MAJORITY LEADER

SEN. LISA MURKOWSKI, R-ALASKA

SEN. JOHN CORNYN, R-TEXAS, ASSISTANT SENATE MAJORITY LEADER AND SENATE MAJORITY WHIP

SEN. JOHN THUNE, R-S.D., CHAIRMAN, SENATE REPUBLICAN CONFERENCE

SEN. JOHN BARRASSO, R-WYO., CHAIRMAN, SENATE REPUBLICAN POLICY COMMITTEE

SEN. ROY BLUNT, R-MO., VICE CHAIRMAN, SENATE REPUBLICAN CONFERENCE