Hobby Lobby ruling left wiggle room over definition of 'closely held' firm
Ever since the U.S. Supreme Court held that some corporations with religious owners don't have to offer insurance for birth control, many employers and attorneys have wondered who qualifies for that exemption and how far it goes.

The court found that "closely held" companies like Hobby Lobby Stores Inc. or Conestoga Wood Specialties Corp. did not have to cover forms of contraception that its owners object to on religious grounds. But what makes a company closely held, and can those employers also object to other federal regulations?

The Internal Revenue Service defines a closely held corporation as being more than 50 percent owned by five or fewer individuals in the last half of a tax year, and not a personal service corporation. But the court opinion doesn't reference IRS or define the term, and local experts told Crain's the debate isn't over which corporations might have religious views — or acquire them.

Wixom-based weapons sightings manufacturer Trijicon Inc., Oxford-based defense industry supplier Barron Industries Inc., Utica-based Weingartz Supply Co. and Ann Arbor Township-based Domino's Pizza Inc. were among about a dozen Michigan businesses in litigation with the federal government over some forms of contraception coverage, before the high court's Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores ruling in June.

Barron, Weingartz and Domino's have since obtained court injunctions in their favor in those cases. Trijicon has been sparring with federal officials in another court about the language of a proposed ruling in its own favor.

Autocam Corp., a Kentwood auto parts supplier with more than 2,100 employees, bowed out of a legal challenge to a contraception mandate by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services after Johnson City, Tenn., private equity firm NN Inc. in July acquired a majority stake in Autocam in a deal worth $300 million.

Partly at issue after the sale was whether Autocam still qualified as closely held for purposes of Hobby Lobby, said Patrick Gillen, an attorney for the company and an associate professor at Ave Maria School of Law.

Autocam Medical LLC, an affiliated medical device component maker that is still owned by the devoutly Catholic Kennedy family, went forward with its portion of the case after the sale. That company won a ruling in January that it's covered by Hobby Lobby and the government must pay its legal bills.

The high court found that the federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993 forbade the government from requiring companies like Hobby Lobby and Conestoga to offer contraception coverage under a 2012 edict from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

The ruling did not fully define what constitutes a closely held company, however, since there was no dispute that Hobby Lobby and Conestoga qualify as family-owned businesses. Gillen said he did not know if Autocam Corp. now covers contraceptives, but it is not exempted by the January court injunction in favor of Autocam Medical.

Meanwhile, legislatures in six states — Georgia, Indiana, North Carolina, Texas, Utah and Wyoming — have seen bills introduced to create or expand a state law similar to the federal religious freedom act.

Michigan, which doesn't have a state RFRA law of its own, saw one proposed during the lame-duck session of the Legislature in November. The bill, which then-Speaker Jase Bolger proposed to pair with a proposed protection of sexual orientation under the state Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act, cleared the House but died at the end of the legislative session in December.

The 1993 religious freedom law applies to the federal government, not to states. State bills introduced in the past year have often been assailed as an attempt to authorize some forms of discrimination against gays and lesbians.

Local attorneys have said they expect other cases to emerge about regulations that violate business owners' rights under the religious freedom law, in other areas, even though the lead opinion in the Supreme Court case states the ruling is limited to contraception insurance.

For example, the National Right to Work Legal Defense and Education Foundation Inc. also tried to argue to the National Labor Relations Board that Hobby Lobby bolstered Pacific Lutheran University's challenge to a unionization election for non-tenure-track professors. The NLRB in January found the professors didn't perform a religious function, and sided against the university.