Crossroads GPS Launches $25 Million TV Ad Initiative Over Next Month to Frame Debate on Economy, ObamaCare, Debt
New ad series to spotlight President Obama’s economic and fiscal policies includes $8 million initial TV ad, “Obama’s Promise,” which airs in 10 states.

WASHINGTON – Today, Crossroads Grassroots Policy Strategies (Crossroads GPS) announced a new $25 million issue advocacy initiative over the next four weeks to frame the national debate on jobs, the economy, ObamaCare and government debt.

The first phase of the initiative launches Thursday with the airing of a new Crossroads GPS TV ad, “Obama’s Promise,” which details the Obama Administration’s poor results on fixing the troubled economy, cutting the debt, keeping taxes low and other key issues.

The initial television buy includes network affiliates in Colorado, Florida, Iowa, Michigan, North Carolina, New Hampshire, Nevada, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Virginia.

The new spot will start airing Thursday, May 17 and run through May 31 in an $8m initial buy. The spot can be viewed here, and is available for high resolution download upon request.

“President Obama made commitments on core issues to the American people, and this ad holds him to account,” said Steven Law, president of Crossroads GPS. “Our country faces serious economic and fiscal problems which require practical solutions and not just promises. If we don’t hold Washington politicians accountable, we won’t fix these problems that are holding our country back.”

The ad urges citizens to support the “New Majority Agenda.” For more information about the six major policy initiatives detailed in the plan, visit www.newmajorityagenda.org

Since President Obama took office in January 2009, the national debt has increased by more than $5 trillion, 45% more people are on food stamps, gas prices have doubled, and job growth is anemic, leaving record numbers of Americans to simply give up looking for work and leave the workforce. Obama and his advisors promised that the stimulus bill would prevent the unemployment rate from rising above 8%, but it has been above 8% for every month of Obama’s presidency since February 2009, and the real unemployment rate is considered much higher by economists.

Crossroads GPS is a policy and grassroots advocacy organization that is committed to educating, equipping and mobilizing millions of American citizens to take action on the critical economic and legislative issues that will shape our nation’s future in the years ahead.

For more information, contact Jonathan Collegio at [email protected] or (202) 559-6424.