Sen. Cruz Discusses Gang of Eight Immigration Bill with Rush Limbaugh
WASHINGTON, DC -- U.S. Senator Ted Cruz (R-TX) today joined Rush Limbaugh on the radio to discuss the problems with the Gang of Eight's immigration legislation. Below are excerts from the discussion and the full audio of the interview:

Excerpts of Sen. Cruz

"A lot of Americans are fed up. They are fed up with Democrats and they are fed up with Republicans. They're fed up with politicians in Washington who don’t stand for anything and it’s how we’ve gotten in this mess. It’s how we’ve gotten $17 trillion in debt and if we keep doing business as usual, it’s how we’re gonna to pass yet another amnesty bill that doesn’t fix the problem. I think Americans are really fed up with that and I think we need to stand up and stop it." - 0:33

Washington consultants advise on immigration, abortion, and gay marriage "that Republicans give up our principles and become Democrats." - 6:27

“It’s interesting. You’ve got a number of politicians who are listening it [to the New York Times’ advice] who have not heretofore gotten significant support in the Hispanic community. In my race in Texas—Texas is a majority-minority state—over 40% of the Hispanics in Texas voted for me in the Senate race, and I was very clear in the race from day one in opposing amnesty and supporting border security and improving legal immigration.” - 6:55

"With the Hispanic voters, supporting border security, supporting legal immigration, supporting rule of law is a principled position. And I gotta tell you, we are in a perilous situation, right now, Rush. There are probably 20 republican Senators in the U.S. Senate who are on the fence, who are wobbling on this issue and not sure of how to vote. The proponents of the Gang of 8 are publicly talking about that they think they can get 70 votes in the Senate, and then use that to bludgeon the House into adopting this 'legalization first, and never secure the border' approach." - 7:45

“Washington, D.C. is a bubble, and there is nothing more powerful than the conservative grassroots when we are engaged and letting our voice be heard.” - 9:26

Re: CBO score on Immigration: “If there’s one thing Washington knows how to do, it’s come up with a bogus cost estimates. I mean, we all remember when Obamacare was passed, and we were told it would save money, and we’ve now discovered it’s gonna cost trillions.” - 10:37

“The proponents of the Gang of Eight say that no one who is here illegally will be eligible for welfare. In the Judiciary Committee I offered an amendment—a very simple amendment, it was just a couple sentences—that said no one who is here illegally shall be eligible for any means-tested welfare, federal state or local. Every Democrat on the Committee, and the Republican members of the Gang of 8 all voted against it.” - 11:04

“We are all the children of those who risked everything for freedom. I think that’s what unites us as Americans.” - 13:20

“If this bill passes if effectively sets up affirmative action -- a strong preference for hiring those that are here illegally…Especially Obamacare, they’re exempted from Obamacare...it's a massive economic incentive for employers to not hire Americans or fire Americans in favor of those who are here illegally, and that doesn't make any sense.” - 13:30

“What this bill gets most fundamentally wrong is it starts with legalization and then it promises – like Wimpy in Popeye, ‘I’ll gladly pay you Tuesday for a hamburger today” – it promises border security sometime in the future, and we all know border security ain’t never gonna come, but the legalization happens immediately.” - 15:51

“We are seeing a massive spike in illegal immigration this past year. And this has happened every time amnesty is discussed. Look, people respond to incentives. If you’re in a foreign country and you want to be an American and you hear hey they’re getting ready to do amnesty, it’s a huge incentive to come illegally.” - 16:35

“This Gang of Eight bill, if it passes, would increase illegal immigration.” - 17:15

###