New contracts give private prison giant nearly 80 percent of Florida's private prison market
TALLAHASSEE | The state has traded one private prison giant for another when deciding in October to award three contracts to manage 3,854 prison beds to The GEO Group, a private prison management company that estimates the new contracts will be worth $57 million annually.

The Boca Raton-based company, which already oversees two prison facilities, now manages prisons that house 76 percent of the state's private prison beds. The expiring contracts are currently held by Nashville-based Corrections Corporation of America.

A CCA spokesman said the company was "disappointed with the decisions ... [but] respects the state's decision and will work closely with them and the successful bidder to ensure a safe, seamless transition."

The consolidation of private prison beds comes as the controversial industry has grown in Florida.

Between 2006 and 2012, the state's prison population increased by 11 percent to 100,928. Over that time, Florida's private prison population grew 88 percent from 5,369 to 10,078. That includes the construction of two new facilities operated by private companies.

Five of the state's seven private facilities are now operated by GEO. Utah-based Management and Training Corporation operates the 1,524-bed Gadsden Correctional Facility, and CCA still operates the 888-bed Lake City Correctional Facility.

October's shakeup in the private prison industry impacted contracts for Moore Haven Correctional Facility, Graceville Correctional Facility, and Bay Correctional Facility, which had been operated by CCA. The Geo Group estimates the new business will be worth $57 million annually over the three-year life of deals.

"We look forward to strengthening our longstanding partnerships with the state of Florida and the communities where we operate across the state," wrote George Zoley, the company's chairman and CEO, in a press release announcing the sale.

The current contracts, which are set to officially expire in February, were competitively bid by the Department of Management Services.

Both companies have been very profitable in recent years. In 2012, The Geo Group had $184 million in revenue, while CCA, the nation's largest private prison operator, brought in $304 million.

In documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, both acknowledge they get most revenue from a "limited number of governmental customers." In Florida, GEO used a large chunk of that government-derived income to lobby the state lawmakers who control state funding.

The company retains seven Capitol lobbying firms in Florida, and last quarter, which did not include the legislative session, spent an estimated $105,000 on lobbying. CCA retains one lobbying firm, paying it an estimated $25,000 each quarter.

Though the companies have had success in expanding Florida's private prison industry, they have faced big losses.

In 2011, the Legislature was considering a proposal that would have moved 14,500 South Florida prisoners to privately-run prisons. Zoley, GEO's top executive, said it would have been "the largest single contract procurement in the history of our industry."

The industry gave nearly $1 million in campaign cash to state lawmakers during that election cycle, according to the National Institute of Money in State Politics. The proposal, though, died in the Senate on a tense 21-19 vote.

It was fiercely opposed by unions who represented state correctional officers.

Matt Dixon: (352) 233-0777