Despite differences with Senate, House leaders willing to protect hospitals from cuts
TALLAHASSEE | At the same time the Florida Senate outlined its case Tuesday in favor of Medicaid expansion to offset the potential loss of federal money to care for the poor, House Republicans met behind closed doors where leadership told them to stand firm in opposition.

The simultaneous meetings highlighted the chasm between the two chambers that has brought the budget process to a standstill and all but guarantees a special or extended session past the scheduled May 1 end date.

The only place where they begin to reach an agreement is on finding ways to prevent hospitals from losing money even if the federal government decreases the amount in the Low Income Pool, a special program that helps hospitals and clinics treat the uninsured.

Senate President Andy Gardiner encouraged all 40 members to attend Tuesday's budget committee meeting where the health care workshop was held. During his opening remarks, the Orlando Republican said hospitals would need $600 million in state money to offset losses if the Low Income Pool, or LIP, goes away.

"Everybody needs to understand the full impact of the decision before us," he said.

As he spoke, House Republicans were on the other side of the Capitol listening to what they later described as a history lesson on the budget process, what happens when the session goes into overtime and how the state pays for health care, including LIP.

An Associated Press reporter holding his ear to the door said he could hear House Speaker Steve Crisafulli telling members to ignore media pressure in favor of Medicaid expansion. Florida newspaper editorial boards, including the Times-Union, have been nearly unanimous in criticizing the House's refusal to consider the Senate's Medicaid plan that would use $50 billion in federal funds to purchase private insurance for 800,000 poor Floridians.

Crisafulli implored members to "stand like a rock" and to "trust us" when it comes to House leaders' opposition to Medicaid expansion and positions on hospital funding, the AP reported.

Amy Baker, the state's chief economist, told the Senate panel that if the LIP program goes away, the state would lose $612 million in revenue over five years and nearly 20,000 jobs.

The Senate's Medicaid expansion plan would actually save money in the long run, Baker said.

Most of that would come from ending the Medicaid Medically Needy program in Florida that helps people who can't afford to pay for sizable medical bills because of severe illness or injury.

Medicaid expansion would create some increased costs to Florida as nearly 600,000 people enroll, Baker said. But she still said there would be a net savings to Florida once everything is factored in: $876 million over five years.

Still, House Republicans said they are not willing to accept the Senate plan because it relies heavily on federal dollars.

However, they have moderated their tone on how the state should respond if LIP goes away or is reduced.

In the past, Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island, has said that hospitals should not ask the state to pick up the slack if the federal government decreases LIP.

But he and other House leaders said Tuesday that once they hear from Washington about whether LIP will continue and how, they will be open to discussions with the Senate on how to keep hospitals whole.

"What's most important to us is to keep LIP and Medicaid expansion as two separate issues, and we'll assess that as we move through," Crisafulli said. "Obviously, right now we're not talking about a budget."

"All options will be on the table," said Rep. Jose Oliva, R-Miami Lakes, who is in line to be House speaker.

Because of time constraints at the Senate committee, University of Florida Health Jacksonville CEO Russell Armistead was the only person allowed to provide public comment. Thirteen others had also signed up to speak.

Armistead talked about the $95 million his hospital stands to lose under LIP and how he is convinced such a loss would force the health center to close in a matter of months.

"It's the truth," he said after the workshop. "I don't like it. It's very unsettling."

Gov. Rick Scott issued a statement late Tuesday that said if lawmakers can't iron out a budget soon, he will call a special session for the budget and also convene a "Commission on Health Care and Hospital Funding" to study how state tax dollars are spent.

"A thoughtful analysis of how taxpayer money supports Florida hospitals, insurance and health care providers will guide us in a special session and aid in the development of the [fiscal year] '16-'17 budget," Scott said.

Gardiner said if Scott doesn't collaborate with legislative leaders on what he hopes to accomplish by a special session, the governor may be disappointed in the outcome.

Tia Mitchell: (850) 933-1321