President Obama will go to Jacksonville Port Authority facility Thursday
Jacksonville's port will be the backdrop for President Barack Obama's visit Thursday when he will deliver a speech about his vision for the nation's economic future.

Jacksonville Port Authority officials hope to make a personal appeal to Obama about one of the port's most pressing needs - fixing the Mile Point navigation hazards that limit the port's ability to get more business from ocean-crossing ships.

The White House announced Monday the president will give his speech at a Port Authority facility. It marks the first presidential visit to the port since President George W. Bush toured the Blount Island Terminal in March 2008.

Obama "will lay out his vision for rebuilding an economy that puts the middle class and those fighting to join it front and center," according to a White House statement.

JaxPort Board Chairman Joe York said the authority is seeking a meeting with Obama.

"I would imagine that everybody in Jacksonville will want to try to get a meeting with him," York said. "Certainly, we want to try to highlight the great things that are happening at JaxPort."

JaxPort's No. 1 project is Mile Point, which is where the Intracoastal Waterway meets the St. Johns River, creating unpredictable cross-currents that limit the passage of large cargo container ships.

The state has earmarked $36 million for a construction project that would weaken those currents by reconfiguring the shoreline at Mile Point on the south side of the river.

Even though the state would provide the money, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers cannot start the construction without getting authorization from Congress. JaxPort has been working with the U.S. Department of Transportation and the corps on an alternative method of funneling the money through the U.S. Maritime Administration - a part of the transportation department - to the corps.

The federal Office of Management and Budget, which is in the president's executive branch, has raised some concerns about that proposed arrangement, said Eric Green, senior director of government and external affairs at JaxPort.

"We had always expected there to be some bumps in the road, and they seem to be coming now as opposed to earlier in the process," said Nick Martinelli, legislative director for U.S. Rep. Corrine Brown, D-Jacksonville. "This would be a whole different paradigm."

He said Brown plans to meet this week with Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx about Mile Point. Martinelli said Obama's visit could be a chance to discuss it directly with him as well.

"Just the fact that he's decided to go back down to North Florida and check out the port is certainly good news for us," Martinelli said.

david.bauerlein@jacksonville.com, (904) 359-4581