Northeast Florida school districts seek funds for new facilities, other capital improvements
Northeast Florida's changing education landscape is most apparent in St. Johns County where many students learn in mini-cities of portable classrooms because of increasingly scarce state and local money to build new schools.

As Florida's consistently top-ranked academic school system, St. Johns is racing to keep pace with rapidly growing enrollment, which now exceeds the capacity of even its newest schools. Neighboring school systems might not have as pressing of a need to build new schools but face a similar funding crunch paying for maintaining and renovating their facilities.

Since state money for public school capital project needs dried up significantly in recent years, Florida districts have to scramble to pay for new facilities, expand buildings or update older ones with new technology so students can master the evolving skills they need to succeed in college as well as the workforce.

Districts commonly use a pay-as-you-go system, borrow money or a combination of both to help pay for new construction and other improvements. Most also save up and carry forward capital funding from year-to-year to offset future costs. Nonetheless, they say they can't continue to wait.

St. Johns County voters will be asked Tuesday to approve a half-cent sales tax to support school district capital projects. If approved, the sales tax would take effect Jan. 1, and could generate about $13 million the first year and a total of $150 million by the time it expires on Dec. 31, 2025.

While other Northeast Florida school leaders have no immediate plans to seek voter approval to levy or increase an existing education sales tax, none would rule out the possibility in the future. They said it all depends on the circumstances, but they aren't all confident they could win a sales tax vote.

"We are the poorest county in the state. We have the poorest kids in the state. We need a half-cent sales tax a lot more than they do but it would never pass here," said Superintendent Phyllis Criswell of the Putnam County School District about the adjacent and far more affluent St. Johns school system.

Criswell said her School Board "is never going to approve going after a half-cent sales tax because our people are poor. We make do with what we get because that is the best we can do," she said.

School capital funding is expected to be an issue in the upcoming Florida legislative session which starts Jan. 12.

Northeast Florida school leaders hope to sway legislators to restore all or some of the state capital outlay project funding cut in recent years. Now that the economy is rebounding, they want to recover some local revenue lost when property values dropped during the recession. In addition, districts that get revenue from impact fees tied to new development are looking for an increase in that funding as residential and commercial growth rebound.

Duval County Public Schools Superintendent Nikolai Vitti said the current system limits local revenue without an adequate funding stream at the state level.

Florida uses a convoluted formula to dole out money to districts. Student enrollment is a key factor that determines how much state money districts get to help pay for daily operations, and for capital improvement projects. So, when district lose students, they also lose state money.

Florida school districts aren't allowed to use operating money to pay for capital projects. Districts rely primarily on revenue generated by their local capital outlay millage property tax rate to pay for the projects, but that rate is capped by the Florida Legislature.

Since, the 2008-09 school year, the legislature reduced that cap from 2.0 mills per $1,000 of assessed property value to the current rate of 1.5 mills. School district capital programs statewide took a financial hit that was exacerbated by the recession, which sent property values and impact fees plummeting.

Another blow later came when Florida lawmakers took away state trust fund money - known as Public Education Capital Outlay or PECO - that had been used for new school construction and gave it to charter schools. However, school districts still get some PECO maintenance funding.

"People have to realize, the combination of reducing that millage by 25 percent at the same time that you had property values dropping close to 20 percent and then you had a student population going in the opposite direction. You have the perfect storm for the problem we are facing now," said St. Johns Superintendent Joseph Joyner.

TAKING IT TO VOTERS

Students are pouring into the St. Johns County School District as residential developments sprout like mushrooms in the county that is state-and nationally-rated as one of the best to live in - due in no small part to the consistent academic excellence of the school system.

The district has 43 schools and says it will need 20 new schools in the next decade. To get by for now, they rely upon costly leased portables - 318 this year, the equivalent of nine elementary schools.

The current state funding isn't enough for that new school expansion.

When the state lowered the cap on the millage rate for school capital projects, that meant a loss to St. Johns schools of about $8 million to $9 million a year. Coupled with lower property values due to the recession, St. Johns has lost about $180 million since 2008 that would have gone to capital projects, district officials said.

Joyner said the half-cent sales tax isn't a panacea. It won't eliminate the capital outlay funding shortage but it will help narrow the gap. The sales tax revenue would augment other revenue the school district gets from its capital outlay millage rate as well as impact fees and proportionate share mitigation, which is essentially school concurrency funding, he said.

Impact fees are a one-time tax imposed on all new residential and commercial construction by local governments to help offset the cost of providing essential services including schools, roads, fire and rescue and other infrastructure. Impact fees are reviewed every five years, and the county will review its impact fees for potential updates in 2015-16.

School concurrency funding basically is paid by a residential developer to offset the impact on school facilities of incoming students from the new community.

Joyner said neither impact fees nor capital outlay millage rate revenue - on their own - ever were designed to pay for the entire impact of building schools. The district can't jack up those fees high enough to pay for the actual impact of the growing enrollment, he said. Although rising property values will increase income from the 1.5 mills capital outlay tax rate, it won't solve funding needs, he said.

If St. Johns voters reject the sales tax, the district has few options. It won't be build as many new schools or renovate existing ones as quickly as it needs. It would look at adding more portables, rezoning or even holding double sessions at some schools, Joyner said.

"I'm not trying to frighten people. I'm just being honest. Those are possible options down the road," he said.

Regardless of the sales tax vote outcome, Joyner said district leaders will go back to the legislature to advocate for changes to the state school funding formula to provide more money so school districts can meet their capital needs.

Joyner said the impact of overcrowded schools is evident every day in his school system. "Our parents and families are feeling the impact now.… They're living it. They're waiting in mile-long parent pickup lines at schools. They're see the additional portables and the strain it puts on our infrastructure. They are living the impact and its just going to get worse and worse," he said.

Without adequate facilities and technology, students ultimately will suffer because research shows overcrowding is detrimental to the quality of education, he said.

MAKING DO

State money cuts appear to have hit the Putnam County School District the hardest in Northeast Florida.

With about 11,600 students, the school district's budget totals roughly $90 million a year. This year, it has about $5.2 million in capital funding to help maintain 18 schools.

Putnam has been faced in recent years with declining enrollment and declining revenues of about $7 million in five years as its property tax values dropped, said Rhonda D. Odom, school district chief financial officer.

In addition, the district's total capital funding decreased about $4.8 million since before the millage rate for capital projects was reduced.

"Most of our recurring capital revenue - millage dollars - are used primarily to fund our maintenance department for districtwide maintenance and repair. And we give $400,000 a year split between our schools for their needs, computer equipment, site improvement, etc.," Odom said.

In Duval County, total capital outlay funding for the district decreased from $23.5 million in 2009-10 to $13.7 million this year.

This year, it has a capital projects fund budget of about $130 million and a long list of projects. The district plans to do about $13.7 million of projects this year including roof repairs at various schools for $4.2 million, plumbing and electrical repairs or replacements at various schools for $2 million, and repair the heating/ air conditioning system at Andrew Jackson High School for $1 million.

Those projects will replace old systems that would eventually fail if left in place, said Mark Sherwood, assistant superintendent for communications. The district will pay for the projects with millage funding as well as capital outlay/debt service funding, he said.

Vitti said he hasn't officially raised the potential possibility of seeking a half-cent sales tax with the Duval County School Board.

"But this strategy along with other funding sources will need to be considered as we look at the long-term capital challenges ," Vitti said.

The Clay County school district isn't looking to build new schools yet. But its key legislative priorities include increased funding to pay for school maintenance, repairs and renovations. The district also wants state line item funding for expanding and better equipping its Career and Technical Education academies.

"The state doesn't provide the funding as it used to. Nor would that funding be enough, which is why we have to look for an education appropriation or some line item to give us that additional funding," Deputy Superintendent Diane Kornegay said.

The district is looking at all potential capital project funding possibilities. Clay voters previously rejected a half-cent sales tax for education. But the Clay County Commission plans to ask voters in the November 2016 general election to extend the county's 1 cent sales tax. The school district now gets 10 percent of that sales tax revenue.

Kornegay said the district hopes to negotiate a higher percentage of that revenue if voters approve the extension.

The Nassau County School District plans to spend about $19 million for major projects including a new pre-kindergarten through fifth grade school and four classroom additions and other improvements at two elementary schools, budget documents show.

The projects will be paid for either by capital outlay millage revenue including money carried forward from previous years, impact fees or a combination of those funding sources, district leaders said.

Nassau's capital outlay fund totals roughly $45 million this year, up about $5 million from 2009-10. That's because the district had money left over from previous years and also had additional impact fee revenue.

At some point, district leaders said Nassau may have to consider options such as possibly borrowing money. That would mean the district would incur a debt to be shouldered by future generations who at the same time would have to spend money on facility needs that arise, they said.

Superintendent John Ruis said a possible sales tax vote "is an option to be considered if student growth outpaces a district's capability to provide facilities for that growth." But that situation hasn't happened as yet in Nassau.

Teresa Stepzinski: (904) 359-4075