2004 Index of Acts
Public Chapter 438 Senate Bill 3341 (Southerland) House Bill 3120 (Yokley)

Amends Title 8, Chapter 8, Part 2, relative to the duties of the sheriff. Amends 8-8- 201 by consolidating references to sheriffs’ duties found throughout the code into one subsection.

Effective March 12, 2004.

Public Chapter 450 Senate Bill 2933 (Ramsey) House Bill 2402 (Mumpower)

Amends Title 8, Chapter 10, Part 1, relative to constables. Amends 8-10-101(h) by deleting the language “24,700" and substituting “24,650.” The amendment to 8-10- 101(h) retains the office of constable in McNairy County. Amends 8-10-101(m) by deleting the language “17,550" and substituting “17,400.” The amendment to 8-10- 101(m) retains the office of constable in DeKalb and Johnson Counties. Amends 8-10-108 by adding new subsection (e) vesting constables in Johnson County with law enforcement powers.

Effective March 15, 2004.

Public Chapter 483 Senate Bill 2085 (Trail) House Bill 2202 (Coleman)

Amends 39-17-1351 by creating an exception regarding the length of validity of a handgun permit issued to a member of the U.S. Armed Services. A handgun carry permit issued to a person who is in or who enters the U.S. Armed Services will remain valid for as long as the person's service continues and the person is stationed outside of Tennessee. Time spent in the state by such person for purposes of furlough, leave, or delay en route does not interfere with this provision, so long as such stay does not exceed 60 days. Allows such persons eight months from discharge or separation from service or reassignment back to the state in which to renew the permit without being considered a new applicant. Any renewal application beyond the eight-month period is considered a new application.

Effective April 8, 2004. Applies to all handgun carry permits in effect or issued on or after the effective date of the act.

Public Chapter 499 Senate Bill 2845 (Person) House Bill 2661 (Briley)

Amends 45-6-209(b) by specifically requiring pawnbrokers to include the following information, if available, in their recorded descriptions of pawned articles: (1) brand name; (2) model number; (3) valid, manufacturer-issued serial number; (4) size; (5) color to the untrained eye, except the color of diamonds would not have to be recorded; (6) precious metal type, content and weight; (7) gemstone description, including the number of stones; (8) any other unique identifying marks, numbers, names or letters; and (9) the action-type, caliber or gauge, number of barrels, barrel length and finish of any firearm.

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 515 Senate Bill 2453 (Graves) House Bill 2326 (McDonald)

Enacts new section 55-8-193. Prohibits a person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on any public street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway from operating or permitting the operation of any sound amplification system, including, but not limited to, any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker, or any other electrical device used for the amplification of sound from within the motor vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle. It is not necessary that a person hearing the amplified sound be able to discern particular words in order for the sound emission to constitute a violation.The prohibition does not apply to noise produced by motor vehicles on private property. In addition, the prohibition does not apply to emergency or public safety vehicles, vehicles owned and operated by a municipal or county government or any utility company, for sound emitted unavoidably during a job-related operation, school or community sponsored activities, auctioneers or auctioning activities, boats or other watercrafts operated on waters or any motor vehicle used in an authorized public activity for which a permit has been granted by the appropriate agency of a municipal or county government. It is not the intent of this section to prohibit any right guaranteed by the United States Constitution and state constitution including freedom of speech and freedom of religion. A violation of this act is a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine only of up to $50.00.

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 533 Senate Bill 2797 (Burchett) House Bill 2753 (Vaughn)

Amends Title 49, Chapter 7, Part 1, relative to certain deaths or injuries occurring on the property of institutions of higher education and to enact the "Robert 'Robbie' Nottingham Campus Crime Scene Investigation Act of 2004". Adds new section 49-7-129. Provides that regardless of whether a public or private institution of higher education has entered into a mutual assistance agreement with a law enforcement agency pursuant to 49-7-118, the chief security officer or chief law enforcement officer of the institution must immediately notify, unless otherwise provided by federal law, the local law enforcement agency with territorial jurisdiction over the institution if the medically unattended death of a person occurs on the property of the institution or if the officer or any other official of the institution is in receipt of a report alleging that any degree of rape has occurred on the property of the institution. The chief security officer or chief law enforcement officer must designate one or more persons who will have the authority and duty to notify the appropriate law enforcement agency in the absence of the chief security officer or chief law enforcement officer. Provides that upon notification it will be the duty of each law enforcement agency to participate in a joint investigation of the death or alleged rape. In the case of a medically unattended death, the local law enforcement agency shall lead the investigation. In the case of an alleged rape, the institution's law enforcement agency shall lead the investigation.

Effective April 15, 2004.



Public Chapter 552 Senate Bill 3280 (Trail) House Bill 3379 (Coleman)

Amends Title 38, Chapter 6, Part 1, relative to certain criminal history information compiled by the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation by adding new section 38-6-120. Authorizes the TBI to sell intrastate criminal history information to the private sector and noncriminal justice agencies for $29.00 per name submitted. Purpose of the fee is to offset expenditures related to operational costs of the TBI.

Effective April 22, 2004.

Public Chapter 588 Senate Bill 2984 (Burks) House Bill 2792 (Hargrove)

Amends Title 36, Chapter 3, Part 6, relative to service of orders of protection. Rewrites 36-3-609. Provides that any subsequent order of protection is effective when the order is entered if the respondent has been served with a copy of the petition, notice of hearing, and any ex parte order issued pursuant to section 36-3- 605(c). An order is considered entered when the order is signed by (1) the judge and all parties or counsel, (2) the judge and one party or counsel and contains a certificate of counsel that a copy of the proposed order has been served on all other parties or counsel, or (3) the judge and contains a certificate of the clerk that a copy has been served on all other parties or counsel. However, regardless of when an order is considered entered, if the court finds that the protection of the petitioner so requires, the court may order, in the manner provided by law or rule, that the order of protection take effect immediately. Service upon a party or counsel may be made by delivering to the party or counsel a copy of the order of protection, or by the clerk mailing it to the party’s last known address. In the event the party’s last known address is unknown and cannot be ascertained upon diligent inquiry, the certificate of service shall so state. Service by mail is complete upon mailing. Provides that, if the respondent has been served with a copy of the petition, notice of hearing, and any ex parte order issued pursuant to section 36-3-605(c), an order of protection issued pursuant to this part after a hearing will be in full force and effect against the respondent from the time it is entered regardless of whether the respondent is present at the hearing. A copy of any order of protection and any subsequent modifications or dismissal will be issued to the petitioner, the respondent, and the local law enforcement agencies having jurisdiction in the area where the petitioner resides. Upon receipt of the copy of the order of protection or dismissal from the issuing court or clerk's office, the local law enforcement agency must immediately enter the order or dismissal in the Tennessee crime information system and take any necessary action to immediately transmit it to the national crime information center. Amends 36-3-605(b) by providing that any ex parte order of protection shall be in effect until the time of the hearing and, if the hearing is held within 15 days of service of the order, the ex parte order shall continue in effect until the entry of any subsequent order of protection issued pursuant to36-3-609.

Effective May 3, 2004, for the purpose of changing any forms necessary to implement the provisions of the act. For all other purposes, the effective date is July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 593 Senate Bill 3426 (Crutchfield) House Bill 3528 (McMillan)

Amends Title 38, Chapter 3, Part 1, relative to homeland security. Authorizes the Commissioner of Safety to commission as peace officers certain officers of the Office of Homeland Security, upon application of the Office of Homeland Security. Homeland Security officers eligible for commission will be those who directly support state, federal, and local law enforcement activities in countering or responding to acts of terrorism. Each officer so commissioned will have all the powers of a peace officer for the sole purpose of carrying out the scope of assigned duties. Those powers include the power to make arrests, serve process, and carry weapons while in the performance of official duties. Every appointed on-duty officer must possess a badge and identification card that identifies the officer as working for the Office of Homeland Security. The officer must exhibit the badge and identification card on demand and before making an arrest within a reasonable amount of time. The officers must also complete appropriate initial training and recurrent law enforcement training substantially equivalent to the requirement of the Tennessee Peace Officers Standards and Training Commission. Requires the keepers of jails in any county or municipality, wherein a violation occurs, to receive all persons arrested by such officers. Persons so arrested shall be received by keepers of jails on the same basis and shall have the same status as prisoners arrested by any other law enforcement officer.

Effective May 3, 2004.

Public Chapter 624 Senate Bill 2097 (Burchett) House Bill 2208 (Brooks, Harry)

Amends 40-39-106(f). For all sexual offenses committed on or after July 1, 1997, makes the name and address of any institution of higher education in the state at which a sexual offender is employed, carries on a vocation or is a student public information. Requires that the aforementioned information be placed on the State of Tennessee's internet home page by October 1, 2004.

Effective May 10, 2004.

Public Chapter 636 Senate Bill 2745 (Trail) House Bill 3452 (McMillan)

Amends 41-3-106(b)(2). Authorizes inmates housed in a county or municipal jail or workhouse to perform any labor on behalf of a charitable organization or a nonprofit corporation or a governmental entity. Requires that all inmate labor for any such organization, corporation, or governmental entity be voluntary.

Effective May 10, 2004.

Public Chapter 655 Senate Bill 2764 (Kilby) House Bill 2705 (Ferguson)

Amends Title 8, Chapter 10 relative to constables. Amends 8-10-119(b)(2), 8-10- 120(a), 8-10-120(d), 8-10-201, 8-10-203. Extends the authority and responsibilities of the Tennessee Constable Association to the Tennessee Constable Council relating to the following functions: (1) approving the design of the patch displayed on the shirt of the official constable uniform; (2) adopting the stripe design and other emblems and lettering displayed on the constable patrol car; (3) sponsoring in- service training on operating a patrol car using lights; (4) developing and maintaining in-service education courses offered throughout the year; and (5) establishing requirements for range qualification for constables. Amends 8-10-205.Requires the county election commission or the county legislative body to notify either the Tennessee Constable Association or the Tennessee Constable Council on the election or appointment of constables. Recognizes that the Tennessee Constable Council is a valid constable organization dedicated to enhancing the professionalism of Tennessee constables and may elect its own officers, set its own dues, determine its own eligibility requirements, and prescribe its own training and teaching requirements. No state funds may be appropriated to the Tennessee Constable Council. The Tennessee Constable Council is not a governmental entity and is not subject to the governmental entity review law, compiled in Title 4, Chapter 29.

Effective May 14, 2004.

Public Chapter 661 Senate Bill 2432 (Burchett) House Bill 2275 (Brooks, Harry)

Amends 62-35-118(d). Permits state or local correctional officer who has completed basic correctional training program and who is current on annual refresher courses to be issued "unarmed security guard/officer" registration card without completion of the required training for such card. Amends 62-35-103(a). Exempts from the provisions governing private protective services those companies using or providing certified law enforcement officers or others for traffic control purposes within temporary work zones located in the public right-of-way and established in accordance with the manual on uniform traffic control devices (MUTCD). The law enforcement agency providing the officers may require that the company have on staff a traffic control supervisor or a traffic control engineer to order to insure compliance with the MUTCD and may also require the company to demonstrate proof of liability insurance.

Effective May 14, 2004.

Public Chapter 695 Senate Bill 3257 (Harper) House Bill 3365 (Sontany)

Amends 41-4-115(d). Authorizes any county or municipality, by resolution or ordinance adopted by a two-thirds vote of its legislative body, to establish and implement a plan authorizing the jail or workhouse administrator of the county or municipality to charge an inmate in the jail or workhouse a co-pay amount for any medical care, treatment, pharmacy services or substance abuse treatment by a licensed provider provided to such inmate by the county or municipality. The county or municipality adopting the co-pay plan must establish the amount the inmate is required to pay for each service provided. A county or municipality may not deny medical care, treatment, pharmacy services or substance abuse treatment by a licensed provider to an inmate who cannot pay the co-pay amount established by the plan.

Effective May 18, 2004.

Public Chapter 727 Senate Bill 3181 (Kilby) House Bill 3397 (Stanley)

Amends 39-16-609 by adding criminal summons to the failure to appear statute.

Effective May 19, 2004.

Public Chapter 757 Senate Bill 2278 (Crowe) House Bill 2601 (Godsey)

Amends 55-10-108(b). Authorizes any motor vehicle officer who investigates any accident to have the parties exchange insurance information.

Effective May 24, 2004.

Public Chapter 766 Senate Bill 3073 (Crowe) House Bill 3242 (Patton)

Amends 49-7-118. Redefines qualifications for higher education campus security guards. Divides campus security guards into three categories: police officers, public safety officers, and security officers. Defines "campus police officer" as a person commissioned by an employing institution and rendered an oath to provide police services, enforce law, exercise arrest authority, and carry firearms. These officers will be subject to the provisions of the Peace Officer Standards and Training Commission. Defines "public safety officers" as a person who is a campus police officer and also performs other significant duties such as certified firefighter, medical first responder, and/or tasks associated with homeland security. Defines "campus security officer" as a person employed by an institution to provide non- police, security-related service. These officers would not be authorized to exercise arrest authority or carry firearms, nor would they be subject to the provisions of the Peace Officer Standards and Training Commission. Defines "law enforcement agency" as an institution employing one or more commissioned police officers. In addition to the minimum requirements under regulation by the Peace Officer Standards and Training Commission, this act allows each board or institution to set additional qualifying factors, training standards, and policies for employees holding a police officer's commission. Extends the jurisdiction of a campus police officer to include the public roads or rights-of-way which connect between facilities, property, or interests of a particular institution. Transfers the authority to enter into written mutual assistance or other agreements with other law enforcement agencies from "security officer" to "a law enforcement agency."

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 769 Senate Bill 3256 (Harper) House Bill 3364 (Sontany)

Amends 41-4-142. Permits a county or municipality upon two-thirds vote of the legislative body to authorize the jail or workhouse administrator to charge an inmate committed to the jail or workhouse a nominal fee set by the legislative body at the time of adoption for the following special services, when provided at the inmate’s request: (1) participation in GED or other scholastic testing for which the administering agency charges a fee for each test administered; (2) escort by correctional officers to a hospital or other health care facility for the purpose of visiting an immediate family member who is a patient at such facility; or (3) escort by correctional officers for the purpose of visiting a funeral home or church upon the death of an immediate family member. The plan adopted may authorize the jail or workhouse administrator to deduct the amount from the inmate’s jail trust account or any other account or fund established by or for the benefit of the inmate while incarcerated. Clarifies that a county or municipality may not deny necessary clothing or hygiene items or to fail to provide services based on the inmate's inability to pay.

Effective May 24, 2004.

Public Chapter 776 Senate Bill 1083 (Jackson) House Bill 1622 (Cochran)

Amends 39-17-1351(c)(6) and (c)(7). Clarifies the eligibility requirements for a handgun carry permit. Provides that a conviction of a criminal offense that is designated as a felony disqualifies a person from obtaining a handgun carry permit. Excepts convictions for any federal or state offenses pertaining to antitrust violations, unfair trade practices, restraints of trade or other similar offenses relating to the regulations of business practices. Provides that a current indictment or information for any criminal offense that is designated as a felony disqualifies a person from obtaining a handgun carry permit. Excepts indictment or information for any federal or state offenses pertaining to antitrust violations, unfair trade practices, restraints of trade or other similar offenses relating to the regulations of business practices.

Effective May 28, 2004.

Public Chapter 777 Senate Bill 3226 (Miller) House Bill 3232 (McKee)

Amends 40-39-111. Provides that a sexual offender may not knowingly reside or work within one thousand feet of any public school, private or parochial school, licensed day care center, or any other child care facility. Provides that a sexual offender may not knowingly reside within 1,000 feet of the property on which the offender's former victims, or the victims' immediate family members, reside. Provides that a sexual offender may not knowingly reside where a minor resides. Excepts the minor children of the offender unless the offender's parental rights have been or are in the process of being terminated as provided by law; or if any minor or adult child of the offender was a victim of a sexual offense committed by the sexual offender. Clarifies that if the ownership or use of or person or entity that occupies property within 1,000 feet of a sex offender's registered address changes, and such change occurs while a sexual offender is residing or working in a particular location, the change shall not form the basis for finding that a sexual offender is in violation of the residence or employment restrictions of this section.

Effective January 1, 2005.

Public Chapter 778 Senate Bill 3430 (Ketron) House Bill 3486 (McMillan)

Amends 55-50-102 by adding subsections (18) and (29). Defines "certificate for driving" as a certificate issued by the department to an individual who does not satisfy the requirements of 55-50-321(c)(1)(C)(i) or (ii). Provides that the certificate for driving will be clearly distinguishable from a driver license and will clearly display on its face: "FOR DRIVING PURPOSES ONLY – NOT VALID FOR IDENTIFICATION". Defines "lawful permanent resident" as the status of having been lawfully accorded the privilege of residing permanently in the United States as an immigrant in accordance with the immigration laws. Amends 55-50-303(a) by adding subdivision (9). Provides that the department shall not issue a driver license to any person who is not a United States citizen or lawful permanent resident of the United States. Amends 55-50-321(c)(1) by adding new subdivisions (C) and (D). Provides that any applicant applying for a driver license, instruction permit, intermediate driver license or photo identification license, upon initial issuance or reinstatement, must provide either an original or certified copy of one of the following: documentation that the applicant is a citizen of the United States; or documentation issued by the United States government establishing that the applicant is a lawful permanent resident. Provides further that any applicant who has received an initial issuance of a driver license since January 1, 2001, must provide documentation as required above upon the first renewal date of the license. Amends 55-50-322(a)(1)(A) by requiring the department to examine every applicant for a certificate for driving in addition to a driver license, intermediate driver license, or learner permit, except as otherwise provided by law. Amends 55-50-323 by providing that the fee charged for a certificate for driving will be the same as the fee charged for a five year Class D license. Amends 55-50-331 by adding new subsections (g) - (i). Provides that the department may issue a certificate for driving to persons whose presence in the United States has been authorized by the federal government for a specific purpose and for a specified period of authorized stay. Provides that the certificate of driving will be valid only during the period of the time of the applicant's authorized stay in the United States. Specifies that no certificate will be issued for a period of less than one year or longer than five years. Provides that the department may issue a certificate for driving to persons who do not satisfy the requirement of 55-50-331(g) or the requirements of 55-50- 321(c)(1)(C), however, such certificate for driving will be valid only for a period of one year. Provides that, except as otherwise provided by law, all laws applicable to driver licenses and financial responsibility will also apply to certificates for driving and all laws applicable to convictions, suspensions, cancellations, and revocations of driver licenses will also apply to certificates for driving. Amends 55- 50-332 by adding new subsection (c). Provides that duplicate certificates for driving obtained in place of such certificates for driving, issued pursuant to 55-50-331(g) or 55-50-331(h) will be valid during the period of time specified in such subsections. Amends 55-50-337 by adding new subsections (c) and (d). Provides that certificates for driving issued pursuant to 55-50-331(g) or 55-50-331(h) will be valid during the period of time specified in such subsections. Provides further that any person issued a license or permit prior to the effective date of this act, who is subject to the provisions of 55-50-331(g) or 55-50-331(h) will, upon renewal or reapplication, receive, if otherwise eligible, a certificate for driving which shall expire in accordance with such subsections.

Effective May 28, 2004, for amendments to 55-50-303(a) and 55-50-321(c)(1). Theamendments to 55-50-102, 55-50-322(a)(1)(A), 55-50-323, 55-50-331, 55-50-332,and 55-50-337 become effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 780 Senate Bill 2364 (Person) House Bill 2343 (Ferguson)

Enacts "Elder Tennesseans Protection Act of 2004". Amends 40-11-150 by adding new subsection (k). Provides that any offender arrested for a violation of section 71- 6-119, involving physical harm or abuse in which the alleged victim is an adult of advanced age as such terms are defined in section 71-6-102, shall not be released within 12 hours of arrest if the official authorized to set bail in the case finds that the offender would be a continued threat to the alleged victim if released within the 12 hour period. The official may, however, release the accused in less than 12 hours if the official determines that sufficient time has or will have elapsed for the victim to be protected. Also amends 68-11-254(a)(1), 68-11-254(a)(2), 71-6-102(5), 71-6-120, 40-15-105(a)(3), 40-35-313(a)(3)(A), and 68-11-1004.

Effective July 1, 2004, except that the provisions of section 6 shall take effect January 1, 2005.

Public Chapter 796 Senate Bill 176 (Norris) House Bill 591 (Pleasant)

Amends 55-8-187. Prohibits the exhibition of obscene and patently offensive movies on or within a motor vehicle if such exhibition is visible to other drivers. Imposes a fine from $2.00 to $50.00 for a violation of the statute.

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 803 Senate Bill 2419 (McNally) House Bill 2796 (Curtiss)

Amends Title 67, Chapter 4, relative to the taxation of unauthorized substances. Provides that the purpose of this act is to levy an excise tax to generate revenue for state and local law enforcement agencies for use by those agencies to investigate, combat, prevent and reduce drug crimes, and for the state general fund. Defines "local law enforcement agency" as a municipal police department, a metropolitan police department, or a sheriff's office. Provides that every local law enforcement agency and every state law enforcement agency must report to the Department of Revenue within 48 hours after seizing an unauthorized substance, or making an arrest of an individual in possession of an unauthorized substance, listed in this subsection upon which a stamp has not been affixed. The report must be in the manner prescribed by the commissioner and must include the time and place of the arrest or seizure, the amount, location, and kind of substance, the identification of any individual in possession of the substance and such individual's social security number, and any other information prescribed by the commissioner. The report must be made when the arrest or seizure involves any of the following unauthorized substances upon which a stamp has not been affixed as required by this act: (1) more than 42½ grams of marijuana, (2) any illicit alcoholic beverage, (3) seven or more grams of any other unauthorized substance that is sold by weight, (4) ten or more dosage units of any other unauthorized substance that is not sold by weight. Provides that the commissioner shall credit the proceeds of the tax levied by this act to a special non-reverting account, to be called the "State Unauthorized Substances Tax Account", until the tax proceeds are unencumbered. The commissioner shall remit the unencumbered tax proceeds as provided in this section on a quarterly or more frequent basis. Directs that the commissioner shall first apply the unencumbered tax proceeds to the costs of storing and disposing of the assets seized in payment of the assessment under this act, which costs shall be added to and become part of the assessment. From the remaining proceeds, the commissioner shall remit 75% of the unencumbered tax proceeds that were collected by assessment to the state or local law enforcement agency that conducted the investigation of a dealer that led to the assessment. Such proceeds are to be used by the agency solely for the purpose of investigating, combating, preventing, and reducing drug crimes. If more than one (1) state or local law enforcement agency conducted the investigation, the commissioner shall determine the equitable share for each agency based on the contribution each agency made to the investigation. The commissioner's determination of the equitable share for each agency shall be final, and shall not be subject to review in an administrative or judicial proceeding. The commissioner shall credit the remaining unencumbered tax proceeds to the state general fund.

Effective January 1, 2005.

Public Chapter 818 Senate Bill 30 (Clabough) House Bill 64 (Overbey)

Amends 39-16-510. Expands the crime of retaliation for past action to include threats against family members. Defines "family member" as the spouse, parent, grandparent, stepmother, stepfather, child, grandchild, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, adopted children of the parent, or the spouse's parents.

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 833 Senate Bill 827 (Harper) House Bill 1202 (Pruitt)

Amends 40-33-211. Requires the Department of Health to apportion up to $200,000 from the funds derived from forfeiture of seized vehicles, driven by owners using a canceled, suspended, or revoked driver license while under the influence of an intoxicant, and placed in the alcohol and drug addiction treatment fund, along with any other gifts or grants, to supplement services related to compulsive gambling disorder, including: (1) a compulsive gambling hotline; (2) coordination of activities and services, and gathering data regarding compulsive gambling; (3) training personnel to screen for, assess, and prevent compulsive gambling; and (4) assuring that assessment services are available through local treatment providers.

Effective June 8, 2004.



Public Chapter 845 Senate Bill 2143 (Kilby) House Bill 2209 (Winningham)

Amends 39-17-417(c) by adding methamphetamine to the present law provisions governing the punishment of cocaine. Amends 39-17-417(i)(10). With respect to a violation of 39-17-417(a), lowers the amount necessary to constitute a Class B felony from 100 grams or more to 26 grams or more of any substance containing amphetamine or methamphetamine or any salt of an optical isomer of amphetamine or methamphetamine. Amends 39-17-417(j)(10). With respect to a violation of 39- 17-417(a), lowers the amount necessary to constitute a Class A felony from 1,000 grams or more to 300 grams or more of any substance containing amphetamine or methamphetamine or any salt of an optical isomer of amphetamine or methamphetamine. Adds new section 39-17-434, prohibiting the possession of any substance with the intent to use such substance in the manufacture of a Schedule I or Schedule II controlled substance or to knowingly convey such substance to another for use in the manufacture of a Schedule I or Schedule II controlled substance. Provides courts with a non-exclusive list of considerations to apply in determining whether the above provisions were violated. Provides that any person authorized by law to dispense, prescribe, manufacture or possess the controlled substance in question would be exempt from the new prohibition. A violation of 39- 17-434 is a Class E felony.

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 855 Senate Bill 2979 (Burks) House Bill 2385 (Curtiss)

Amends Title 68. Adds a new part relative to the inspection, testing and quarantine of property where methamphetamine was manufactured. Directs the Commissioner of Environment and Conservation to compile and maintain a list of certified industrial hygienists and such other persons or entities as the Commissioner certifies as qualified to perform the services of industrial hygienists. Directs the commissioner to also compile and maintain a list of persons authorized to perform clean-up of hazardous waste sites, including but not limited to property used to manufacture methamphetamine. Such property may include, but is not limited to, leased or rented property such as a hotel or motel room, rented home or apartment, or any residential property. Such lists may also be posted on the website maintained by the commissioner. Provides that the combination of substances necessary for the manufacture of methamphetamine is a hazardous substance pursuant to 68-131-102 (9)(A). Provides that any property, or any structure or room in any structure on any property wherein the manufacture of a controlled substance listed in 39-17- 408(d)(2) is occurring or has occurred, may be quarantined by the local law enforcement agency where the property is located. The law enforcement agency which quarantines the property will be responsible for posting signs indicating that the property has been quarantined and, to the extent they can be reasonably identified, for notifying all parties having any right, title or interest in the quarantined property, including any lienholders. Provides that any person who has an interest in property quarantined may file a petition in the general sessions, criminal, circuit or chancery court of the county in which the property is located for the purpose of requesting that the court order the quarantine of the property be lifted for one of the following reasons: (1) that the property was wrongfully quarantined; or (2) that the property has been properly cleaned, all hazardous materials removed and that it is now safe for human use but the law enforcement agency who imposed the quarantine refuses to lift it. The court shall take such proof as it deems necessary to rule upon the petition filed and, after hearing such proof, may grant the petition and lift the quarantine or deny the petition and keep the quarantine in place. Once the property has been quarantined, any party having a right, title or interest in the quarantined property, including any lienholders, may contact either a certified industrial hygienist or other person or entity certified as qualified from the list maintained by the commissioner to perform appropriate testing on the property to determine whether hazardous waste is present on the property, or a contractor from the list maintained by the commissioner for clean-up and removal of all hazardous waste from the property. The property must remain quarantined until a certified industrial hygienist or other person or entity named on the commissioner’s list certifies to the quarantining agency that the property is safe for human use.

Effective June 8, 2004, for the purpose of promulgating rules. Effective July 1, 2004, for all other purposes.

Public Chapter 865 Senate Bill 2935 (Ramsey) House Bill 2629 (Buttry)

Amends Title 38, Chapter 8, Part 1, by adding a new section. Provides that all law enforcement agencies are allowed to open their shooting ranges for public use when such ranges are not being used by law enforcement personnel. The law enforcement agency in charge of a shooting range may establish reasonable regulations for the use of such firing range in order to promote the full use of such range without interfering with the needs of law enforcement personnel. Allows law enforcement agencies to charge a reasonable fee for persons or organizations using the range and may require users to make improvements to the range.

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 869 Senate Bill 2929 (Trail) House Bill 2659 (Briley)

Amends 8-4-115(a)(1)(C). Authorizes the local law enforcement agency and the court clerk to collaborate on an automated process for the electronic submission of final dispositions for criminal cases to the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation. Once the process has been certified by the TBI, all final dispositions shall be reported electronically. Further, upon implementation of an automated process, the delivery to the local law enforcement agency of a completed judgment order to be used by the local law enforcement agency for completion of an R-84 Disposition Card and the submission by the local law enforcement agency of a completed R-84 Disposition Card to the TBI will no longer be required. Amends 8-4-115(a)(1) by adding a new subdivision (E). Requires the law enforcement agency to deliver to the appropriate court clerk’s office a warrant or capias containing the state control number assigned by the law enforcement agency upon the arrest of an individual. Requires the court clerk to record the state control number in the court information system of the court clerk office. Amends 8-4-115 by adding a new subsection (h). Provides that upon the establishment of an automated system for final disposition reporting, clerks of court shall submit final disposition reports electronically to the TBI. Jurisdictions that submit final disposition reports electronically will cease the submission of R-84 Disposition Cards upon advisement from the TBI. Provides that the submission of an electronic final disposition report shall have the same force and effect as the submission of a R-84 Disposition Card. Amends 8-4-115 by adding a new subsection (i). Provides that any automated court information system being used or developed on or after July 1, 2005, including, but not limited to, the Tennessee court information system (TnCIS) being designed pursuant to 16-3- 803(h), shall ensure that an electronic file of final disposition data will be reported to the TBI. The form, general content, time, and manner of submission of the electronic file of final disposition data will comply with the rules and regulations prescribed by the TBI.

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 877 Senate Bill 2833 (Trail) House Bill 2813 (Coleman)

Amends 37-2-415(a)(8). Authorizes the Department of Children's Services to request that a criminal justice agency perform a federal name-based criminal history record check of each adult residing in a home during an emergency situation when a child must be placed in home-care due to the absence of parents or custodians. Provides that the child shall be removed from the home immediately if any adult resident fails to provide fingerprints or written permission to perform a federal criminal history check when requested.

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 889 Senate Bill 2922 (Crutchfield) House Bill 3008 (Hagood)

Amends 40-6-205 and 40-6-215. Revises the provisions governing the issuance of a criminal summons. Provides that a criminal summons will be issued if the affiant is not a law enforcement officer except that a magistrate may issue a warrant for arrest rather than a criminal summons if: (1) the offense complained of is a felony,(2) there are multiple-affiants and one or more of the affiants is a law enforcement officer, (3) after examination of the affiant and the affidavit of complaint, the magistrate has probable cause to believe that the issuance of a warrant of arrest rather than a criminal summons is necessary to prevent an immediate danger of domestic abuse victim, (4) the affiant has a written police report concerning the incident for which the arrest warrant is sought or the incident can be verified with a report on file with the appropriate law enforcement agency, (5) a reasonable likelihood exists that the person will fail to appear in court, (6) there are one or more outstanding warrants or criminal summons for such a person, or (7) the person cannot, has not, or will not offer satisfactory evidence of identification. Gives the local law enforcement agency responsible for booking and processing the discretion to establish booking and processing procedures that meet the needs of the particular jurisdiction. Eliminates the requirement of keeping persons being booked pursuant to a criminal summons segregated from other criminals during the booking and processing procedure. Requires the sheriff or other law enforcement agency in the county responsible for serving the summons, to provide the defendant with notice of the court time and date the defendant is to appear, either at the time the summons is served or at the time the defendant is booked and processed, if booking and processing is ordered to occur prior to the first court date. Requires the court clerk, sheriff, or other law enforcement agency, to provide notice to the affiant, or affiants in the case of multiple-affiants, of the date and time when the defendant is required to appear before the court. Clarifies that the failure to appear for court or failure to appear for booking and processing is a separate criminal offense punishable as provided for in 39-16-609. Adds new section 40-6-117. Clarifies that a judge who is elected to an eight year term and who is licensed to practice law in Tennessee can always issue an arrest warrant regardless of whether the exceptions in 40-6-205 or 40-6-215 apply.

Effective June 8, 2004.

Public Chapter 893 Senate Bill 2606 (Williams) House Bill 3104 (Hood)

Amends 55-9-603(f). Makes the violation of the seat belt law a primary offense. Amends 55-9-603(a). Revises the requirement that no person may operate a passenger motor vehicle unless that person and all passengers over four years of age are restrained by a safety belt to only those times in which the vehicle is on a highway. Amends 55-9-603(h). Exempts from the seat belt law vehicles being operated under 15 miles per hour if it is used in a parade, hayride, or crossing a highway from one field to another. Amends 55-9-603(f). Provides that the Department of Safety shall not report any convictions under this section except for law enforcement or governmental purposes. Amends 55-9-603 by adding a new subsection (k). Provides that the Department of Safety shall file a report by March 1 of each year to the 104th, 105th, and 106th General Assemblies on data collected for the prior five years by the department relating to violations of 55-9-603. Such data shall include the number of persons cited for violations of 55-9-603, their race, ethnicity, sex, age, and any other information the department deems relevant. Amends 55-9-604(a). Specifies that receipt of a citation or warrant for arrest for failure to wear a seat belt is inadmissible in a civil action, except under certain circumstances.

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 899 Senate Bill 3159 (Kilby) House Bill 3182 (Briley)

Enacts the “Tennessee Serious and Violent Sex Offender Monitoring Pilot Project Act”. The Act makes appropriations for the monitoring program for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2004. Amends 40-28-201(a). Provides that in addition to the other charges and fees imposed by this section, any person who is under the jurisdiction and supervision of the Board of Probation and Parole and is enrolled in an electronic monitoring and tracking supervision program shall be required to contribute such funds as the board deems necessary and reasonable to cover the applicable costs of said program. Provides that the provisions of this subdivision shall also apply to any probationer or parolee for violation of a serious offense or sexually violent offense, as defined in 40-39-201, transferred to the state of Tennessee from another state under the supervision of the Interstate Compact for the Supervision of Probationers or Parolees. Amends Title 40, Chapter 39 by adding a new part setting forth definitions and authorizing the board to establish the monitoring program and promulgate guidelines governing it. Directs the board to develop implementing guidelines for the continuous satellite-based monitoring of serious offenders and violent sexual offenders, in consultation with all participating state and local law enforcement, by December 31, 2004. Directs the board to contract, prior to December 31, 2004, with a single vendor for the hardware services needed to monitor subject offenders and correlate their movements to reported crime incidents using a system meeting the requirements of the act. Requires the board to make a report, on or before March 1, 2005, to a joint meeting of the Judiciary Committee of the Senate and the House of Representatives and the Joint Oversight Committee on Correction regarding the implementation of this act, and the results of the programs created by this act. Sets forth additional guidelines for the administration of the program. Specifically authorizes the Department of Correction, the Board of Paroles, the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation, and all local law enforcement agencies to share criminal incident information (limited to the time, place, and nature of the crime) with each other and the vendor selected by the department to carry out the purposes of this part, and authorizes the department to direct the vendor so chosen to use data collected pursuant to this part in preparing correlation reports for distribution to and use by state and local law enforcement agencies.

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 907 Senate Bill 3203 (Harper) House Bill 3363 (Sontany)

Amends 41-2-123(b)(1). Adds “public easements” and “alongside public waterways” to the list of places the sheriff and/or superintendent of the county workhouse can permit misdemeanor jail inmates or workhouse inmates to work for sentence reduction credits. Requires that inmates work within 50 feet of the shoreline when working alongside public waterways.

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 908 Senate Bill 3180 (Kilby) House Bill 3394 (Shepard)

Amends 8-7-110(a). Provides that any law enforcement officer employed by or assigned to a judicial district drug task force pursuant to 8-7-110 must meet the minimum certification requirements of the Peace Officers Standards and Training Commission, however, such officer will not be entitled to receive a police pay supplement for said certification. Amends 8-42-101(3)(C). Requires members of a drug task force to meet the criteria set forth in 8-7-110 in addition to the rules and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of Finance and Administration in order to be eligible for state-supported legal defense in lawsuits arising from the performance of their official duties.

Effective June 7, 2004.



Public Chapter 911 Senate Bill 3364 (Bryson) House Bill 3403 (Hargrove)

Amends 39-14-150. Enacts the “Identity Theft Victims’ Rights Act of 2004”. Defines the offense of identity theft and identity theft trafficking and classifies identity theft as a Class D felony and identity theft trafficking as a Class C felony. In a prosecution for identity theft trafficking, permits the trier of fact to infer from the defendant’s possession of the personal identifying information of five or more different individuals that the defendant possessed the information with the intent to sell, transfer, give, trade, loan or deliver the information. However, if the defendant had the consent of one or more of the individuals to possess the information of that individual, any such consenting individual cannot be counted in determining whether an inference of possession for sale may be drawn by the trier of fact. Defines “personal identifying information.” Declares that any person whose identity is unlawfully obtained in violation of this section is a victim of crime within the meaning of Article I, § 35 of the Constitution of Tennessee and Title 40, Chapter 38. Requires that a business with a policy of discarding customer records after a specified period of time must, prior to discarding it, shred or burn the record, erase the identifying information, modify the record to make the information unreadable, or take action to destroy the information so that it reasonably believes that no unauthorized person will have access to it. A violation of this requirement is a violation of the Tennessee Consumer Protection Act and is punishable by a civil penalty of $500 for each record that identifies a customer. Limits this fine to a total of $10,000 for any one customer. Establishes procedures for the seizure and judicial forfeiture of any property acquired or used in connection with violations of this section. Provides that seized property will be forfeited pursuant to the procedure set out in 39-11-713 but will be disposed of pursuant to this section as follows: All property ordered forfeited will be sold at public auction. The proceeds will be disposed of by the court. The attorney general will be compensated first for all expenses incident to the litigation, as approved by the court. The costs for appeals will be provided for by the trial court upon conclusion of the litigation. The attorney general will direct that any public agency be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses resulting from the investigation, seizure and storage of the forfeited property. Out of the remaining proceeds, the court will order restitution to be made to the person or persons whose identity was stolen for any identifiable losses resulting from the offense. The court will then award the remainder of the funds as follows: (1) in the event that the investigating and seizing agency was a state agency, ten percent of the funds will be distributed to the state treasurer who will deposit the funds in a designated account for the agency to be used in its identity theft operations, (2) in the event that the investigating and seizing agency is the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation then, ten percent of the funds will be distributed to the state treasurer who will deposit the funds in a designated account for the agency to be used in its identity theft operations, and (3) in the event that the investigating and seizing agency is a local public agency, then 25% of the funds will be distributed to its local government for distribution to the law enforcement agency for use in the enforcement of this section (when more than one local public agency participated in the investigation and seizure of forfeited property as certified by the attorney general, then the court will order a distribution of the funds according to the participation of each local public agency), and (4) the remainder of the funds will be distributed to the state treasurer who will deposit the funds in the state general fund to defray the incarceration costs associated with the offense of identity theft trafficking. Funds awarded under this section may not be used to supplement salaries of any public employee or law enforcement officer. Funds awarded under this section may not supplant other local or state funds.

Effective July 1, 2004.

Public Chapter 921 Senate Bill 3217 (Jackson) House Bill 3467 (McMillan)

Amends Title 40, Chapter 39 by adding a new part 2. Enacts the “Tennessee Sexual Offender and Violent Sexual Offender Registration, Verification, and Tracking Act of 2004.” 40-39-201 sets forth the legislative intent of the act. 40-39-202 defines terms used in the act. (Note: “SOR” means the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation’s centralized record system of offender registration, verification, and tracking information.) 40-39-203 provides that within 48 hours of establishing or changing a primary or secondary residence or becoming employed or practicing a vocation or becoming a student in this state, the offender shall register in person as required by the provisions of this act. Likewise, within 48 hours of release on probation or any other alternative to incarceration, excluding parole, the offender shall register in person as required by the provisions of this act. Provides that an offender who is incarcerated in this state in a local, state, or federal jail, or a private penal institution shall, within forty-eight hours prior to such offender's release, register in person, completing and signing a Tennessee Bureau of Investigation (TBI) registration form, under the penalty of perjury pursuant to 39-16-702(b)(3) as follows: (1) if incarcerated in a state, federal, or private penal facility, with the warden or the warden's designee, or (2) if incarcerated in a local jail, with the sheriff or the sheriff's designee. Provides that an offender from another state, jurisdiction, or country, who has established a primary or secondary residence within this state, shall, within forty-eight hours of establishing such residency, register in person with the designated law enforcement agency, completing and signing a TBI registration form. Provides that an offender from another state, jurisdiction, or country, who is not a resident of this state, shall within 48 hours of employment, commencing practice of a vocation or becoming a student in this state, register in person, completing and signing a TBI registration form with: (1) the sheriff in the county or the chief of police in the municipality within this state where the offender is employed or practices a vocation, or (2) the law enforcement agency of any institution of higher education, or if not applicable, the designated law enforcement agency with jurisdiction over the campus, if the offender is employed or practices a vocation or is a student. Provides that an offender from another state, jurisdiction, or country, who becomes a resident of this state pursuant to the Interstate Compact Act codified in Title 40, Chapter 28, Part 4, shall register within forty-eight hours of becoming a resident in person with the board, in addition to the requirements of the Interstate Compact Act and the sex offender directives from the board. Provides that offenders who were previously required to register under Title 40, Chapter 39, Part 1, shall register in person with the designated law enforcement agency within 30 days of the effective date of this act. Offenders who reside in nursing homes and assisted living facilities are exempt from this requirement, as otherwise provided by this act. Sets forth the information the registrant is required to disclose on the TBI registration form. Provides that not later than the third day after an offender’s initial registration, the registering agency must send by the U.S. postal service the original signed TBI registration form to TBI headquarters in Nashville. 40-39-204 provides that the TBI will maintain and make available a connection to the SOR, for all criminal justice agencies with Tennessee Information Enforcement System (TIES) (internet) capabilities by which registering agencies will enter original, current and accurate data required by this act. TBI will provide viewing and limited write access directly to the SOR through TIES (internet) to registering agencies for the entry of record verification data, changes of residence, employment, or other pertinent data required by this act and to assist in offender identification. Provides that registering agencies must, within twelve hours, enter all data received from the offender into the TIES (internet) for the enforcement of this act by TBI, designated law enforcement agencies, Tennessee Department of Correction (TDOC), private contractors with TDOC, and the board. Provides that at least once during the months of March, June, September, and December of each calendar year, all violent sexual offenders must report in person to the designated law enforcement agency to update the offender's fingerprints, palm prints and photograph and to verify the continued accuracy of the information in the TBI registration form. Once a year during the March reporting, the violent sexual offender will pay the specified administrative costs not to exceed $60. Provides that once a year, all sexual offenders shall report in person, no earlier than seven calendar days before and no later than seven calendar days after the offender’s date of birth, to the designated law enforcement agency to update the offender's fingerprints, palm prints, and photograph, to verify the continued accuracy of the information in the TBI registration form, and to pay the specified administrative costs not to exceed $60. Requires that within three days after the offender’s verification, the designated law enforcement agency with whom the offender verified must send by U.S. postal service the original signed TBI registration form to TBI headquarters in Nashville. Provides that the TBI will be the state central repository for all original TBI registration forms and any other original forms required by 40-39-207 which are deemed necessary for the enforcement of this act. Provides that the designated law enforcement agency must retain a duplicate copy of the TBI registration form as a part of the business records for that agency. 40-39-205 sets forth the requirements and procedures for completing the TBI registration form and transmitting the form to TBI headquarters. 40-39-206 sets forth the requirement that TBI establish, maintain, and update a centralized record system of offender registration, verification, and tracking information. Requires TBI to report to the appropriate agency responsible for the offender’s supervision whenever there is a factual basis to believe that an offender has not complied with the provisions of this act. Requires the TBI to establish and operate a toll-free telephone number, to be known as the “Tennessee Internet Criminal Information Center Hotline,” to permit members of the public to call and inquire as to whether a named individual is listed among those who have registered as offenders as required by this act. 40-39-207 sets forth the time frame and procedure by which an offender may petition TBI to be removed form the sex offender registry. Provides for an appeal process through the courts. 40-39-208 sets forth a non-exclusive list of ways in which an offender can violate the provisions of the act. Provides that a violation of this act is a Class E felony and sets forth the punishment for violation of the act. 40-39-209 provides that no record may be removed from the SOR, unless ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in 40-39-207(a)-(d). 40-39-210 provides that upon receipt of notice of the death of a registered offender, the TBI shall remove from the SOR all data pertaining to the deceased offender. 40-39-211 provides that a sexual offender or violent sexual offender may not knowingly reside or work within one thousand feet of any public school, private or parochial school, licensed day care center, or any other child care facility. Provides that a sexual offender or violent sexual offender may not knowingly reside within 1,000 feet of the property on which the offender's former victims, or the victims' immediate family members, reside. Provides that a sexual offender or violent sexual offender may not knowingly reside where a minor resides. Excepts the minor children of the offender unless the offender's parental rights have been or are in the process of being terminated as provided by law; or if any minor or adult child of the offender was a victim of a sexual offense committed by the sexual offender. Clarifies that if the ownership or use of or person or entity that occupies property within one thousand feet of a sex offender's registered address changes, and such change occurs while a sexual offender is residing or working in a particular location, the change shall not form the basis for finding that a sexual offender is in violation of the residence or employment restrictions of this section. A violation of this section is a Class E felony. Amends 39-16-702(b) by adding a new subdivision (3). Provides that perjury committed on a sexual offender or violent sexual offender TBI registration form is a Class E felony.

Effective August 1, 2004. Effective June 8, 2004, for the purpose of the TBI designing, printing, and distributing the registration and other necessary forms pursuant to 40-39-205(a) and promulgating any rules necessary to implement the provisions of this part.

Public Chapter 940 Senate Bill 374 (Cohen) House Bill 1474 (Briley)

Amends Title 38, Chapter 8, Part 1 by adding a new section 38-8-116. Enacts the “General Patton Act of 2003.” Provides that, the course of training leading to the basic certificate of compliance issued by the Tennessee POST Commission pursuant to 38-8-107, may include a course of instruction in animal behavior generally and canine behavior specifically. For law enforcement officers who have completed the animal behavior training course required by subsections (a) and (d) of this section, provides that any annual in-service training, necessary for the salary supplement authorized in 38-8-111, may also include the animal behavior training course. Provides further that every officer who was employed prior to the time when the course of instruction was established and offered may be required to complete it as part of such officer's annual in-service training. Amends Title 4, Chapter 7, Part 1 by adding a new section 4-7-118. Provides that before a person appointed by the commissioner can become a commissioned member of the highway patrol, such person, as a part of the training for the position, must complete a course of instruction in animal behavior generally and canine behavior specifically that complies with the requirements 38-8-116. For members of the highway patrol who have completed the animal behavior training course required by this section, provides that any annual in-service training, required for members of the highway patrol, may also include the animal behavior training course. Provides that any member of the highway patrol who was employed prior to the time when the course of instruction required by subsection (a) was established and offered will be required to complete it as part of any annual in-service training required of the highway patrol. Provides that any such member will have two years from the effective date of this act to receive the instruction required by subsection (a). Any officer who does not comply with this subsection shall be subject to department disciplinary proceedings. Provides that any member of the highway patrol who completes a course of instruction in animal behavior approved by the POST commission for use as required in 38-8-116, will be in compliance with the provisions of this section. Amends 44-17-403 by deleting subsection (f) in its entirety. Amends 39-14-212(d). Provides that aggravated cruelty to animals is a Class E felony. Amends 39-14- 202(f). Provides that cruelty to animals is a Class A misdemeanor and that a second or subsequent conviction for cruelty to animals is a Class E felony. NOTE: The provisions of this act shall not apply to any animal while that animal is being used for training, for an occupational purpose, or for hunting.

Effective June 15, 2004.

LOTTERY

Public Chapter 476 Senate Bill 3212 (Kyle) House Bill 3250 (Tindell)

Enacts the “Tennessee Charitable Gaming Implementation Law” and provides a process for United States Tax Code § 501(c)(3) organizations to apply to the Secretary of State to hold an annual lottery event for the benefit of the organization. This law provides standards for applicants. The Secretary of State will submit a list of qualified applicants to the General Assembly in an omnibus bill for the approval of the General Assembly in accordance with the Tennessee Constitution. The Secretary of State will post approvals and relevant information on the Secretary’s website. Each § 501(c)(3) organization holding an approved lottery event must give notice to each chief law enforcement officer of the county or municipality in which the annual event is conducted 130 days prior to the event date listed in the application, but if the event date is less than 130 days from receiving approval for the event, the organization must immediately give notice to law enforcement officials. Also, notice must be given of cancellation of events. Notice of an event or cancellation must be given by letter sent by certified mail or by actual physical delivery and must include the name of the organization, the name of the event, the location of the event, the type of lottery game, the event date (as applied and actual if different), any additional locations, and the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible if different than the organization’s chair, president or chief administrative officer. No more than two annual events per calendar year will be held at the same location in each county during any annual event period.

Effective April 7, 2004.

Public Chapter 620 Senate Bill 3078 (Cohen) House Bill 3390 (Tindell)

Modifies 2004 Public Chapter 476 regarding charitable gaming. Changes some deadlines for submitting applications to the Secretary of State to hold annual events and provides for the transmittal of an additional list of qualified 503(c) organizations to the General Assembly. Authorizes the Secretary of State to establish rules concerning conflicting locations for annual events.

Effective May 6, 2004.

Public Chapter 890 Senate Bill 3094 (Cohen) House Bill 3017 (Tindell)

Amends the earlier enacted 2004 public chapters dealing with annual events to raise money for § 501(c)(3) organizations. Changes the time period for making application to the Secretary of State and modifies the information required in the application, which must include the location or locations, at a minium, each county in which the annual event will be operated.

Effective June 8, 2004.