Tim Curtis Candidate for Congress Florida 11th Congressional District About Tim
About Tim

Tim Curtis is running for Representative, US House of Representatives, in Florida’s 11th Congressional District. Born in Uniontown, PA, Tim grew up in Temple Terrace, FL and has considered it to be his home since he was a child. As a 1992 graduate of the University of South Florida (B.A., Business Administration), a 20-year honorably retired US Marine Corps Chief Warrant Officer, and a successful small-businessman in Tampa since 1999, Tim has a wealth of experience and pattern of success employing the principles that he now seeks to take to Congress.

Tim stands for the Constitutional tenets that limit the Federal Government’s powers and responsibilities and costs to those specified in the US Constitution. He is a proud Democrat and his guiding principles are uniquely American and constitutionally grounded – free enterprise; economic strength; equal rights, justice, and opportunity; and a strong national defense. Tim has invested his life in contributing to the national defense and the welfare of the community he was raised in. He serves as the Chaplain of VFW Post 10140; is a member of the Tampa Bay Leadership Prayer Breakfast Committee; and serves on the Tampa Bay Marine Corps Scholarship Foundation, which just this past year has contributed over $200,000 to help 70 students to pursue higher education in the community and the State of Florida.

Tim has a heart for helping the youth of Tampa Bay, as demonstrated by his multiple years of sharing his experience a nd success principles through Great American Teach-In events, and 19 years as a basketball referee and member of the West Coast Officials Association. Politically, Tim served four years on the Citizens Advisory Committee to the Hillsborough County Commission, two years as its Chairman, and is a member of the Tampa 9-12 Project.

Tim has two adult sons, one who operates the family business and one currently serving in the U.S. Army in Afghanistan. Tim enjoys being a grandfather, and is an avid golfer and tennis player.