Careful Examination Needed of Sotomayor’s Extensive Record

Washington, D.C. – As expected, President Barack Obama has named Judge Sonia Sotomayor as his choice to replace Judge David Souter as the next Justice on the United States Supreme Court. Concerned Women for America (CWA) calls on all senators to demand ample time for a careful and thorough examination of the nominee’s record. CWA President Wendy Wright said, “A necessary quality for a Supreme Court justice is to be committed to equal treatment of the law, regardless of ethnicity or sex. Sonia Sotomayor has an extensive record and several troubling opinions where she seems willing to expand certain ‘rights’ beyond what the Constitution establishes and the appropriate Supreme Court precedent. Revealing her immodest bias, she stated that a 'Latina woman with the richness of her experience would more often than not reach a better conclusion than a white male who hasn't lived that life.' Congress needs to thoroughly vet Judge Sotomayor and Americans deserve enough time to evaluate her record and her announced bias for certain people. Her high reversal rate alone should be enough for us to pause and take a good look at her record. Frankly, it is the Senate’s duty to do so.” Mario Diaz, Esq., CWA’s Policy Director for Legal Issues, said, “Much has been made in the media about a Hispanic woman being nominated, but the truth is that none of that should matter as the Senate fulfills its ‘advise and consent’ role. What matters are the judge’s judicial temperament and her view of the Constitution. We must determine if Judge Sotomayor will respect the Constitution as written or legislate from the bench. She has made some disconcerting statements that should require everyone to examine her record with an open mind and reach some conclusions. For example, she said once that ‘policy was made at the appellate level,’ a very dangerous way of looking at the role of a judge for those of us who value our freedoms as guaranteed in the Constitution.”





For Information Contact:

Demi Bardsley

(202) 255-2278

media.cwfa.org