Inland Empire economic growth outpaces state but challenges remain
A new economic report about the Inland Empire shows steady gains in logistics, health care and construction sectors as well as a strong job market and economy, but challenges remain with overcoming poverty and low education levels.

The momentum is expected to continue in 2017, said John Husing, chief economist for the Inland Empire Economic Partnership and author of the report.

In all, the Inland Empire has created nearly 240,000 jobs since the low point of the Great Recession.

“We are nearly 100,000 jobs higher than we were than before the Great Recession,” Husing said in a phone interview. “What has happened is better than what’s been going on in the state because we have significant job growth in sectors paying $45,000 to $60,000 a year. We’re in much better shape in that respect.”

Husing’s report was presented Thursday, at the Seventh Annual Southern California Economic Summit in Los Angeles. The summit included discussions on improving the economic viability of local communities and attracting new businesses and industry clusters. More than 400 business and elected leaders attended the event.

“We still have a high number of people that are living in poverty, and we need to lift those up,” said Hasan Ikhrata, executive director of Southern California Association of Governments, one of the event sponsors. “We need to create high paying jobs and continue to do that as we move forward. We have done well. We’re moving in the right direction.”

For San Bernardino County and the Inland Empire, five industry sectors — logistics, construction, health care, manufacturing, and professional/management/scientific work — are driving economic growth.

Logistics, or goods movement, accounted for 23.3 percent of jobs created in the Inland Empire from 2011-2016, and continues to grow, according to Husing. The sector is likely to create another 11,221 jobs in 2017, he said.

Construction still is below it’s pre-recession peak, but the sector is growing again because of the Inland Empire’s undeveloped land and Southern California’s need for single-family homes, industrial facilities and infrastructure, according to Husing. The sector gained back 31,305 jobs in the past four years and should add another 5,500 in 2017, according to the report.

An uptick in health care jobs has been buoyed by a shortage of health care workers, the aging population and the larger number of insured people as a result of the Affordable Care Act, AKA Obamacare. The sector is expected to add 4,335 jobs in the Inland Empire in 2017.

Manufacturing, also below its pre-recession peak, is expected to add 2,879 jobs in the Inland Empire in 2017. Husing said the I.E.’s “sub-par” performance in manufacturing is indicative of “California’s punishing regulatory environment plus energy policies that now have the state’s electrical costs 43.3 percent above Nevada, the second most expensive state west of the Mississippi.”

Advertisement

The professional, management and scientific work sector, according to Husing, is emerging as an economic force, with a growing need for professional service providers to support other industries. Also, the expected increase in construction jobs will drive the demand for engineers. Altogether, the professional sector is expected to add 1,021 jobs in the Inland Empire 2017, according to the report.

Despite the rosy outlook, the report notes challenges remain for the region with notably high poverty levels and income disparity.

Only 17.8 percent of the two-county region’s population — and 25 percent of those under the age of 18 — live below the poverty line, according to the report.

“We still have the issue of the education of our adult labor force being relatively modest and therefore that has colored the nature of the economy.” Less education generally means lower-paying jobs.

Here, Inland cities lag behind the rest of Southern California: 47.1 percent of adults had a high school education or less in 2015, and only 20.1 percent had a bachelor’s degree or higher.

Ontario Councilman and Ontario International Airport Authority president Alan Wapner, who attended the summit, sees hope.

“There’s an enormous amount being done particularly by the K-12 schools, Chaffey College and Cal State San Bernardino, all focused on making sure that we are getting the kind of training set up that fits with the kinds of jobs opening up in the region,” he said.