NY commission starts work on what are likely to be hefty raises for state lawmakers
ALBANY >> A new state commission started the ball rolling Monday on what promises to be substantial pay raises for legislators, top state officials and their senior aides.

“I think we have a full range of work to look at,” said James Lack, a commission member and former Long Island state senator. “I’m just sorry it has been 18 years.”

Lack was referring to the last time legislators voted for raises, in 1998. In exchange for agreeing to then-Gov. George Pataki’s proposal to allow charter schools, legislators got a 38 percent pay raise, bringing their base salary to $79,500 as of 1999.

“We don’t know the parameters of the legislative job at this point, what it may be at the end of this legislative session. … What each of us may be comfortable recommending as a part-time salary may be irrelevant if, in fact, the Legislature decides to go full time,” said commission member Fran Reiter, Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s appointee to the panel, referring to the possibility of limits on outside income.

Advertisement

The move to hike the pay of legislators, statewide officials and agency commissioners comes as the Commission on Legislative, Judicial and Executive Compensation has recommended raising the pay of state Supreme Court justices to $192,300 per year from the current $174,000. The raise takes effect automatically April 1 unless the Legislature votes to reject it.

Also this month, the New York City Council voted itself a 32 percent pay raise, bringing member salaries to $148,500 per year, from $112,500. The plan included a ban on most outside income.

The state commission is scheduled to make recommendations on executive and legislative pay by Nov. 15, with the recommendations taking effect on Jan. 1, 2017, unless the Legislature votes to reject them.

The governor’s current salary is $179,000 per year.

Cuomo and legislative leaders created the commission to put in place virtually automatic pay raises every four years as part of the 2015-16 state budget.

Monday’s meeting of the commission in New York City was billed as an organizational session to prepare for a decision on raises for legislators and Executive Branch employees. Commission members did not mention the scandals and arrests that have hit Albany in recent years but acknowledged the process was likely to be controversial when it comes to hiking the pay of members of the Assembly and Senate.

Last year, both Senate Majority Leader Dean Skelos and Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver were stripped of their leadership posts and convicted of federal corruption charges.

On Monday, the commission agreed to hold public hearings on pay raises March 10 in New York City and March 23 in Albany, with two other hearings possible in Syracuse and on Long Island.

In the meantime, members agreed on the need to gather information about pay scales for legislators in other states as well as in major cities across the U.S.

“We will look at a lot of data and we will make comparisons to other situations,” Reiter said, citing the high pay for top officials at SUNY and CUNY.

Reiter said New York public-sector salaries are “incredibly low” compared to other professions but that the expectation is “that public-sector salaries are different and are generally lower than one is going to find even in the non-for-profit sector.”

But commission members also cited “anomalies” in some state agencies where high pay is more the norm, such as at public authorities and major SUNY institutions.

They mentioned the example of Robert Megna, a former Assembly aide and Cuomo’s budget director who Lack said now has a $400,000-a-year administrative job at SUNY Stony Brook, as well as Alain Kaloyeros, the head of SUNY CNSE Polytechnic in Albany who was reported to be the highest paid state worker, making almost $1 million per year.