Letters from readers: All reward, no risk for homeowners
HOME BUYERS

All reward, no risk

In Sunday's article in The Times-Union, a homeowner states that he will quit making monthly payments, although he can still afford them, because "he wants to get the banks' attention."

If the condo he purchased in 2005 had increased in value by $100,000, would he split his good fortune with the bank?

Had the homeowner borrowed the money from his parents, instead of a bank, would he still be willing to walk away and leave them holding the debt on his questionable purchase?

HENRY CHAMBLISS

Orange Park

Teacher bill

Changes needed

Senate Bill 6, if passed by the Florida House of Representatives and signed by the governor, will add at least $42 million in unfunded mandates.

This will happen in fiscal year 2011-12 when Duval County public schools also lose $43 million in federal stimulus money with no legislative plan for replacement.

In order to pay for this new requirement, districts will have to turn current salary scales upside-down, severely reducing salaries for experienced teachers.

The bill prohibits any compensation be given for experience or for advanced degrees.

As Duval and other districts increase our Advanced Placement and similar college-level courses, many more teachers will need advanced degrees and should be compensated for their advanced knowledge, gained on their own time and at their own expense.

Senate Bill 6 requires districts to develop hundreds of tests to establish learning gains of students to be used as the predominant factor in teacher and principal evaluations and compensation.

As one of only two large districts in Florida that has developed these tests, and used them for performance pay, we know the time and cost needed to make them fair and reliable for such major decisions.

Districts that have successfully moved to more performance-based systems have involved all of the key stakeholders and have required additional funds to make the transition.

While we agree with the purpose of the bill to strengthen our ability to discharge ineffective teachers and to use learning gains as a significant portion of teacher and principal compensation, more input is needed to reduce the negative unintended consequences before this bill is implemented.

ED PRATT-DANNALS,

superintendent,

Duval County

public schools

HEALTH CARE

A campaign promise

One of the main complaints that voters have about politicians is that their candidates did not fulfill their campaign promises.

President Barack Obama fulfilled one of his main campaign promises, a health care bill, and people still complain.

MICHAEL CROSS

St. Augustine

REPLY: SHOOTINGS

Police not at fault

A letter writer opined that outrage should be heaped upon the police for taking decisive action to eliminate an active threat - not just to them, but to others.

Yet, hardly mentioned was the previously convicted robber/suspect involved in an armed kidnapping (because that is what a "carjacking" is) who had taken hostages after robbing and terrorizing a bank and endangering literally hundreds of people on Baymeadows Road and surrounding businesses.

We learned the officers' names and time on the department days before we found out that (gasp) the suspect is a convicted robber out of prison!

Until our vocal community affixes the real blame for these crimes, then the criminals - who apparently think the community is behind them - will continue their mad rampage.

A car full of defenseless hostages cannot be allowed to leave the area of police control.

There is to the very real likelihood of even more death and destruction by the car's driver (endangering other drivers in his flight from justice or to the hostages themselves who are now eyewitnesses to a crime spree).

In a perfect world, there are no criminals.

GREG DIFRANZA,

Institute of Police

Technology and Management,

University of North Florida

U.S. AND AFGHANISTAN

Corrupt systems

I find it humorous and very disturbing that our president visited Afghanistan to lecture its president on corruption.

As I see it, in Afghanistan the people bribe (OK by local custom) their officials to get things done.

In the United States, companies and organizations donate to the politicians' election campaigns and then they sweeten the pot for the other legislators to get their bill passed.

The only difference is that our legislators have made our system of corruption legal. Corruption is still corruption.

Seeing the system work, as in the recent health care bill (what a misleading title), it is no wonder that people are upset and becoming more involved in correcting the system.

KEN SCHERZ

Jacksonville