Skewered: Sleeping driver gets nasty wake-up call after impaling car on motorway crash barrier



This was the scene after a driver got a terrifying wake-up call having falled asleep while driving.



Andy Dangerfield had been on his way college after an early start when he nodded off at the wheel.

He careered into the centre of Interstate 90 in Montana and straight into a metal guardrail which speared through the engine of his Chevy Suburban.

Before he could slow the station wagon, it had passed through and exited via the rear window - missing his body by inches.

Skewered: The crash barrier passed straight through Mr Dangerfield's car Left hand drive: The crash barrier entered through the right side of the car

Dangerfield, 21, told police he had left his Washington home early that morning on his way to a college in Idaho but at about 11.30am he began to get tired and must have fallen asleep.

These amazing photographs were taken by passerby Sam Ingram who said, 'The driver was a guy heading east to college.



'He fell asleep at the wheel and drifted off the shoulder hitting the end of the section of guard rail.

Crash site: The accident occurred on Interstate 90 in Montana

'The guard rail came through the right headlight, engine compartment, firewall, glove box, passenger seat, rear seat and exited out the driver's side rear window.

'This was one very lucky kid. God was definitely looking out for him.'

Police said it was lucky Dangerfield, who was charged with careless driving, was lucky to be driving alone.



Montana Highway Patrol Sgt. Jason Hildenstab said: 'If he had a passenger with him, it would have killed him.'



Crumple zone: Police said the length of barrier that passed through the vehicle was around 30 yards Busy highway: Remarkably, neither Mr Dangerfield or anyone else was injured in the accident

Sgt. Hildenstab said had never seen an accident like it because the guardrails are designed to crumple on impact.



Yet despite a 30-yard spike of metal penetrating the car Dangerfield escaped entirely without injury.



'He didn't even have a scratch on him,' said Sgt Hildenstab.