Company boss strangled his wife to death and kept her fully clothed body in freezer in fish processing plant for TEN YEARS



A Japanese pensioner has been arrested on suspicion of strangling his wife and keeping her dead body in a freezer for 10 years.



Masaichi Yamada, 80, was arrested in the northern Japan port of Kushiro early yesterday.



It followed the discovery of the frozen corpse - which was still fully clothed - in the freezer of a fish-processing company which Mr Yamada owns.

Held: Masaichi Yamada, 80, was arrested in northern Japan on suspicion of strangling his wife and keeping her dead body in a freezer for 10 years

Gruesome: The body was found in a freezer in a fishing company which Mr Yamada owns

According to The Telegraph, a spokesman for Hokkaido police said: 'The suspect maliciously strangled the victim with a string-like object at their home and abandoned her body in the freezer at his working place.'



It is not yet known when the alleged murder took place.



Police said the woman would be 71 if she was alive now.

It has been reported that Mr Yamada confessed to police officers that he killed his wife following an argument at their home between 2002 and 2006.



Probe: Police surround the fish factory in northern Japan where the body was discovered

Shocking: Masaichi Yamada, 80, was arrested in the northern Japan port of Kushiro, pictured, on suspicion of strangling his wife and keeping her dead body in a freezer for 10 years

He is then believed to have transported his wife's body in his car to the factory.



The body was found after the victim's brother told police officers he had not been able to contact his sister for a number of years.



Officers then carried out a search of the factory.



The alleged murder has focused attention on Japan's ageing population problem which has seen an increase in the number of elderly criminals.



Although the country's murder rate has been decreasing, the number of murderers over 65 has risen.



According to The Wall Street Journal, elderly offenders increased by a massive 46% in 2010 compared to nine years earlier.