Thursday Lead Letter: Illegal aliens should not have the right to vote
On July 4, 2017, 15,000 immigrants were sworn in as new American citizens — something each of them worked hard to attain.

On that day, they earned the most sought-after citizenship in the world and swore they would support and defend our Constitution.

And on that day, along with their citizenship, they were granted the right and the responsibility to vote.

There are more than 11 million illegal immigrants currently living in the United States.

These illegal aliens have crossed our borders, violated our laws and ignored the processes we have in place to keep our citizens safe.

ignoring the law

And, yet, there are cities throughout the United States that willingly ignore this violation of the law.

Many cities like New York, Chicago and Los Angeles proudly call themselves "sanctuary cities" where violent illegal aliens can find refuge and forgiveness for any violations of the law they have committed.

These sanctuary cities put the safety of all American citizens at risk to harbor fugitives.

Even worse, some cities grant illegal aliens the right to vote.

In San Francisco, voters passed a proposition in 2016 that grants illegal aliens with school-age children the right to vote in school board elections.

Now College Park, Md., is weighing a measure that would permit illegal aliens to vote in elections.

Proponents of the measure argue that residents — regardless of their legal status — rely on critical government services and should have the opportunity to weigh in.

Should College Park approve this absurd measure, it would be one of 11 cities in Maryland to do so.

Cities like San Francisco and College Park, among others, have lost their American values and have been overrun by liberals.

losing sight of our principles

They have forgotten the principles our nation was founded on — the right for American citizens to choose our leaders — in granting foreigners who violated our laws to come to our country the right to shape our country’s future through voting.

It is simple:

You are either an American citizen or you are not. If you are, you enjoy the rights and privileges of American citizenship. And you also bear the responsibility to ensure its safety and survival for generations to come.

That is why the right to vote should not be allowed or practiced by anyone who was not born in our country — or by anyone who has not taken the necessary and legally required steps to become a citizen of our nation.

This right is too precious to grant to those who have not earned it.

Adam Putnam,

candidate for governor,

Bartow