Libyan navy ship sinking after clashes between army and ISIS in Benghazi port
A Libyan navy ship docked at Benghazi port was hit during heavy fighting today between the army and Islamist fighters in Libya's second-largest city, residents said.

Smoke was seen rising from the port area, to which the army had earlier moved heavy guns to attack positions of Islamist fighters.

A security source said the ship was sinking but this could not immediately be confirmed.

Heavy fighting broke out near the seaport of the city today as the army, backed by forces loyal to a former general, attacked Islamist groups, residents said.

Street fighting: Libyan soldiers open fire their weapons during clashes with Islamic militias in Benghazi in this October 29 photo. There are reports a Libyan navy ship docked at Benghazi port was hit during the fighting

Dozens of residents were leaving the city, heeding a call by the army to evacuate the port area where military officials say Islamists are holed up after more than two weeks of fighting.

A Reuters reporter saw the army deploying tanks and artillery in Libya's second-largest city.

Yesterday at least 210 people were killed in fighting in the city since troops loyal to the country's elected government launched an attempt to re-take the city from Islamist militias two weeks earlier, a medical official said.

The official would not identify those killed, or say whether they included government troops.

The turmoil in Benghazi started when renegade General Khalifa Hifter - a former Gadhafi army chief who joined the opposition decades before the uprising - launched a campaign against Islamist militias which were implicated in series of assassinations and attacks on journalists, activists, and security forces in the city.

A Libyan military solider takes cover in the midst of the fighting. Military officials say Islamists are holed up after more than two weeks of fighting

The turmoil in Benghazi started when renegade General Khalifa Hifter - a former Gadhafi army chief who joined the opposition decades before the uprising - launched a campaign against Islamist militias

Hifter won support among large sectors of Libyans but the army units loosely allied with him were defeated and forced to leave the city by Islamist militias.

Then, the internationally-recognised government, led by Abdullah al-Thinni, joined ranks with Hifter and on October 15, launched a wide offensive to retake the city. Until then, Hifter troops had largely fought from bases outside the city.

On Sunday, a security official in Benghazi said government troops have entered a new neighborhood in the city. The official said the troops are carrying out a wave of arrests against Islamist militias and have arrested one of their spokesmen.

Both officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they weren't authorised to brief reporters.