Mike Huckabee ducks questions about dodgy herbal diabetes 'solution'
Mike Huckabee warned the first South Carolina audience of his newly minted presidential campaign on Friday that he didn't have time to answer an endless string of questions.

'I'll take a few,' said the former Arkansas governor. 'And when they get hard, we're done.'

True enough – both before his economic speech in a cozy hotel meeting room got underway, and afterward during a brief press conference, he dodged questions about a touchy subject on Team Huck: the slick infomercials he made this year for a 'Diabetes Solution Kit' that includes unproven herbal supplements.

Huckabee brushed off questions about whether he still endorses the product, which he enthusiastically hawked in February and March on TV and in radio ads that ran on SiriusXM and other networks.

But he did say he wishes he'd been paid more for the gig that has inspired Clintonesque questions about his avarice and his judgment.

Joe Barton, president of Barton Publishing – the company that paid him – told Daily Mail Online that his contract called for 'a five-figure monthly amount.'

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEOS

SECOND BITE AT THE APPLE: The former Arkansas governor finished second among Republicans in the 2008 presidential nomination delegate count, but then embraced a broadcasting and writing career

HUCKSTER? Huckabee appeared in infomercials in February for a 'Diabetes Solution Kit' that included herbal supplements, and he won't say if he still endorses the 'natural' product

The kit combines a diet and exercise program with cinnamon and chromium, which Barton said help drive down blood sugar levels and control hemoglobin A1C, a diabetes indicator in human blood.

'I'm living proof that the remedies and lifestyle changes promoted in the Diabetes Solution Kit are spot-on for getting rid of this life­-threatening disease,' Huckabee said in a press release, issued not in his early days as a fresh-faced politician, but on Feb. 5 of this year.

MEET MIKE HUCKABEE Mike Huckabee Former Arkansas governor Age: 59 Religion: Southern Baptist Base: Evangelicals Résumé: Former governor and lieutenant governor of Arkansas, former Fox News Channel host, ordained minister, author Education: B.A. Ouachita Baptist University. Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary (did not finish). Family: Married to Janet Huckabee (1974), with three adult children. Mrs. Huckabee is a survivor of spinal cancer. Claim to fame: 'Huck' is a political veteran and has run for president before, winning the Iowa Caucuses in 2008 and finishing second for the GOP nomination behind John McCain. He's known as an affable Christian and built a huge following on his weekend television program. Achilles heel: Huckabee may have a problem with female voters. He complained in 2014 about Obamacare's contraception coverage, saying Democrats want women to 'believe that they are helpless without Uncle Sugar.' And in 2015 he earned scorn for hawking herbal supplements in infomercials as a diabetes cure.

But the American Diabetes Association and the Canadian Diabetes Association both caution that herbal supplements are not effective tools for fighting diabetes.

Barton conceded that he is not a physician, but said Integrative Medicine Center of Santa Barbara chief Dr. Scott Saunders is 'on our team.'

He also said his contract with the former governor began February 1 and ended less than seven weeks later, on March 19, after Huckabee gave him 30 days notice just a few weeks into the ad campaign.

The ads themselves were more combative, pitting the former governor – who famously lost 100 pounds by changing his diet – against the medical and pharmaceutical establishment.

'Prescription drugs aren’t going to cure you,' Huckabee says on-screen. 'They’re only going to keep you a loyal pill-popping, finger-pricking, insulin-shooting customer so Big Pharma and the mainstream medical community can rake in over $100 billion annually.'

Less than three months later, he's the sixth Republican to enter the 2016 White House race. And he's in no mood to talk about it.

'Are you still convinced that herbal supplements can cure diabetes?' Daily Mail Online asked the presidential hopeful before his audience of 75 people got seated.

'You know,' Huckabee replied, 'that's not why I'm here today.'

Told that Daily Mail readers are interested in health and wellness, Huckabee responded: 'Good! Tell 'em to do all they can.'

'Including buying the products on your infomercial?' came the follow-up.

'I'm not doing that right now,' he insisted. 'I'm running for president.'

'But you were,' Daily Mail Online reiterated. 'You were.'

'Right,' he said, looking over his shoulder. 'And I'm running for president.'

HUCKABEE, INC.: He's written a dozen books including the 2006 diet tome when he was slimmer, but this year it's his diabetes-solution marketing that has gotten him into trouble

A staffer with the Upstate Chamber Coalition, the event's sponsor, rescued him – getting in between the governor-turned-TV-host-turned-pitchman-turned-candidate and his questioner.

In seconds Huckabee was again smiling and shaking hands, looking like the manicured, made-up TV host.

Later, Daily Mail Online asked him how much he was paid to make the ads.

'Not nearly enough, I'll tell you that,' Huckabee said with his should-be-patented 'aw shucks' twang.

His spokesman J. Hogan Gidley questioned whether the governor had ever claimed the Diabetes Solution Kit was a cure for the disease.

'Asking "Does he still believe it?" implies that he ever believed it before,' the spokesman told Daily Mail Online. 'Show me where he said it.'

And after his speech, Huckabee refused to say whether or not he still endorses the product.

His name and face, which used to appear at 'DiabetesReversed.com,' are gone now. And the microsite 'HuckabeeDiabetes.com,' at one time the online portal to buy what he endorsed, now brings Web surfers to the copmany's website.

'We can't use his likeness on the page anymore,' Barton explained.

'But he really believed in the program. I think it came down to his political advisors telling him – you know.'

'It would have been nice to continue the relationship,' Barton added. 'We had such a successful campaign. But we've moved on.'

CAMPAIGN: THe Baptist minister-slash-politician is doing all the things a serious presidential candidate does, including touring companies in Iowa (shown), but his first South Carolina appearance included questions that he didn't want asked

He insisted, though that 'it's not the herbal supplements' that make the program work – referring back to his 2006 diet book 'Quit Digging Your Grave with a Knife and Fork.'

'The basic premise of that book is the essence of that plan,' Huckabee said, referring to the infomercial product.

'It's not about herbal supplements.'

'It's really about controlling diet, exercise, maintaining a very low level of carbs so you're not eating a lot of starchy foods that become sugar.'

Huckabee was defiant, to a point, defending his diet prescriptions while distancing himself from Barton, the company that sells the products in his ads.

His only moment of reflection came in the face of a reminder that the ads could be political dynamite since they were just months – not decades – old.

'Yeah,' he said, his voice trailing off in resignation.

Asked three times if he still endorsed the Diabetes Solution Kit, he responded with a brisk walk out of the room and a well-worn dodge: 'You know, I'm running for president.'