Black people are three times more likely to face the death sentence in Houston than whites, study finds

Study by Raymond Paternoster a criminologist at the University of Maryland

Research commissioned by defence team of death row prisoner Duane Buck

Buck was sentenced to death for double fatal shooting in 1995

Spared from lethal injection in 2011 because trial was 'racially influenced'

Research, commissioned by death row prisoner Duane Buck's defence team, has shown black prisoners in Houston are more likely to face death sentence

Black defendants facing trial in Houston are three times more likely to face a death sentence than whites, a new study has claimed.



A study by a criminologist at the University of Maryland said since the reinstatement of the death penalty in 1977 there have been 116 executions in Harris County, which incorporates Houston, the largest city in Texas.



It is more than any entire state in the area apart from Texas itself.

Professor Raymond Paternoster carried out the research after being commissioned by death row prisoner Duane Buck's defence team.



Buck was sentenced to death for the fatal shootings of his ex-girlfriend and a man in her apartment in July 1995.



His death sentence is currently being reconsidered by the Texas courts, The Guardian reports.

Professor Paternoster looked at 504 cases of adult defendants accused of capital murder in Harris County between 1992 and 1999.

It was during this period that Buck was charged for murdering his former girlfriend, Debra Gardner, and a man called Kenneth Butler.

Of that number he then broke it down to 21 cases - including that of Buck's - which were most similar in circumstances.

He found that seven out of the ten men sent for capital trial were black African American.

This compares with just one of the five white defendant.

In his report he writes: 'The probability that the district attorney will advance a case to a [death] penalty trial is more than three times as high when the defendant is African American than for white defendants.'

In Texas the jury decides whether those convicted will face execution. Of those facing trial Harris County juries sent four of the seven black defendants to execution and also the white defendant.



He said this slightly redressed the balance as 100 per cent of the white capital defendants in the sample were given death penalty compared with 57 per cent of the African American sample.



But of the original group of 21 cases, the black defendants were more than twice as likely to be sentenced to death than their white counterparts, he said.

The report - filed on Wednesday - is part of petition by Buck's defence team.

Since the reinstatement of the death penalty in 1977 there have been 116 executions in Harris County, which incorporates Houston, the largest city in Texas

Buck, 50, was spared from lethal injection in 2011 when the justices said they would review an appeal in his case because it had been 'racially influenced'.

Two appeals, both related to a psychologist's testimony that black people were more likely to commit violence, were before the court. One was granted; the other was denied.

Christina Swarns of the NAACP legal defense fund, told the paper there was a pattern of racial discrimination in the death row punishment in Texas. She said: 'Over generations there has never been a time in Texas when the death penalty did not yield evidence of racial discrimination.'

Buck was convicted of gunning down ex-girlfriend Debra Gardner, 32, and Kenneth Butler, 33, outside Houston on July, 30, 1995, a week after Buck and Gardner broke up.



A study by a criminologist at the University of Maryland looked at 504 cases of adult defendants accused of capital murder in Harris County between 1992 and 1999

A third person, Buck's stepsister, Phyllis Taylor, also was wounded, though she has since forgiven Buck and sought for his death sentence to be commuted to life in prison.

Texas has the country's most active death row, executing more than four times as many people as any other state since the death penalty was reinstated in the United States in 1976, according to the Death Penalty Information Center.

The Harris County district court is now considering whether or not to grant Buck a new sentencing hearing.