Georgia Sheriff Victor Hill accused of shooting Atlanta woman leaves scene despite not cooperating
A sheriff who was acquitted two years ago in a major public corruption case is now accused of shooting a woman in a sprawling model home near the Atlanta suburb of Lawrenceville.

Gwenevere McCord, 43, was found shot in the stomach Sunday evening and taken to the hospital in critical condition, Gwinnett County police said.

Sheriff Victor Hill, 50, the chief law enforcement officer of nearby Clayton County, was identified as the shooter.

He refused to speak with investigators at the scene and was allowed to leave the scene with no charges.

The victim, an agent at Paran Realty who knew Hill, is still unconscious and has not been able to give police any information because of her injuries, Gwinnett County District Attorney Danny Porter told Daily Mail Online.

Scroll down for video

A Georgia sheriff was allowed to leave the scene of a shooting at a model home in Lawrenceville. Above, Gwenevere McCord, 43, who is thought to know Hill, is taken out of the $330,000 house on a stretcher

McCord, (left) was reportedly showing the house to two prospective buyers when the incident involving Clayton County Sheriff Victor Hill, 50 (right) occurred

Hill, who was previously acquitted of more than 20 counts of corruption, refused to answer police investigators' questions. Above, the sheriff (foreground) during his 2005 swearing-in ceremony

The shooting was 'reported as accidental' by Hill at 5.39pm Sunday night, according to the Atlanta Journal Constitution.

It is not known why Hill was at the home, which is about an hour's drive from Clayton County.

'He refuses to give any statements,' Gwinnett County police Sgt. Brian Doan told reporters late Sunday of Hill's involvement.

Neighbors have speculated that the sheriff and McCord, who is from Jonesboro, Clayton County, could have been romantically involved.

A police spokesman said that they could have also just been business associates.

A handgun was recovered during a search in the home near Lawrenceville, but it was not known whether it was the official's government-issued gun.

Porter said that a backup gun was also recovered on Hill's ankle.

He said that the sheriff 'appears to be not in the performance of his duties'.

The injured woman was reportedly showing the 3,800-square foot model home to two people interested in buying a house in the neighborhood.

Paran Realty lists the 'elegant' five-bedroom, five and a half bath house for $329,990.

The two people looking at the home who were interviewed by police were not inside the home at the time of the shooting and Hill and the McCord are thought to have been alone inside the house, according to Porter.

It is not know why Hill was at the house (pictured) an hour away from his own county. McCord was still unconscious as of Monday morning and could not talk to police

Two witnesses who were questioned by police were not inside the house (pictured) at the time of the shooting. The victim and Hill are believed to have been alone

A weapon was recovered at the scene where McCord was shot and another handgun was recovered from Hill's ankle, according to District Attorney Danny Porter

The sheriff left the scene in a black SUV with his attorney, according to WTOC.

In 2012, he was elected sheriff despite being under indictment on felony corruption charges.

A jury the following year acquitted him of the 27 felony charges, including theft and giving false statements.

Hill was able to continue as sheriff in the county south of Atlanta after the jury's acquittal.

The charges had stemmed from Hill's previous term as Clayton County's sheriff, from 2005 to 2008. The indictment accused Hill of using his office for personal gain.

Special Assistant District Attorney Layla Zon said during the trial that Hill used his county car for trips that he paid for, in part, by using a government credit card.

But Hill's attorneys argued that the charges were politically motivated. Hill has drawn controversy since the day he first took office in 2005, when he fired 27 deputies.

A judge later ordered that the deputies be reinstated and Clayton County paid $7million for their firings.

Two lawyers who represented Hill during his trial on the criminal charges didn't immediately respond to phone messages and emails from The Associated Press early Monday.

Hill (right) was acquitted of 27 corruption charges including theft and giving false statements. He and his lawyers say that the charges were politically motivated

Late Sunday, Gwinnett police said investigators have been consulting with the District Attorney's Office and no charges have been filed in the ongoing investigation.

Possible charges against Hill would proceed differently since he's a sheriff, police said.

'When you're an active sheriff in the state of Georgia, there are certain legal requirements and steps that have to be taken,' Doan told reporters at the scene.

'It's not just an average citizen where you can take out a warrant for their arrest.'

Georgia police officers including sheriffs can only be arrested with a warrant from a Superior Court judge, said.

'Police should have their investigation wrapped up fairly quickly, and then we’ll have a decision in the next few days,' Porter said.