Barnett: Signed, sealed, delivered, 01/09/98
Friday, January 9, 1998Story last updated at 11:20 p.m. on Thursday, January 8, 1998

Adelaide Sink and Allen Lastinger will be running the combined banks in Florida. -- Ricardo Romagosa/staffBarnett: Signed, sealed, delivered

NationsBank takes legal reins

By Simon Barker-Benfield

Times-Union business writer

When Barnett Banks employees come to work today, they'll find on their desks a letter of welcome from NationsBank's chief executive officer, a coffee mug with the words, ''One Vision, One Future, One Company'' and a button with the same slogan.

For Barnett's employees, the message will be clear: Their 120-year-old institution is history.

With only a little fanfare, giant NationsBank of Charlotte, N.C., becomes the legal owner today of Jacksonville-based Barnett, which it bought last year for $14.6 billion to become the biggest bankin the state and the third biggest in the nation.

Although employees will see many organizational changes over the next three months, for Barnett customers nothing much will change until October.

''They'll use their same checks, they'll use the same deposit slips, they'll use the same offices, the same products - everything is the same,'' said Allen L. Lastinger Jr., the new chairman and chief operating officer of NationsBank-Florida and Barnett's former president and chief operating officer.

Barnett customers will pay the same interest on loans as NationsBank customers and will get the same rate for their certificate of deposits as NationsBank customers.

Barnett stockholders, who are getting 1.1875 shares of NationsBank stock for each share of Barnett they own, will get a letter this month asking them to turn over their Barnett stock certificates, after which NationsBank will send them new NationsBank stock certificates plus a check for any fractional amounts left over.

Employees and the managers of the two banks have been told they can expect to see positions in the combined banks cut by almost 20 percent - 6,000 jobs - as part of an effort to cut $915 million in expenses to help pay for the deal.

Yet, there are more questions about the job cuts than the new top management can or is willing to answer, including basics like who will go from where, and when all this will happen.

Lastinger said branches that duplicate each other won't be closed until after the two banks' computer systems are combined in October. Regulators and analysts expect many of those branches to be in the Orlando and South Florida markets.

Lastinger declined to say how many branches will be closed.

''I think it would be inappropriate and premature to start talking about the details,'' he said.

But Alex Sink, president of NationsBank-Florida, did offer a hint at the approach being taken, which is to have fewer but bigger branches with slightly more employees.

''This doesn't happen in the Jacksonville market, [but] in most of our markets we are going to be combining a lot of offices - two $40 million [in deposits] offices will become one $80 million office,'' she said.

Separate from the branch sales designed to cut costs is the sale of 127 branches in the Tampa area to satisfy anti-trust rules. It will take place toward the end of the first quarter of the year, Lastinger said.

NationsBank paid top-dollar for Barnett, whose senior management put it up for a one-week auction in August. One Wall Street estimate is that NationsBank paid a whopping $3,000 per Barnett customer, which it needs to recoup before it starts making a profit.

Until October, NationsBank will operate dual NationsBank/Barnett computer systems. By then, NationsBank expects to have completed the conversion of hundreds of Barnett's computer systems and programs, which will enable NationsBank's computers to read all Barnett customer account numbers without Barnett customers having to change anything.

An equally critical priority for Lastinger and Sink will be organizing the work force of the new bank.

NationsBank will be adding about 22,000 Barnett employees to its existing 8,000 Florida employees. ''Over the next three months, we will align things to the new organizational model,'' Lastinger said.

What will happen in the Jacksonville-based state headquarters operation is up in the air.

One former Barnett unit - EquiCredit, with 1,000 Jacksonville employees who make consumer loans - is being recreated and expanded as a NationsBank unit with a new corporatewide role. Barnett's technology unit, also with about 1,000 Jacksonville employees, is being kept, too.

But for an unknown number of Barnett staff who had corporate roles that have counterparts in Charlotte the future is uncertain.

''What you are doing is gearing the staffing and resource to be more attuned to an operating environment rather than a strategic or corporate environment, and that just requires fewer people,'' Lastinger said.

Lastinger said the activities of Barnett's legal group will be cut back, as will the strategic planning/corporate development functions, with several staff members placed in NationsBank.

''The finance group will be less of a corporate resource but more of an operating resource, so it is going to be reduced in number, and most of the finance responsibilities will be shipped to Charlotte,'' he said.

Barnett's asset management group is being reorganized, with some of its functions reporting to a NationsBank executive in St. Louis.

Lastinger declined to say how many jobs in all are at risk, saying that eliminating a position did not automatically mean a person would no longer have a job. They would have ample opportunity to find another job either within NationsBank-Florida or elsewhere in the country, he said.

The company does not plan to announce which functions will be eliminated, he said. ''It is not an event, it's a process. It doesn't happen conveniently so we can make an announcement,'' Lastinger said. ''We are being very protective of that information,'' he said.

Search Tips -

Use + to require word,

- to omit.

Enter words describing a concept or keywords.

Story Archives

Dave Roman

News |

Community |

Learning Center |

Marketplace |

Entertainment |

Home

Metro |

Neighbors |

Opinion |

Obituaries

Business |

Daily Special |

Sports |

Weather |

Wire

About us |

E-mail staff |

How to advertise

This site, and all its content, © The Florida Times-Union 1998

')

//-->=0)document.write(unescape('%3C')+'\!-'+'-')

//-->