Americans get the least paid vacation time in the world, research of developed nations has revealed.

While employees in other countries enjoy as many as 40 days off a year, U.S. workers are legally entitled to no paid vacation, although many get 10 days of national holidays, the studies found.

A map compiled by Thrillist combining data from Mercer's Worldwide Benefit And Employment Guidelines and the Center for Economic and Policy Research shows the stark differences in vacation allowances across the world.

The results cover 64 countries with the figures based on entitlements for employees with 10 years of service who work a five-day week.

Give us a break: This graphic shows that Brazil, Bolivia, the U.K. and others parts of Europe lead the world in paid vacation time - whereas American workers are not legally entitled to any paid days off

According to the data, the U.S. is the only country out of all those featured that does not require employers to give their workers paid leave.

By comparison, Brazilians get 30 paid vacation days plus 11 national holidays, for a staggering total of 41 days off each year, according to research by Mercer in 2009.

The map shows that the UK is also among the world's leader when it comes to annual paid leave with 28 days. The catch for Brits, however, is that public holidays can be included in workers' 28 days.

The rest of Europe also does quite well when it comes to getting paid to take time off.

The report says Poland boasts 26 compulsory days while Austria, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Luxembourg and Sweden all get 25 days off as standard.

Austrians also get 13 public holidays each year, giving them a massive total of 38 days off.

Stark differences: A chart compiled by the Center for Economic and Policy Research shows that workers in the U.S. get zero paid vacation days, while countries in Europe fare much better

Hot spot: US workers have some of the world's iconic attractions on their doorstep, including the Grand Canyon and Las Vegas, but have to work their socks off to enjoy them

In other parts of the globe, French workers get 31 days including public holidays, Bolivians get a 37 days when 10 public holidays are included, while Sweden and Luxembourg both get 25 days statutory leave and a total of 36 altogether.

With a single year of service in a job, workers in Finland are entitled to 30 days off.

At the other end of the spectrum comes India with 12 days (28 with public holidays), China (10 days and a total of 21), Thailand (6 days compulsory leave and 22 in total) and the Philippines (20 in total including just five compulsory).