Neighbors of San Bernardino shooters 'noticed them acting suspiciously'
The husband and wife shooters who shot 36 people in San Bernardino in Wednesday had been acting suspiciously in recent weeks, neighbors claim.

Syed Rizwan Farook, 28, and Tashfeen Malik, 27, were apparently working late at night in their garage and receiving numerous packages to their home in Redlands, California.

But according to nearby residents, they did not report them for fear of racial profiling.

It has since emerged the couple had 12 pipes bombs, a stock pile of tools to assemble explosives, 2,000 9mm rounds, and over 2,500 223 rounds in their suburban home.

Scroll down for videos

Neighbors claim Syed Farook and Tashfeen Malik were working late into the night in their garage in Redlands, California, but did not know whether to report them. It has emerged the couple had 12 pipe bombs in the house

FBI detectives are seen here questioning a neighbor at the door of the couple's house on Thursday

An FBI agent searches the home before it emerged the couple were keeping 12 pipe bombs in the property

This is the moment police burst into the couple's home on Wednesday night after the shooting

Aaron Elswick, whose friend lives on the street, told KTLA a neighbor described her regret at not reporting Farook and Malik.

'Sounds like she didn't do anything about it,' Elswick said.

'She didn't want to do any kind of racial profiling. She's like, 'I didn't call it in … maybe it was just me thinking something that's not there.'

Police continue to search the couple's home.

Officials would not specify what items are inside the home but they told reporters they have reason to be cautious as they go about their search.

Farook met his Pakistani wife-turned-accomplice Tashfeen Malik while on the hajj in Saudi Arabia and appeared to have been radicalized, law enforcement officials revealed this afternoon.

Investigators told CNN that Farook, a native US citizen of South Asian descent, was in touch by phone and via social media with more than one international terrorism subject.

Aaron Elswick, whose friend lives on the street, told KTLA a neighbor described her regret at not reporting Farook and Malik. She had seen them receiving multiple packages but did not want to racially profile them

Syed Rizwan Farook (pictured), 28, who is U.S.-born, and his wife Tashfeen Malik, 27, were killed in a gun battle with police after the mass shooting at a government holiday party in San Bernardino

Pre-dawn raid: FBI agents search outside a home in Redlands, California, connected to Farook and Malik

A broken window and crushed fence is seen at a home in Redlands, California, linked to the San Bernardino shooting suspects Syed Rizwan Farook and his wife

REVEALED: ARMORY OF HUSBAND-AND-WIFE KILLER DUO WHO USED 'MILITARY TACTICS' IN POLICE SHOOTOUT Police revealed late Wednesday that Farook and Malik were armed with two assault rifles and two automatic handguns in their battle to the death with the cops. Officials told the LA Times that a .223-caliber DPMS Model A15 rifle and a Smith and Wesson M&P15 rifle were both recovered from the scene. They also found a handgun made by Llama and a Smith and Wesson handgun. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms said they traced the guns and found that two of them were bought legally, though it did not specify which guns and who purchased them. It came as a police source speaking to Fox News said the killer duo used 'military tactics' to confront police. They reportedly had body-mounted cameras, which would have allowed them to record the massacre.

Federal officials told NBC News that Farook made a trip to Saudi Arabia within the past two year, most likely for the hajj – the religious pilgrimage to the sacred city of Mecca that all devout Muslims are required to go on at least once in their lives.

It is believed that during his stay abroad, he met Malik, got engaged and later brought her over the US on a K-1 fiancee visa.

After the couple got married, Malik, who was a native of Pakistan, became a naturalized US citizen.

On Wednesday morning, Farook, 28, and Malik, 27, dropped off their six-month-old baby with Farook's mother, saying they were going to a doctor's appointment.

By noon, according to police, the couple had donned assault clothing, armed themselves with rifles and stormed a holiday party attended by San Bernardino County employees, killing 14 people and wounding 17 others.

The suspects' bullet-ridden black SUV is seen in a street in Redlands, California, early Thursday morning as police continue their investigation

Local news footage on Wednesday evening showed one of the dead attackers outside the shot-out SUV. The suspect was killed in a police chase while still inside the vehicle, then moved on the street

Grisly aftermath: An assault rifle is seen resting on the sidewalk near a large blood stain and a pair of black sneakers in Redlands

This image appears to show a body being pulled from the vehicle after the attackers had been killed

The shooters began their massacre at the Inland Regional Center (top left) before fleeing. Police later traced them to a home in Redlands (bottom right), where a chase began which ended on San Bernardino Avenue (top center), where the two were shot dead

According to some reports, the duo had GoPro cameras strapped to their body armor during the shooting.

Before sunset, after a massive manhunt and a violent shootout with police on a residential street in the city of Redlands.

Those who knew Farook, among them his colleagues at the San Bernardino County Public Health Department, described him as a devout Muslim but not someone who often talked about religion.

'He never struck me as a fanatic, he never struck me as suspicious,' said Griselda Reisinger, a former colleague.

Co-worker Patrick Baccari, who shared a cubicle with Farook, told the Los Angeles Times he and his young family appeared to be 'living the American dream.'

Syed Farook's brother-in-law Farhan Khan (pictured) spoke at a press conference held at the offices of the Council on American-Islamic Relations in Anaheim to say he was stunned to hear of his relative's involvement in the shooting

Somber mood: President Barack Obama addressed the shooting from the Oval Office shortly before noon Eastern Time, saying it is possible the massacre in San Bernardino was related to terrorism, but it's also possible it was workplace-related