Oxford University accused of 'selling its prestige' to Vladimir Putin associates
It was hailed as a ‘very generous gift of philanthropy’ by the Prime Minister himself.

But a £75million donation to Oxford University from oligarch Len Blavatnik has led to a row over the Ukrainian’s links to Vladimir Putin.

Odessa-born Mr Blavatnik, who outbid Roman Abramovich to buy a 15-bedroom Kensington mansion for £41million in 2004, topped this year’s Sunday Times Rich List with an estimated fortune of £13billion.

He is the boss of Warner Music, which he bought in 2011.

Oligarch Len Blavatnik (pictured above with singer Rita Ora last week) donated £75million to Oxford University in 2012 but the large sum has now led to a row over the Ukrainian’s links to Russian President Vladimir Putin

Mr Blavatnik, who topped this year’s Sunday Times Rich List with an estimated fortune of £13billion, gave Oxford £75m - one of the biggest donations in history - to set up the Blavatnik School of Government (pictured)

He gave Oxford £75million – one of the biggest donations in the institution’s history – to set up the Blavatnik School of Government in 2012.

The school is due to switch to new premises designed by Herzog & de Meuron, the architects behind the Tate Modern, this year.

However, the move may not come off without a hitch, for critics have now accused Oxford of failing to investigate whether Mr Blavatnik was involved in alleged state-sponsored harassment of BP staff in Russia.

Signatories to an open letter including academics, human rights activists and Russian dissidents, have called on the university to ‘stop selling its reputation and prestige to Putin’s associates’.

They say that in 2008 and 2009 dozens of Westerners, including Britons, were ‘forced out of Russia’ in a bitter dispute between BP and a group of oligarchs over TNK-BP, Russia’s third-biggest oil company.

The oligarchs’ group, Access-Alfa-Renova (AAR), eventually won out – and sold their stake to Russian state oil firm Rosneft, in a deal described in the open letter to The Guardian as ‘highly controversial’.

It continues: ‘Oxford University apparently failed to investigate these facts, AAR’s track record from the beginning, and its close ties with the Kremlin. We insist that the university should stop selling its reputation and prestige to Putin’s associates.

‘It should and carry out a new and independent due-diligence investigation with clearly-defined ethical norms.’

Odessa-born Mr Blavatnik - who is the boss of Warner Music, which he bought in 2011 - outbid Chelsea FC owner Roman Abramovich to buy a 15-bedroom Kensington mansion for £41million in 2004 (pictured above)

The letter was organised by Ilya Zaslavskiy, a TNK-BP employee and Oxford graduate who ran Moscow’s Oxford alumni association.

The signatories include Pavel Litvinov, one of eight people who protested in Red Square in 1968 against Moscow’s invasion of Czechoslovakia. He was exiled for five years to Siberia.

The letter was also signed by Vladimir Bukovsky, jailed by the KGB. Mr Bukovsky, who lives in Cambridge, exposed the Kremlin’s use of psychiatric treatment against dissidents.

A spokesman for the university said: ‘Oxford University has a thorough and robust scrutiny process in place with regard to philanthropic giving.

‘The committee to review donations conducts appropriate due-diligence based on publicly-available information.

‘The university is a world leader for research and education at a time of growing global competition. Generous philanthropic donations help make this possible.’

AAR has previously denied having anything to do with harassment of BP managers.