Lance Armstrong shares Christmas card photo with five children and girlfriend
One-time world legend Lance Armstrong's career as a professional cyclist might be over thanks to his doping scandal, but he certainly seems to have a lot to look forward to in these pictures from his Instagram account.

The former sportsman, who lost all of his achievements from 1998 onwards after it emerged that he had used performance-enhancing drugs over the course of his career, posted an adorable photograph of himself, his long-time girlfriend Anna Hastings, 34, and his five children Friday.

'Happy Holidays from all of us to all of you! Looking FORWARD to 2017!' the 45-year-old cyclist wrote in the message, which was sent from Kukio, Hawaii, where he leases a home.

Scroll down for video

Happy family: Former cyclist Lance Armstrong posted this picture on Instagram. Clockwise from left: Son Luke, 16; Lance himself; girlfriend Anna Hastings, 34; twins Isabelle and Grace, 14; daughter Olivia, six; and son Max, seven

He shared the photo from Hawaii, where he has a home

Included in the photo are his son Max, seven, and daughter Olivia, six, whom he had with Hastings, and his other children Luke, 16, and twins Grace and Isabelle, both 14, from his marriage to Kristin Richard.

All were dressed up to the nines for the shot - including a smart little tailored suit for young Max, and a beautiful flower garland for Olivia.

Armstrong started dating Hansen in 2008 after they mey while she was working for his cancer charity, which he set up after a near-fatal bout of testicular cancer in 1996.

The pair have been together since then, with Max being announced five months after they began dating, and Olivia following a year on from that.

And judging by the photos on Armstrong's Instagram account the years that have followed have been very happy ones, with his pics showing milestones in the family's lives.

Water lot of fun: Armstrong met Hansen in 2008, and the pair have been dating since then. Soon after their partnership was announced, the pair conceived Max, and a year later Olivia. This photo shows all three on Anna's birthday this year

Birthday boy: Max had a fun seventh birthday with a foam party by the swimming pool in July - the same month a US Justice Dept report lambasted him as a doper and said his case should go to trial, not get the summary judgement he wanted

On your bike! Armstrong lost his records from 1998 onwards due to the doping claims, but it looks like his children are on track to set some of their own, with both Max and Olivia on bicycles - Olivia only starting recently

Daddy dearest: His kids took him for a Father's Day brunch at the Hotel Jerome in Aspen, Colorado. Armstrong owns properties in both Texas and Colorado