The stark reality of iPod's Chinese factories
Last updated at 12:17 18 August 2006

It has come to define a generation. In just five years, Apple's iPod has become one of the most popular and iconic gadgets around. More than two

million people in Britain own one, and last year alone 22.5million were bought worldwide: a phenomenal 61,644 a day.

The distinctive digital audio players – which can store thousands of songs, photos and even full-length films – have turned California-based Apple into one of the world's most profitable companies, earning founder Steve Jobs a

$3billion fortune.

Last year Apple achieved a record billion-dollar profit, boosted by the launch of its latest Nano model, which is the width of a pencil and weighs

just 1.5oz. A million Nanos were sold in just 17 days, including one to Pope Benedict XVI.

But have you ever wondered where your iPod is made, and what's in it?

The Mail on Sunday has traced the incredible journey an iPod makes from conception to completion, and uncovers the harsh working conditions in the Chinese factories where iPods are made.

Although it is one of America's most prestigious brands, nearly all Apple computers and iPods are made abroad, predominantly in China. As you might expect, the workers who assemble them see little of the profit.

The first factory we visited was in Longhua, just 20 miles from Hong Kong. Run by Taiwanese company Foxconn, it is the original and largest plant to be built in mainland China.

It's a sprawling place where 200,000 people work and sleep – meaning this iPod City has a population bigger than Newcastle's.

Arriving at the gates, the visitor is initially struck by the giant billboards inviting anyone over 16, the legal working age here, to apply for jobs.

Workers live in dormitories on the site, 100 to a room, arriving with a few possessions and a bucket to wash their clothes. The accommodation may be free, but it comes at a cost – no one outside the plant is allowed to visit

the workers.

Security is high everywhere, but especially in the five-storey E3 factory which makes the Nanos.

Police – not security guards – are stationed on all gates, studiously checking those entering and leaving the site to thwart rivals intent on

industrial espionage.

Zang Lan, 21, from Zhengzhou in central China, has worked on the Apple assembly line for a month. Her 15-hour days earn her £27 a month – about half the wage weavers earned in Liverpool and Manchester in 1805, allowing for

inflation.

This is low, even for China, but Zhengzhou is a particularly poor region so workers would accept even less.

'The job here is so-so,' Zang Lan says. 'We have to work too hard and I am always tired. It's like being in the army. They make us stand still for hours. If we move we are punished by being made to stand still for longer.

The boys are made to do push-ups.' Every morning the workers, in beige jackets to denote their junior status, are taken up to the factory roof for a military-style drill.

'We have to work overtime if we are told to and can only go back to the dormitories when our boss gives us permission,' says Zang Lan. 'If they ask for overtime we must do it.

After working 15 hours until 11.30pm, we feel so

tired.' Foxconn, one of the world's biggest IT companies, is currently investing £31million in plants in Beijing and Suzhou to take advantage of China's cheap workforce.

A fifth of Foxconn's million-strong workforce is deployed here, working on other Apple products, including computers. Only a tiny proportion of workers are allowed to make iPods.

The second iPod plant we visit, in the industrial area of Suzhou on the borders of Shanghai, belongs to the Asustek company. Here workers produce more than two million motherboards and 150,000 laptops a month, as well as the popular iPod Shuffle.

The site, as large as eight football pitches, is surrounded by barbed wire. It employs 50,000 workers and its six gates are manned 24 hours a day, seven days a week, with particular attention paid to gate five which leads to

factory eight – the home of the iPod Shuffle.

Here the dormitories are outside the plant, and we spoke to some of the workers at the end of their working day. Although the proximity to Shanghai means they are better paid than their Foxconn counterparts, earning up to £54

a month, they have to pay for dormitories and food, which takes up half their salaries.

Working up to 12 hours a day, their only freedom is the half-hour walk to and from work.

One 26-year-old security guard, who would not reveal his name, earns £ 80 a month.

'Factory eight is mostly made up of women as they are more honest than men,' he tells us. ' The iPod Shuffle is very easy to steal because it is so small.' The guard is virtually the only person we interviewed in the communist run country who understood the implications of China's cheap labour force.

'Payment is lower because the boss wants to reduce our costs,' he says. 'Prices need to be competitive to get orders from abroad.' Which is

exactly why Apple makes its products in China.

The Nano contains 400 parts that together cost an estimated £41. The tiny flash memory card, which stores thousands of songs, is by far the most expensive part at £25.

Made in Korea, flash memory, which replays the music without skipping when the user moves, is extremely robust. That was proved when staff on a technology website ran over their iPod in a car. The screen broke, but the music played on.

The amplifier comes from Edinburgh-based Wolfson Microelectronics, whose audio converter translates the digital information into buzz-free analogue sound. This essential component, costing just 85p, makes an 8,500-mile journey to be assembled in China.

Batteries cost £2.60 each, and the headphones and the ClickWheel used to select tracks each cost 45p. Labour costs in the Chinese factories we traced are a further £4.20 per iPod.

Everything considered, the total cost of manufacturing an iPod Nano is around £41. In Britain they sell for between £109 and £179.

Still, putting together an iPod's hundreds of components is a task of fiendish complexity and mindboggling logistical efficiency.

For an idea of the global nature of business, consider just one component, the Nano's central PortalPlayer microchip. The chip's core technology is licensed from British firm ARMthen modified by PortalPlayer's programmers in

California, Washington state and Hyderabad, India. The finished chip will carry about one million lines of code.

PortalPlayer works with microchip design companies eSilicon and LSI Logic, both based in California's Silicon Valley, who send the finished design to a 'foundry' in Taiwan.

These sites can cost up to £1.5billion to set up, and represent the most complex aspect of chip construction.

They produce thousands of 'wafers' – thin metal discs imprinted with hundreds of thousands of chips. These are sent out to be cut up into

individual discs, which go on to Taiwan, where each is tested individually.

The chips are then encased in plastic and readied for assembly by Silicon-Ware in Taiwan and Amkor in Korea.

The finished microchip is sent to a warehouse in Hong Kong, then transported to the plants in mainland China, where the iPods are put together, before being shipped worldwide.

Will Sturgeon, managing editor of IT website silicon.com, said such global operations are now commonplace.

'Apple are only one of thousands of companies manufacturing their products in the same places and in the same conditions,' he said. 'It's the nature of big business today to exploit any opportunity that comes their way.'

James Kynge, author of China Shakes The World, argues that despite Westerners' perceptions about working conditions in factories, the wages are a godsend that are transforming rural China. 'The money sent back to farming families

from the workers now exceeds the amount made from agriculture,' he says.

'Because China has no independent unions, subcontractors like Foxconn are able to keep wages artificially low. Workers will be lucky if they make two per cent of the profit from an iPod. Foxconn will make less than ten per

cent. Far more money is spent by Apple on marketing the product than making it.'

China misses out on this lucrative market because its poor global reputation means it has not been able to build its own worldwide brands.

'Even if the Chinese made their own version of the iPod and sold it at a fraction of the price, no one would buy it,' says Kynge. 'Consumers respond to the Apple logo, not the people in Chinese factories making the products.'

Apple declined to comment last night.