Jacksonville.com: Legislature adjourns on time 5/2/97
Saturday, May 3, 1997Story last updated at 11:26 p.m. on Friday, May 2, 1997

Legislature adjourns on time

$42 billion state budget includes no new taxes

By Randolph Pendleton

Times-Union senior writer

TALLAHASSEE - Florida's first Republican-controlled Legislature in 122 years passed a $42 billion budget amid a flurry of legislation yesterday and roared to a rare on-time adjournment.

The Legislature's first ending before midnight in five years capped a session that saw election and school reforms, as well as the first bills restricting abortions in a decade.

Senate President Toni Jennings and House Speaker Daniel Webster, two Orlando Republicans who had promised to complete the session by dinner time on the 60th day, sat down at a festive table in the lobby between the two chambers moments after the final gavel fell at 5:59 p.m. and drank a glass of orange juice.

Gov. Lawton Chiles even got in on the act, draping a napkin over his arm like a waiter.

''It's gorgeous,'' Sen. Bill Bankhead, R-Ponte Vedra Beach, said of the on-time adjournment.

But the lawmakers may be back in the fall.

Chiles has indicated he would call a special session to approve more money for school construction if legislative leaders can reach a consensus on a source over the summer.

The 1997-98 budget passed yesterday spends 6 percent more than last year but includes no new taxes. It boosts per-student spending in public schools by 3.7 percent and features $75 million in Florida Lottery proceeds for college scholarships school. It also puts $24 million more in new juvenile crime prevention programs and another $22 million into the Healthy Kids medical insurance program.

Before adjourning, the Legislature passed and sent to Chiles yesterday bills that would repeal sentencing guidelines and require school districts to adopt procedures to cut construction costs.

Also approved were teacher tenure restrictions, merit pay for teachers and a package of tax breaks designed to encourage job creation.

Jennings and Webster said they were proud that they were able to accomplish all of their priorities within the regulation 60 days.

''I think the people of Florida can be pleased with what we've done,'' Jennings said, ''and we did it deliberatively and we did it on time.''

Chiles said the Republicans knew they had to contend with his veto power, so they worked with him on legislation.

''I give them credit,'' Chiles said. ''I think they had a good session.''

Chiles said his greatest disappointment was the Legislature's failure to provide more school construction money, but Webster and Jennings have agreed to work with him over the summer to try to find a solution.

Both presiding officers tried to hold down the last-minute surprises and Jennings even offered to let the tax-break bill die if any senators were uncomfortable with not having some House changes in writing.

Nonetheless, there were some budget provisions and language in budget-related bills that had little scrutiny.

Some issues that languished in previous years, such as the ban on partial-birth abortions and a requirement for informed consent for those seeking abortions, found the Republican leadership more receptive.

One such bill was the sentencing guideline repeal that prosecutors had sought for years.

The bill repealed the guidelines that were enacted 14 years ago in an effort to eliminate the wide disparities in sentences for people convicted of similar crimes.

State Attorney Harry Shorstein of Jacksonville applauded the action, saying it would give judges more flexibility.

Shorstein said the repeal was particularly needed in areas where judges have been too lenient.

''Frankly, we haven't had that problem in my circuit,'' Shorstein said.

The bill would replace the guidelines with a floor, below which judges could not go without valid written reasons.

Judges would be free to sentence up to the maximum allowed by law without explanation.

''It's a major victory for law enforcement,'' said Arthur Jacobs of Fernandina Beach, lobbyist for the Prosecuting Attorneys Association.

Jacobs said he worked with the Governor's Office on the bill and expects Chiles to sign it.

The school facilities bill sparked a lively debate in the House, where many Democrats objected to a provision that would count portable classrooms as 75 percent of a regular classroom.

Portable classrooms currently do not count as available facilities in determining a district's needs.

Rep. Elvin Martinez, D-Tampa, said the portables are unsafe and should not be counted.

''We should not condone wooden fire traps as a place for our children,'' Martinez said.

McGlade Holloway, Duval County's assistant superintendent of facilities services, said the county owns 250 portables and leases another 290 which the School Board will be asked to buy Tuesday.

Search -

Use + to require word,

- to omit.

Enter words describing a concept or keywords.

Dave Roman

News |

Community |

Learning Center |

Marketplace |

Entertainment |

Home

Metro |

Neighbors |

Opinion |

Obituaries |

Entertainment

Business |

Daily Special |

Sports |

Weather |

Wire

About Us |

E-mail Staff

This site, and all its content,

© The Florida Times-Union 1997

')

//-->=0)document.write(unescape('%3C')+'\!-'+'-')

//-->