Peru Two mule Michaella McCollum's dramatic transformation
For the last six months, drug mule Michaella McCollum's life has been a non-stop procession of sun-soaked holidays and late-night parties with an A to Z of reality stars.

Yet, as she brushes shoulders with her illustrious new friends, you would never know she was one half of the 'Peru Two' - one of the most high-profile drug trafficking cases of the 21st Century.

Since her release from jail last summer the 23-year-old has been regularly photographed enjoying the high life in an attempt to put a glossy veneer over her criminal past.

McCollum now has a celebrity manager who appears to have been tasked with turning her into a household name, and just this weekend she was out with a host of reality stars in Birmingham after Geordie Shore star Aaron Chalmers' MMA debut.

These days McCollum never appears to be too far from a camera lens documenting her every move and is often seen with a four-figure designer handbag on her arm.

She also has been rumoured to have been offered £250,000 for rights to a book, but perhaps the high life is not as lucrative as it seems, as McCollum was spotted signing on at a job centre in Belfast hours after a jaunt in Spain.

Michaella McCollum appeared a little worse for wear as she stepped out in Birmingham on Sunday, with a stain on her dress

Michaella relied on her designer clutch bag to protect her modesty, while enjoying a night out with the likes of MTV stars James Bryce and Jordan Davies

Her celebrity outings are a far cry from four years ago, before she had a drastic makeover, when McCollum (left, sporting a very different dark bun) and Melissa Reid were convicted of trying to smuggle £1.5 million of cocaine

McCollum was spotted signing on at a job centre in Belfast hours after a jaunt in Spain

The ex-convict, from Dungannon, Northern Ireland, was jailed in Peru in 2013 along with Melissa Reid for trying to smuggle £1.5 million of cocaine.

They were found in possession of 24lbs (11kg) of the drug hidden inside food packets in their luggage as they prepared to board a flight from Lima to Madrid.

Because of their looks, ages and backgrounds belying the crimes they had committed, their case drew significant media attention.

McCollum was released on parole last March after serving less than half of her sentence but initially had to stay in Peru, where she carried out voluntary work until August when she flew back to Belfast.

But while McCollum is intent on wiping out her past, anti-drugs campaigners have criticised her for her antics.

McCollum was also pictured with footballer Jamie O'Hara at the MMA debut of Geordie Shore star Aaron Chalmers, for she had secured ringside seats

McCollum pictured with Sara Goodhart ahead of the fight in Birmingham

McCollum, pictured, was released on parole in March 2016 after serving less than half of her sentence in Peru

Paul Hannaford, an ex-addict who tours the country warning children of the dangers, slammed McCollum for her rise to prominence, along with Jim Gamble - one of Northern Ireland's most respected police figures.

Mr Hannarford said: 'Drug traffickers have no regard for other people whatsoever, they just see it as a means for making large amount of money.

'They do not see the people they affect or the young children forced to live in crack dens.

'She got herself into the limelight for making thousands of people's lives a misery. I don't think she should be trying to make herself into some sort of star now.

'If I was working for a reality show channel I wouldn't go anywhere near her. In most jobs, if they found out you were a drug smuggler your CV would be thrown straight in the bin.

Before her latest celebrity night out, she sunned herself in Ibiza - the very place where her ill-fated smuggling plan was hatched four years ago - for almost a month

McCollum never appears to be too far from a camera lens documenting her every move and she seems to be rewarded handsomely for her efforts, as a four-figure designer handbag is always on her arm

'I could take her to some drug dens and it would make her cry.'

Before her latest celebrity night out, it appears she sunned herself in Ibiza - the very place where her ill-fated smuggling plan was hatched four years ago - for almost a month.

THE CONTRAST OF MCCOLLUM'S CO-DEFENDANT In stark contrast to her co-defendant, Melissa Reid has kept herself firmly out of the public limelight. Even when she landed in the UK after her release, she was taken out of the airport via a back door, which meant she did not appear before the waiting media. Melissa Reid (pictured with her parents) has kept herself out of the public limelight Since she was pictured kissing and cuddling a new boyfriend in August last year Reid, now 23, has otherwise disappeared from public view. She is said to be trying to rebuild her life in her native Scotland. Her father said last summer that Reid was 'just trying to get back to normality'.

It has been claimed she hopes to use her notoriety to kickstart a reality TV career, but talk that she was being considered for Celebrity Big Brother were denied by the show's makers.

Mr Gamble told the Irish Independent: 'Ten minutes working in an HIV clinic for the church does not a reformed character make.

'Not seeking publicity or attention, going about your business of rehabilitating yourself, giving something back over a sustained period of time in a humble and unassuming way - that speaks louder than an apparently choreographed interview that lacked any form of challenge.'

McCollum was last month pictured joining the dole queue outside a Belfast job centre to sign on for taxpayer-funded handouts from the Government after returning from Ibiza, where she was on one occasion photographed with a £2,000 Chanel handbag.

At the time, one fellow job seeker said: 'I was surprised to see her there after all the photos of her enjoying herself on holidays abroad.'

Originally from County Tyrone in Northern Ireland, McCollum can expect to receive €69-a-week Jobseeker's Allowance.

Yet in April last year, an Indian modelling modelling company contacted her on social media to discuss a partnership. MailOnline contacted the firm for comment but received no response.

It has been reported that McCollum has been offered a £250,000 tell-all book deal detailing her criminal exploits and time behind bars in Lima.

Sporting a very different look, McCollum struggles to hold back tears during her trial in Peru in 2013

Because of their looks, ages and backgrounds belying the crimes they had committed, their case drew significant media attention

But Mr Hannaford questioned her position as a potential role model and railed against the dangers of cocaine, and pointed out that the UK has the highest ratio of users of any country in the world.

He added: 'It's not just drug addicts who are affected, it's all of their families too, and not all drug users live in dens.

'They're people you see working in the city, or they are housewives. I know plenty of people whose lives, families and finances are being torn apart because they are spending literally thousands of pounds a week on cocaine and trying to hide it from their partners.'

Miss McCollum's representatives have been contacted for comment.