Justin Timberlake and Jessica Biel host Hillary Clinton fundraiser with fellow celebs
Hillary Clinton's $33,400 per ticket lunchtime fundraiser in Los Angeles attracted an A-list crowd with power couple Justin Timberlake and Jessica Biel opening their doors for the Democrat today.

Jennifer Aniston, Jamie Foxx and Tobey Maguire were some of the boldest-faced names in attendance, according to the Clinton campaign.

Reporters, as per usual, weren't allowed to step foot into the residence.

Scroll down for video

Hillary Clinton waves from inside her motorcade as she arrived for a lunchtime Los Angeles fundraiser hosted by Justin Timberlake and Jessica Biel

Hillary Clinton's $33,400-a-head fundraiser was hosted by celebrity power couple Justin Timberlake and Jessica Biel opening their doors for the Democrat today (Biel posted this picture on Instagram)

Jessica posted some very candid and goofy photobooth pictures of herself, Justin and Clinton alongside the caption: 'Look who came over for lunch'

Around 100 people attended the event, according to the pool report.

Millionaire heiress Maya Henry, 15, posted pictures of herself with Aniston, Biel and Timberlake at the luxurious villa in Los Angeles.

Originally, Oscar-winning actor Leonardo DiCaprio was supposed to host the Clinton fundraiser, but according to Variety he got in a deadline crunch for a project he's working on for the Toronto Film Festival, which kicks off Sept. 9.

The project is a climate change documentary entitled, 'Before the Flood,' and includes interview from prominent Democrats like President Obama, former President Bill Clinton – the candidate's husband – and Secretary of State John Kerry.

United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Pope Francis are also included in the film.

While DiCaprio was preoccupied with the project, he did his due diligence to find someone else to host the fundraiser, personally approaching Timberlake and Biel to do the job, Variety said.

Multi-million heiress Maya Henry (right), 15, posted some beautiful Instagram pictures from the event, including one with former Friends star Jennifer Aniston (left)

She posted another snap moments later, thanking Justin (right) and Jessica (left) for being 'such wonderful hosts'

Composer Chloe Flower shared the moment Justin and Jessica gave a joint speech while a beaming Hillary Clinton stood on stage next to them

Reporters traveling with Hillary Clinton were given a glimpse of Justin Timberlake and Jessica Biel's driveway as the power couple hosted a lunchtime fundraiser for the Democrat

Stars including Jamie Foxx and Tobey Maguire (both left) shook hands before the A-listers were transported to the venue in golf carts

Actress Jennifer Aniston is spotted outside Justin Timberlake and Jessica Biel's house today in Los Angeles as she attended a fundraiser for Hillary Clinton

Actor Tobey Maguire was spotted entering a fundraiser for Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton today in Los Angeles

Tobey Maguire was one of the biggest names at the fundraiser that also attracted Jennifer Aniston and Jamie Foxx

Actor Tobey Maguire (left) attended the $33,400 Hillary Clinton fundraiser alongside his wife Jennifer Meyer (right)

Guests, including actor Tobey Maguire (center), mull around outside the home of Justin Timberlake and Jessica Biel, who hosted a fundraising lunch for Democrat Hillary Clinton

Tickets, like many that have attracted Hollywood celebrities, are set at a maximum donation price – hence the $33,400 per person.

Clinton is spending Monday through Wednesday of this week doing West coast fundraising, before giving an address on Donald Trump's ties to the 'alt-right' movement from Reno, Nevada on Thursday.

As part of this West coast tour yesterday she appeared last night on 'Jimmy Kimmel Live!' and raised funds at the home of Magic Johnson.

After her appearance at the Timberlake-Biel house in Los Angeles, Clinton jetted down to Orange County to grab more dollars from Democrats.

Tomorrow she'll head up north to the Bay Area and attend two galas, including one hosted by Apple's CEO Tim Cook and co-hosted by Lisa Jackson, who now works for Apple, but formerly served as President Obama's Environmental Protection Agency head.

John Gile (right), who serves as Co-Chair of Hillary Clinton for President, thanked a youthful looking Justin for a 'wonderful event'

Yael Braun (left), wife of talent manager Scooter (right), were also sharing pictures from the fundraiser which was originally meant to be hosted by Leonardo DiCaprio

American-born composer and classic pianist Chloe Flower wrote 'let's keep America great' alongside her photo from the lavish Los Angeles villa

THE A-LIST: Celebrities at the $33,400 fete included Tobey Maguire, Jennifer Aniston and Jamie Foxx, the campaign said