Trump more popular with Republicans than almost any post-war President
Donald Trump's popularity among members of his own party in is higher than any other post-war President except for George W. Bush.

On day 500 of his term of office, which fell on June 4, Mr Trump's approval rating among Republicans stood at 87 per cent, according to Gallup.

The figure puts him head of John F. Kennedy or Barack Obama who found favour with 85 per cent and 79 per cent of Democrats on same day.

How post-war presidents have polled among their own supporters since the Second World War

Only George W. Bush has been more popular than Donald Trump among Republican voters

Another poll, published by the independent Monmouth University Polling Institute, put his overall approval rating at 43 percent.

That marks a slight increase on April's figure and is level with his highest score, recorded in March 2017.

The survey was conducted by telephone in the two days after Mr Trump met Kim Jong-un.

Seven-in-10 voters said the meeting was a good idea is up from 63 per cent in late April, including 93 per cent of Republicans, 74 per cent of independents, and 49 per cent of Democrats.

Only 20 per cent say the Singapore meeting was a bad idea.

In addition, just under half of respondents said the meeting made Trump stronger as opposed to 13 per cent who thought it made him look weaker with 38 per cent saying it made no difference.

Kim Jong Un received similar numbers to the President, with 45 per cent saying it made him look stronger, 9 per cent weaker, and 39 per cent saying it didn't change his international stature.

Seven-in-ten American voters believe the President was correct to meet Kim Jong-un

Patrick Murray, director of the independent Monmouth University Polling Institute, said: 'The event was clearly a good photo op for both leaders, but the top goal from the US perspective was reducing the nuclear threat posed by Kim's regime.

'The public is more optimistic than pessimistic that this will be an outcome of these talks, but only just slightly.'

But the president remains a divisive figure within the country and his popularity within the Republican base has strengthened his grip on the party, increasing the prospect of a second term.

Mark Sanford, a Republican congressman in South Carolina who had been critical of Mr Trump, lost his seat in a primary contest to Katie Arrington, an enthusiastic Trump supporter.

Corey Stewart, who has made defending Confederate monuments his cause, became the Republican nominee for one Virginia's state's two Senate seats.

He has been disowned by much of the Republican Party but was congratulated by Mr Trump for his primary win.