Georgia GOP candidate gets white powder mailed to her
Envelopes containing a white powdery substance and notes with offensive language were delivered to the home of Georgia GOP congressional candidate Karen Handel (pictured) and her neighbors

A suspicious note with white powder was delivered to the home of Republican congressional candidate Karen Handel.

Georgia police confirm they are now investigating a total of five calls after Handel and her neighbors received envelopes containing a powdery substance and a note labeling her a 'dirty fascist' on Thursday.

According to Roswell Police spokesperson Lisa Holland, police received a call around 1.30pm that someone had received an envelope in a mailbox that contained an unidentified powdery substance in the suburban neighborhood of Roswell.

Currently, it is unknown if anymore envelopes have been delivered, but the US Postal truck that was involved has been notified.

Authorities, including the FBI, are searching several streets including Holcomb Bridge Road, Old Alabama Drive, Bankside Drive, and Roxburg Drive - which was shut down Thursday afternoon.

Handel, who is running for the Georgia Sixth District Congressional seat, confirmed that she received an envelope at her home and released a statement, saying: 'This afternoon we had some suspicious packages delivered to our house and to our neighbors. The packages contained threatening letters and a suspicious substance.

'The police were quickly notified and street is now being blocked off. We will continue to coordinate with law enforcement as necessary.'

According to Roswell Police spokesperson Lisa Holland, police received a call around 1:30pm that someone had received an envelope in a mailbox that contained an unidentified powdery substance in the suburban neighborhood of Roswell (Handel's home pictured above)

A neighbor of Handel's posted a photo of one the notes (above) that were delivered to five houses in the area, calling the Republican a 'dirty fascist c***' and her neighbors "Bourgeoisie motherf*****s'

Handel will face off against Democrat Jon Ossoff in a special election on June 20 for Georgia’s Sixth District Congressional Race, which is hotly contested as the winner will replace the seat left vacant by Tom Price when he was named Health and Human Services Secretary.

The Ossoff campaign confirmed that staff and the Ossoff family have also received multiple threats of violence during this election and a security detail has been hired.

The incident comes a day after a politically motivated shooting on Republicans practicing for a charity congressional baseball game occurred, with House Majority Whip Steve Scalise shot in the hip. He remains in the hospital in critical condition.

Among the Republicans targeted by the shooter's social media rants was Handel, who was labeled by the man as a 'Republican b****'.

'Republican B**** Wants People to Work for Slave Wages, when a Livable [sic] Wage is the Only Way to Go! Vote Blue, It's Right for You!' James Hodgkinson wrote on Facebook.

Handel (pictured on Sunday in Georgia) was also targeted on social media by James Hodgkinson who shot House Majority Whip Steve Scalise on Wednesday. Hodgkinson wrote on Facebook: ''Republican B**** Wants People to Work for Slave Wages, when a Livable Wage is the Only Way to Go! Vote Blue, It's Right for You!'

Handel (pictured on Sunday in Georgia) responded to the information about Hodgkinson by saying that it is time to 'work together in a civil and productive way'

Handel responded to the information about Hodgkinson by saying that it is time to 'work together in a civil and productive way'.

'I am aware that the suspect recently made vile comments about me on social media,' she said.

'It also appears that the suspect targeted members of Congress specifically because he disagreed with their views.

'We should not allow our political differences to escalate to violent attacks. We must all refuse to allow the politics of our country to be defined in this way.'