Texas church shooter Devin Kelley was an 'outcast'
Devin Patrick Kelley (pictured) walked into the First Baptist Church of Sutherland Springs, dressed in full combat gear, and began shooting, according to local law enforcement sources

The Texas church shooter who shot dead 26 people and injured 24 others was an 'outcast' who 'preached his atheism' online.

Former classmates say Devin Patrick Kelley, 26, who stormed First Baptist Church of Sutherland Springs in Texas and opened fire on Sunday, was 'creepy', 'crazy' and 'weird'.

Patrick Boyce, who attended New Braunfels High School with the killer, told DailyMail.com: 'He had a kid or two, fairly normal, but kinda quiet and lately seemed depressed.

'He was the first atheist I met. He went Air Force after high school, got discharged but I don't know why.

'I was just shocked [to hear the news]. Still haven’t quite processed how he could have done that.'

Nina Rose Nava, who went to school with the gunman, wrote on Facebook: 'In (sic) in complete shock! I legit just deleted him off my fb cause I couldn't stand his post.

'He was always talking about how people who believe in God we're stupid and trying to preach his atheism'

Christopher Leo Longoria replied: 'I removed him off FB for those same reasons! He was being super nagtive (sic) all the timd (sic).'

Kelley, (pictured in a yearbook photo, left, and recently, right) 26, of New Braunfels, shot dead 26 people and injured 24 others

Devin Patrick Kelley is pictured here in a New Braunfels High School 2009 yearbook photo

The shooting happened at the First Baptist Church of Sutherland Springs (pictured), where around 50 people usually attend service

Michael Goff added: 'He was weird but never that damn weird, always posting his atheist sh** like Nina wrote, but damn he always posted pics of him and his baby - crazy.'

Nava added to DailyMail.com: 'I went to school with him. We had a few conversations here and there. It's not something I expected from him.

'He was an outcast but not a loner. He was popular among other outcast. I haven't spoke to him since high school.'

Another former classmate, who asked to remain anonymous, told DailyMail.com: 'I grew up going to school with him... Always creeped me out and was different.'

She said she moved away from the area while she was in junior high and lost touch with a lot of people.

Kelley, who was married, had recently posted a photo of an AR-15 style gun on his Facebook page with the caption: 'She's a bad b***h'

Investigators work at the scene of a deadly shooting at the First Baptist Church in Sutherland Springs, Texas, Sunday

However, Kelley recently commented on one of her Facebook posts.

'I said I just want to move back to Texas,' she said. 'And he said something along the lines of "Texas isn't any better". Pretty much said he didn't like Texas.

Former classmates say Devin Patrick Kelley as 'creepy', 'crazy' and 'weird'

'I think he had one kid, she/he is still a baby. He was married but I don't know to who. It's crazy to think I grew up with him. Same town. Same school. Same classes.

'He was different in school and creeped me out but never would I have thought he would do such a horrific thing.'

A former friend wrote on Facebook: 'It's scary to know this psychopath has been in my house. I can't believe I was friends with this guy and I literally would stay the night at his place when we were kids.'

He added: 'I ended up distancing myself from him in high school after he got in an argument with me in school and he tried punching me several times. Dude was crazy man.'

Cord Eubank Brown wrote on social media: 'I cannot believe this. I went to high school with this maniac.

'There were people I knew who stayed away from this guy for many reasons, which all make sense now. He just requested me on facebook recently.'

First Baptist Church Pastor Frank Pomeroy's (right with his wife Sherri) 14-year-old daughter, Annabelle (left), is among the dead

She 'was one very beautiful, special child,' the pastor said. His wife, Sherri Pomeroy, said her husband was out of town at the time of the shooting. Pictured: Annabelle

Kelley walked into the First Baptist Church of Sutherland Springs on Sunday, dressed in black, tactical gear with a ballistics belt and an assault rifle, and began shooting, according to local law enforcement sources.

Kelley of New Braunfels, a suburb of San Antonio, was shot by Stephen Willeford, 55, before he climbed in an SUV to flee the scene, a local resident told DailyMail.com.

Another local resident, Johnnie Langendorff, who had witnessed the confrontation refused to let the shooter get away. Both he and Willeford, a local plumber, jumped in his truck and gave chase.

In a Facebook post, Langendorff's girlfriend Summer Caddel described how the pair had 'jumped in my boyfriend's truck and they chased that sick b*****d down in pursuit until the cops could catch up. He was able to run the shooter off of the road on 539!'

As they approached a sharp curve in the road, near the 307 and 539, Kelley appeared to lose control and his car swerved off the road.

Kelley was already dead when they found him. It's unclear if he committed suicide or died from his pursuers' gunshots.

Cops discovered multiple weapons and possible explosives in his vehicle.

San Antonio police also raided Kelley's home on Sunday evening, with K9 and bomb squad units.

Kelley, who was married, had recently posted a photo of an AR-15 style gun on his Facebook page with the caption: 'She's a bad b***h.'

He reportedly purchased the Ruger AR-556 rifle in April last year from an Academy Sports & Outdoors store in San Antonio, according to CNN.

When he filled out the background check paperwork, he checked a box that indicated he didn't have a past criminal history, an official told said, adding that he listed an address in Colorado Springs, Colorado.

Texas Sheriff Joe Tackitt said that the shooter was not known to law enforcement.

A LinkedIn account which appears to be Kelley's states that he joined the US Air Force after graduating New Braunfels High School in 2009.

An Air Force official said the gunman was court-martialed in 2012 and discharged two years later.

Spokeswoman Ann Stefanek said Kelley was court-martialed on one count of assault on his spouse and another count of assault on their child. He received a bad conduct discharge, 12 months' confinement and a reduction in rank.

Sunday school teacher Karla Holcolmbe and her husband Bryan also died in the rampage, their family confirmed. A local resident says their pregnant daughter-in-law was also killed

Mother-of-four, Joann Ward, is said to have died in the wake of the shooting, according to her family

Sisters six-year-old Brooke (left) and eight-year-old Emily Garza (pictured, right, sitting on the right, next to her sister Rihanna) were killed in the shooting according to her family. Nine-year-old Rihanna (sitting next to Emily) had her glasses shot off her face but survived

Stefanek also said Kelley served in Logistics Readiness at Holloman Air Force Base in New Mexico from 2010 until his discharge.

Kelley volunteered as a teacher for Bible studies at Kingsville First Baptist Church, according to his LinkedIn which shows him posing which a young child.

He was married to Danielle Shields, and they appear to have a child together. She was previously a teacher at the First Baptist Church.

Kelley lived at his parents’ home with his wife and child and neighbor Mark Moravitz told ABC News he would sometimes hear gunshots coming from near that house late at night.

The gunman's mother-in-law, Michelle Shields, also appears to have been a parishioner at the church and was friends on social media with the pastor's wife.

It is not clear whether they were at the church at the time of the shooting.

Local law enforcement say the gunman had a relatively clean criminal record, with just a traffic offenses in recent years.

The names of the victims are now emerging and include a mother-of-four and her two young daughters, a 14-year-old pastor's daughter and Sunday's stand-in preacher, his wife, and eight-months-pregnant daughter-in-law.

The first victim to be identified was Annabelle Pomeroy, whose father - First Baptist Church Pastor Frank Pomeroy - had been out of town during the attack. The grieving dad told ABC he's lost 'one beautiful girl, and a 'special child.'

Bryan Holcombe had been standing in for Frank Pomeroy when Kelley opened fire. Witnesses say he was the first victim to be struck by the shooter's gunfire.

'Bryan was filling in,' the witness, who did not want to be named, told DailyMail.com. 'He was walking up to the pulpit when he was shot in the back.'

He was killed, alongside his wife of 25 years, Sunday school teacher Karla Holcombe, as well as their eight-months-pregnant daughter-in-law Crystal, local residents reported.

'The family is just devastated,' the witness added.

The couple ran a canvas repair shop before retiring and had attended the church for 25 years.

Mother-of-four Joann Ward and three of her children were also shot. Family have since told the Dallas News that Joann and two of her daughters, six-year-old Brooke and eight-year-old Emily have died.

Ward's six-year-old stepson Rylan, who was shot four times, is still in hospital after undergoing emergency surgery. The mom's eldest daughter Rihanna, nine, had the glasses shot off her face but escaped injury by hiding under a pew as shots rang out.

The shooting took place at the church, which is located about 30 miles from San Antonio. Sutherland Springs is a community of about 400 people

The victims ranged in age from five to 72, with two killed outside the church, 23 killed inside, and one person who died after medical transport, officials said.

And 34-year-old Amanda Mosel told MySA that her 13-year-old goddaughter was killed during the shooting. She said she was sad she skipped church this morning, but she normally attends that sermon. 'It's a small, tight-knit church,' she said.

Many of the dead remained inside the small rural church Sunday evening, as crime scene investigators worked to reconstruct the scene.

Authorities declined to officially name any of the deceased victims on Sunday evening, as they worked to secure the crime scene and notify victims' families.

'We don't know names of any of the victims at this time because we're still trying to work the crime scene,' said Wilson County Sheriff Joe Tackitt.

Residents of the community gathered for an emotional candlelight vigil on Sunday night as the names of the victims began to emerge.