Bush poised to veto budget items
TALLAHASSEE -- Gov. Jeb Bush vetoed a $750,000 appropriation for a Jacksonville workforce development program called "Work Keys" last year, but local legislators are still trying.

This year, the program, jointly operated by the Duval County school system and the Jacksonville Chamber of Commerce, is back in the budget at a more modest $250,000, and Bush is again pondering whether to let it stand.

Work Keys evaluates the skills of those seeking employment and matches them with available jobs.

The battle over such local projects reflects the vastly different views that Bush and legislators have of the state government's role in the lives of Floridians, at least as it applies to the budget.

That difference in philosophy may mean millions of dollars in vetoes when Bush acts later this week on the state's $50.9 billion budget for 2000-01.

Even appropriations like the $25 million to buy Cedar Swamp in Jacksonville, which has Mayor John Delaney's strong backing, are getting tough scrutiny from the Governor's Office, local lawmakers say.

"We're working on it," Sen. Jim Horne, R-Orange Park, said.

Delaney's chief of staff, Susan Wiles, said the Mayor's Office has not heard from the governor on any of the city's projects.

"We're just waiting," she said.

While Bush's vetoes are not expected to match last year's $313 million bloodbath, he has hinted he intends once more to take a tough approach to the local projects scattered throughout the budget.

In doing so, Bush is carrying out the budget philosophy he enunciated when he took office 17 months ago, calling for spending to be limited to statewide projects rather than random local ones.

"There must be a process where all projects and programs can be evaluated on their merits and not their ability to hire expensive lobbyists or to prey on the consciences of hardworking, well-intentioned legislators," Bush wrote in his 1999 veto message.

Legislators may agree in principle, but they find it difficult to follow that standard in practice because they know they are judged by many of their constituents on the basis of how much money they bring back to their districts.

Projects reappear

So once again the budget is peppered with local projects, although this time some of them have been through evaluation processes that may make them more palatable to Bush.

There is $1.25 million for the Jacksonville Museum of Science and History, though Bush vetoed $460,000 for that facility last year. The Police Athletic League leadership program in Jacksonville is budgeted for $200,000 despite the fact that Bush vetoed $250,000 last year. And the Northeast Florida Fairgrounds in Callahan, which had $300,000 vetoed last year, is trying for $200,000 this time.

One thing Bush learned from last year's experience is that he should not spring the vetoes on legislators without warning.

This time, Bush said, he will call lawmakers and give them a chance to defend their projects before he takes any action.

House Speaker John Thrasher, R-Orange Park, personally delivered the budget to Bush last week with a joking plea for leniency.

Thrasher wore a white medical coat and held a stethoscope to Bush's chest, saying he wanted to determine if the governor had a heart.

Review process added

But lawmakers took it seriously last year when Bush slashed their projects and programs from the budget.

Easy targets like the $75,000 for fencing public hunting land so dogs would not invade adjacent private property were on the veto list. But so were worthy-sounding items like substance abuse programs.

There were cries of outrage and complaints that the governor had been too heavy-handed.

There were also, however, attempts to reform the budgeting process so that proposals would go through an objective review that would rank them according to the state's priorities.

This was done for two categories, juvenile justice and water and sewer projects, that were hit by a large number of vetoes last year.

Projects such as the city of Jacksonville's truancy interdiction program, which is budgeted for $250,000, and the new wastewater treatment plant for Callahan, budgeted for $750,000, are likely to gain approval this year because of the review process they went through.

But Rep. Sharon Merchant, a Palm Beach Gardens Republican who tried unsuccessfully to pass legislation establishing criteria for all projects, said the juvenile justice review process failed to rigorously prioritize the items.

"It's better than nothing, but it still needs some work," Merchant said.

Rep. Steve Wise, R-Jacksonville, said he thought Bush's vetoes resulted in improvements to the budget process, even if they bruised some feelings.

"I think he's absolutely right on that," Wise said. "It gets out of control."

Not that Wise was happy about the veto of the Work Keys project, one that he supported.

Wise said the governor's staff did not understand the project or realize that he did not intend for the entire $750,000 to be kept in Jacksonville and made no attempt to find out the details.

"The governor never called me, never talked to me," Wise said.

This year has been different, Wise said, with the governor and his staff working closely with him as chairman of the Education Appropriations Committee.

Wise said he thinks the education projects that went through his committee will gain approval, but some of the university construction that was not on the Board of Regents' recommended list may be in trouble. The University of North Florida projects, including a $12.4 million science and engineering building, have the regents' backing and should be all right, Wise said.

Wise said he expects Work Keys, which categorizes workers' skills so they can be matched with available jobs, to survive this year. While it is located in Jacksonville, it is a pilot program that can be expanded to other areas of the state, Wise said.

Importance to state

It is such things as the designation of an item as a pilot program that make it difficult to assess which projects are truly of statewide importance. They may affect just one community, but there is the possibility that if they are successful, they can be duplicated elsewhere.

St. Johns County Road 210 was described as an evacuation route in hope of getting $2 million for widening, but the Governor's Office has indicated it will have to be convinced.

Tourism and economic development can also confuse the issue.

Is the Miami Goombay Festival a local event or something that might draw visitors to the state? Bush vetoed $100,000 for it last year.

Is the LaVilla Cultural Museum a statewide resource or just a Jacksonville project? Bush vetoed $100,000 for the museum last year and this year will have to decide whether to approve $300,000 for its Lift Every Voice and Sing program.

Will $14.9 million spent for road and infrastructure improvements for economic development at Cecil Field benefit the entire state or just Jacksonville? It is the governor's call.

Horne, the Orange Park senator, said he thinks Cecil Field will be all right, but some other local projects, which he wouldn't name, could be in trouble.

"I think the governor is looking at a significant amount of veto dollars," Horne said.