Planned Parenthood office moving
Planned Parenthood of Northeast Florida is moving its Beaches office to a larger, more visible site in Jacksonville Beach on July 3 in order to serve more patients with family planning, gynecological exams and other services.

But recent state budget cuts may force the clinic to turn away some low-income and uninsured patients. Administrators learned last week that Planned Parenthood of Northeast Florida won't receive $115,000 in state funding that has provided counseling, birth control and exams for women who can't afford those services.

"It will have a significant impact," said Wanda Lanier, executive director of the program, noting the budget cut will impact about 25 percent of the patients. "How timely."

Gov. Jeb Bush slashed about $300 million from the new state budget last week. About $18.4 million in Northeast Florida projects were cut.

The Beaches Planned Parenthood clinic is moving to 1760 Third. St. S. in the San Pablo Shopping Center after 20 years in an office on Sailfish Drive in Atlantic Beach.

"It's time to move on," said Jan Ostler, the office's director of health services.

The clinic provides reduced-cost pap smears, breast cancer screening, pregnancy testing, birth control, anonymous screening for HIV and sexually transmitted diseases, hormone replacement therapy, testicular screening and educational workshops. It also sponsors FACES teen service, a series of plays by teens on sexuality, date rape, sexual assault and sexually transmitted diseases.

Administrators expect the new location to attract more patients in the Beaches region. The new facility is about 200 square feet larger than the previous clinic and will operate with the same staff and hours.

A doctor and nurse practitioner will be available three days a week from 2 to 5 p.m. on Tuesdays and Fridays and from 9 a.m. to noon on Thursdays. The clinic will increase its resources if the demand increases, Ostler said

Planned Parenthood of Northeast Florida is a private non-profit clinic with three offices in Duval County, including the Beaches site. It provides affordable health care through a contract with the Duval County Health Department.

The Beaches clinic sees about 1,000 patients a year, Lanier said, and about 80 percent of them have no insurance or are underinsured. The clinic also accepts Medicaid. The clinic charges about $50 for a pap smear compared to the $90 to $120 fee billed by private doctors, Lanier said.

Planned Parenthood is seeking other private sources of funding to replace the $115,000 budget cut, which made up about a quarter of its health care budget, she said.

"We're concerned beyond the pregnancy issue," Lanier said. "It's a public health issue."

The funding, the only government money that the agency received, also helped the clinic provide free screening and treatment for sexually transmitted diseases.

Women who are turned away will be referred to the Duval County Health Department. Lanier hopes the patients will follow that advice, but doesn't know if the health department can handle the extra patients.

Lanier said Bush's decision may have been a good political move.

"But it makes no financial sense whatsoever," she said.

The state will pick up the cost when women with unwanted pregnancies end up getting on Medicaid for pre-natal care and delivery.