With Kaine and Warner support, trade bill moves ahead
President Barack Obama's massive Pacific trade deal began its long and likely difficult path through Congress Thursday, but not before both of Virginia's senators were called to the White House in an effort to recharge the deal.

All but one Senate Democrat voted Tuesday to hold back on an initial approval the Obama administration wants to move ahead in negotiations with 11 other countries, including Japan, Malaysia and Vietnam. Agreement came Wednesday, and was voted through the Senate Thursday, after votes on an African trade extension and new ways to counter currency manipulation were added to the day's schedule, according to The New York Times.

The later concession could make negotiations more difficult with some of the countries involved, The Times reported.

Virginia's senators voted against moving forward Tuesday, and for it on Thursday. Both were among the Democrats called to the White House Tuesday evening for what U.S. Mark Warner's spokeswoman called "a constructive discussion about the best path forward."

After Thursday's vote, Warner said in a statement that a trade deal will open new markets for Virginia farmers, manufacturers and small businesses, but the agreement must also protect U.S. labor and environmental standards.

Critics of the Trans Pacific Partnership say it will push manufacturing jobs into other countries. They also note that the deal has been negotiated in secret. Its details are not publicly known.

Opponents from across the political spectrum are hoping to deny Obama so-called "fast track" authority, which allows his administration to nail down details and submit the pact for up-or-down approval in Congress, no amendments allowed. Labor groups in particular have pushed back against the deal.

U.S. Sen. Tim Kaine, who brought Obama's secretary of commerce to metro Richmond last month to discuss this deal with local business people, said in his own statement Thursday that he was pleased by the week's progress. More votes, starting next week, must be won before the issue clears the Senate and heads to the House for more discussion.

"I refused to allow consideration of trade legislation until the Senate passed strong enforcement measures," Kaine said in his statement. "As we prepare to take up major trade initiatives in the coming months, my biggest priority is ensuring we can negotiate enforceable deals that protect workers' rights, environmental standards and intellectual property, while eliminating barriers that some countries erect to keep American products out."

The deal has been pitched as a way to lower tariffs and other imbalances in international trade, and to set precedents for labor and other standards. It would set trade rules for a massive swath of the world's economy. Giving Obama fast track authority "gives the U.S. the best chance of elevating the standards for global trade in ways that will level the playing field," Kaine said Thursday.

The ramifications for Virginia are difficult to suss out, but the state already exports hundreds of millions in agricultural products to countries involved in the negotiations. The deal could have a major impact on the Port of Virginia, particularly once the Panama Canal expansion allows larger ships quicker access between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.

The port has no public position, though, on the bill. A spokesman declined Thursday to discuss the agreements potential impact at the port, saying that the issue is very politicized.

Gov. Terry McAuliffe, who speaks often of "the new Virginia economy" and the important role advanced manufacturing will play in it, said in a statement Thursday that he hopes Congress finds the sweet spot on this deal. It needs to protect workers while opening markets, he said.

"Virginia is well positioned for success as it competes in the global economy, and I want to be aggressive in seeking out every opportunity for our Commonwealth to compete," the governor said in his statement. "When we operate under open and fair agreements that provide a level playing field, we can show the world that Virginia truly is the best globalized, entrepreneurial, IT-driven and innovative economy in the world."

The countries involved in this deal ring the Pacific Ocean. In addition to Japan, Malaysia and Vietnam, Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru and Singapore have been part of the talks.

Fain can be reached by phone at 757-525-1759.

CORRECTION: The original headline on this article, "Kaine, Warner back Trans Pac; deal moves after White House confab" has been edited to more accurately reflect this week's movement. Thursday's Senate vote was to move forward with debate on the trade promotion, or "fast track," authority President Obama seeks while negotiating the Trans Pacific Partnership pact. The vote was not on the trade agreement itself, which is still being negotiated with other countries, and the senators have not pledged support for the deal's particulars.