Republicans hold Virginia Senate
RICHMOND – Republicans kept control of the Virginia Senate Tuesday, turning back a well-funded Democratic push.

After all the spending, by both parties, all the commercials and all the posturing, the chamber's division of power was unchanged: 21-19 in favor of Republicans.

Incumbents from both parties held serve despite high hopes in a handful of targeted districts. The majority came down to a pair of districts where long-time legislators decided to retire.

Republican Glen Sturtevant won the 10th District, in metro Richmond, preserving it for his party. Democrat Jeremy McPike won in Northern Virginia's 29th, doing likewise for his.

That leaves Republicans with the votes to block Democratic Gov. Terry McAuliffe's legislative package wherever they see fit. Plus, two of the three moderate Republicans who backed a quasi-privatized version of Medicaid expansion last year are retiring, leaving a GOP caucus that may have shifted to the right.

Photos from around the Peninsula on Election Day 2015. Follow our live coverage here: http://bit.ly/1NapG2u (Daily Press Photo Staff) (Daily Press Photo Staff)

The result also takes some wind out of Democratic sails here going into the 2016 presidential elections. McAuliffe and others pointed Tuesday to the groundwork laid in voter contacts during this election, but failing to take the Senate after a major and concerted push is a blow.

Senate Majority Leader Thomas K. “Tommy” Norment said in a statement that his party’s victory was “all the more impressive in that it was achieved despite the record-breaking millions of dollars spent by Gov. McAuliffe, his allies, and out-of-state, single-issue PACs.”

Norment, R-James City, noted that the parties have traded narrow control of the Senate in recent years, and that Virginians “made their choice.”

Seventeen of the chamber's 40 seats weren't contested this year. Most of the rest weren't considered competitive, given how well one party or the other had performed there in the past.

Senate control would have given McAuliffe some leverage, but was never going to be a total game changer for Democrats because Republicans control the House by a wide margin. Democrats gained a seat there Tuesday, leaving the GOP one seat short of a veto-proof margin, but that hardly opens the door for the governor's legislative agenda.

So, after weeks of intense campaigning that saw McAuliffe telling crowds that a Senate majority could help him pass gun control legislation or expand Medicaid in Virginia, the governor said hours before the results came in that the importance of control had been overstated.

“It's a nice talking point,” McAuliffe said during one of several barnstorm stops around the state. “But at the end of the day, I'm just trying to find common sense folks to work with us.”

The governor was his optimistic self during the stop, but the state party sought to temper expectations. A widely circulated mid-morning memo laid out a number of perceived disadvantages for Democrats and declared the effort to take the Senate had “always been an uphill battle.”

McAuliffe said he hadn't seen the memo late Tuesday afternoon, and he seemed put out by an internal inference that victory wasn’t at hand.

The memo pointed to low Democratic turnout in off-year elections, the influence of outside cash and gerrymandering as factors that needed to be overcome.

“That Democrats are competitive at all … is a huge gain for the party this year,” it stated.

The gerrymandering concern raised a number of Republican eyebrows, as did the memo’s section on outside cash. The Virginia Senate lines were drawn under Democratic control, and Democrats pulled together significantly more funding from large donors than Republicans, thanks in large part to a $2.2 million infusion from former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg's gun control group.

Also, Philip Munger, son of Berkshire Hathaway partner Charles Munger, gave $1 million to the Democratic Party of Virginia this year, according to the Virginia Public Access Project.

But the memo's central point held true, Christopher Newport University Political Scientist Quentin Kidd said Tuesday night.

“I think it was always an uphill climb,” he said.

Republican turnout is simply better in off-year elections, and Democrats couldn't juice their own turnout enough to overcome that, Kidd said.

The out-sized focus on gun control may also have hurt Dan Gecker, the Democratic candidate in metro Richmond’s 10th District, Kidd said. With Bloomberg's buy, it became the central issue.

“It did not benefit Democrats,” agreed Geoffrey Skelley, a political scientist at the University of Virginia. “I think we can say that at this point.”

But McAuliffe said he didn't hear from voters about guns, or about tolls, an issue Republicans seized on in Northern Virginia after the administration announced a plan to toll a key highway there during peak hours.

“You know what (voters) care about?” McAuliffe said Tuesday afternoon. “K-12, pre-K. That's what we get asked about. Nobody talks to me about guns or the tolls.”

The governor also said he had no regrets about announcing the tolling plan about a month before the elections.

“As governor I've got to deal with transportation issues,” he said. “We've got to make decisions that are in the best interest of the state.”

Republicans turned their attention Tuesday night toward the next legislative session, which starts in January. Speaker of the House William Howell said his caucus looks forward to working with the Senate to “craft a conservative, responsible budget proposal.”

He made no mention of the fact that McAuliffe will present his version of the budget next month.

“In the coming weeks, House Republicans will outline policy proposals on health care, K-12 education and economic development,” Howell said in a statement. “Our goal remains to offer real solutions that move Virginia forward.”

Fain can be reached by phone at 757-525-1759.

Previously ...

By winning a key seat opening in metro Richmond, and holding everywhere else, Republicans kept control Tuesday of the Virginia Senate.

Not all returns are in around the state, but the Associated Press has called Senate District 10 for Republican Glen Sturtevant. The district, held now by retiring state Sen. John Watkins, R-Powhatan, was key for both parties.

Republican Hal Parrish is narrowly leading in the state's other closely watched opening seat, Northern Virginia's Senate District 29. As of 9:10 p.m., though, only 36 percent of those returns were in.

Elsewhere, incumbents appear to be holding serve, signaling that Republicans will at least hold on to their 21-19 lead in the 40 member chamber.

"Rs will either have 21 or 22 seats in VA Senate depending on #va29 outcome," political scientist Geoffrey Skelley Tweeted.