Bush signs $53 billion budget, but vetoes fast train funding
TALLAHASSEE -- Gov. Jeb Bush signed into law Monday a $53.5 billion state budget for the fiscal year that begins next week but vetoed more than $7 million for high-speed rail construction.

Bush did approve more than $4 million for planning on public transportation stations that could eventually be used for the trains, if they are ever built. Bush said that would meet the state's obligation under a voter-approved constitutional amendment calling for building the bullet train system.

With the economy in a downturn, lawmakers couldn't spend as much as the advocates for various programs wanted, but Bush noted that the state's budget is bigger overall than last year and, in a defense of his tax-cutting policies, argued that things are better here than elsewhere.

''We're better than off than many states,'' Bush said pointing specifically to California, which is facing a $38 billion deficit. ''California is used as the most dramatic example but many other states have similar problems.

''Thankfully, because we have not had tax increases ... we have a healthier economy and because of that our economy is generating growing revenues for the state,'' Bush said in remarks before signing the budget. He pointed out that this year's budget grows by 6.3 percent over last year's.

Besides a sluggish economy, lawmakers were also constrained by voter mandates. In addition to the train amendment, Floridians passed a constitutional amendment in November that requires that public school class sizes be reduced.

Bush is hoping that the class-size amendment is repealed but said in the meantime the budget has to account of the requirement.

''A significant percent of the moneys going to education are going to lower class size,'' Bush said.

The Legislature kept the budget largely free of the local spending projects that often pad the budget, giving Bush less to veto this year than he has in the past. Bush has been highly critical of and prone to veto any project that doesn't appear to meet at least a regional need.

''This is a clean budget in many ways,'' Bush said. ''As clean as a budget has been in our state in modern times.''

The signing comes just a week before the beginning of the state's fiscal year that begins July 1, late this year because lawmakers were unable to agree on a budget during their regular spring legislative session. They returned for a 16-day special session in May to finalize the spending plan.

There were programs that received less money this year than last. Others were funded, but not at levels advocates for the programs or even state agencies said were necessary to meet demand.

For example, the budget includes money for the Florida KidCare program, which provides low-cost children's insurance, but caps enrollment. More money is provided for Florida's troubled child welfare program, but only about half of what the Department of Children & Families said they needed.

The Legislature also couldn't find tax dollars to meet the complete demand at the state's universities, instead authorizing an 8.5 percent tuition increase.