Kaine: Skilled workers, not just money, needed to expand the Navy fleet
The Navy needs support from Congress to expand its fleet, but it won’t get far without a skilled labor force. That’s a concern for Sen. Tim Kaine.

The Virginia senator plans to convene an event in Hampton Roads in early June to discuss regional work force issues in light of ambitious plans. The fleet stands at about 280 ships now, and the Navy hopes to achieve a 355-ship fleet by the mid-2030s through a combination of new construction and extending the life of current vessels.

“We talk about what 355 means for the budget, and there are a whole series of issues there, but there is a real work force need,” Kaine said Tuesday at meeting of the Senate Armed Services sea power panel. “Folks who are going to be building these ships are in pre-K right now.”

Kaine, the son of a Kansas ironworker, has supported skilled trades during his time in the Senate. He has visited The Apprentice School at Newport News Shipbuilding and co-chairs a Senate caucus that focuses on career and technical education.

Details are still being worked out on the Hampton Roads event, but Kaine wants to pull together representatives of community colleges, K-12 schools, the business community, apprenticeship programs and the shipbuilding industry.

The Newport News shipyard, a division of Huntington Ingalls Industries, is currently hiring about 400 people a month to meet demands for construction, overhaul and maintenance of nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and submarines. So far, the shipyard has not had problems finding skilled workers to fill those positions, President Jennifer Boykin said last week.

That hiring rate is expected to continue until August, when it will taper off. The shipyard is Virginia’s largest industrial employer, and the work force is expected to reach around 23,000 with this latest hiring surge. It is the only shipyard in the country that builds nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and one of two that builds nuclear-powered submarines.

Concerns about the work force have also spread to the Navy’s four public shipyards.

Sen. Jeanne Shaheen, D-N.H., is eyeing the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard, located at the southernmost tip of Maine. Neighboring New Hampshire has one of the nation’s lowest unemployment rates, yet there is a need to develop employees skilled in science, technology, engineering and mathematics.

“Finding the skilled STEM workers to fill those shipyard jobs is challenging,” she said.

James Geurts, the Navy’s acquisition chief, said the single biggest factor for keeping skilled jobs is certainty of funding that leads to a long-term plan. A skilled worker needs to know that a job won’t disappear.

Another key is following through with planned investments at public shipyards to have “a world-class facility that attracts world-class talent.”

Two-carrier purchase update

The Navy is considering ordering two aircraft carriers at once, something not done since the defense buildup during the Reagan administration in the 1980s. Responding to one of Kaine’s questions, Geurts said he expects to know more about the potential savings in a couple of months.

The Navy has asked the Newport News shipyard to submit a proposal.

“I would think by early summertime we’ll have a good look at the numbers, we’ll have a good understanding of those numbers,” said Geurts, assistant Navy secretary for research, development and acquisition.

Last week, Boykin told reporters that a two-carrier buy would save about $1.6 billion across labor, planning, engineering and advance ordering. Geurts on Wednesday declined to specify a number.

“There is certainly a large potential of savings that warrants this very close look,” he said, adding later, “I expect it would be a lot of money. I just don’t want to put a number (on it) yet until I’ve had a chance to work with the shipyard.”

CAPTION 3D Sytems along with Huntington Ingalls Industries' Newport News Shipbuilding division are collaborating on adaptive manufacturing technologies to build naval warships. 3D Sytems along with Huntington Ingalls Industries' Newport News Shipbuilding division are collaborating on adaptive manufacturing technologies to build naval warships. CAPTION 3D Sytems along with Huntington Ingalls Industries' Newport News Shipbuilding division are collaborating on adaptive manufacturing technologies to build naval warships. 3D Sytems along with Huntington Ingalls Industries' Newport News Shipbuilding division are collaborating on adaptive manufacturing technologies to build naval warships. CAPTION World War II veteran Ray Duley recounts surviving the sinking of the USS Vincennes in the Pacific Theater. World War II veteran Ray Duley recounts surviving the sinking of the USS Vincennes in the Pacific Theater. CAPTION U.S. pilots and crews from Carrier Air Wing 8 and 350 sailors from the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle of the French Navy are conducting operational training together through the end of May. U.S. pilots and crews from Carrier Air Wing 8 and 350 sailors from the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle of the French Navy are conducting operational training together through the end of May. CAPTION In the wake of a pilot's death, the U.S. Air Force Thunderbirds cancel Fort Lauderdale Air Show appearance. In the wake of a pilot's death, the U.S. Air Force Thunderbirds cancel Fort Lauderdale Air Show appearance. CAPTION On April 14, 2018, the Virginia-class fast attack submarine USS John Warner (SSN 765) launched tomahawk missiles from the Mediterranean Sea as part of a multi-national strike operation against the Syrian government in order to degrade the Syrian government's capability to produce and utilize chemical weapons. The submarine's operations in the Mediterranean Sea are part of a routine deployment in support of our regional allies and partners and U.S. national security interests.(U.S. Navy) On April 14, 2018, the Virginia-class fast attack submarine USS John Warner (SSN 765) launched tomahawk missiles from the Mediterranean Sea as part of a multi-national strike operation against the Syrian government in order to degrade the Syrian government's capability to produce and utilize chemical weapons. The submarine's operations in the Mediterranean Sea are part of a routine deployment in support of our regional allies and partners and U.S. national security interests.(U.S. Navy)

Lessig can be reached by phone at 757-247-7821.