Federal judge issues opinion in Gloucester transgender lawsuit
GLOUCESTER – In protecting the privacy of all of its students, the Gloucester County School Board is protecting a constitutional right, according to U.S. District Judge Robert G. Doumar.

Doumar issued a written opinion Thursday explaining his recent decision to deny a preliminary injunction that would have required Gloucester County Public Schools to allow a 16-year-old transgender student to use the boys' restrooms at the start of school on Sept. 8.

The injunction request is a part of a lawsuit filed on behalf of Gavin Grimm by the American Civil Liberties Union. The ACLU is seeking a court order requiring the School Board to let Grimm use the boys' restroom, even though he was born female.

“The judge's decision is disappointing but an appeal has already been filed,” said Rebecca Glenberg, the ACLU of Virginia’s Legal Director. “We and Gavin remain focused on achieving a positive outcome at trial and on appeal.”

Doumar filed his order denying the injunction in the U.S. Eastern District Court in Newport News on Sept. 4 minus his written opinion.

The decision, which the ACLU is appealing, means that Grimm, a junior at the high school now, will be required to follow the restroom policy the School Board approved in December 2014. The policy requires all students to use single-stall private restrooms or restrooms associated with their physical sex.

A hearing on the injunction was held in Norfolk on July 27. At that time, Doumar dismissed the Title IX discrimination claims in the lawsuit, saying that federal law allows schools to separate restrooms based on sex.

"Furthermore, society demands that male and female restrooms be separate because of privacy concerns," Doumar wrote in the opinion issued Thursday. "Not only is bodily privacy a constitutional right, the need for privacy is even more pronounced in the state educational system. The students are almost all minors, and public school education is a protective environment. Furthermore, the School Board is tasked with providing safe and appropriate facilities for these students.

Video Separate but Equal? Gavin Grimm identifies himself as a transgender boy but he was born a female. This school year, Grimm officially began living his new life as a male, changing his name and registering as a new male student at Gloucester High School. Gavin Grimm identifies himself as a transgender boy but he was born a female. This school year, Grimm officially began living his new life as a male, changing his name and registering as a new male student at Gloucester High School. See more videos

"The Court gives great weight to the concerns of the School Board — which represents the students and parents in the community — on the question of the privacy concerns of students, especially at this early stage of litigation and in the complete absence of credible evidence to the contrary."

In addition to Title IX, the lawsuit claims that the policy violates the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment. Doumar has not yet ruled on that claim.

David Corrigan, an attorney representing the school district, said he could not comment on Doumar's decision.

He argued in court in July that the school district had offered three unisex restrooms to the entire student body at the school and allowed Grimm to continue to use the girls' restrooms, which he has chosen not to do. Grimm has also stated, according to court documents, that he is not asking to use the locker rooms. He participates in a homebound physical education program.

"All students have equal comparable restroom facilities," Corrigan said in July. "He is not being treated differently."

Doumar wrote that Grimm had failed "to show that his presence in the male restroom would not infringe upon the privacy of other students."

He said the ACLU and Grimm had not submitted enough evidence to show that the school's policy caused injury or hardship.

Doumar reiterated in the opinion, as he said repeatedly during the hearing in July, that the ACLU is fighting an "uphill battle" in the case.

Doumar questioned a letter submitted in the case by the Department of Education through the U.S. Department of Justice that says "a school must treat transgender students consistent with their gender identity." He said the letter does not stand up to scrutiny because it contradicts its own policy under Title IX which also requires "schools to provide sex-segregated restrooms, locker rooms, shower facilities, housing, athletic teams, and single-sex classes under certain circumstances."

"It will not be permitted to disinterpret its own regulations for the purposes of litigation," Doumar wrote. "As the Court noted throughout the hearing, it is concerned about the implications of such rulings. Allowing the Department of Education's letter to control here would set a precedent that agencies could avoid the process of formal rulemaking by announcing regulations through simple question and answer publications. Such a precedent would be dangerous and could open the door to allow further attempts to circumvent the rule of law — further degrading our well-designed system of checks and balances."

In the lawsuit, Grimm seeks to have the school district's restroom policy declared unconstitutional, and asks for an unspecified amount of money for damages.

If the judge rules in Grimm's favor, it will be the first time a federal court has said that restricting a transgender student's restroom use is discriminatory.

Earlier this year, the U.S. District Court in Western Pennsylvania dismissed a lawsuit that a transgender male student filed against the University of Pittsburgh. The lawsuit was filed in 2011, and a judge said in April that the university didn't discriminate against the 25-year-old student when it prohibited him from using male facilities because he was medically a woman.

Since the Grimm case began creating headlines last fall, disputes over transgender restroom policies in schools have popped up across the country.

Recently, a Missouri transgender girl's request to use the girls' bathroom split her school, causing a protest by nearly 200 students. In Ohio, a superintendent's decision to let a transgender student use the boys' room triggered protest from parents.

In the rural upstate New York town of Potsdam, Superintendent Joanne M. Chambers said last month that the district would now allow transgender students who now use a unisex bathroom the option of using the bathroom or locker room of the gender with which they identify.

In April, the Nevada legislature rejected a bill that would have required students to use bathrooms corresponding to their biological sex and Minnesota lawmakers voted to restrict transgender students' access to school locker rooms and bathrooms.

Last year, Maine's highest court ruled that a transgender fifth-grader could use the girls' restroom.

The Gloucester County School Board now has 21 days to file an answer to the lawsuit. Then a trial date will be set on the 14th Amendment claim.