Norment, Senate Republicans, pull switcheroos to nail down Northam
Senate Republicans seem to be pulling a little political stuntery in this election year, forcing Lt. Gov. Ralph Northam to break ties on controversial bills, only to redo the vote almost immediately and make his tie-breaker irrelevant for anything but a campaign ad.

Shortly after the slim Republican majority forced Northam, one of two Democrats running for governor, to break a 20-20 tie on an immigration bill Wednesday, GOP contender Ed Gillespie blasted out an press release, bashing Northam for the vote.

Gillespie spokesman Matt Moran said the campaign didn't request the maneuver from Senate Republicans, but he declined to say whether they knew it was coming.

"We talk to the Senate Republican Caucus about a lot of things," he said.

Here's how it works: Republicans hold 21 of 40 Senate seats. The lieutenant governor votes only in cases of a tie. If one Republican votes against a bill that the GOP caucus wants to pass, and which all Democrats vote against, that locks the Senate 20-20.

Northam breaks the tie, siding with fellow Democrats and temporarily killing the bill. Then the Republican who voted against the bill moves for reconsideration, which is just a do-over. On the do-over, the lone Republican switches to a "yes" vote and the final decision is recorded, 21-19.

Senate Majority Leader Tommy Norment did this Wednesday on the aforementioned immigration bill, House Bill 2000. Norment, R-James City, declined afterward to discuss the matter with reporters. Northam's chief of staff, Clark Mercer, was standing nearby as Norment walked away.

"Fruit basket's in the mail from the Gillespie campaign," he said.

Mercer pointed to six times this session that Republicans reconsidered a tie vote or, in at least one case, reconsidered a winning vote, turning it into a tie for the lieutenant governor to break.

Some examples are more compelling examples than others. Earlier Wednesday state Sen. David Suetterlein's initial "no" vote on a bill to prohibit local governments from setting wage floors for their contractors required Northam to break a tie. Within two minutes the vote had been reconsidered and the bill passed 21-19. An attempt to reach Suetterlein after session Wednesday was not successful.

State Sen. John Cosgrove, R-Chesapeake, switched his vote on a regional charter schools bill Monday. After the vote, Cosgrove told the Daily Press that his initial "no" vote was accidental and there was no attempt to force the lieutenant governor's hand.

It's not unusual for the Senate to reconsider votes, or for one senator to change his or her vote. Repeated tie votes that turn into 21-19 party line votes, however, are unusual.

On Tuesday, state Sen. Dick Black voted "no" on legislation meant to block state enactment of the federal Clean Power Plan. Black, R-Leesburg, seemed genuinely surprised when Republican colleagues - who also seemed surprised - urged him to change his vote. Black said later that his first vote was a mistake.

Northam focused on Norment's switcheroo Wednesday, calling it a disingenuous maneuver on a bad bill meant to scapegoat immigrants. In an eight-sentence statement, Northam tied Gillespie to President Donald Trump three times, saying they both "want to demonize immigrants for political gain."

"Tommy Norment and Richmond Republicans were elected to do their jobs, not play games," Northam said in the statement. "I did my job today by putting a stop to it."