Questions follow Bank of America's EquiCredit move
The first few days of Bank of America's plan to end the practice of lending home mortgage money to people with bad credit have been noisy ones, as customers, employees and industry experts all had something to say about it.

Some customers were concerned about the future of their loan payments, and who would be responsible for them. Employees wondered about how, or if, they would be able to keep their jobs. And mortgage professionals questioned whether the entire of idea of lending money to people with obvious credit risks has passed its time, especially given the current economic slowdown.

On Wednesday, the Charlotte, N.C.-based bank said it planned to sell off its divisions that specialize in these kinds of loans -- they are known as subprime, where a lender charges a higher interest rate in return for giving money to people with blemished credit. The bank decided the business was too financially risky.

Still, by selling the divisions, which operated in Jacksonville under the name EquiCredit, the bank left about 1,200 employees wondering about their jobs. Bank officials said they were confident the employees would be able to keep their jobs, either within the bank or with another company that will take over segments of EquiCredit.

Yesterday, bank spokeswoman Eloise Hale reiterated that no employees will be left jobless after the piece-by-piece deals to sell EquiCredit are finalized. EquiCredit is broken into three divisions. Two of those, covering about 500 Jacksonville employees, are in the process of being sold; Bank of America is looking for a buyer for a third unit, one with about 700 employees.

"The [employees] are going with one of the buyers or they are going to find another job within the bank," Hale said. "We are hopeful they will go with one of the buyers."

One of those buyers, Meritage Mortgage Corp. said it will make offers to about 160 employees and keep them in Jacksonville. Another buyer, Houston-based Aegis Mortgage Corp., has not made any official statements about the future of the Jacksonville staff, either publicly or within Bank of America.

Through a phone receptionist, an Aegis spokeswoman declined to comment for this story yesterday. And a Bank of America executive familiar with the pending Aegis deal referred calls to the company's media office.

Hale said she couldn't comment on Aegis because the deal is only "a binding letter of intent."

A spokesman for the Mortgage Bankers Association of America, an industry lobbying group in Washington, D.C., said he had little information about the company. Aegis is listed in the group's directory as a member, but the only details are a company address and phone number. Most other members list corporate executives and the type of business they do in the directory.

Meanwhile, while the job details are sorted out, other workers at Bank of America's call centers and banking branches dealt with another problem: Hale, the bank spokeswoman, said because of media reports on the future of EquiCredit, many customers in the First Coast were concerned about the future of their home loans.

Hale said many of those questions came from people who have non-subprime loans. All employees that took those calls and e-mails reassured customers that none of the recent moves will impact non-subprime loans handled outside of EquiCredit, Hale said.

And by getting rid of EquiCredit, Bank of America also raised questions as to the future of the subprime lending industry. Chicago-based Superior Bank made a similar call a few weeks ago, as did First Union last year.

Analysts said the idea of giving loans to people with bad or no credit was popular in the mid- to late-1990s because the economic boom put money in a lot of people's pockets. But the recent economic slump has taken that money away.

"You've got many more banks getting out of subprime lending than coming in right now,'' said Marni O'Doherty, an analyst with Keefe, Bruyette & Woods in New York. ''Banks are finding it much more labor-intensive, since you've got to be on top of these types of loans as soon as they get delinquent."

-- Wire service material was used in this report.