EquiCredit gets new owner
Bank of America has sold the second of three local lending units specializing in loaning money to people with poor credit. Bank spokeswoman Eloise Hale said the 975 Jacksonville-based employees who work in the division, a loan servicing center, will keep their jobs with the new company, Fairbanks Capital Corp.

Salt Lake City-based Fairbanks Credit agreed last week to buy the branch of EquiCredit from Bank of America. Terms of the deal weren't released.

The deal is a continuation of Bank of America's exit from the business of lending money to home buyers with credit problems, also known as subprime lending. The company, which has about 4,500 employees in Jacksonville, began getting out of the industry in August when it sold EquiCredit's sales and other mortgage-related branches. It still needs to unload the remainder of EquiCredit, a portfolio of about $22 billion worth of loans.

The bank has been looking to shed itself of the subprime lending units so it can turn its attention to more stable, and profitable, departments. Also, subprime lending in general has been getting negative publicity lately as governments and other organizations have been examining the process.

Fairbanks is privately owned by affiliates of several financial companies, including Financial Guaranty Insurance Co., and GE Capital Equity Investments Inc. Before the EquiCredit deal, Fairbanks had about 1,000 employees working out of Salt Lake City and another office in suburban Philadelphia.

Fairbanks officials couldn't be reached yesterday to comment.

Bank of America completed the first phase of its subprime lending purge in August. Houston-based Aegis Mortgage Corp. bought a big share of EquiCredit, and the remainder was sold to Resource Bancshares Mortgage Group, based in Columbia, S.C. Resource Bancshares moved many of the the former EquiCredit employees into its Jacksonville-based mortgage company, Meritage Mortgage Corp.

Staff writer Mark Gordon can be reached at (904) 359-4103 or via e-mail at mgordon@jacksonville.com.