Texas attorney general enters cancer agency’s political maze
As Texas’ cancer-fighting agency veered close to collapse in October, its oversight committee huddled behind closed doors, seeking a solution.

Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott has a seat on the committee, which is the governing board of the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas. But he didn’t show up for this critical meeting.

It’s not that Abbott was unavailable. That same day, he gave an interview to Fox News on the presidential election.

Abbott’s absence from CPRIT’s crucial deliberations was hardly unusual. Though state law grants a seat to the attorney general or one of his staff members, Abbott never has attended any of CPRIT’s 23 meetings. Even as the agency was barreling toward near-death, he sent an aide to fill the chair.

A succession of problems has beset CPRIT: conflicts of interest, allegations of favoritism, widespread resignations, and an $11 million grant made to a Dallas company without the required scientific or business review.

But the attorney general, the state’s chief legal officer, demonstrated little apparent interest, based on his correspondence. Over the past five years, Abbott exchanged only nine emails with key state officials concerning CPRIT, an examination of records by The Dallas Morning News found.

Abbott said his behavior arose from his anticipation of possible future conflicts. Picking a high-ranking assistant to take his place “allowed me to retain the independence to take action to respond to any broader challenges posed by CPRIT,” Abbott said in a written statement. “Hindsight proved foresight correct.”

Despite his proclamations of independence, the attorney general — a possible candidate for governor — now has entered a political and bureaucratic maze at CPRIT.

Last December, Abbott’s office announced that it would investigate CPRIT. Abbott is therefore in the position of investigating an agency over which his office already had oversight. As part of this inquiry, the attorney general potentially is looking into the behavior of board members from whom he has accepted campaign contributions.

To complicate matters further, Abbott is investigating the agency’s granting of money to a company that had an Abbott campaign donor as an investor. A law firm representing that company also has served as legal counsel for Abbott’s campaign organization. That same law firm has contributed $160,000 to Abbott’s campaigns since 2001.

In addition, Abbott’s office is representing CPRIT, as legal counsel, in its dispute with a foundation created to raise private funds for the public agency. Among the foundation’s donors are people who also have given money to Abbott’s campaigns.

Abbott, who didn’t grant an interview request but answered numerous written questions, said he sees no problems with these arrangements.

“The Attorney General’s broad responsibility is to enforce and apply the laws of Texas,” he wrote. “The independent authority to accomplish that fundamental and constitutional task cannot be eroded by legislative appointments to committees.”

Abbott said he doesn’t consider himself to be a member of the oversight committee because he picked a staff member. CPRIT, however, lists Abbott as a member on its website, with a picture of him and an extensive biography.

‘Extra eyes’

Once a shining star among state agencies, CPRIT is fighting for its survival as the legislative session winds down.

Legislators are working on a bill to reform the agency’s operations, and it remains unclear how much CPRIT will be able to spend in the upcoming two-year budget.

The governor, lieutenant governor and House speaker called for a moratorium on new awards in December. As a result, more than 170 applications are stalled at various stages of CPRIT’s award process. No new applications have been reviewed for five months. Some were sent back so scientists could resubmit them later. Others have been withdrawn.

The agency is also short-staffed. It has yet to replace two executives who quit as troubles mounted late last year, as well as out-of-state experts to evaluate applications for funds. Dozens of those experts quit last year amid concerns that politics was influencing who received agency awards.

Over the past five months, the Travis County district attorney’s office has conducted a criminal investigation into how CPRIT has awarded grants. No results have been announced.

Texas voters in 2007 approved the $3 billion program to fight cancer. The legislature passed a bill to create a new agency, overseen by an 11-member board.

The governor, lieutenant governor and speaker of the House each appoint three members to the oversight board. The other two members are the comptroller of public accounts and the attorney general — or staff members chosen to carry out their duties.

“They were put on there for that extra set of eyes and knowledge,” said Rep. Jim Keffer, the Eastland Republican who co-wrote the law that created CPRIT. Since then, Abbott and state Comptroller Susan Combs have said they had a conflict of interest between their state duties and having a seat on the committee, Keffer said.

Abbott said even before the Legislature passed the bill, his office asked that the attorney general be removed from the oversight committee. Those repeated requests were made “orally” to legislators and staff members, not in writing, he said.

He said he selected James “Jay” Dyer in July 2008 to sit on the oversight committee. Dyer had joined Abbott’s office that month as special assistant and senior counsel to the attorney general.

Records released under the state public records law show that Dyer asked several questions about CPRIT’s operations. Since being picked by Abbott, he attended 15 of 22 meetings. Another attorney from Abbott’s office attended CPRIT’s first meeting.

Dyer, however, was absent from the June 18, 2010, oversight committee meeting. He said he was out of town. That was when the panel ratified an $11 million award to Peloton Therapeutics, which is using laboratory discoveries at UT Southwestern Medical Center to try to develop new anti-cancer drugs. CPRIT awarded the grant without the required business or scientific review.

Dyer said he learned about problems with the Peloton grant only when CPRIT disclosed them last November.

The following month, the chairman of the oversight committee, Austin businessman Jimmy Mansour, instructed CPRIT’s executive director to ask Abbott to “seek affidavits from all individuals related to or associated with Peloton, past and present.”

Two days later, the attorney general’s office said it would open a civil investigation.

Cathy Bonner, a former close aide to Gov. Ann Richards who played a key role in the idea of creating CPRIT, said Abbott should have walled himself and his office off from the investigation. She said the attorney general shouldn’t investigate an agency in which he or a staff member has a seat on the governing board.

“The worst conflict is Abbott being in charge of any kind of investigation,” she said.

The Travis County district attorney’s Public Integrity Unit, which has statewide jurisdiction to pursue alleged corruption within state government, should have handled the investigation, Bonner said.

Abbott rejected that argument, saying the attorney general’s seat on the oversight committee did not remove “the responsibility to fully perform the constitutional and statutory duties to administer all state laws of Texas.”

Abbott also noted that CPRIT requested an investigation by the attorney general, triggering a state law that required him to “provide the requested legal services.”

“Mansour could have requested an outside law firm, but apparently chose not to do so,” Abbott said.

Reached for comment, Mansour said he deferred to Abbott. “As Chairman of a state agency, I asked my lawyer, the Attorney General, for assistance,” Mansour said in an email. “I would not presume to direct him on how he conducts his own business pursuant to my request.”

Campaign dollars

Three committee members who ratified the award to Peloton have contributed $150,000 since 2002 to Abbott’s campaigns. Among them is Charles Tate, a Houston investor and major Republican campaign donor.

Tate has given $140,000 to Abbott’s campaigns. Of that, he contributed $100,000 in November, about three weeks before the attorney general started the civil investigation of CPRIT.

Tate didn’t return messages seeking comment.

At least one Peloton investor also has ties to Abbott. Dallas philanthropist Peter O’Donnell, one of Peloton’s early financial backers, has contributed $130,000 to Abbott’s campaigns since 2001.

O’Donnell has said he invested in Peloton in July 2011, more than a year after the CPRIT oversight committee ratified the company’s award. He said he purchased 900,000 shares of Peloton stock and donated all of his shares to UT Southwestern Medical Center in December 2011.

O’Donnell’s charitable foundation has also given $1.5 million to a nonprofit group that supplemented salaries of CPRIT officials.

He declined to comment on his campaign contributions to Abbott. In a statement to The News, he said he gave money to the CPRIT Foundation to help “recruit the best talent in the country to fight cancer.”

Remeditex Ventures, a Dallas-based investment company, is also a Peloton investor, according to both firms’ websites. Remeditex declined comment Friday when reached by The News. But according to a Dallas Regional Chamber blog item by Remeditex’s chief scientific officer, Dr. Dennis Stone, the firm was “conceived and funded” by Lyda Hill. The granddaughter of oil pioneer H. L. Hunt, Hill has donated almost $7,000 to Abbott’s campaigns.

Campaign contributions from CPRIT oversight committee members and a Peloton investor don’t pose any problems for the attorney general’s investigation, said Eric Bearse, an Abbott campaign spokesman.

“People who give to General Abbott know that he will enforce the law,” Bearse said.

Many clients

Peloton and Abbott’s campaigns both have used the services of a large and powerful law firm that has offices in Dallas and Austin, as well as London and Hong Kong.

Locke Lord is representing Peloton in the Travis County district attorney’s criminal investigation of CPRIT, said Paul E. Coggins, a Dallas-based partner of the firm and a former U.S. Attorney for the Northern District of Texas.

“That is actually Harriet Miers’ client,” said Coggins, referring to Peloton.

Asked if Miers is handling the representation of Peloton in both the criminal investigation and the civil investigation by Abbott’s office, Coggins replied: “I think she probably is doing both.” He then referred questions on details to Miers.

Miers, who served as deputy chief of staff for President George W. Bush and was nominated for a seat on the U.S. Supreme Court, didn’t return messages seeking comment.

Abbott appeared in the Oval Office in 2005 to show support for Miers’ nomination to the high court, and has said he worked with Miers while she served in the White House. When Abbott ran in 2010 for re-election as attorney general, Miers contributed $5,000 to his campaign, records show.

An Abbott spokesman, asked whether Locke Lord is representing Peloton in the attorney general’s civil investigation, said in an email that he didn’t know.

Abbott said the CPRIT investigation “has been undertaken in collaboration and with the support of the Travis County district attorney’s office.”

The attorney general’s Computer Forensics Unit recovered deleted or destroyed CPRIT emails about Peloton, Abbott said.

“Because of that, we were able to learn what occurred — and how it happened,” he said.

CPRIT, at the request of the Travis County district attorney, has not released the emails to The News, citing the criminal investigation.

Since 2006, Abbott’s campaigns have paid Locke Lord $87,000 for legal work, records show.

In 2007, the firm hired Abbott’s longtime operations manager, Gardner Pate, who now does legal work for Abbott’s campaign. Pate didn’t return several messages seeking comment.

The firm Locke Lord has contributed $160,000 to Abbott’s campaigns since 2001, according to the Texas Ethics Commission.

The law firm also represented Peloton when The News filed requests with UTSW for public records about the firm. UTSW faculty members are advisors to both Peloton and to a major investor. The university also received stock in the company in 2011 from O’Donnell.

The attorney general’s office rules on what information must be released to the public under state law.

Attorneys for Locke Lord and the University of Texas System, UTSW’s parent body, asked Abbott’s office to withhold some of the records that the newspaper requested. The attorney general’s office decided the university could withhold some documents, but had to release others.

Until The News inquired, Abbott said, he didn’t know Locke Lord represented Peloton.

He noted that Locke Lord represents both the newspaper and its parent company, A.H. Belo Corporation. Locke Lord, and its various predecessor firms, have done legal work connected to The News for several decades.

“Do the above facts mean that The Dallas Morning News should not report on CPRIT? Of course not,” Abbott said.

Abbott said it is “well recognized that the Texas governmental structure frequently places the Office of Attorney General in a position of representing more than one adverse interest in a particular matter.”

Another example of that popped up recently.

In late March, the attorney general’s office said it had opened an investigation into a nonprofit group created to help pay salaries and other expenses at CPRIT.

Abbott’s office said the CPRIT Foundation failed to get state approval before it reorganized under a new name.

CPRIT and the foundation have a dispute over how remaining funds can be spent before the foundation winds down its operations.

The attorney general’s office is representing CPRIT in discussions with the foundation to try to resolve the matter, said Jerry Strickland, an Abbott spokesman.

Donors to the foundation who also have contributed to Abbott’s campaigns include O’Donnell and four current or former members of the oversight committee — chairman Mansour, vice chairman Dr. Joseph Bailes, Tate, and ex-committee member Cindy Brinker Simmons, a Dallas public relations executive.

Legislative action

Although Abbott said he resolved the “potential for conflict” by choosing Dyer — who is not involved in litigation or investigations — to sit on the oversight committee, Dyer no longer attends the meetings.

In an email last December, Dyer told CPRIT: “Pending resolution of the Office of the Attorney General inquiry into CPRIT, I will abstain from participating in further Oversight Committee business.”

In fact, Dyer said recently, there are “inherent conflicts associated with the [Office of the Attorney General] serving as the state’s law firm and having a designee on CPRIT’s governing board.”

Last January, state Auditor John Keel released a scathing critique of CPRIT.

Keel said having the comptroller and attorney general on the oversight committee “could impair their independence or professional judgment” because they are responsible for enforcing state laws and regulations over CPRIT and its grant recipients.

Legislators are poised to take action, in response to the state audit.

The Senate has approved a bill to reform CPRIT’s operations that removes the attorney general and the comptroller, or their staff members, from the oversight committee. House members are working on that legislation.

Abbott told a Senate committee in February that he supports the change.

Staff writers Matt Jacob and Emily Sides contributed to this report.