Dwaine Caraway wants Dallas to ban plastic bags, as Austin has
Every few years, the city of Dallas considers banning the plastic bag. And every few years, the City Council discards the idea.

But with a plastic-bag ban now in effect in Austin, Dallas City Council member Dwaine Caraway is ready to give it another go. On Monday, he asked City Attorney Tom Perkins to draft a proposed ordinance “immediately” for council review.

“Austin has set a tone,” said Caraway. “It’s such a problem here in the city, where you see the bags flying everywhere — in the trees, in parks, everywhere.

“What’s wrong with paper bags? We had them all your life and all my life, and you didn’t see them everywhere. … Let’s try to follow in Austin’s footsteps.”

That won’t be easy.

In 2008, the interim director of Dallas’ Office of Environmental Quality recommended a 5-cent tax on plastic bags, to be followed by a phased-in ban. Members of the City Council showed little enthusiasm.

“We’re not in the business to go about taxing plastic bags,” Linda Koop, chairwoman of the council’s Transportation and Environment Committee, said at the time.

Assistant City Manager Jill Jordan said last month that Dallas is at least a year away from even considering a ban. But Caraway’s not willing to wait.

“We’re going to deal with it,” he said. “It’s something I think will make our city a cleaner city, and all the stores have to do is figure out another way to bag their stuff.”

Caraway said reusable bags aren’t the answer — not if customers have to pay for them.

“I do not support you having to spend $4 to buy a bag,” he said. “That’s the store’s responsibility. They should figure out a way for you to bring your groceries home.”

Austin’s ordinance was passed in March 2012 but didn’t take effect until March 1 of this year, to give merchants time to prepare.

It bans single-use plastic bags, the thin, flimsy kind that often wind up in gutters and storm drains, stuck to fences and hanging in trees. Sturdier reusable plastic bags are permitted.

The ban applies to supermarkets, convenience stores, restaurants, hardware stores, department stores, bookstores and other such retailers. It does not affect sales of packaged plastic bags, such as boxes of trash can liners. There are exemptions: dry cleaning bags, for example, produce bags and bags for carry-out food items that could leak — soups, sauces and the like.

Last month, the Texas Retailers Association sued Austin, claiming the ban violates state law. Austin officials said they’re confident the measure will withstand legal challenges.

And two weeks ago, Rep. Drew Springer, a freshman Republican from Muenster, filed the Shopping Bag Freedom Act, which would overturn the Austin ordinance.

“This act is just the latest example of government elites trying to step between the business and consumer in an attempt to push forward a misguided nanny-state agenda,” he said.