Multiple deportee arrested in molestation of North Texas girl, 9
A man who has been deported four times from the U.S. was arrested early Saturday after he climbed through a bedroom window and molested a 9-year-old girl, Parker County authorities say.

Israel Andrade, 35, has been jailed on a charge of burglary of a habitation with intent to commit another felony, according to the Parker County sheriff’s office.

Andrade was deported in 2003, 2004, 2009 and 2010, according to government records.

His relatives told authorities he returned to the United States from Mexico about a month ago.

He was arrested after a Springtown woman called police to report that a stranger had fondled her daughter, according to Parker County officials.

The girl told investigators she had been awakened by a man who groped her while she was sleeping on a couch. The man spoke in broken English and motioned for her to follow him back to the bedroom, but she screamed and he fled through a window.

The girl’s parents discovered their cellphones were missing, and her mother called police from a nearby convenience store.

Investigators followed footprints to a neighbor’s home, where Andrade had visited. They said they found him at a relative’s home, sleeping on top of the stolen phones.

They also reported finding two pairs of children’s underwear in a pair of his jeans, and tennis shoes with a tread pattern matching the footprints outside the girl’s home. The child’s mother identified the underwear as her daughter’s.

Parker County Sheriff Larry Fowler said the arrest of Andrade shows the need for better border security.

He credited Texas sheriffs and the Department of Public Safety for doing what they can under current laws and with available resources.

“Our federal government needs to step forward and aid us in enforcing the laws,” he said.

State Rep. Phil King, R-Weatherford, also said the case shows the deficiencies in border enforcement.

“What is it that Washington, D.C., does not understand about the need to secure our border against criminals?” he said in a written statement. “I can assure you this crime would have never occurred if our border had been properly secured.”