Texas judge knocks down minimum grading on report cards
AUSTIN - A state judge upheld Texas' truth-in-grading law Monday, rejecting arguments by several school districts that contended that they could still require teachers to give minimum grades - such as a 50, 60 or 70 - on student report cards.

State District Judge Gisela Triana-Doyal said the law was clear that school districts cannot enforce policies that require a minimum grade for students regardless of their achievement on report cards, class assignments and homework.

Eleven school districts from the Houston area had filed suit against the state, asserting that the 2009 law applied only to class assignments and not to progress reports or semester report cards. They cited vague language in the law to support their position.

But the judge dismissed their arguments, saying the legislation was "not ambiguous" and reflected the Legislature's intent to protect teachers from having to give grades that weren't earned.

Teacher groups had supported the measure by Sen. Jane Nelson, R-Flower Mound, last year, asserting that minimum grades were undermining the authority of teachers to accurately assess the performance of their students.

"This ruling is a victory for Texas teachers, students and parents because now all grades - on class assignments and on report cards - will accurately reflect how well students have mastered their coursework," Nelson said after the ruling. "Knowing the truth about a student's progress is important information for helping all children succeed in school."

Both the Dallas and Fort Worth school districts have minimum grades of 50, and several other districts in North Texas have similar policies. Some schools have not allowed their teachers to give less than a 70 in core subjects.

The plaintiff school districts and other districts around the state contend that that the new law infringes on local control of schools.

The Texas School Alliance, representing the state's large, urban districts, said many of its members shifted to minimum grades to provide a "safety net" for students at risk of dropping out. If a student has no chance of making up a poor grade, he or she is more likely to give up on a class and cause disciplinary problems or drop out of school, the alliance says.

State Education Commissioner Robert Scott triggered the lawsuit last fall when he issued a directive to school districts telling them that under the new law, all report cards must reflect "honest grades" for each grading period.

One leading teacher group, Texas AFT, supported Scott and intervened in the case, contending that minimum grade policies "promote irresponsible behavior, cover up failure and are not in the best interests of students or schools." Teacher leaders also called the policies the "ultimate grade inflation."

A lawyer for the plaintiff school districts said his clients could appeal the decision or try to lobby the Legislature next year to restore grading authority to districts.