Sounding Off: Best Southwest readers tell us what they think of the Texas voter ID law
RAISE YOUR VOICE: Share your own opinion online at dallasnews.com/sendletters. Sign up for Sounding Off or submit a guest column (and includeyour full name and contact information) by visiting dallasnews.com/voices.

What do you think of the Supreme Court’s ruling on the Texas voter ID law?

Thomas Allen, Lancaster: I agree with the 5th Circuit and the Supreme Court, and I hope their legal reasoning will be that voter ID laws do not infringe on the fundamental right to vote. I think voter ID laws are good public policy and do not place an undue burden on voters.

Only qualified voters must be identified and allowed to vote. There must be no proxy voting. As a former election judge and poll watcher, I’ve personally seen the inflated poll lists and done my part to help purge them, but the poll lists are never completely accurate, because it is impossible for an election judge to know who is moving in and out of a precinct that has in excess of 3,000 voters. We must eliminate proxy voting.

Henry Barber, Cedar Hill: It’s clear the Republican Party is seriously concerned about the increase in Hispanic voters, who tend primarily to vote for Democratic candidates. That is the primary reason they are so upset about illegal immigration and voter ID. Even if the immigrants themselves don’t vote, many of their children and grandchildren will be voters in the future.

This is just a continuation of the Jim Crow laws of the early 1900s that were intended to discourage African-American voters in the Deep South. The Republicans will do everything in their power to delay the increase of Democratic voters. Sadly, they could try to attract Hispanic and African-American voters, but that would irratate the established Republican base of middle- and upper-income Americans. So, what we are seeing now are Republican candidates, Greg Abbott for example, using their Hispanic relatives and friends to attempt to show they are actually pro-Hispanic. I doubt any Hispanics are deceived by those ads.

However, Hispanics who aspire to statewide office in Texas have to claim to be conservative Republicans if they are to have any chance at success. I wonder how many of them will switch parties when the Hispanics help the Democratic Party regain control of the various statewide offices? You don’t think that will happen? How many Democrats suddenly became Republicans when they thought that was the only way to win elections? I look forward to the day that campaign finance laws are revised to limit the power of the wealthy elite like the Koch brothers. I just it happens in my lifetime.

Donna Barnes, Duncanville: If the Supreme Court had not decided to overturn key parts of the Voting Rights Act we wouldn’t even be discussing this. But since they did, I can understand the 5th Circuit Court overturning Judge Ramos’ ruling only because it was made too soon before the election.

If Judge Ramos’ ruling had come earlier in the year I would wholeheartedly support her ruling. It’s a shame that the Supreme Court thinks there is no more voter discrimination in our nation. It’s plainly obvious that there is. Why would our elected officials change the way people can vote and make it harder for some people to vote? Why would you be able to use a concealed handgun license and not a college student ID?

People who have voted their entire lives now find it hard, if not impossible, to vote and that is the height of obstructionism to me. The Voting Rights Act was meant to make it fair and even for all Americans to vote, not just some.

Bill Betzen, Oak Cliff: The voter ID law is simply a continuation of Texas history. Texas has been working to disenfranchise poor and minority voters for generations.

If legislators truly wanted to honor democracy they would have written a law that would have encouraged a picture ID but it would have allowed everyone to vote. What they would have done is they would simply record who identified at the polling place with a photo ID. Those who did not have a photo ID would have their ballots marked so that if there was a challenge to the vote because it was very close, then those votes could be double checked.

If the integrity of the vote was the issue this should have been the alternative.

Thelma Clardy, DeSoto: I absolutely do not agree with the appeals court’s decision to reinstate the voter ID card. It is nothing but a discriminatory tactic and reminiscent of Jim Crow laws that prevented minorities from voting. The Republicans continue to seek ways to disenfranchise voters instead of the opposite.

Mike Conner, Grand Prairie: I have no problem whatsoever in presenting a photo ID to vote. I present a photo ID, driver’s license and debit card if I go through the drive-through at the bank, I have to present a photo ID at the ATM. It’s totally beyond my belief that there are 600,000 people in the state of who are supposedly driving a vehicle and have to go the bank or grocery store about twice a week on the average, but yet they don't have some form of ID that has a picture on it that tells someone who they are.

These people are most likely young to middle-age adults, say age 18 to 50-plus, possibly as many as 400,000 that are said to not have a driver’s license or some other form of ID. I don’t see how there are this many adults that are possibly driving without a driver’s license. These numbers sound like they have either been made up or somehow fudged in the accounting process.

Ernest Cuellar, DeSoto: Gee, you can’t cash a check of any kind without an ID, you cannot board a plane to fly out of the city without an ID, you can’t enter a city, county or state courtroom without an ID. So with all this in mind, you should be able to vote without a picture ID and vote Chicago-style, early and often.

Maurice Durham, Cedar Hill: I do not agree with the federal appeals court decision to allow Texas’ new voter ID law to go forward in next month's elections. Though the court’s members state that it’s too close to election time to change the rules, only conservative leaning courts would err on the side of depriving some citizens the right to vote.

There is sufficient evidence to suggest the measure is no more than an attempt to affect the voting power of Democratic voters in the first place, yet the court finds it cumbersome to restore voting rights laws that poll workers are already accustomed to and that have been in place for years.

It is no coincidence that Republican-approved flavors of voter IDs like gun permit licenses favor conservative voters, with licenses and handgun costs being prohibitive to low-income voters. Yet, it disapproves of student IDs that more low-income young voters are more likely to possess.

L. Steve Flores, Cedar Hill: I have always been asked for ID even before it was required. Not everyone has a state ID or driver’s license, so what you have should be able to use what you have or the card you get in the mail.

I am Mexican-American and proud to be a registered voter. The only discrimination I ever experienced was in my birth state Kansas.

Phillip Heslander, Duncanville: A wise commentator recently said the all-out, well-funded broadside on the Texas law is because the opponents know the coming election will show it does not have the dire effects on voting that they have claimed for purely political reasons. More than 30 states have voter ID laws, and implementation has resulted in increased voting, not less.

Texas has bent over backwards to make IDs conveniently available, even cost-free, yet the assault continues unabated on the theory that we have legions of residents who are presently incapable of proving their identity and will remain so in the future because of official oppression. This is part of the “victim” psychology by which designated groups or factions are deemed to be so downtrodden and non-functional in daily affairs that they must be given dispensations or exemptions from normal, limited, civic duties.

The opponents of the law think we are idiots. You cannot work, own a home, rent, buy a car, receive welfare, have a bank account, pay taxes, draw Social Security, be covered by Medicare or Medicaid, (you can complete the long list), without valid ID.

One of the canards tossed about is that a concealed carry permit is sufficient ID yet a college ID is not; the requirements for a CWP are far more extensive, which is not mentioned by the opponents of voter ID. The other argument is that there is not much proof available for voter fraud. I would disagree with the premise, but assuming this is true, what difference does it make? Are the opponents really concerned that the state may be wasting money for no reason? And how the heck will we know without voter ID anyway? There is also evidence that unauthorized immigrants are somehow voting in more than minuscule numbers. Who remembers ballot box 13 from some years ago? I guess that is not possible anymore?

Barbara Kazlowski, Cedar Hill: Any law that makes it difficult for American citizens to vote is immoral and unpatriotic. From the U.S. Supreme Court to Texas courts, it’s clear that Republicans on these courts are discriminating against low-income, minority, elderly and young voters, who are likely to be Democrats.

All the excuses Republicans use to justify their unconscionable behavior are nonsense. The “problem” of voter fraud is practically nonexistent, only 1-2 percent of voters, yet Republicans use this flimsy excuse to justify disenfranchising millions of voters across the country. Their true objective is to rig elections in their favor.

Some states with Republican governors have fewer early voting days and shortened hours in poor and minority neighborhoods. Some Republican governors, including ours, imposed voter ID rules that are burdensome for elderly and low-income voters, who must go to a few different places to obtain and pay for paperwork in order to have an approved voter ID.

Some Republican groups mailed intentionally wrong information to Democratic voters, saying registered voters must register again, or giving the wrong polling locations or days. Some states are making it impossible for college students to vote. A commentator on conservative Fox News said on TV that young women shouldn’t vote.

It’s disgusting that these cheaters have been doing this for years with impunity. Our politicians and judges are supposed to work on behalf of all Americans, not just their own political party. This kind of obvious discrimination is common in states with Republican governors. Within three hours of the Supreme Court’s partisan decimation of the Voting Rights Act, Gov. Rick Perry formed a discriminatory plan to make it hard for low-income and minority Texas citizens to vote.

This shameful behavior should be illegal. Blatant Republican dirty tricks have made us regress to the Jim Crow era.

Gene Lantz, Oak Cliff: I have always been proud that the long arc of justice bent toward more democracy in America. Even in my short lifetime, I have seen the end of white primaries, the lowering of the voting age, the end of poll taxes and the first bilingual ballots.

But the most recent past shows that the spokes of the wheels of progress are being deliberately shattered. The judges are selling our very election process, the soul of our democracy, to the highest bidder. Candidates who used to hope for thousands to run campaigns now need millions of dollars and can only be elected with the approval of the richest oligarchs. The Texas voter suppression law is the worst of the worst. The toilet-paper-thin excuse of preventing voter fraud is utter nonsense both in theory and in statistical fact.

Those who love democracy must mobilize and fight against the Texas voter suppression law and everyone who backs it.

Kevin Loyd, Grand Prairie: I have no problem with showing my ID if asked for it. There is so much fraud in just about everything nowadays that people will do anything to stuff the ballot box for their candidates even if it means using voter registration cards of people who are deceased.

It also cuts down on unauthorized immigrants being allowed to vote. This is an American privilege and it’s a shame that so many don’t vote or abuse that right to get what they want. Check the name on your card and make sure that it matches what is on your ID and if there are any problems or concerns, then make the call now to be sure that there won’t be a problem when you go to vote.

Better safe than sorry. But the key point to all of this: Go vote!

Craig Marckwardt, The Woods: Anyone who wants to dispute how important voting is to everyday life in the United States need only look to the makeup of the current United States Supreme Court and recollect Karl Rove’s blueprint for a permanent Republican majority, first in Texas, and then nationally.

The branch of government not subject to checks and balances appears to be, by a usual margin of 5 to 4, driving that agenda by condoning obvious gerrymandering and voter suppression.

In my eyes, once again, Justice Ginsberg in her dissent got it right. We will never know if the male justices did, as the ruling was made without comment.

My vote will make no difference in the makeup of the U. S. Senate or House of Representatives, but I encourage each and every one of my southwest Dallas neighbors to vote, even if provisionally. At the Mountain Creek Library on Oct. 22, it was simple and quick — no lines. At least I can feel a little included at the state level.

Gary Moon, Duncanville: To vote you have to be 18, not a felon, and a citizen of the United States. How else are you to be identified as such, if you don’t have an id? This is a stupid argument, to put it mildly.

Fred Nixon, Oak Cliff: The voter ID law is either a good law that is right or a bad law that is wrong. A few judges rendering an opinion based on time limitations being too close to the election is an insult to the voting public. You would hope that your government was there to help you instead of appearing to stifle the public vote.

E.B. Pope, Lancaster: They must be Abbott and Perry cronies. Making it hard for people to vote is flat wrong and un-American.

Douglas Rose, Grand Prairie: The Texas voter ID law is essential to achieve fair and honest voting in America. We are not a third world country. Why let third world non-residents vote who do not meet the same legal qualifications other Americans must meet in order to register their vote?

Candace Talmadge, Lancaster: The Texas voter ID law is a complete farce. If the state were truly concerned about voting fraud, the place to address it is absentee balloting, where the likelihood of voter impersonation is far higher precisely because it is not in-person voting.

But since Republican-leaning military personnel are more likely to use absentee ballots, our fine GOP legislators and governor have no problem with it. All I want to know is this: I have been voting without an ID in this state since 1982. Why do I need one now? I find the presumption that I am cheating inherent in this law extremely offensive. I have a constitutional right to vote, and nowhere in the amendment granting me that right does it say I must have identification.

Charles Taylor, Dallas: Honestly I see nothing wrong with the picture ID as it relates to making it difficult to vote. It is easy to obtain a picture ID from DPS. There are senior citizens who may have a problem getting to a location to obtain the ID. However, if all these churches who claim to help the community would put their buses and members to work, they could get a picture ID. A school ID should be permitted; a government or employee ID should be accepted. There are other forms of IDs that should be accepted. Anyone wishing to vote will find a way.

Kirby Warnock, Oak Cliff: I feel the appeals court ruling was incorrect, because if a law is wrong, there is no reason to delay its demise. The entire voter ID push is a solution seeking a problem. The supporters like to say it is to “preserve the integrity of the vote,” but it is already preserved. There has not been a single case of widespread voter fraud since LBJ’s primary win over Coke Stevenson back in the 1940s. None.

It is very, very difficult to vote fraudulently at the polls. What this entire thing is a stealth move to suppress votes by the elderly and minorities, two groups that usually vote Democratic. It places an extra burden on them because they have to travel to a DPS office to obtain an approved ID. Since these folks don’t have a driver’s license, they have to get someone to drive them, and if they live in a rural area, it adds an extra burden to travel the miles to a DPS office.

A perfect example is the Big Bend of Texas, where my family lives. If a person lives in tiny Imperial, or Terlingua, they have to get a friend or family member to drive them 60 miles and 120 miles respectively, round-trip, just to be able to vote. Yet in the past they were able to vote without this extra ID, and there has been no widespread case of voter fraud tipping an election.

I find the entire thing reminiscent of the poll tax, or literary tests that were used in the Jim Crow era to deny blacks the vote in the Deep South.

Paul Wehrmann, Oak Cliff: I do not agree with the court’s ruling nor the state’s voter ID law. The court ruling is yet another example of partisan judicial fiat based neither on law nor reason. Allowing a statute ruled unconstitutional to stand because election officials would somehow be unable to enforce the election rules from previous elections borders on being ludicrous.

Going from the ludicrous to the ridiculous, we have the voter ID law itself. With the supposed purpose of eliminating a problem of impersonation-based voter fraud, the law will disenfranchise an estimated 600,000 Texas voters, with a disproportionate effect on minority voters. The best research shows that the actual number of such cases of voter fraud throughout the country since 2000 rests at 10 or less. The most aggressive estimates touted by supporters of voter ID laws sets the number at 375.

Like death panels and anchor babies, voter fraud by impersonation is a creation of hyper-partisan fantasy. Not even Fox News can support such blatant disregard of reality. “Texas Attorney General Gregg Abbott, a Republican, launched an investigation in 2005 to uncover what he called an ‘epidemic’ of voter fraud. But reviews of Abbott’s investigation two years later yielded no cases of voter impersonation fraud. A Dallas Morning News review in 2008 found the 26 cases prosecuted were all against Democrats, most involved blacks and Hispanics, and typically involved people who helped elderly voters with mail-in ballots, but failed to follow state law by signing their names and addresses on the envelopes. Abbot’s investigation was paid for with a $1.4 million Justice Department crime-fighting grant.” — information published on foxnews.com on Sept. 24, 2011, from a story by the Associated Press.

The Texas voter ID law does nothing to prevent voter fraud by mail-in ballot.

So, if not to prevent voter fraud what is the purpose of the voter ID laws? The same purpose as our gerrymandered legislative districts and the same purpose of the Republican party at least since the ascendancy of Newt Gingrich.

That purpose is not to serve the American people nor to do the greatest good for the greatest number of Americans nor to promote freedom nor to protect the Constitution. It is quite simply to elect as many Republicans as possible, no matter the means or the cost.

Jim West, Ferris: Although I’m not familiar with the intricacies of the voter ID law, I feel it is absurd to not have a photo ID to vote.

Norma Wiley, DeSoto: I am 100 percent in favor of a voter ID law. Voting for the leaders of our country, the very people that will make the laws affecting all of us, is the greatest privilege and responsibility we have as citizens in this nation. To do it without first showing proof of who we are is extremely irresponsible and ultimately dangerous. I am required to show proof of my identity before I board an airplane, when cashing a check, when renting a car and many other activities of daily life, so why not for voting for the leaders of this country?

I would even go so far as to say that those who are against showing ID to vote must want there to be voter fraud brought into the equation. Who does it hurt to require that an ID be shown? Only those who want to vote illegally or the politicians who want the illegal vote in order to get into office. Corruption seems to be rampant in our government and is getting worse. A permanent voter ID law would greatly decrease that.

sounding off form