U.S. grants Texas a waiver on No Child Left Behind rules
AUSTIN -- Texas got a reprieve on Monday from federal education rules that would have labeled as failing almost every school district in the state.

The U.S. Department of Education granted Texas a long-awaited waiver from certain provisions of the No Child Left Behind Act, the signature domestic policy of President George W. Bush. There is broad agreement that the 2001 law needs an overhaul but Congress has failed to act.

Texas joins 41 other states and Washington, D.C. that have been relieved from federal standards that this year require more than 90 percent of students in each school and district to pass the state’s standardized tests in reading and math.

Education Commissioner Michael Williams estimated that 95 percent of Texas school districts would not have cleared that bar. Missing the standards for consecutive years can lead to sanctions such as replacing a school’s teachers and principal.

“The underlying message throughout our negotiations with the federal government has been Texans know what’s best for Texas schools,” Williams said. “I believe our school districts will appreciate the additional flexibility this waiver provides while also adhering to our strong principles on effective public education.”

Only the lowest-performing 15 percent of schools statewide will be under the act’s requirements and will become subject to a series of federally mandated interventions.

The waiver, however, comes with a condition. Texas must create an evaluation system for teachers and principals that is tied to standardized test scores.

In order to keep the waiver for the 2014-15 school year, the state will have to launch a 40-district pilot program to test the new teacher and principal evaluation system. The Education Department expects the program to be used statewide by the following year, and Williams committed that the system will be fully implemented at that point.

The teacher evaluation policies have been hugely controversial in states that implemented them to abide by the terms of the federal waiver. Teacher groups say test scores are a limited measure of a teacher’s work, and research has called into the question the validity of teacher assessments based on student test scores.

“The pursuit of this conditional waiver is an unfortunate about-face by Texas in agreeing to many of the same requirements that were in the federal Race to the Top grant program, in which Texas declined to participate,” said Holly Eaton of the Texas Classroom Teachers Association.

In the recent legislative session, lawmakers focused on reducing the state’s emphasis on high-stakes tests and chose not to enact a bill that would have included student test scores as part of the teacher’s evaluation.

Texas initially refused to cede to the conditions established by U.S. Education Secretary Arne Duncan, but after months of negotiations eventually agreed to the terms. The waiver was granted Monday just as the federal government readied for a partial shutdown.

Superintendents welcomed the newfound flexibility they will get to spend federal education dollars to help students improve test performance, said Casey McCreary of the Texas Association of School Administrators. The law had required school districts to spend 20 percent of their money with specific federally approved tutoring companies.

Austin American-Statesman, The Associated Press