Perry blasts Obama over rise in illegal immigrant children entering U.S. on their own
WASHINGTON — Gov. Rick Perry blames President Barack Obama for a recent increase in the number of minors entering the country illegally on their own, blasting the administration in a letter released Monday.

By not deporting more of the unaccompanied children, the administration is “perpetuating” the reasons they come, Perry wrote.

“Inaction encourages other minors to place themselves in extremely dangerous situations,” Perry wrote. “Every child allowed to remain encourages hundreds more to attempt the journey. Our country can no longer provide the temptation for these unaccompanied minors to engage in this tragic and illegal migration.”

Overall, deportations have increased on Obama’s watch, and illegal immigration has decreased sharply in recent years. This year, however, the number of unaccompanied minors being detained at the border has spiked, according to the Department of Homeland Security, an indication more are trying to cross.

Once in U.S. hands, some are reunited with family members in their home countries or in the U.S., some are taken in by American sponsors, and others are eventually deported.

Government agencies and nonprofit groups that shelter such children have been overwhelmed in recent months. Recently, homeland security officials took the extraordinary step of using a Defense Department outpost, Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, to host some of the children.

Despite the increase, unaccompanied minors make up only 5 percent of border apprehensions, according to the homeland security department.

Rep. Henry Cuellar, D-Laredo, said he has visited detained children under federal supervision and disagrees with Perry’s assertions that increased deportations will reverse the trend.

In the past, illegal immigrants could travel back and forth over the border to see their children, he said. But with tighter border security, illegal immigrants in the U.S. attempt to have their children cross the border to reunite the family.

“You just can’t send the kids back; you have to find the parents,” said Cuellar, the top Democrat on a House panel for border security. “The parents are already here illegally, and then they get desperate in terms of they want to get their children.”

Methods of illegal migration vary greatly from year to year, homeland security officials say. Other possible reasons for the trend could be that children may be getting caught more often due to new border strategies, or that smugglers may have shifted their tactics to include a stronger role for minors.

Perry did not mince words about what he thinks the problem is and who should fix it.

“This must stop, Mr. President, and it is your responsibility to make that happen,” Perry wrote. “The federal government must stop new arrivals at the border, repatriate those already here, and prevent and discourage others.”

Perry has frequently assailed Obama’s record on immigration, even meeting the president at the airport during a Texas visit to present a letter arguing for more focus on border security.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.