Fact Check: Republicans who deem border fence inadequate should put part of blame on Hutchison
President Barack Obama swooped into Texas this month to ask the country to take another chance on immigration reform. It’s a tough pitch: Critics say border security and interior enforcement still aren’t effective enough.

But Obama argued that his administration has fulfilled the prerequisites for reform, including beefing up the Border Patrol and deporting more illegal immigrants. To the fact checkers at PolitiFact.com, one of Obama’s comments stuck out: that his administration has gone “above and beyond” what Republicans wanted, including building a 700-mile border fence.

OBAMA’S CLAIM: “They wanted a fence. Well, the fence is now basically complete.”

The Department of Homeland Security told PolitiFact that it has completed 649 of 652 miles of the border fence. But some Republicans won’t be satisfied, Obama told his El Paso audience. Obama quipped that Republicans would demand a “higher fence” or a “moat” with alligators in it.

Yet it’s misleading to say that Obama has gone “above and beyond” what Republicans requested, PolitiFact concluded.

The Republicans who wrote the Secure Fence Act of 2006 required 700 miles of double-layered fence between Tecate, Calif., and Brownsville, Texas. There is just 36 miles of double-layered fence, PolitiFact reported. Most of the border fence is single-layer fence and vehicle barriers.

Indeed, some Republicans, such as Sen. Jim DeMint, R-S.C., say the fence isn’t what they wrote into law. As PolitiFact noted, it was another Republican — Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas — who actually changed that law. She had support from other Senate Republicans, according to the Congressional Record.

Hutchison’s change, which passed in late 2007, gave DHS the discretion to decide whether a physical fence was the best way to “achieve and maintain operational control over the border.”

At the time, her aides explained that Hutchison didn’t oppose the fence. She was responding to complaints from South Texans who thought their concerns about it were ignored.

Local politicians, ranchers and business groups argued that the double-layered fence would carve up private property, hurt commercial ties with Mexico, and disrupt wildlife habitats. (Her amendment also required DHS to consult with local governments and landowners about the fence.)

Whether an expensive border fence was the right policy is another issue. It’s fair to say there is disagreement about that. Texas’ own homeland security director, Steve McCraw, told a border security panel in October 2007: “A fence isn’t going to work. It’s not the solution.”

Even Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, was an early skeptic. He told this newspaper in early 2006 that the fence was “a 19th-century solution to a 21st-century problem.”

(Aides to Hutchison and Cornyn said Friday that the fence is just one part of effective border security, which the Texas senators think Obama has failed to achieve.)

PolitiFact states that Hutchison “quietly altered” the fence law because her amendment was tucked into a massive spending bill that passed in late December 2007, when most lawmakers were trying to get out of town. (Democrats controlled the House and Senate in 2007.)

Indeed, we couldn’t find much debate about Hutchison’s amendment in the Congressional Record.

But her proposal was covered by The Associated Press and The Washington Times, which wrote that Hutchison “has led the charge to change the 2006 law.” DeMint spoke out against the amendment on the Senate floor. The amendment “changes what we have already passed,” he said. “It allows for only a single-layer fence.”

PolitiFact concludes that Obama’s claim was “barely true” because DHS didn’t build the fence that congressional Republicans envisioned in 2006.

But other Republicans took an active role in granting the discretion that allowed DHS to build a different kind of barrier. Cornyn and Sen. Pete Domenici, R-N.M., co-sponsored the Hutchison amendment when it was introduced in July 2007, according to the Congressional Record. (So did three Democratic senators from border states.)

BOTTOM LINE: Obama may have exaggerated his fulfillment of GOP wishes. But Senate Republicans played an important role in changing the way the fence was built.

Dave Michaels has covered business, politics and policy from Dallas, Austin and Washington, D.C. His weekly Fact Check column aims to impartially assess the week’s most important claims and quotations. Please send thoughts, ideas or comments to dmichaels@dallasnews.com.

OUR SOURCES: “They built the danged fence . . . or did they?” PolitiFact, May 16; President Barack Obama speech on immigration and border security, May 10; Congressional Record, Dec. 17, 2007, and July 25, 2007; “Massive spending bill could alter fence law,” The Associated Press, Dec. 18, 2007; “Spending bill shrinks border fence,” The Washington Times, Dec. 18, 2007; “Border fence divides lawmakers,” The Dallas Morning News, Jan. 1, 2006.