Dewhurst opposes Texas’ tuition breaks for illegal immigrants
Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst on Monday publicly broke with Gov. Rick Perry on whether to give illegal immigrants in-state, college tuition breaks.

“I understand the argument for it, I understand the governor’s position, but this is all about fairness,” said Dewhurst, a Republican running in a crowded field for the Senate.

“If we’re not going to give fellow Americans who live in Louisiana or Oklahoma or New Mexico the ability to come into Texas and have in-state tuition and save $70,000, $80,000, $90,000 … then is it fair to give that break to people who are not citizens here?”

Dewhurst’s comments, made during the taping of Inside Texas Politics, which airs Sunday on WFAA-TV (Channel 8), mark one of his strongest signals yet to tea party activists and conservatives that he’ll be tough on illegal immigration.

Perry, a fellow Republican now running for president, has gotten flak from rivals for backing the 2001 law that gives young illegal immigrants in Texas, here usually because of their parents, the same in-state reduced tuition rate for college and universities.

Perry said he favors that approach because it gives illegal immigrants who are “in Texas of no fault of their own” the ability to get an education and not be a drag on the state’s resources.

Dewhurst’s criticism of Perry, his longtime ally, is rare but not unexpected, given the ever-changing political dynamic in the Texas GOP.

Though critical of the law, Dewhurst didn’t say whether it should be repealed.

“I would not have signed that law, if I were Governor Perry,” he said. “From a perspective of fairness, I don’t think it’s fair for our fellow American citizens not to have that break.”

Dewhurst, however, agreed with Perry that it is impractical to erect a huge fence along the massive border with Mexico. Perry favors a targeted approach that relies heavily on border agents and others.

“I’ve got to be shown that it actually works,” Dewhurst said of a border fence. “At the end of the day it’s people, and so I’d be agreeing with Governor Perry.”