Lieutenant governor candidate Dan Patrick knows struggles of going broke
AUSTIN — Sen. Dan Patrick pitches himself as a strong fiscal conservative as he seeks the GOP nomination for lieutenant governor. Clouding his claim, though, is his own financial failure 27 years ago.

The Houston Republican walked away from about $800,000 in debts, filing for personal bankruptcy during the oil bust of the 1980s. That came after his budding Houston-area chain of sports bars, Dan and Nick’s Sportmarkets, tanked and left him broke.

Patrick told The Dallas Morning News this week that it took 10 years for his family to regain financial equilibrium.

The meltdown, he said, taught him to be cautious and take nothing for granted. It also provided valuable lessons that he said helped propel him to later success in business and politics.

“I’m accountable. It was 30 years ago. I’ve learned a lot,” said Patrick, a rising Republican lawmaker who has tea party backing. “And it helped build my conservative roots, quite frankly.”

His opponents declined to directly criticize Patrick’s business dealings, though in a long GOP campaign, personal issues could become a major factor. And while Patrick has moved on, his biggest creditor in the bankruptcy still seethes.

“He was a problem. It was a hassle getting rent money from him,” recalled Houston landlord and developer Victor Denenburg.

Patrick owed him $384,000 in unpaid rent on one of the sports bars, in northwest Harris County, according to bankruptcy records.

“He’s never offered to pay any of it,” Denenburg said. “It’s pretty pitiful. … Anybody would be irritated when somebody walks off with a bankruptcy. It’s just an easy way to get out of your debts.”

Patrick argued that America’s free enterprise system thrives on entrepreneurs such as himself. He cited business icons such as Walt Disney, whose first studio went bankrupt, and Texas political titans such as former Gov. John Connally, who also went broke.

In the 1990s, Patrick became host of a conservative radio talk show in Houston. He currently is majority owner of two radio stations, in Houston and Dallas. He declined to describe his net worth, but his most recent personal financial statement with the Texas Ethics Commission contains more than 100 pages listing stocks, bonds, real estate and other investments.

“If you’re looking for someone who has never made a mistake, then I’m not the guy,” he said. But he quickly added, “Probably neither are my three opponents.”

Patrick is challenging Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst for the GOP nomination. Also seeking running are Land Commissioner Jerry Patterson and Agriculture Commissioner Todd Staples. Spokesmen for Dewhurst and Patterson declined to comment Thursday.

The Staples campaign said it is important that the lieutenant governor be a “responsible steward of our state’s tax dollars.”

“Todd Staples is a highly qualified leader and has run a successful business for many years. He does not have any campaign loans, campaign debts or owe past due bills to employees and vendors,” said Staples campaign manager Cody McGregor.

Patrick is not the only bankruptcy filer in the race.

In 1982, Dewhurst took his company Trans-Gulf Supply Co., an oil drilling firm, into bankruptcy, owing creditors $7 million. He eventually repaid all secured creditors out of his own pocket, and a spokesman said no lawsuits were ever filed by any unsecured creditors.

In later years, his main company, Falcon Seaboard, also endured financial tight times. But it never went into bankruptcy and soared after Dewhurst was successful in the power plant business. Dewhurst’s fortune is estimated at about $200 million.

Patrick said he has never tried to hide his bankruptcy.

He has mentioned it repeatedly on his radio show and even discussed it in his 2002 book, The Second Most Important Book You Will Ever Read: A Personal Challenge to Read the Bible.

Patrick said GOP voters probably will sympathize with him. He said his financial failure turned him into a fiscal hawk who wants to force state government into greater austerity. In May, he cast one of the few Republican no votes on the state budget, even though GOP colleagues crafted the spending plan.

Some fellow conservatives were unhappy with his vote and accused him of political grandstanding.

Patrick, first elected to the Senate in 2006, calls it part of a natural progression from his financial troubles 27 years ago.

“I’m now 63, and I’ve led a long and mostly successful life. But I have had failures,” he said. “I take all responsibility for what happened.

“There’s nothing more sobering than going broke in your mid-30s and having to start all over. Not only did that help me be a great success in the radio business … it made me focus on being very conservative with my own money, my businesses’ money and the taxpayers’ money.”

The teachable moment came in the mid-1980s, when he was a well-known TV sportscaster in Houston, Patrick said.

“I was 35, full of energy and had been successful in television up until then,” he recalled, citing his desire for a career change. “My vision was to build a national chain of sports bars that would be some of the first of their kind in the country.”

He teamed with Nick Nickolas, founder of upscale Nick’s Fishmarket restaurants in Chicago, Honolulu and Beverly Hills. In Houston, the two launched five Dan and Nick’s Sportsmarkets, which served up food, drink and sports scores.

“We didn’t fail because we didn’t have a good product,” Patrick said. “The economy collapsed around us.”

Plunging oil prices and the savings and loan crisis sent Houston into a tailspin. Patrick said that despite his hard work, the restaurants couldn’t be saved.

In October 1986, Patrick filed for bankruptcy under his birth name, Dannie Scott Goeb. (He legally changed it to Dan Patrick, his on-air name, years later.)

He listed more than $816,000 in debts and just over $104,000 in assets. Among his debtors was the Internal Revenue Service, which Patrick owed $13,186 in federal income taxes withheld from his restaurant employees’ paychecks.

He also owed smaller amounts in property taxes to two Houston-area school districts, who later sued his companies for nonpayment. And his businesses were slapped with more than two dozen tax liens by federal, state and local governments.

Patrick said he worked extra jobs and eventually paid off the IRS.

In May 1987 a federal bankruptcy judge proposed to discharge him from his more than 50 other debts. They included banks, Dallas developer Trammel Crow, utility companies, local businesses and even the hospital and doctor who were owed $10,000 for medical care received by Patrick’s son, Ryan.

The case was closed in October 1992. Patrick said he couldn’t recall details. More than a decade later, as he got ready for his first bid for the Senate, he cleared up all the tax liens through the secretary of state’s office.

Looking back, Patrick recalled an agonizing ordeal that “wore me out physically and mentally.”

He returned to broadcasting, this time in radio, not TV. A key move was to sign up for his AM station in Houston a then largely unknown conservative talk show host: Rush Limbaugh.

Patrick also had his own daily talk show to promote his conservative views. He gradually attracted a sizable listener base, a key factor in his election to the Senate and his influence in Texas GOP politics as he launches a statewide run.

tstutz@dallasnews.com

rtgarrett@dallasnews.com

AT A GLANCE

Debts that Dan Patrick walked away from in bankruptcy:

Total debts: $816,288

Secured: $81,031

Unsecured: $722,071

Owed to IRS: $13,186 (later paid)

Unsecured debts included:

$384,000, on a lease with Houston landlord-developer Victor Denenburg

$125,000, on a lease with Dallas developer Trammel Crow

$103,790, on a loan by Texas Commerce Bancshares-Champion Park

$5,000, for services by Houston orthopedic surgeon Eghtedar Sadeghpour, who had treated Patrick’s son, Ryan

$5,000, for services by Houston’s Memorial City Hospital, also for care of Ryan

$4,893, unpaid account at Buddy’s Meats of Houston

$1,027, trade debt to H Discount Liquor of Houston

SOURCES: Federal bankruptcy records; Dallas Morning News research