Ted Cruz talks religious liberty with Iowa home-schoolers, demurs on 2016 plans
DES MOINES, Iowa — Sen. Ted Cruz promoted religious liberty and school choice Tuesday to a ballroom of home-schoolers — his fourth visit in eight months to a state that plays an outsize role in picking presidents.

The Texan’s appeal to social conservatives won ovations and fueled more speculation about his ambitions as he touted his support for charter schools and home schooling.

“We should see a thousand flowers bloom. I’m convinced school choice is the civil rights issue of the 21st century,” he said. “Education is foundational to every other challenge you’ve got.”

He recounted his role, as Texas’ top appellate lawyer, defending a Ten Commandments display at the state Capitol. In another case, while in private practice, he said he helped to preserve a cross used as a memorial to veterans, erected on federal land in the Mojave Desert.

And he denounced the Obama administration for trying to force even groups of Catholic nuns to provide contraceptive coverage, despite their religious views.

“How misguided have we gotten, how through the looking glass have we gone? … It’s wrong and it’s unconstitutional,” he said.

Cruz makes a return visit to New Hampshire in less than a month, and there’s little mystery that he’s eyeing a run for the White House.

“I hope so,” said Will Van der Molen, 33, an Altoona maintenance worker who came to the conference with his wife, Lisa, and their four kids.

“The knock on conservatives is they can’t win in a general election, but neither can a moderate,” he said, citing the last two GOP presidential nominees, Mitt Romney and John McCain.

After his speech, Cruz said he didn’t know about a “Draft Ted Cruz for President” super PAC formed two months ago.

The group has a website, runtedrun.com.

Its treasurer, Paul Kilgore, served as treasurer for a super PAC that raised millions to promote the 2012 campaign of Texas Gov. Rick Perry.

“This is something I’m not involved with and if others choose to speak out and exercise their First Amendment rights, God bless them,” Cruz said.

As for whether he’s in Iowa because he’s running for president, he said: “I am here in Iowa to have the opportunity to congratulate and encourage home-schoolers and to speak on behalf of the rights of parents to educate their children free from the government restricting their constitutional rights.”

Cruz is one of the most polarizing figures in either party, and Democrats gave him a chilly welcome to Iowa.

The party’s national chairwoman, Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Florida, called reporters ahead of Cruz’s visit to denounce his opposition to gay marriage, extended jobless benefits and comprehensive immigration changes.

“The tea party clearly has had a stranglehold over the Republican agenda, and Ted Cruz has been driving that agenda,” she said.

Steve Deace, a prominent conservative radio host in Iowa, called it smart for Cruz to visit with home-schoolers. He called them “the most organized political lobby in this state.”