Migrant faults lieutenant governor candidate Patrick on immigration stance
HOUSTON — State Sen. Dan Patrick, who says Texas leaders must “stop the invasion” from Mexico, went along with a decision to hire at least four unauthorized immigrants as cooks and dishwashers at his sports bar in the mid-1980s, according to a Houston-area man who says he was one of them.

Miguel “Mike” Andrade, 48, of Missouri City, told The Dallas Morning News and Houston’s KTRK-TV that he, his cousin and two other men from Mexico worked at one of Patrick’s five sports bars that operated in the Houston area until 1986.

At the time, it was not illegal for U.S. businesses to employ unauthorized workers.

Patrick, one of four Republicans running for lieutenant governor in the March 4 primary, said Tuesday he only “vaguely” remembers Andrade at one of his establishments. He said he had nothing to do with the hiring and that managers at each location handled employment decisions.

“We had literally hundreds of full-time and part-time employees. It’s a transient business and many young people come and go,” Patrick said in a statement.

Andrade agreed that a manager under Patrick hired him and the other three men, but said that after a few months Patrick knew that the four workers didn't have permission to be in the country – because he told Patrick.

He said Patrick was a compassionate employer. He said Patrick offered sympathy over their anguish at living so far from their loved ones and being constantly in fear of being deported.

“He was real, real, real kind with us…real good with the Hispanic community. He was really wishing (he had) some kind of power…to help us to work in this country and have a better life,” said Andrade, who recalled that he was hired at the West Houston sports bar in 1983 or 1984.

Patrick said the sudden appearance of his former employee less than two weeks before the primary smacks of dirty politics by his opponents.

The “tactic is centuries old, and the allegations they now use are decades old,” he said.

The development focuses new attention on Patrick, who has denounced weak enforcement of immigration laws, says he want to beef up border security and has accused his GOP rivals of being soft on the issue.

One of his challengers, Land Commissioner Jerry Patterson, called Patrick a hypocrite.

“You shouldn’t be one thing when you’re running for office and be something else when you’re not,” he said, referring to Patrick. “Here we have the true…hypocrisy of the past versus present political endeavor.”

Patterson said an investigator his campaign hired located Andrade last week and that he signed a statement about working for Patrick in Houston.

In the interview with The News and KTRK, Andrade said that Patrick wrote him a letter of recommendation to help him establish temporary residency after a 1986 federal law offered amnesty for undocumented immigrants. Andrade became a U.S. citizen in 1992.

Patrick said he had no recollection of ever writing such a letter.

Andrade also said that while he was a kitchen worker for the sports bar, Patrick offered to help him visit his ailing mother in Guanajuato.

“He said [is there] anything I can do so you can go and see your mom? I don’t want to see you suffer,” Andrade said.

Patrick then said, “I can go and bring you to here,” according to Andrade, who said he believed that meant Patrick could drive him to Houston past U.S. inland border checkpoints.

Andrade said he declined to make the trip, for fear he'd be caught and Patrick would get in trouble.

Patrick rejected Andrade’s claim about helping after visiting Mexico.

“Mr. Andrade’s allegation that I offered to break federal law in order to help him is an outrageous lie,” Patrick said. He said suggesting he would be willing to commit a crime for an employee is “simply preposterous.”

Patrick’s business was able to use workers without proper papers because federal law didn't penalize employers who did so.

The practice was made illegal under the Immigration Reform and Control Act that President Ronald Reagan signed in November 1986, said immigration expert Tony Payan of Rice University.

Andrade, who works as an apartment maintenance man and runs a small business as a home remodeler, told The News and KTRK that he agreed to come forward because for several years, he's been “a little bit upset” over what he called a new, harsh tone Patrick has taken on immigration matters.

Andrade recounted how he received a phone call in 2006 when Patrick’s first won his state Senate seat. It was from his cousin, Guadalupe Andrade, whom he had helped land a job at Patrick’s establishment more than two decades earlier.

“He said Dan Patrick is on TV saying bad things about us,” Miguel Andrade said. “When I see how he was talking bad things about us, I was real surprised real surprised.”

Guadalupe Andrade died a few years ago, Miguel Andrade said. Reporters were unable to reach two brothers, Manuel and Ruben Rodriguez, whom Miguel Andrade said also lacked proper papers when they were hired at Dan and Nick’s Sports Market in West Houston’s Rice Village.

Patrick was co-owner of five sports bars. All of them closed after the oil bust of the mid-1980s dragged down Houston’s economy. Patrick filed for personal bankruptcy, and never repaid more than $800,000 he owed to creditors.

Patrick has said shedding debts as he did through bankruptcy was legal, and that he rebounded from failure with grit and determination.

Andrade said he has no pay stubs and he wasn't sure if he received federal W-2 forms while working at the Rice Village location and another Patrick sports bar on Gessner Road in Southwest Houston. Andrade said he got a Social Security number and green card from a Houston flea market.

Patrick said every employee hired by his business completed federal forms before going to work.

“I know this because my mother was our bookkeeper, and she was, and still is, a stickler for the rules,” he said. “Everyone was hired and paid in accordance with regularly accepted business practices of the time.”

Patrick recalled that Andrade was “an affable young man and seemed to be a good and conscientious worker.”

At times in his political career, Patrick has painted illegal immigration in dire terms.

“There are terrorists and drug runners coming into Texas and the sheriffs in 15 border counties are being asked to stop them with only a .45 on their hip and a shotgun in the trunk,” he told a Houston business group in 2006, according to the Texas Observer.

“They are bringing Third World diseases with them,” he said of unauthorized immigrants. Although Patrick cited “tuberculosis, malaria, polio and leprosy,” a state epidemiologist later rebutted his statement and said there was no evidence of that.

Andrade, who voted in the 2012 GOP primary and general election, said the speeches don't sound like the man he remembers.

“He’s changed,” Andrade said. “He is trying to make a division, to…look at us like something that is not good for this country, something negative for this country.”

Andrade, who first emigrated from the Mexican state of Guanajuato at age 14, said he and his wife of 22 years live quietly in Missouri City with four of their five sons. The eldest, 21, serves in the U.S. Army, he said.

About three years after arriving in Houston, Andrade said he heard of Patrick’s idea of sports bars, then a new part of popular culture. The Rice Village location was just opening, and soon overflowed with customers, said Andrade, who said he came aboard as a $3.85-an-hour dishwasher.

Within a few months, he switched to cooking in the kitchen, which paid $6, he said. Soon, he got to know Patrick, he said. “He liked the way we worked as Mexicans,” Andrade recalled.

During the campaign, Patrick has portrayed himself as being the toughest on immigration laws.

Patterson and the others, Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst and Agriculture Commissioner Todd Staples, have fired back, saying he has misrepresented their actions and positions. All three said they never have hired an unauthorized immigrant.

rtgarrett@dallasnews.com; tstutz@dallasnews.com

Staff writers Robert T. Garrett reported from Houston and Terrence Stutz from Austin.