Dallas dentist David Alameel brings big fortune to U.S. Senate race
WASHINGTON — With a huge fortune and willingness to spend lavishly, Dallas dentist David Alameel could give Democrats a much more competitive Senate candidate than expected next year.

“I’ll just do whatever it takes. Money is not an issue for me. It’s more whether or not whether I feel can make a difference,” he said Monday after surfacing as the fourth Democrat trying to oust two-term Sen. John Cornyn. “We need new ideas. Not just the same politicians with the same redundant parroting of talking points.”

One of Texas’ most prolific campaign donors, Alameel has actually backed Cornyn. In 2004 and 2005, he and his wife donated $8,000 to the senator’s campaign and $7,500 to his political action committee.

He now derides Cornyn as “an establishment figure” and “tactician” whose main focus is on stymieing President Barack Obama and getting reelected.

Cornyn has set aside nearly $7 million for re-election and faces a weak field in the GOP primary. Alameel is worth upwards of $50 million — his wealth comes from a chain of dental clinics he sold five years ago, and other investments — and could force Cornyn to dig deep.

But Democrats haven’t won statewide in two decades and Cornyn remains heavily favored. He won’t have trouble raising funds, he’s been winning statewide since 1990, and in 2008 he coasted to a second Senate term, spending $19 million.

Alameel spent $4.5 million running for Congress last year, the most of any Texas candidate, but ended up fourth in an 11-way primary — far behind the eventual winner, freshman Democratic Rep. Marc Veasey of Fort Worth.

Two other Democrats who are seeking to unseat Cornyn have never run for office before: El Paso lawyer Maxey Scherr and HyeTae “Harry” Kim, an Odessa physician.

A fourth has run for Congress three times — as a Republican. Michael Fjetland, president of a company that installs window coatings, lost primaries in 2000, 2002 and 2006 to former House Majority Leader Tom DeLay of Sugar Land. The last try, he ran a distant third with just 1,550 votes. He now laments extremism in that party.

“The GOP has kind of closed in on itself,” he said. “They’re grumpy old people. And that’s not what the world looks like anymore.”

Alameel, 61, criticizes both parties — Republicans for “lack of compassion,” Democrats for being overly fond of big government and deficit spending — but financially, he’s backed both sides.

He’s given $700,000 in the last six years to Democrats at the federal level. In Texas, he’s spread the love.

He gave Attorney General Greg Abbott, the GOP front-runner for governor, $165,000 from 2002 to 2008 — though he also gave $30,000 last year to Abbott’s Democratic rival, state Sen. Wendy Davis of Fort Worth.

Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst got $250,000 from 2002 to 2008. Gov. Rick Perry got $75,000 in 1998.

“I’m not your typical Democrat,” Alameel said. “I’m conservative in many ways and have worked with both parties. I’m very pro-military, very pro-national security.”

Staff writer Nick Swartsell contributed to this report.

Follow Todd J. Gillman on Twitter at @toddgillman.