Texas lawmakers draw extra pay for special session while far from Capitol
AUSTIN — Here’s a secret about this special legislative session: Most lawmakers don’t have a lot to do.

With a slim agenda, most members of the House and Senate have stayed home or are enjoying some vacation. But that hasn’t stopped the majority from collecting money to cover the cost of working in Austin.

Lawmakers get $150 a day to cover their living expenses while in the capital during regular and special sessions. The per diem will cost taxpayers about $800,000 for the 30-day special session that must end by Tuesday.

While the House has met exactly two days and the Senate all of five, 147 lawmakers are collecting the daily stipend, including weekends.

Precisely because they haven’t been here, eight senators and 26 House members have given written notice that they are declining the per diem when they’re not in Austin. Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst also declined some payments.

All of the House members who declined payment are Republicans, although many in the majority party accepted extra pay, too.

“I just don’t want anyone to ever think there’s an issue with us being paid when we’re not actually up here,” said Rep. Cindy Burkett, R-Mesquite, who turned it down. “Perception means a lot. So I try to stay above that.”

Burkett was one of five Dallas-area House members who requested not to be paid the per diem. Fifteen from the delegation accepted the payments.

Craig McDonald, director of Texans for Public Justice, said the $150 a day is to cover real expenses while doing state business, not a bonus while at home.

“Most taxpayers would say that if we’re paying them per day, they should be here working those days. And the fact is that they’re not,” McDonald said.

$7,200 salary

Lawmakers’ salaries are limited by the state constitution to $7,200 a year. The per diem is meant to help pay for housing and food while working in Austin.

But it shouldn’t be considered a paycheck supplement, said Tom “Smitty” Smith, director of Public Citizen.

“Per diem is designed for expenses you actually incur while serving in Austin for official business. It’s not a gift or a salary substitute,” he said.

Part of the problem is that during regular sessions, lawmakers are working 60 hours and taking home about $75 a week.

“The per diem has become the substitute for a real paycheck,” Smith said, arguing that lawmakers should persuade taxpayers to approve a raise rather than achieving it through per diems.

Many who represent the Dallas area pointed to expenses they incur whether in Austin or not. Some maintain apartments for regular sessions and state business during the interim. Others say they have worked on issues and help craft legislation from their district offices, devoting hours to the state.

Sen. John Carona, R-Dallas, said the expense money is allocated and allowed under state law.

“We’re entitled to it and I see no reason not to accept it,” he said. “There are certain costs relative to service, and it seems perfectly reasonable to accept the money.”

The special session began May 27 with just one topic, redistricting, a topic that has kept 19 House members busy with hearings around the state.

Gov. Rick Perry added several issues last week, but the House and Senate have had long stretches during which they haven’t met. And with little work to do in other committees, few lawmakers have a role in the Capitol at all.

‘It all works out’

Rep. Helen Giddings, D-Dallas, said she stays in hotels now when she comes to Austin and the $150 doesn’t cover meals, lodging, transportation and parking.

“Basically it all works out,” Giddings said.

Rep. Angie Chen Button, R-Garland, said she’s staying at a La Quinta and still losing money. She said she had $5 left over from her per diem to pay for food.

Still, having been made aware of the issue, she said she intended to donate back the per diem she received for days not spent in Austin.

Rep. Eric Johnson, D-Dallas, said he hadn’t even considered not taking the money because no lawmaker knows in advance when the House will convene or adjourn.

“I can tell you that I’m not making a fortune doing this,” he said with a broad laugh. “But I enjoy serving.”

Rep. Kenneth Sheets, R-Dallas, said he has accepted the per diem because he has traveled to Austin about five times this month to handle business.

He pointed out that he has refused to enter into the state retirement system because legislators pay into the system based on their $7,200 salary, but their pensions are based on the salary of district judges — now $140,000 annually.

“It’s an unfair drain on the system,” he said.

He said he tries to weigh decisions carefully to do the right thing.

But the fact is, he said, “there are moral and ethical obstacles throughout this chamber every day.”

Follow Christy Hoppe on Twitter at @christyhoppe.

AT A GLANCE: Dallas-area roll call

How Dallas-area lawmakers handled the per diem

Accepted:

Sen. John Carona, R-Dallas

Sen. Craig Estes, R-Wichita Falls

Sen. Jane Nelson, R-Flower Mound

Sen. Ken Paxton, R-McKinney

Sen. Royce West, D-Dallas

Rep. Roberto Alonzo, D-Dallas

Rep. Rafael Anchia, D-Dallas

Rep. Dan Branch, R-Dallas

Rep. Angie Chen Button, R-Garland

Rep. Stefani Carter, R-Dallas

Rep. Yvonne Davis, D-Dallas

Rep. Helen Giddings, D-DeSoto

Rep. Eric Johnson, D-Dallas

Rep. Linda Harper-Brown, R-Irving

Rep. Jeff Leach, R-Plano

Rep. Jodie Laubenberg, R-Parker

Rep. Toni Rose, D-Dallas

Rep. Scott Sanford, R-McKinney

Rep. Kenneth Sheets, R-Dallas

Rep. Van Taylor, R-Plano

Declined:

Sen. Robert Deuell, R-Greenville

Rep. Cindy Burkett, R-Mesquite

Rep. Jason Villalba, R-Dallas

Rep. Bennett Ratliff, R-Coppell

Rep. Scott Turner, R-Frisco

NOTE: Reps. Dan Branch and Angie Chen Button said after they were contacted by a reporter that they would give back their pay for days the Legislature did not meet.

SOURCE: Dallas Morning News research