Texas’ Matagorda Bay suffering from drought, water use
A matrix of shallow, placid streams covers the vast, flat marshland at the mouth of Texas’ Colorado River as it empties into the Gulf of Mexico. Chewing on a plastic-tipped cigar, Buddy Treybig steers his shrimp boat through canals and into Matagorda Bay.

Treybig, 52, has been shrimping the bay — a semi-salty body of water nearly 30 miles wide, sheltered from open sea by the Matagorda Peninsula — since high school. And it’s never been harder, he said.

Dwindling rains, a stubborn drought and more demand for water upriver in Austin have taken a toll on the crabs, shrimp, oysters and fish that provide livelihoods for coastal communities.

“We’re in bad shape already. The shrimp and oysters are almost gone,” said Treybig, a self-appointed defender of the bay and an advocate for people who depend on it to make a living.

Big shrimp boats are chained up on shore; Treybig said their owners couldn’t make enough fishing to pay for fuel.

Recurring droughts have plagued Texas with particular intensity since 1996, with worsening consequences. In November, voters approved spending $2 billion from state reserves to create a revolving fund for water infrastructure improvements. But most projects are years away — no relief for the bay or the people who make their livings from fishing and tourism.

Matagorda Bay is an estuary, a sheltered place where the gulf and the river mix, and the marine life needs fresh water to survive. The Colorado River is the largest source of that water, but the river’s flow has been declining for years.

According to the Lower Colorado River Authority, “inflows into the bay over the past five years have been the lowest of any five-year period in recorded history, eclipsing even the historic drought of the 1950s.”

If that continues, the estuary’s ecosystem will be thrown off-balance, ecologists say.

“We can kill an estuary,” said Paul Montagna, a marine ecologist at Texas A&M Corpus Christi. “We did it with Nueces Bay.”

In 1983, the dam that created Choke Canyon Reservoir northwest of Corpus Christi cut off 48 percent of the fresh water flowing into Nueces Bay, causing large-scale declines in shrimp and oyster populations. The bay has never recovered.

In Matagorda Bay, the Colorado washes down decaying plant and animal matter that feed shrimp larvae, as well as microscopic phytoplankton, a crucial food source for blue crabs, fish and clams that mature in the shallow estuary waters.

The river also moderates the bay’s salinity; water that is too salty encourages the growth of parasites and diseases that target oyster reefs, which help keep the bay healthy by filtering water and eating algae.

“When that doesn’t happen, it no longer supports the estuary ecosystem,” Montagna said.

Communities around the bay were shaken in September, when the river authority proposed to halt, for the first time, periodic releases of fresh water into the bay from the Highland Lakes west of Austin. The authority’s state-approved water plan requires such releases when rainfall alone isn’t enough.

The lakes provide fresh water for more than 1 million Central Texans, and the drought had drained the two largest to 32 percent of capacity. Clara Tuma said the proposal was intended to avoid the threat of mandatory, severe water use restrictions for all customers of the lower Colorado authority.

Heavy rains in October provided a reprieve. The river authority retracted the proposal but said the critical shortage could return as early as March.

Mitch Thames, director of the Bay City Chamber of Commerce, said Treybig is a crucial part of the team that represents Matagorda County interests in state politics.

“He’s our go-to expert … the very best at observing changes in the bays and estuaries,” Thames said. “He’s got a perspective of someone who was raised on the bay, whose father lived on the bay, and who’s been on the bay almost every day for about 45 years.”

Treybig has served on committees for the state Legislature and the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department. He had been on an advisory council for the Lower Colorado River Authority, but quit earlier this year, disillusioned with the politics surrounding water.

And the area’s lifestyle may be changed forever. Treybig, who owns two seafood markets and an oyster processing plant, doesn’t want his 20-year-old son to become a shrimper.

“There’s no future in it,” he said. “You used to make $150,000 in just your first month on the bay in the 1970s, but now you’re lucky to make $40,000 to $50,000 a year.”

Treybig hoists a net from the water, where he’s been dragging it to show how he catches shrimp. There’s a beachball-size wad of seaweed, small fish, crabs, jellyfish, starfish and a handful of shrimp.

The captain of a passing boat holds up an empty basket to show he’s caught nothing.

Dylan Baddour is a student journalist for reportingtexas.com at the University of Texas at Austin.