Texas college tuition up 55% since 2003 deregulation, analysis shows
AUSTIN — Texas students are paying 55 percent more for tuition and fees at state universities a decade after lawmakers lifted restrictions on costs, putting some of Texas’ premier universities out of reach for many families, an analysis by The Dallas Morning News shows.

Tuition is up 9.1 percent this school year from 2010-11, the last before the Legislature’s major budget cuts of 2011. The average cost for a typical semester for a state resident is an estimated $7,533 this year.

Dominic Chavez, spokesman for the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board, said the problem is twofold: lack of state funding and bloated institutions.

“Higher education has to do everything more effectively and efficiently with less dollars,” Chavez said. “We have to invest at strong levels plus help control the cost of the institutions.”

Tuition is a problem for states around the country. In Texas, as elsewhere, there’s a lack of consensus among policymakers about how to tackle the problem, despite projections that the state’s budget picture has improved.

Gov. Rick Perry touts a $10,000 bachelor’s degree he’s pushing universities to develop, but some question whether corners would be cut to provide the same quality education as a more expensive degree. And on Friday, he called for a freeze in tuition rates for four years.

Some lawmakers hope to boost financial aid, but the state is expected to face a budget crunch again next year.

Kelsey Menzel, a former college adviser at Samuell High School in southeast Dallas, said many of her students were the first in their families to go to college, some of whom are illegal immigrants, who needed financial aid or loans to attend school.

“At the beginning of the year, everyone was thinking, ‘I can go anywhere, do anything,’” Menzel said. “But reality kind of set in. When the financial award letters started coming in, they’d say, ‘Maybe it’s not feasible or not the right path for me.’”

It’s a sign of a sea change in Texas education. State officials used to brag about the affordability of college, but the costs have ballooned since 2003, even when inflation is factored in.

Less money from state

That year, to help close a budget cap without raising taxes, lawmakers cut the amount of taxpayer money the state sent to universities — an overall 11 percent decrease per student — but removed ceilings placed on tuition so campuses could make up for the lost revenue.

Leslie Helmcamp, a policy analyst with the Center for Public Policy Priorities, a left-leaning think tank, said a forward-funded program would change the timing of state funding so universities know how much money they have before they offer students financial aid.

In the meantime, with less money available per student and enrollment rising, families have to look elsewhere for funding.

Money from TEXAS Grant, the state’s main financial aid program, is an option for many need-based students, but to help all eligible students in the next two-year budget would cost $1.4 billion. In the current budget, spending was cut 10 percent, to $550 million. That covers 29,000 fewer students.

And grants aren’t always a viable option. Students from middle-income families don’t qualify for need-based aid.

Jeneill Manderscheid, a 21-year-old psychology and child development senior at the University of Texas at Dallas, works part time as a pharmacy technician and is determined to complete her degree in four years while juggling a family.

After Manderscheid married her longtime boyfriend, her part-time income allowed her to qualify for grants, but not before she accrued three years’ worth of college loans.

Manderscheid decided to continue living at her parents’ home, now with her husband and son, to save for the future.

“I will admit, I am afraid of the debt that I will face once I graduate college,” she said. “I’m still uncertain as to what I want to do with my degree. I’m thankful that I have a good paying job to fall back on at least. But I know that eventually I will need to help out my husband, for he has his own debt to pay off.”

Manderscheid, knows the value of saving early, if possible. She entered her son, Dan, in a Gerber contest to win a $10,000 prize toward his education. Just in case, she has a backup plan: a savings account she started when she became pregnant.

“In due time, as long as we stay on top of things, we will eventually pay off all these loans waiting for us at the end of the tunnel, even though it will definitely be rocky at first,” she said.

Manderscheid is far from alone. Nationwide student loan debt is more than $1 trillion, exceeding credit card debt. The average Texan who carries loans owes about $27,000.

Helmcamp’s recent report for the Center for Public Policy Priorities says lawmakers need to look at funding financial aid to alleviate a heavy reliance on loans. Her findings are detailed in a new report that looks at the cost of college and how families are financing it.

“We’re a growing state and we need to invest in our public and higher education, using the rainy day fund when we need to because that’s what it’s there for,” Helmcamp said. “We can’t just focus on cutting alone.”

Spiking numbers

In Texas, a booming population has added to overall state spending, and while schools are seeing larger freshman classes, having more students doesn’t just mean more tuition; it also can drain university resources and available housing.

While the average tuition hovered in the upper $4,000s before deregulation, students have seen a wide range of fluctuations in the nine years since then.

The cost at Beaumont’s Lamar University is up 90 percent from 2003-04, whereas the University of Houston at Clear Lake, based on estimates of this year’s costs, has only raised tuition 35 percent in the same time frame.

The University of Texas at Dallas is the most expensive public university in the state — $11,592 for the current year — surpassing the Austin flagship, but freshmen are locked in at that rate for the four years they remain at UTD.

Texas universities’ tuition spikes are part of a nationwide trend. A bad economy and budget cuts have forced schools nationwide, including in Illinois, California and Wisconsin, to raise rates.

But the situation in Texas was compounded when lawmakers cut close to $1 billion from higher education funding last year.

Kevin Hegarty, chief financial officer and vice president of UT in Austin, said cannibalizing existing resources can only go so far, especially when an increasing portion of the state budget goes toward health care costs. Hegarty said the flagship school of the UT System lost $92 million in the most recent cuts.

“We’re not just going to save our way to prosperity by cutting, cutting, cutting,” he said.

Others say universities need to find way to cut costs.

State Rep. Dan Branch, the Dallas Republican who leads the House Higher Education Committee, said cuts are “forcing higher education administrators to be more creative and innovative in educating students.”

Hegarty and Branch said that integrating degree plans to allow students to attend community college for two years before moving to a university for a specialized degree will cut costs. Next year, lawmakers will consider providing incentives to ease such transitions.

Thomas Lindsay, director of the Center for Higher Education at the Texas Public Policy Foundation, a conservative Austin think tank, said the key to reducing administrative bloat is cutting unnecessary personnel, combining university purchasing power and having instructors teach more classes.

He added that the governor’s 2011 $10,000 degree challenge could be revolutionary for higher education pricing.

Ideas that were on the table last year, such as focusing on more online classes and rewarding schools for graduating students within four years, could get new life when lawmakers tackle the issue again next year.

Without budget trouble as deep as what the Legislature faced last year, it will be easier to reach a consensus, said Sen. Judith Zaffirini, D-Laredo, who heads the Senate Higher Education Committee.

But the focus, she said, must be to “maintain excellence” and keep college affordable by fully supporting TEXAS Grant and giving universities enough funding.

“If we don’t reduce financial aid as much as we did last time, then college will be affordable,” she said. “Higher education is a partnership that brings together students and their families with their selected college and universities, and the state.”