News for Dallas, Texas
A key point in the debate over whether Texas should have 19 more coal-fired power plants is whether the state really needs all of them.

Power companies and the Electric Reliability Council of Texas say yes because the state could face power shortages in two years without more juice. TXU Corp., which has proposed building 11 coal-fired plants, put Texas' need for power at the center of the company's public campaign for plant permits.

Environmentalists, on the other hand, oppose using coal to make power. They say a statewide conservation program could eliminate the need for most of the plants and buy Texas time to invest in cleaner technology.

The Natural Resources Defense Council and environmental investment group Ceres will release a study today that shows an $11 billion investment in conservation – rather than coal plants – could eliminate about 80 percent of the anticipated growth in power demand during the next couple of decades.

"Investment in efficiency resources to meet most of this reliability need offers a cost-effective solution and ... can effectively push out reliability concerns to beyond 2021," the report states.

"These actions can avoid a risky and environmentally damaging investment in new coal-fired power generation."

Legally, the debate doesn't matter. TXU doesn't have to prove its plants are needed to get permits.

But the debate has left some legislators thinking about ways to boost conservation and wondering whether regulators should have the ability to consider need when handing out plant permits.

"We want to do some things that incentivize and encourage conservation," said state Rep. Phil King, R-Weatherford. "Ten or 15 years from now, you may say: Hey, there were three or four power plants that we didn't have to build."

Since announcing its plans to build 11 coal-fired power plants in April, TXU has pointed to a growing need for more power in Texas.

In the announcements of the new plants, TXU noted that ERCOT predicts reserve margins – the amount of excess power in the state grid – would drop below the target level of 12.5 percent by 2010.

But last summer, after the rolling blackouts and after Texas hit record levels of power demand, ERCOT updated its forecast. Now the council predicts Texas' reserve margins could drop below the target next year.

Bill Bojorquez, vice president of system planning for ERCOT, said he revised the forecast because the economic outlook in Texas became more optimistic. Higher employment, income and population mean more electricity use.

But ERCOT doesn't have a way to include possible conservation in its forecast.

Mr. Bojorquez said the forecast is meant to show how much excess capacity the grid would have on the day when demand reaches its highest point, excluding any surprises such as extreme temperatures or a plant outage.

Originally, the forecasts helped regulators decide if the state needed more plants. Now that regulators no longer make that decision, the forecasts help power plant investors decide whether to build more.

But the forecasts have become part of the debate rhetoric about coal plant pollution as TXU tries to win public support for the new plants. Legislators already have filed bills to tax coal and boost energy efficiency goals. Legislation to hold up new permits or tighten requirements is possible.

The prospects for such bills could go up if environmentalists can convince legislators that there's an economically justifiable alternative to coal. With that in mind, each side is trying to sway public opinion on the potential for energy efficiency to replace at least some of the new plants.

"When do you start worrying as an individual who lives in Texas? Do you start worrying when it hits 9 percent? 5 percent? Two percent? It's all about when do you start to get uncomfortable with your electricity supply," said TXU spokeswoman Kim Morgan.

And the Clean Coal Foundation of Texas, an industry group, warned last week: "Unless the utility companies that serve Texas begin building additional capacity immediately, the rolling blackouts that shocked consumers across this state in April of 2006 could become all too commonplace."

The environmental groups, in their report, said conservation could delay such concerns for 15 years and offered suggestions to legislators.

State Rep. Rafael Anchia, D-Dallas, has filed a bill to mandate more energy efficiency efforts by electric utilities.

Existing state law requires utilities to offset 10 percent of their annual growth in electricity demand through efficiency measures.

Mr. Anchia's bill, HB 269, would increase the required offsets to 50 percent of the utility's annual power demand growth.

That change is among the recommendations in the Ceres report. Other suggestions are to change building codes to boost efficiency, invest more tax dollars in efficiency and require regulators to review efficiency measures.

Mr. King, who was chairman of the regulated industries committee during the last legislative session, said he wants to overhaul the electricity system, and conservation is one of his three priorities.

"There's not something that says: If you do A, B and C, we won't have to build three coal plants. But as we take a full look at electricity this session and try to find a way to supply reliable electricity at the best price possible, then you're looking at three things. You're looking at competition, construction and conservation," he said.

E-mail esouder@dallasnews.com

and rloftis@dallasnews.com