Homeland Security tepid on Rick Perry's request for more border enforcements
Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano this afternoon brushed off Texas Gov. Rick Perry’s request for surveillance planes and 1,000 fresh troops along the Mexican border.

That drew swift denunciation from the governor, who put state police and other assets on standby, citing the heightened risk of spillover violence from Mexico’s drug war.

Napolitano said she would “look at Governor Perry’s request,” but she emphasized that the federal government already has surveillance along the border.

“We have a lot of technology akin to drones already that are being employed in different ways,” she said on MSNBC.

Through an aide, Perry denounced that as a “wait and hope strategy” as drug cartels and Mexican authorities vie for control in Mexico’s border cities.

"How many Americans will have to die before our federal government takes serious action along the Texas-Mexico border?” Perry spokeswoman Allison Castle said this afternoon. "The administration has been reviewing the governor's request for 1,000 National Guard troops to support local law enforcement along the border for over a year. It’s time for the federal government to allocate the appropriate resources to the Texas-Mexico border.”

Napolitano first took Perry’s troop request under advisement more than a year ago and she has never publicly rejected it.

He reiterated the request last week in a letter to her, and repeated his demand on Monday, two days after the murders of three people connected to the American consulate in Ciudad Juárez, across the border from El Paso.

Perry has also requested unmanned Predator drones for aerial surveillance, complaining that while three such aircraft patrol the Arizona-Mexico border, none are assigned to Texas. That request is also pending.

None of those assets likely would have prevented Saturday’s murders, which remain under investigation by Mexican and U.S. authorities.

This afternoon, Perry announced that he has activated the first phase of the state’s "spillover violence contingency plan.” That includes more border surveillance by state and local law enforcement, and more state Department of Public Safety helicopter patrols along the Rio Grande. He also ordered DPS SWAT teams on standby.

"With the growing threat of violence in Mexico spilling over the border, we have taken important measures to increase the law enforcement presence along the Texas border and have placed additional resources on standby to combat any potential situation,” Perry said in a statement.

Napolitano, in her MSNBC interview, said that "we’re constantly revisiting what is happening at the border. We’ve added manpower, we’ve added technology, we’ve added lots of things there. And indeed we have not seen spillover violence onto the U.S. side the way one would predict, given what’s going on just across the bridge in Juárez."

She said the violence has persisted despite Mexican President Filipe Calderón’s unprecedented deployment of soldiers to border cities. Calderón is visiting Juárez this afternoon.

"It’s an outrageous crime," Napolitano said, referring to Saturday’s killings. "It is part of a wave of violence that has gone through Juárez over the last years, the presidency of President Calderón of Mexico has been deeply involved, even sending the military into Juárez. That hasn’t helped."

She added that the border area "needs to be a safe zone. Right now it’s not, and we need to work with Mexico to make it so."

Napolitano did not elaborate on her assessment that Calderón’s military strategy wasn’t working, but she wasn’t signaling that support for that approach has wavered. Spokesman Matt Chandler said the U.S. government remains "committed to supporting President Calderón in his courageous fight against drug trafficking organizations."