Arizona misguided, but fears of residents aren't
There's a restful schadenfreude in watching the contempt of the nation shower down on somebody else's fool head, to see someone else reviled, for a change, for their parochial public cranks.

And as long as the demagogues in Arizona are dancing and tooting their horns, everybody's hands are too full to worry about crazy secessionist talk or bizarre textbook revisions down here in Texas.

A little part of me whispers with relief: It's somebody else's turn to look absurd. Let them convince a jeering world that we're not all bonkers; it's just a small but noisy rabble.

It's even tempting to join the party and mock the infernal union of paranoid retirees and blowhard opportunists that gave birth to Arizona's notorious new immigration law.

Unquestionably, it's a bad law. No matter how you try to modify its specifics or defend its intent, it draws official suspicion to certain people because of race. In the hands of overzealous cops or unscrupulous public officials, it's a ready-made tool for sanctioned abuse.

But, as is so often the case, the issue has been dramatically oversimplified, the facts on the ground often ignored in favor of neatly fitting a preconceived political storyline.

One of the familiar storylines is racist xenophobes using the law to abuse innocent minorities, lawful citizens or peaceable immigrants who are "just looking for a better life."

The other storyline tells of noble patriots bravely standing up to the illegal immigrant hordes who threaten to destroy our culture and way of life.

Both storylines – and an awful lot of journalists who ought to know better – have ignored the complicated evolution of events that led to Arizona's draconian misstep.

If Arizona has acted out of fear, that doesn't mean there's nothing to be afraid of.

Abandoned by federal politicians too cowed by party extremists to tackle immigration reform, states and cities have been left with the ultimately untenable choice of doing nothing or overstepping their bounds.

And Arizona has suffered appalling drug and gang violence, which has bled over its long, largely unprotected border from northern Mexico.

"I understand the frustration that has built and built and built in this state until finally it erupted into something ugly," Laurie Roberts, a reasoned and respected columnist for the Arizona Republic, wrote in a blog posting titled "Arizona: the nation's punching bag."

"Unfortunately, nobody is really listening," she wrote. "If you speak in support of [the new law], you're a racist ... If you speak against the new law, you're un-American."

Occasionally, outsiders have taken notice of the problems besetting the state. Last year, ABC's Brian Ross reported on the astonishing kidnapping rate in Phoenix, a practice imported by violent drug cartels.

In 2008 alone, there were 370 cases, which made Phoenix the kidnapping capital of the nation. Had it not been a worse year in Mexico City, it would have been the kidnapping capital of the world.

Veteran Arizona writer Leo W. Banks, who used to chronicle the state's rich cowboy lore, American Indian history and spectacular natural setting, increasingly writes in the Tucson Weekly about a lawless border zone where violent smugglers terrorize ranchers, and the unchecked overland migrant traffic is causing irreparable environmental damage.

"[T]alk to people on the ground, and what they fear most is the loss of personal security," Banks wrote in a recent Wall Street Journal guest column. "They are angry that the federal government is unable to provide them with this most basic of human rights."

It's not "racist" to fear violent criminals who have proved their willingness to rob and steal and kill, nor is it "patriotic" to use such crimes as a pretext for harassing innocent people.

Arizona picked a bad, divisive, embarrassingly discriminatory solution, a solution that laid it open to censure and ridicule.

A bad solution doesn't mean there's not a problem.