Democrat Farouk Shami denies paying rival Hank Gilbert to quit Texas governor race
Two top Democratic candidates for statewide office strongly denied Tuesday that a contribution of $150,000 was part of an arrangement for one to drop out of the race for governor.

Houston businessman Farouk Shami contributed $100,000 to the campaign of Hank Gilbert three days after Shami jumped into the race for governor and Gilbert switched to the race for agriculture commissioner. The additional $50,000 arrived Dec. 31.

Kinky Friedman, Gilbert's opponent for the Democratic nomination for agriculture commissioner, seized on the contribution.

"Gilbert was trashing Farouk one day and then cozying up to him the next, and this accounts for it," Friedman said. "Farouk is an old friend, but he knows better than to offer it to me. I am somebody who can't be bought."

Gilbert's take

Gilbert, an East Texas rancher, said the donation was merely a sign that Shami believed in his campaign.

"This would probably fly if you were talking about somebody who was an entrenched politician, had spent years in politics and was used to making these kinds of deals," said Gilbert, who lost the agriculture commissioner race to Republican incumbent Todd Staples in 2006. "I am running to get rid of those types of people. He [Shami] told me that he believed in my campaign and needed me to be the next agriculture commissioner."

Shami didn't record the contributions on his campaign finance report, which was filed Friday with the Texas Ethics Commission. Campaign officials said that was an oversight and would be corrected. Gilbert reported the contributions in his filing with the state; they made up two-thirds of what he raised in the last half of last year.

The accusations are "absolutely unfounded and rumor-mongering by the Democratic establishment that isn't pleased" that Shami is running for governor, Shami spokesman Charlie Ray said.

Other donations

Shami has increased his political contributions to other Democrats running this cycle, including Sen. Rodney Ellis of Houston and attorney general candidate Barbara Ann Radnofsky. His largest contribution after what he gave Gilbert, though, was $20,000, to the Texas Democratic Party.

Gilbert said Shami met with him at the end of November and told the rancher that he could help the Democratic Party by running for agriculture commissioner instead. He asked for Gilbert's endorsement for governor.

Gilbert said his dwindling campaign account was a factor in his decision.

"I knew he had the resources there, and I agreed," said Gilbert. "I felt more comfortable in the agriculture commissioner spot. The only reason I was running for governor was because I didn't see anyone out there to do the job."

He said that changed after several discussions with Shami. The pair agreed on several issues, including transportation, equality, education and green energy.

Gilbert said he was grateful and saw nothing unethical when Shami made the largest donation his campaign had received in the days following the endorsement.

'Hurts my feelings'

The accusation of underhandedness "kind of hurts my feelings," he said. "My wife's upset, my kids are upset. That is not the kind of people we are."

Staples, the Republican agriculture commissioner, posted an item on his campaign blog about the discrepancy between Gilbert's and Shami's campaign finance reports. And Friedman's campaign sent an e-mail blast Tuesday accusing Gilbert of shifting his allegiance in exchange for campaign cash.

Gilbert also said he supported the decision by Vince Leibowitz, his campaign manager, to move to Shami's campaign once he dropped his own bid for governor.

"If something else comes along, you can't fault people for taking it," he said.

Ray said Shami and Gilbert are clearly aligned on policy matters, so the backing makes sense. "Farouk admires the Gilbert campaign, and that is evidenced through significant contributions and adopting policy," Ray said.