Parkland Memorial emphasizes care over nationality, is top hospital in noncitizen births in Texas
Dallas County's public hospital is ground zero in the growing controversy over babies born to illegal immigrants.

While members of Congress argue about ways to prevent these infants from automatically becoming U.S. citizens, the staff at Parkland Memorial Hospital is doing what it always does: delivering babies.

Parkland handled 11,071 births last year to women who could not provide proof of U.S. citizenship – or 74 percent of the total 14,872 births at the hospital. Most of these women are believed to be in the country illegally.

It was the busiest hospital in the state for such births.

In 2004, women in this category accounted for 11,087 births, or 70 percent of the total deliveries.

Dr. Ron Anderson, Parkland's chief executive officer, could not be reached for comment on the birthing trend. In the past he has defended the hospital's delivery policy, which welcomes all pregnant women and offers prenatal care, regardless of citizenship.

"We are tasked with taking care of the indigent sick of Dallas County – that includes the immigrant population, both legal and illegal," he said in a 2006 story about Parkland's handling of so many births to noncitizens.

Paula Turicchi, the hospital's senior vice president over women and infant services, said last week that when a woman "arrives and is in labor, we are going to take care of her."

"Patient care is our first priority," she said.

Harris County's Hospital District was second with 7,479 births last year to women who were not U.S. citizens. Those births accounted for 82 percent of the 9,115 deliveries at two of the district's public hospitals, Ben Taub General Hospital and LBJ General Hospital.

Kitty Allen, a spokeswoman for the Harris County district, said both hospitals focus on delivering healthy babies by also offering prenatal care to all pregnant women.

"It's more cost-effective for the Harris County taxpayers to have a healthy baby, a healthy mom and a normal delivery," she said. "We are trying to avoid the million-dollar babies who end up in the neonatal intensive care unit. It just makes good economic sense as well as good moral sense."

The cost of births to noncitizens is covered by an emergency Medicaid program, which also allows the state and federal government to keep track of the number of such births.

The Texas Health and Human Services Commission produces an annual list of the Top 25 hospitals in the state for such births. Only two hospitals in Dallas made the list last year – Parkland and Methodist Dallas Medical Center, which ranked 18th with 748 births.

Seven Harris County hospitals on that list, including the two public hospitals, reported a combined 13,436 births, about 14 percent more deliveries than the two Dallas hospitals.