Republicans Curnock and Flores finally jab at each other days before runoff
WASHINGTON – The two Republican finalists for the chance to take on Rep. Chet Edwards have been pounding away at the veteran Waco Democratic congressman for months. But with just days until their runoff, they've finally focused on each other.

Rob Curnock and Bill Flores sniped at each other last week in radio advertisements and news releases on issues such as Curnock's homestead tax exemption and Flores' 2008 voting record. "Washington dirty politics has arrived here in Central Texas," a Curnock e-mail declared.

Beyond the barbs – or perhaps even behind them – remains a focus on Edwards, the longtime incumbent in the conservative-leaning district. Flores and Curnock both point to their experience and ideas as evidence that they are the best candidate to challenge Edwards in the general election.

"Who can win in November?" Curnock said. "That's the No. 1 thing in this runoff."

Key endorsements

Flores, a retired Bryan oil and gas executive, won 33 percent of the vote in the five-person primary; Curnock was second, with 29 percent, and under state law, a candidate must win more than half the votes to be nominated.

Flores' campaign has picked up steam since the March 2 primary, with several key endorsements. Last week, former U.S. Sen. Phil Gramm campaigned with Flores.

The fall race is likely to be Texas' most competitive congressional contest. Republicans are targeting the district as a prime candidate to pick up a seat, noting that the district is the most GOP-leaning in the nation that's currently held by a Democrat.

Edwards and other Democrats express confidence that his moderate record and history of delivering for his constituents will help him carry the day. But as Republicans hold out hope of capturing a House majority, the district could be key.

"If people are serious about changing the direction of America, this is the kind of seat that's got to be won," Gramm said last week.

Flores touts a huge fundraising edge, which he said will be critical to take on a well-funded Edwards. Flores has raised $818,000, while Curnock has collected about $171,000, according to the most recent campaign finance reports.

Curnock, owner of a Waco video production company, said that no matter who is the GOP candidate, Edwards will have a fundraising advantage and that he had little financial support when he lost to Edwards by 8 percentage points in 2008.

Curnock, who also lost Republican primaries in 2000 and 2002, said his campaign experience, his name recognition with voters and his willingness to take on Edwards make him the best candidate.

"We are the one candidate in this race that has been vetted," he said.

Flores countered that repeatedly running for an office doesn't guarantee November success, either, and that his business experience and familiarity with balancing budgets would resonate more with voters.

"My experience is directly on point with what the people of this district are worried about: jobs, the economy and deficit spending," he said.

That was the extent of the back-and-forth until recently.

Throwing punches

Curnock attacked Flores for voting in the 2008 Democratic primary and then not voting in that year's general election. Flores said that he was voting against Barack Obama in the primary and that he got tied up in business meetings and couldn't get to the polls in November.

The Flores campaign questioned Curnock's collection of about $2,000 in homestead tax exemptions on a different property than his primary residence. Curnock said that it was an honest mistake and that he has taken steps to switch the exemption back to his current address.

Still, the jabs are fairly light. Both candidates have agreed to endorse the winner of the runoff, in part because they struggle to point out major differences in their conservative viewpoints. Among Flores' goals are using tax cuts and regulatory reforms to stimulate job growth and creating term limits for lawmakers and their staffs. Curnock says he wants to help repeal the recently passed health care legislation and implement a national sales tax.

"Rob and I both agree that either of us would be better candidates than Chet Edwards in Congress," Flores said last week on WBAP's The Mark Davis Show. "Unfortunately over the last few days, we've been spending most of our time throwing rocks at each other."

Staff writer Todd J. Gillman contributed to this report.