Calderón urges Congress to renew ban on assault weapons in fight against drug cartels
WASHINGTON – Mexican President Felipe Calderón asked Congress on Thursday to renew an expired U.S. ban on assault weapons to help in his war with drug cartels, and he stepped up criticism of Arizona's crackdown on illegal immigration, warning that it will lead to racial profiling.

"We will win," he said of the drug war.

"But we cannot ignore the fact that the challenge to our security has roots on both sides of the border," Calderón said, referring both to U.S. demand for illicit drugs and its relatively open market for firearms.

Many of those weapons, he said, end up in the hands of drug gangs responsible for more than 23,000 killings in the three years since he deployed Mexican troops to reassert control.

Conservatives fumed at hearing a foreign leader critique American laws on the floor of the U.S. House, though members of both parties praised Calderón's battle with organized crime and lauded his efforts to bolster economic opportunity in Mexico, in part because that would ease the flow of workers heading north illegally in search of jobs.

"Migration is not just your problem. We see migration as our problem as well," Calderón said.

Still, his attacks on the new Arizona law – which requires police to check the immigration status of anyone they suspect of being in the country illegally – struck Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, as "inappropriate." Calderón's comments about the assault weapons ban, which expired in 2004, also fell flat among Republicans.

Mexican and U.S. officials agree that the southbound flow of weapons and drug profits has fueled the cartels. Efforts to intercept contraband have increased dramatically in recent years. But Calderón said gun violence in his country spiked after the ban expired.

Texas Sen. John Cornyn, a member of the Senate GOP leadership, said the U.S. has already been cracking down on so-called straw purchases of weapons, in which buyers acquire the guns for a third party.

"I have a lot of respect for President Calderón and his commitment to fight the cartels, but I don't think Americans ought to give up any of their freedoms in order to address another country's problems," he said, adding, "I'm a little uncomfortable with his commenting on American internal affairs and American domestic laws."

Calderón and President Barack Obama both denounced the Arizona immigration law on Wednesday at the White House ahead of a lavish state dinner.

The Mexican president's call for an assault weapons ban also wasn't a highlight for Dallas Rep. Pete Sessions, a member of the House GOP leadership. "There's very little desire on our side of the aisle to hear someone come and advocate for specific pieces of legislation," he said.

Democrats were more enthusiastic.

Rep. Eliot Engel, D-N.Y., who chairs a subcommittee that oversees U.S.-Mexico relations, called the desire to reinstate the weapons ban "common sense."

House Intelligence Chairman Silvestre Reyes of El Paso said: "I thought it was courageous of him to mention it and take issue with the Arizona law. He's realistic. In my private meetings with him I've told him, you know, politically that's a nonstarter."

Roughly half of Congress attended the 35-minute speech, the first by a foreign leader to a joint session of Congress this year.

But more than three dozen teenage congressional pages in blue blazers filled seats on the Republican side, to offer the semblance of a packed chamber.

Cornyn and Texas Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, both Republicans, had front-row seats. Much of the state's House delegation was missing, including eight of 20 Republicans and three of 12 Democrats.

Three members of the Obama Cabinet attended the Calderón speech – Attorney General Eric Holder, Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano and Interior Secretary Ken Salazar.

They joined in a Democratic ovation when Calderón criticized the Arizona law.

Holder is reviewing the law and will advise Obama soon on whether he should try to block its enforcement.

On the push for a renewed ban on assault weapons, Calderón stressed his respect and admiration for the U.S. Constitution and its Second Amendment, "but believe me," he said, "many of these guns are not going to honest American hands. Instead, thousands are ending up in the hands of criminals."

Of 75,000 firearms seized by Mexico in the last three years, he said, more than 80 percent of those the authorities were able to trace came from the United States. With 7,000 gun shops near the Mexican border, he said, "almost anyone can purchase these powerful weapons."

Calderón also called on Congress to overhaul U.S. immigration laws. "The time has come to reduce the causes of migration and to turn this phenomenon into a legal, ordered and secure flow of workers and visitors," he said.

Sen. Jeff Sessions of Alabama, the senior Republican on the Judiciary Committee, disagreed with him on the weapons ban and the Arizona law, and he considers it premature to seek comprehensive immigration reform before the border is under control.

"People like to lecture the United States," he said, though he added that Calderón has been a "good neighbor."

"I'm impressed with his leadership on crime and violence. He is exactly right – what's good for Mexico economically is good for the United States. We need for them to prosper."

Calderón lauded Obama's new emphasis on reducing drug demand through treatment and prevention, in addition to traditional law enforcement efforts.

"We have not hesitated to use all the power of the state, including the federal police and the armed forces" to weaken the cartels, he said. "We are hitting them, and we are hitting them hard."

Rep. Pete Sessions liked that part of Calderón's message.

"He was honest about the problems that his country has and the relationship that we share with them," he said, adding that drugs and violence are "a joint responsibility of our country and theirs."