Dan Gelber :: The Gelber Blog
Stand Your Ground and the Zimmerman Verdict

An unarmed boy is killed by a man armed with a gun, and a jury says that, under the law of Florida, no crime has been committed.

The only real question before the jury was whether Zimmerman justifiably used deadly force. This was the only question, but as in many cases stemming from an altercation where death results, it can be a difficult one. How do you assign blame to a series of cascading and emotional events? Someone cuts off a motorist, looks inappropriately at a spouse, spills coffee accidentally on a customer.

Unkind words are exchanged, arguments lead to fists, and fists lead to deadly force usually with a gun.

At what point is someone precluded from availing themselves of the justification of self-defense because of their own poor judgment or bad behavior.

In 2005 the Florida Legislature fundamentally changed the analysis used by juries to assign blame in these cases. When the legislature passed the Stand Your Ground law it changed the rules of engagement. It eliminated the duty to avoid the danger and it eliminated any duty to retreat.

If the Trayvon Martin killing was tried prior to the Stand Your Ground law being passed, the jury would have been told that self-defense was not available to Zimmerman unless he had used every reasonable means to avoid the danger. The jury would have been told that even if they believed Zimmerman had been attacked wrongfully by Trayvon, he could not use deadly force if he could have safely retreated or run away.

Here is the actual jury instruction read to Florida juries prior to the legislature’s enactment of Stand Your Ground.

“The defendant cannot justify the use of force likely to cause death or great bodily harm unless he used every reasonable means within his power and consistent with his own safety to avoid the danger before resorting to that force.

The fact that the defendant was wrongfully attacked cannot justify his use of force likely to cause death or great bodily harm if by retreating he could have avoided the need to use that force. “

In this case, did Zimmerman use “every reasonable means within his power…to avoid the danger” or did he follow Trayvon despite admonitions that he did not need to?

Notwithstanding the forensics that Zimmerman suffered injury, could he have safely run away, or retreated from an unarmed teenager?

The jury did not get to analyze the case in these terms because the law of Florida after Stand Your Ground eliminated the duty to avoid the danger and the duty to retreat.

Here is the actual instruction that was read to the Zimmerman Jury:

“If George Zimmerman was not engaged in an unlawful activity and was attacked in any place where he had a right to be, he had no duty to retreat and had the right to stand his ground and meet force with force, including deadly force if he reasonably believed that it was necessary to do so to prevent death or great bodily harm to himself or another or to prevent the commission of a forcible felony.”

While in the Florida legislature I strongly opposed the Stand Your Ground law because I believed it would provide defenses to people who had created the scenarios they sought protection from. Or it would leave juries without the proper rules of engagement that ought govern predictable human interactions.

By taking away from the jury the simple notion that people have an obligation to “avoid the danger” or retreat if they could do so safely, they were, essentially, authorizing stupid, venal and, as in this case, often tragic behavior.

The case was not an easy one and, frankly, made harder because the prosecution failed to present a cohesive narrative choosing instead to offer alternative and inconsistent theories. But their job was unquestionably made much more difficult by the decision of the Florida legislature to fundamentally change the behavior we will tolerate from citizens who recklessly decide to take the life of another.