THE FACTS ON BROWN’S ANTI-CHOICE RECORD

Shaheen campaign spokesman Harrell Kirstein released the following statement this afternoon on Scott Brown’s anti-choice record:

“Being pro-choice means letting women make their own reproductive healthcare decisions, but Scott Brown believes both the government and women’s employers should be able to interfere in these private decisions. He twice backed legislation that would force women to look at pictures of fetuses before they terminated a pregnancy, and he both cosponsored and voted for the Blunt Amendment that would let employers deny women coverage for a range of healthcare services, including mammograms and contraception. This summer he also supported the Supreme Court Hobby Lobby decision that allows certain employers to deny women contraception coverage.”

“These are the facts and they are undisputable. New Hampshire women need a senator they can count on to protect their healthcare rights, and that’s Jeanne Shaheen, not Scott Brown.”

THE FACTS:

FACT: Scott Brown TWICE backed legislation that would have forced women to view color photographs of fetuses before ending a pregnancy.

Women’s Right To Know Act Was Introduced In 2005 By Then-State Senator Brown. “Senate no. 979 by Mr. Knapik, a petition (accompanied by bill, senate, no. 979) of Michael R. Knapik and Scott P. Brown for legislation relative to a woman’s right to know. The judiciary. The commonwealth of Massachusetts in the year two thousand and five. [Massachusetts General Court, SB 979, Introduced 1/5/05]

“Senate no. 979 by Mr. Knapik, a petition (accompanied by bill, senate, no. 979) of Michael R. Knapik and Scott P. Brown for legislation relative to a woman’s right to know. The judiciary. The commonwealth of Massachusetts in the year two thousand and five. [Massachusetts General Court, SB 979, Introduced 1/5/05] Right To Know Law Would Require A Woman To View “Color Photographs” Detailing The Development “Of The Unborn Child At Two Week Gestational Increments From Fertilization To Full Term.” In January 2003, legislation was introduced described as “An Act Relative to A Woman’s Right to Know” included a woman seeking an abortion must be provided with “a description of the probable anatomical and physiological characteristics of the unborn child at two week gestational increments from fertilization to full term, including color photographs or if a representative photograph is not available, realistic drawings of the developing unborn child at two week increments, and including written information about brain and heart function and the presence of external members and internal organs at each stage of development” before a doctor could perform an abortion. [Massachusetts General Court, SB 979, Introduced 1/5/05]

In January 2003, legislation was introduced described as “An Act Relative to A Woman’s Right to Know” included a woman seeking an abortion must be provided with “a description of the probable anatomical and physiological characteristics of the unborn child at two week gestational increments from fertilization to full term, including color photographs or if a representative photograph is not available, realistic drawings of the developing unborn child at two week increments, and including written information about brain and heart function and the presence of external members and internal organs at each stage of development” before a doctor could perform an abortion. [Massachusetts General Court, SB 979, Introduced 1/5/05] Brown Cosponsored 2003 Right To Know Legislation As A Member Of The Massachusetts House Of Representatives. “Brown also co-sponsored the so-called ‘Women’s Right to Know Bill,’ which would require doctors at reproductive clinics to inform patients in graphic detail about the risks associated with abortions and would require women to observe a 24-hour ‘reflection period’ before the procedure can be performed.” [Milford Daily News, 3/1/04]

“Brown also co-sponsored the so-called ‘Women’s Right to Know Bill,’ which would require doctors at reproductive clinics to inform patients in graphic detail about the risks associated with abortions and would require women to observe a 24-hour ‘reflection period’ before the procedure can be performed.” [Milford Daily News, 3/1/04] The Text Of The 2003 Act Was Identical To That Of The 2005 Act, Including Requiring A Woman To View “Color Photographs” Detailing The Development “Of The Unborn Child At Two Week Gestational Increments From Fertilization To Full Term.” In January 2003, legislation was introduced described as “An Act Relative to A Woman’s Right to Know” included a woman seeking an abortion must be provided with “a description of the probable anatomical and physiological characteristics of the unborn child at two week gestational increments from fertilization to full term, including color photographs or if a representative photograph is not available, realistic drawings of the developing unborn child at two week increments, and including written information about brain and heart function and the presence of external members and internal organs at each stage of development” before a doctor could perform an abortion. [Massachusetts General Court, HB 2644, Introduced 1/3/03]

FACT: Scott Brown both co-sponsored and voted for the Blunt Amendment that would let employers deny women access to a range of healthcare services, including contraception and coverage for mammograms.

Brown Cosponsored And Voted for the Blunt Amendment, Which Would Allow Employers or Insurers to Deny Coverage On Religious or Moral Grounds. On March 1, 2012, Brown voted against a motion to table the Blunt Amendment, which, according to the Boston Globe, would “allow any employer or insurer who has religious or moral objections to a particular health service from covering it.” Brown cosponsored the legislation the Blunt Amendment was based on. [Vote 24, 3/1/12; Boston Globe, 2/18/12; S.1467, Introduced 8/2/11]

On March 1, 2012, Brown voted against a motion to table the Blunt Amendment, which, according to the Boston Globe, would “allow any employer or insurer who has religious or moral objections to a particular health service from covering it.” Brown cosponsored the legislation the Blunt Amendment was based on. [Vote 24, 3/1/12; Boston Globe, 2/18/12; S.1467, Introduced 8/2/11] Blunt Amendment Would Allow Employers To Block Access To Women’s Contraception Or Any Procedure They Object To On Religious Or Moral Grounds. “U.S. Sen. Scott Brown is defending his support of an amendment that would have allowed employers or health insurers to deny coverage for services they say violate their moral or religious beliefs, including birth control. The Massachusetts Republican said he believed Blunt bill, which he co-sponsored, would have prevented the federal government from compelling individuals, including Catholics, from going against their religious beliefs.” The Washington Post described that the amendment, “would have rolled back the Obama administration’s health coverage rule by allowing insurance companies and employers to opt out of covering prescriptions, such as contraceptions, or procedures they object to on religious or moral grounds.” [Associated Press, 3/1/12; Washington Post, 3/1/12]

FACT: This summer Brown supported the Supreme Court Hobby Lobby decision that lets certain employers deny women contraception coverage.

Brown Supported And Defended Hobby Lobby Decision. “BROWN: Sure well first of all. I’ve always supported women’s health care and access to contraception, but by injecting government into every aspect of our lives, Obamacare threatens our freedoms. I think most folks have seen the mandates from Washington are really effecting people’s everyday lives and this is just another aspect of it. The court’s ruling, obviously represents another drawback for Obamacare and it’s clear that that prevision violated the Constitution and it’s guarantee of religious freedom, and I’ve supported in the past and will continue to support the right of people of faith to practice their faith and– even though that may be out-of-touch with social opinion. It’s a narrowly drawn case.” [WKXL, 7/2/14]

FACT: A Massachusetts pro-life group endorsed Scott Brown because he voted pro-life.