Most Confirmed Alien Inmates (71.0%) in Prison for Violent Crimes, 2014-2015 Agency Annual Statistical Information
Inmate Population

Florida's Alien Inmate Population has Decreased over the Past Three Years.

On June 30, 2016, Florida prisons held 4,754 confirmed alien inmates, 307 less than the June 30, 2015 total of 5,061 and 467 less than the June 30, 2014 total of 5,221.

Approximately 71.5% of confirmed alien inmates are in prison for violent crimes.

What is an alien inmate?

An alien inmate is one who does not have U.S. citizenship. Newly admitted inmates are referred to Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE, formerly part of INS) agents who identify and investigate those who may be aliens.

What happens once alien inmates finish their prison sentences?

As with other inmates, alien inmates are released from prison when their sentences are completed. If ICE has notified the Department that they want to take an alien inmate into custody, the inmate is released only into ICE custody. Some alien inmates cannot be deported. However, the vast majority of alien inmates who complete their sentences in Florida prisons are released to ICE for further immigration processing, including possible deportation.

Under what circumstances would an alien inmate be deported?

Alien inmates are deported promptly after release from prison, if they have been ordered out of the country, have no further appeals of their final deportation order, and are from a country to which the United States can deport them. Other alien inmates are transferred to ICE for further deportation proceedings when their sentences expire, unless ICE refuses to receive and detain them (for example, in some cases when the alien is from a country to which they can not be deported).

Primary Offense of Confirmed Alien Inmates * One of the following conditions must occur for a crime to be defined as violent under this definition: actual physical harm or threat of physical harm, or a reasonable probability exists that individual criminal acts could have resulted in unintended physical harm or the threat of physical harm.

Cuba remains the single country with the largest number of confirmed aliens in Florida’s prison system: 1,655 (35%) on June 30, 2016. Mexico is second with 882 or 18% of the confirmed aliens.