NARAL Pro-Choice America PAC Endorses Jeanne Shaheen

Today, NARAL Pro-Choice America PAC endorsed Jeanne Shaheen at a women’s campaign event in Manchester. The event kicked off the Shaheen campaign’s “A Senator New Hampshire Women Can Trust” tour focused on highlighting what is at stake for New Hampshire women in the election this November.

“I have always supported a woman’s right to choose because I know women should be making health care decisions in consultation with their doctors and their families, not their employer,” said Senator Shaheen. “Scott Brown’s record is clear: when it counts, he doesn’t stand up for women’s reproductive rights and economic security. He co-sponsored legislation to let employers deny women coverage for birth control or even mammograms. New Hampshire women can’t trust Scott Brown, and his record is move evidence that he is wrong for New Hampshire.”

“When it comes to women’s access to healthcare, this election simply could not be more important,” said Laura Thibault, Executive Director of NARAL Pro-Choice New Hampshire. “On the ballot in New Hampshire this fall, we have two candidates with opposite records on women’s health care. Scott Brown has shown time and again that he can’t be trusted to stand up to his party and protect women’s rights, but Senator Shaheen has spent her entire career fighting for New Hampshire women. Now, we’re going to fight for her and send her back to the United States Senate.”

As Governor, Jeanne Shaheen signed into law bipartisan legislation guaranteeing insurance coverage for contraception. It was backed by 120 Republicans and 121 Democrats in the New Hampshire State House. In the Senate, she helped introduce legislation to reverse the Supreme Court’s Hobby Lobby decision in order to protect women’s access to birth control and contraception.

When Scott Brown was in the Senate, he cosponsored the Blunt Amendment, which would have allowed employers to deny women access to basic health services including contraception and even mammograms. Brown recently defended the Supreme Court’s Hobby Lobby decision, which allows certain employers to stand between women and their doctors. And as a Senator from Massachusetts, Scott Brown also repeatedly voted against the Paycheck Fairness Act, which would provide women with protections from pay discrimination.

Senator Shaheen stood strongly opposed to the Blunt Amendment and recently cosponsored the Not My Boss’s Business Act to reverse the Supreme Court’s disastrous Hobby Lobby decision because she knows women should be making their healthcare decisions with their doctors, not their employers. Jeanne Shaheen is also an original cosponsor of the Paycheck Fairness Act and worked to fight pay discrimination as Governor when she successfully strengthened the state’s equal pay protections.

Events highlighting the difference between Jeanne Shaheen and Scott Brown on each of these issues will take place throughout the week and across New Hampshire.