Trump Right on US Muslim Cheers for 9/11; But Got # Wrong – Wash Post Cites Schlussel
By Debbie Schlussel

UPDATE, December 2, 2015, 12:30 a.m.: Watch this CBS News report video featuring reporter, Pablo Guzman, confirming Muslims cheering on 9/11. Was he lying, too? Nope . . .

**** UPDATE: Looks like Trump was exactly right about the location, wrong about the number (which is irrelevant in my book). The Washington Post fact checker doesn’t read his own paper or look at its database (that is not online). This is done often by reporters and editors at mainstream media, including pan-Muslim Nolan Finley of The Detroit Newsistan. From the September 18, 2001 edition of the Washington Post:

In Jersey City, within hours of two jetliners’ plowing into the World Trade Center, law enforcement authorities detained and questioned a number of people who were allegedly seen celebrating the attacks and holding tailgate-style parties on rooftops while they watched the devastation on the other side of the river.

Not “thousands,” but good enough to establish his point that there are plenty of Muslims on U.S. soil who cheer their fellow co-religionists’ jihad and mass murder of Americans. Not news to any of us. More incidents of U.S. Muslims cheering the 9/11 attacks, deatailed below.

**** SCROLL DOWN FOR OTHER UPDATES ****

Donald Trump is under media fire for correctly saying that Muslims on American soil cheered the 9/11 attacks. He got the story right, but the city (and number of protesters) wrong. In fact, Muslims in America in at least three cities cheered the 9/11 attacks–in Paterson, New Jersey, Dearbornistan, Michigan, and West Bloomfield, Michigan. Students at a Dearbornistan school later wore sweatshirts they made glorifying the 9/11 attacks, and, also in Dearbornistan, Muslim Ford Motor Company factory workers cheered and high-fived the 9/11 attacks. The Washington Post “Fact Checker” column cites to DebbieSchlussel.com regarding this.

* Paterson, New Jersey: Trump claimed that Muslims in Jersey City, New Jersey cheered the 9/11 attacks on the day they happened. Jersey City’s Mayor denies that. But that’s because the cheering happened not in Jersey City, but in Paterson, New Jersey–the city with the nation’s largest population of Palestinians.

As I noted on this site, several years ago, MTV reported that this happened. I wish I still had the MTV video of the story. I watched it on MTV back when it aired. They did a whole segment on it. It’s strange that there is no record of it online, but as I always say, just because it is not online, doesn’t mean it didn’t happen. There are those few occasional news stories that are either pulled or haven’t been put online in the first place because they are older (or in paid archives of newspapers–not the case here). I never found this story documented online, as I looked several times over the years. But MTV–I believe MTV News–did a story on it several years ago. From what I recall, MTV did not have the footage of the actual protest in support of the 9/11 attacks and towers falling, but they showed what happened and interviewed people who said they were there, including people in some credible positions in Paterson–I believe from law enforcement. The network also showed damage that was done in front of what I believe was the Paterson town city hall and how railings and cement (or other material) trash cans in front of the city/town hall were damaged, too, by the people–Muslims–who cheered.

I’m not saying MTV is the most credible source in the world, but it is a liberal source sympathetic to Muslims. MTV is more likely to report that something like that didn’t happen rather than the other way around, so that’s why I found it noteworthy. Remember, many people who worked for MTV and MTV News now work for more mainstream news sources like ABC News, etc.

The Washington Post “Fact Checker” Glenn Kessler’s highly-slanted column is filled with more left-wing opinion on my website than fact but states:

Some conspiracy Web sites cite a column by controversial blogger and commentator Debbie Schlussel, who is highly critical of Muslims, that makes a reference to an MTV broadcast of protests and riots in Paterson, N.J.; this claim has never been authenticated.

Yup, if you tell the truth, you’re “controversial” and the object of affection of “conspiracy web sites.” I asked the Washington Post opinionist-posing-as-fact-checker what constitutes a “conspiracy web site,” but, though he responded, he didn’t provide me with a definition. And I guess he also missed these examples below (which I’ll send him–let’s see if he corrects the record).

* Dearbornistan, Michigan: As I previously reported on this site, Muslim factory workers at Ford Motor Company cheered, high-fived, and otherwise applauded the 9/11 attacks. What’s even more disgusting is that Ford kept the Muslims who cheered the murder of 3,000 Americans employed for three years thereafter, and when the company finally fired them, the Muslims sued. A snippet of my report:

Last week, Ford Motor Company finally won a suit by a former employee, Arab Muslim Saleem Shariff, who cheered the 9/11 attacks and high-fived fellow Arab Muslim employees on the day of the attacks. Three others–Khalid Ali Alward, Abdul Mohamed, and Saleh Mohamed Omar–also Arab Muslims, participated and did the same thing: they cheered and high-fived the 9/11 attacks. And they all sued when they were not hired for permanent employment, but only Shariff appealed after losing at the trial court level. . . . I’m glad Ford won, but only kinda glass-four-fifths-empty glad. You see, I’m perplexed as to why a major American automotive manufacturer with a name brand to protect, would keep in its employ four employees who cheered the wholesale murder of nearly 3,000 Americans. Ford didn’t fire Shariff or the others until 2004, three years after he cheered and high-fived the attacks. Why not? There is simply no excuse for it. . . . Part of the problem is the union–the UAW, which also didn’t have a problem with these schmucks praising the attacks on America, and pressured Ford to keep them on.

* West Bloomfield, Michigan: On 9/11, a doctor sent out an e-mail that he or his nurse was present at the now-defunct “The Sheikh” restaurant in West Bloomfield, Michigan, picking up an order of food on 9/11 and observed the Muslim waiters there cheering as the TV screens in the establishment replayed scenes of the 9/11 attacks happening. Thereafter, most of the mainstream media bought owner Noureddine “Dean” Hachem’s claim that the story was made up and that it was a rumor, and Hachem sued the doctor.

But what happened in the lawsuit and thereafter is enlightening and wasn’t reported or followed in the media, except by me. In the lawsuit, Hachem mysteriously “lost” all credit card receipts for most of the morning and lunchtime of 9/11, preventing the defendant doctor from putting forth witnesses who saw the waiters cheer at “The Sheikh.” I reviewed the depositions of Hachem and others in the case, and that’s where Hachem’s answers are evasive and his story falls apart, indicating the cheers for 9/11 likely did happen at his restaurant and he was trying to cover it up. That’s in addition to the failure to produce the credit card receipts of the time in question. Moreover, Hachem lost he lawsuit. But while the lawsuit was proceeding, Hachem, a Shi’ite Muslim immigrant and Hezbollah supporter, was indicted and went to federal prison for running an international car theft ring, which U.S. Customs agents believed was funding Islamic terrorism including Hezbollah, as funds from the scheme apparently went to a mysterious bank account in Lebanon.

Hachem received a shorter sentence with agreement from the Justice Department because he provided “inside information” on Islamic terrorism. Incredibly, on the first anniversary of 9/11, FOX News, CNN, NBC News, and other news outlets, reported on Hachem’s story as an example of alleged anti-Muslim backlash. None reported on the story falling apart on during Hachem’s failed lawsuit or about his indictment for the terror-linked car theft ring. Even more incredible, Hachem and his wife owned many restaurants in Detroit Metro Airport and had unscreened and unfettered access to the airport and its vicinity, which they could have easily used to get weapons, explosives, or anything else on planes. Yup, exactly the access you want to give to a Hezbollah Muslim who ran an international auto theft ring linked to terrorism.

Ironically, after Hachem went to prison and his “The Sheikh” restaurant closed, it became “La Shish,” whose new owner, Talal Chahine, another Shi’ite Muslim, became a fugitive after he was indicted for using La Shish to finance Hezbollah to the tune of over $20 million. La Shish is now closed, too, and Chahine is in Lebanon, where he is Hezbollah royalty and loved by the Ayatollahs of Iran who direct it.

And, last, but not least, a lawsuit documents that Muslims at Ford Motor Company cheered the 9/11 attacks. And there were many reports that Muslims in Dearbornistan and Dearbornistan Heights cheered the 9/11 attacks, particularly those in those cities’ public schools.

* Dearbornistan, Michigan: While there aren’t hard news reports of the cheers, there are plenty of mainstream news stories on the 15 Muslim students at Edsel Ford High School who, in 2010, made sweatshirts glorifying the 9/11 attacks. They admitted that they made the pro-9/11 sweatshirts as a belligerent act in revenge for how they felt Muslims were portrayed in media reports on the Christmas Day Undiebomber attack on a Northwest flight to Detroit. What–Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab was a Wiccan? Oh, and by the way, disciplinary action by the school was reversed because the Muslim students’ 300 Muslim parents and supporters whined at a school meeting and defended their kids’ actions. As I noted at the time,

So, yes, Donald Trump was wrong about the location and number (he said “thousands”) of Muslims who cheered the 9/11 attacks there, but that’s just logistics. He was definitely right about Muslims applauding 9/11 on U.S. soil, and it happened all over the place. The location is a distinction without a difference.

Does it make a difference whether or not the Muslims who cheered the 9/11 attacks were in Jersey City, New Jersey or in a Ford Motor Company factory or school in Dearborn, Michigan?

Nope.

**** UPDATE: The Washington Post “Fact Checker” Glenn Kessler posted an update citing this column:

Note: We originally linked to a conspiracy web site about the MTV claim but then updated with a direct link to Schlussel’s column. She objected to the suggestion she was conspiracy-minded and on Nov. 23 posted an update citing some examples of Muslims in the United States applauding the attacks, such as four Ford factory workers in Dearborn, Mich. “MTV did do a story on it,” she wrote in an email. “I’m not saying MTV is the most credible source in the world, but it is a liberal source.” She says she no longer has a copy of a MTV broadcast and it cannot be found online. “It’s strange that there is no record of it online, but as I always say, just because it is not online, doesn’t mean it didn’t happen.” We have asked MTV and Viacom, owner of MTV, for comment.

**** UPDATE: As I noted in previous posts, several Muslim women in Dearbornistan scheduled their C-sections and induced delivery dates at Oakwood Hospital in 2002 and 2003 to occur on 9/11, since that’s a day of celebration for them. This included a Muslim nurse who worked there.