Jeff's Record
Jeff Judson is the only candidate for Texas House District 121 with a record of standing up for the conservative cause and fighting for low taxes and limited government.

A Record of Fighting Big Government

Jeff Judson is a 7th generation Texan who has been a consistent leader and activist for smaller, more effective government, serving as a congressional staffer, think tank president, local elected official, and public policy consultant. An effective leader, Jeff was recognized as one of the “Most Influential People in San Antonio” by the San Antonio Express News because of his leadership in twice defeating wasteful light rail projects in San Antonio in 2000 and 2015.

Jeff is an associate with Kaeppel Consulting, LLC, which helps private companies and government agencies cut down on wasteful bureaucracy, increase productivity by offering solutions to improve workplace morale and create a culture of constant improvement– the same changes he wants to make in state government.

As a public policy consultant, he has represented a number of Fortune 500 firms seeking freedom from government regulatory burdens by working with grassroots organizations, academics, and think tanks to change the national debate. Jeff works exclusively on free market, limited government issues in his consultancy by recruiting and managing the work of a national network of conservative academics, think tanks, and grassroots organization to inform the public debate on issues of interest to free-market-oriented clients.

30 Years of Dedicated Conservative Activism

Jeff has extensive experience working in government, grassroots movements, and the Republican Party. He was elected four times to the Olmos Park City Council, where he voted to cut taxes every year but improve core services like police and street maintenance. He served as President of the Texas Public Policy Foundation for eight years, building it into one of the most influential limited government, free market think tanks in the U.S, and until recently served as a Senior Fellow and Board member of the nationally influential Heartland Institute and on the board of the San Antonio Tea Party. Jeff is also a committeeman on the State Republican Executive Committee representing Texas Senate District 25.

Strong, Texas Family Values

Jeff was born in San Antonio, attended Marshall and Clark High Schools, and graduated with a degree in Philosophy from the University of Texas, where he worked his way through college waiting tables and selling insurance. He and his wife Margaret were married in 1989 and have three children, with the oldest enrolled at Texas A&M University. Both Jeff and Margaret are very active members in their community and in their church at Grace Northridge.

Many generations of history in District 121

Jeff Judson’s service to District 121 as State Representative will continue his family’s long history of pioneering leadership in manufacturing and public service in the district and in Bexar County.

Jeff’s family moved to Texas in the 1840s and founded the Hard Scrabble Ranch near where the current Judson Road is located in District 121. Jeff’s great-grandfather, J.W. along with his brother, Moses formed the Judson Bros. Well Drilling Co. when they were in their early 20s, eventually bringing in the first flowing artesian water well for the Kampmann family who owned the Lone Star Brewery. Jeff’s great-great uncle Moses served on the Bexar Co. School Board; later named the Judson Independent School district in his honor. In 1910 J.W. acquired what later became the Judson Candy Co, and his son George Judson, Sr. served as CEO until his death in 1963, and his son George Judson, Jr. (Jeff’s father) as General Manager until the mid-1970s. Many people in San Antonio remember taking field trips as school children through the Judson Candy Factory, then located on South Flores.