Daveed Gartenstein-Ross
Dr. Daveed Gartenstein-Ross is a senior fellow at FDD. Described by The International Herald Tribune as “a rising star in the counterterrorism community,” his career has focused on understanding how terrorist groups and other violent non-state actors (VNSAs) are changing the world, and fashioning creative solutions to this growing challenge. Daveed is also the chief executive officer of the private firm Valens Global, and an associate fellow at the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism – The Hague. Previous positions he has held include senior advisor to the director of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s Office for Community Partnerships, fellow with Google’s think tank Jigsaw, and adjunct assistant professor in Georgetown University’s Security Studies Program.

As a practitioner, some of Daveed’s recent projects have included: delivering regular briefings and assessments to U.S. government agencies on such topics as ISIS’s European attack network, the implications of the failed coup in Turkey on counterterrorism efforts, and the strategic implications of the Libyan civil war; organizing and facilitating a conference in Nigeria as an EU-appointed Strategic Communication Expert, helping civil society activists understand militant groups’ use of social media and forge a strategic action plan for countering it; mapping the online counter-ISIS narrative space for Jigsaw/Google’s Redirect Method, which was designed to divert users who may be susceptible to the jihadist group’s propaganda, and provide them with a different perspective on ISIS; serving as a subject-matter consultant on militant groups during live hostage negotiations; designing and delivering lectures and training for U.S. government personnel through such programs as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Individual Terrorism Awareness Course and the Naval Postgraduate School’s Leader Development and Education for Sustained Peace program; and designing and leading strategic simulations exploring the competition between VNSAs and state actors for major academic institutions, such as Johns Hopkins University.

Daveed has testified on his areas of core competency before the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives over a dozen times, as well as before the Canadian House of Commons. He has also served as an expert witness on terrorism and sub-state violence in numerous federal legal cases, including criminal, civil, and asylum cases. He is frequently a featured speaker at events throughout the globe, including delivering keynote speeches at the U.S. Army Special Operations Command Commander’s Conference, the University of Southern California’s National Center for Risk and Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events (CREATE), and the Global Futures Forum. Other venues where he has spoken include the Royal United Services Institute (London), the Kazakhstan Institute for Strategic Studies (Kazakhstan), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Minerva Research Initiative, and the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting.

Known for his rigorous scholarship, Daveed is the author or volume editor of twenty-three books and monographs. He has published widely in the popular and academic press, including in The New York Times, The Washington Post, Foreign Affairs, Foreign Policy, The Atlantic, and Terrorism & Political Violence. He is also a member of the Editorial Board of the leading peer-reviewed journal Studies in Conflict & Terrorism. Daveed holds a PhD in world politics from the Catholic University of America and a JD from the New York University School of Law, and can conduct research in five languages.