Tancredo: Threats on Islam sites could deter terrorists
Washington – Republican presidential hopeful Tom Tancredo says the best way he can think of to deter a nuclear terrorist attack on the U.S. is to threaten to retaliate by bombing Islamic holy sites.

The Colorado congressman on Tuesday told about 30 people at a town-hall meeting in Osceola, Iowa, that he believes such a terrorist attack could be imminent and that the U.S. needs to hurry up and think of a way to stop it.

“If it is up to me, we are going to explain that an attack on this homeland of that nature would be followed by an attack on the holy sites in Mecca and Medina,” Tancredo said at the Family Table restaurant. “Because that’s the only thing I can think of that might deter somebody from doing what they otherwise might do.”

Mecca and Medina, in Saudi Arabia, are Islam’s holiest cities.

A Washington-based Islamic civil rights and advocacy group responded Thursday, calling Tancredo’s statement “unworthy of anyone seeking public office in the United States.”

“Perhaps it’s evidence of a long-shot candidate grasping at straws and trying to create some kind of a controversy that might appeal to a niche audience of anti-Muslim bigots,” said Ibrahim Hooper, spokesman for the Council on American-Islamic Relations.

This isn’t the first time Tancredo has suggested such action.

In 2005, he drew international criticism after he told a radio talk-show host that “you could take out” Islamic holy sites if terrorists ever launched a nuclear attack against the United States.

BARABOO, Wis.

16-year-old convicted of killing principal

A high school student was convicted Thursday of fatally shooting his principal three times as homecoming festivities were about to begin last fall.

The jury deliberated for nearly 6 1/2 hours after closing arguments Thursday before deciding on the first-degree intentional-homicide charge against Eric Hainstock, 16. He could face up to life in prison.

Prosecutors argued earlier Thursday that Hainstock shot Weston Schools principal John Klang on purpose Sept. 29, lied about the gun going off during a struggle and has been trying to blame others ever since.

The teen’s attorneys conceded he killed Klang but said he was a troubled kid and didn’t mean to kill the one person he hoped would listen to his problems.

LEXINGTON, Ky.

Airport can’t be sued for fatal Comair crash

A judge ruled Thursday that a Kentucky airport cannot be sued for last summer’s deadly Comair plane crash, dealing a blow to the airline’s efforts to divide blame and potentially millions of dollars in damages.

Judge James Ishmael declared Blue Grass Airport could not be held legally responsible because it enjoys “sovereign immunity” as part of the merged Lexington-Fayette County government.

The Aug. 27 crash killed 49 people, and Comair is the primary defendant in many liability lawsuits filed on behalf of the victims.

The airline countersued the airport, arguing it is partially to blame because of poor runway signs and markings that might have contributed to the pilots’ attempt to depart from a runway that was too short.

Comair’s case against the airport’s control tower, which is run by the Federal Aviation Administration, is still pending.

LOS ANGELES

Minister convicted on marijuana charges

A minister accused of distributing marijuana through his church was convicted on a drug charge Thursday.

The Rev. Craig X. Rubin, 41, faces up to four years and eight months in prison for possessing marijuana for sale, said Jane Robison, a district attorney’s spokes woman.

Rubin and some 400 members of Temple 420 say marijuana is a religious sacrament. They burn and smoke pot during services.

Rubin said he won’t appeal his conviction.

“If my society believes I’m a danger and a threat, it’s better off without me,” he said.

NEW YORK

Band looks to kazoos to make record buzz

Members of a 1980s funk and disco group were preparing Thursday to lead an attempt to break the world record for the largest kazoo ensemble.

Organizers were hoping to sign up 3,000 impromptu players for the evening attempt in Harlem, which was to be led by the female vocalists of Skyy. Their 1980 song “Skyyzoo” featured the sound of kazoos being played for some gentle backup.

The current kazoo record was set New Year’s Eve in Rochester, where 2,600 kazooers gathered to play before midnight.

PARIS

13,000 evacuated in Canary Islands fires

Thousands of vacationing tourists and homeowners were forced to flee ahead of raging wildfires that have engulfed parts of the Canary Islands since the weekend.

Local officials said at least 13,000 people evacuated homes, hotels, campgrounds and other areas of the seven Canaries, Spanish territory in the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of southern Morocco.

More than 86,000 acres have been burned or otherwise affected by the fires since Friday, mostly on the islands of Tenerife and Gran Canaria, according to a spokeswoman for the islands’ government who was not allowed to be quoted by name.

The flames, which were “stable” but still not under control Wednesday, were stoked by winds in excess of 40 mph and temperatures over 104 degrees, the spokeswoman said.

At least 150 homes have burned. There have been no reports of casualties.