Colorado senators ask NASA not to cancel manned space flight program
COLORADO SPRINGS — Colorado’s two U.S. senators today urged NASA Administrator Charles Bolden to re-evaluate the proposed cancellation of the Constellation program.

The plea by Sens. Mark Udall and Michael Bennet was delivered in a face-to-face meeting with Bolden in Washington as the National Space Symposium began here. The two also presented a letter stating their concerns for Bolden to give to President Barack Obama.

Udall described himself as “guardedly optimistic” by Bolden’s comments that he is committed to human spaceflight and to being flexible in working with Congress as the $19 billion NASA budget is debated.

Colorado could stand to lose several thousand jobs and an estimated $300 million in revenues annually if the Constellation program — which aims to return humans to the moon and beyond — is canceled as proposed by Obama in his fiscal year 2011 budget, according to a recent economic development study.

Lockheed Martin Space Systems based in south Jefferson County is the prime contractor for the Orion crew vehicle, a key Constellation component.

“I pressed him on the importance of jobs associated with Constellation and our leadership in space,” Udall said. He added he also raised concerns about national security.

Udall said he suggested a restructuring of the Constellation program so “some Orion-like effort could move forward” and Lockheed Martin can remain “up and doing what it is doing right now.”

Udall said he agreed with Bolden that NASA’s approach to human spaceflight is “financially unsustainable,” but asked for a clearer longterm strategy.

Bolden “understood the importance of these jobs to Colorado,” Udall said, and urged the senators to wait until Obama explains more of his vision for NASA in a “space session” on Thursday in Florida.

In a statement released today, Gov. Bill Ritter also urged Obama to not cancel Constellation.

“To abruptly change direction like this will lead to significant dislocation and distress at a precarious time for the economies of our nation and state,” Ritter said.

Ann Schrader: 303-954-1967 or aschrader@denverpost.com.