Lessons in bear country
Valley, Wyo.

Audra Morrow, who grew up in Boulder and spent five glorious and quite cosmopolitan years living in San Diego, never imagined any of this. But here she is in the middle of the wild, rugged and stunningly remote Absaroka Mountains of northwestern Wyoming, flinging open the door of the tiny schoolhouse and leading the entire student body – this year it consists of four second-graders – out for recess.

She stands at the open door for a few moments, near the shelf containing three canisters of pepper spray, and she carefully scans the thickets of sage and pine that surround the old white school.

At the moment, there are no grizzly bears in the shrubs, and this is good.

Morrow relaxes and, with a cheerful “OK, go ahead!” she sends the kids scurrying out to play. She hopes that when a gigantic bear comes snorting and prowling around the school – and on a regular basis they do – the new, 8-foot high, heavy-gauge metal fence around the schoolyard will be sturdy enough to keep the beast out.

Back inside later on, she smiles and tells of the bear drill. It’s a well-practiced procedure at this school and a few others in grizzly country.

“First,” she says, “I yell ‘Bear!”‘

The moment the word leaves her lips, even though she was just explaining the drill to a visitor, two of her students spin around and look at her. Then their eyes dart to the window. And then, satisfied that this is not the actual thing, they resume coloring.

“After I yell,” Morrow continues, “the kids know to stop whatever they’re doing and walk, definitely not run, into formation. I stay between them and the bear, and they get into the school.”

She laughs then, a nervous chuckle, at her own description of the bear drill.

“I guess I’d never thought too much about that part,” she says. “The part where I stay between the kids and the bear.”

Morrow lives with two loud dogs in a small cabin next to the schoolhouse. She never walks outside without one of the canisters of bear spray. Last school year, her first at the Wyoming Standard School, she and her students had 10 grizzly bear sightings.

One, before the fence went up, was a young cub that came running down the dirt driveway. Everyone walked – briskly, perhaps – back into the school, knowing the mother bear was probably not far behind.

“I was pretty new,” says Morrow, who just began her second year at the school. “At first I thought it was a big fuzzy dog.”

The sightings culminated in the spring when, from inside the early-1900s schoolhouse, teacher and students watched an adult grizzly ambush an elk along the Shoshone River just 100 feet behind the school.

“We didn’t see the grizzly get the elk, but it chased it into a thicket. And the elk never came out,” Morrow says.

Something, she figured, had to be done. With great cooperation from the Wyoming Game and Fish Department and lots of volunteers – mostly the rancher parents of the schoolkids – the bear fence went up.

As the grizzly bear likely nears the end of its protection under the federal Endangered Species Act in the lower 48 states – it could be removed as early as this fall – living among the large, aggressive animals has become routine in this part of the country. The bears once numbered as few as 180 or so, but now, after decades of almost total protection, their numbers in Yellowstone National Park, just 20 miles to the west, and the surrounding areas have grown to more than 600.

Leading the charge to stave off grizzly bear extinction in Wyoming has been Mark Bruscino, the Fish and Game Department’s bear biologist. He is stationed in Cody, 35 miles to the northeast of Morrow’s Valley school.

“We’re finding bears in places where they haven’t been seen in 60 years,” Bruscino says.

Two years ago, Bruscino says, he live-trapped two grizzly cubs that were hanging around Wapiti Elementary School, 20 miles west of Cody. Then the trap was reset for the mother – successfully.

Wapiti Elementary School has had a bear fence since 2002. As a reminder of what lurks beyond, a huge grizzly hide, complete with head, is nailed to the wall just outside the principal’s office.

“That one,” says Wapiti teacher Angie Terri, “was a problem bear. It was hanging around the school, and then it started hanging around the post office just down the street.”

Bruscino says he doesn’t want any more bears to end up on a wall. In Wyoming, the bears get one strike, or confrontation with people. The bear is trapped and relocated by the Game and Fish Department. In the second confrontation, the bear is shot.

“Grizzlies around here in the 1970s were headed for extinction,” Bruscino says. “We reversed that and brought them back in a big way. The challenge now is to maintain a recovered population.”

Thirty-five miles away, down a winding road through some of the most majestic scenery America has left, Audra Morrow stands in the doorway of her schoolhouse and smiles.

She loves the bears. Even the big grizzly that stood on its hind legs recently and put its gigantic paws on her cabin window while the teacher was inside.

“I e-mail my friends back in San Diego,” she says. “I say, ‘Guess what we saw at recess today?”‘

Contact Rich Tosches at rtosches@denverpost.com.