Kicking and screaming, Colorado Republicans move closer to supporting Donald Trump
CLEVELAND — Donald Trump hit one of his big applause lines in his acceptance speech Thursday night at the Republican National Convention and his screaming fans jumped to their feet.

The Colorado delegation, for the most part, remained in their seats. Some clapped. Others sat arms crossed.

“Look at stubborn Colorado,” a Georgia delegate and Trump campaign surrogate snorted from behind the delegation’s seats.

For the entire Cleveland convention, the Republican Party wanted to exhibit party unity, but Colorado helped spoil it. And the state delegation’s lukewarm reception to Trump’s big speech — which lasted more than 70 minutes and featured the nominee vowing emphatically to rescue the nation from a long list of grave ills — proved conspicuous.

But even if they weren’t cheering, many of the Republican activists appeared willing to forgive and forget, whether for party loyalty or fervent distaste for presumptive Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton.

“What we had here was a family affair, and we are supposed to be able to have these disagreements and walk out of here all in the same family,” said George Teal, a Ted Cruz supporter and Castle Rock councilman. “I’m a Republican. I’ve always been a Republican. I’m not going running somewhere else.”

Don Olmstead didn’t stand or clap in his seat. “I am going to vote for my conscience, which means I’m going to vote none of the above,” the El Paso County delegate said. Nothing Trump could say from the stage mattered to him. “The way he ran his campaign, it’s too late. He doesn’t have any core principles.”

Alex Wong, Getty Images Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump (Center-L) and Republican vice presidential candidate Mike Pence (Center-R) stand with their families at the end of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

Jim Watson, AFP/Getty Images Balloons fall after Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump spoke and accepted the party nomination on the last day of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016, in Cleveland, Ohio.

Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump and Republican vice presidential candidate Mike Pence stand with their families on the fourth day of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

Jim Watson, AFP/Getty Images US Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump (C L) and vice presidential candidate Mike Pence (C R) are joined by their families at the end of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016, in Cleveland, Ohio.

Joe Raedle, Getty Images Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump points to the crowd as he delivers a speech during the evening session on the fourth day of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.



John Minchillo, The Associated Press Supporters watch Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump speak on a outdoor screen in downtown on Thursday, July 21, 2016, in Cleveland, during the final day of the Republican convention.

Evan Vucci, The Associated Press Republican Presidential Candidate Donald Trump, speaks during the final day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Thursday, July 21, 2016.

J. Scott Applewhite, The Associated Press A delegate dances during a music break in the final day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Thursday, July 21, 2016.

Alex Wong, Getty Images Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump points to the crowd as he delivers his speech Thursday night at the Republican National Convention in Cleveland.

Jim Watson, AFP/ Getty Images Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump (R) looks on as his daughter Ivanka Trump leaves the stage on the last day of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016, in Cleveland, Ohio.



J. Scott Applewhite, The Associated Press Ivanka Trump, daughter of Republican Presidential Nominee Donald J. Trump, speaks during the final day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Thursday, July 21, 2016.

Carolyn Kaster, The Associated Press Rep. Marsha Blackburn, R-Tenn., speaks during the final day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Thursday, July 21, 2016.

John Moore, Getty Images Reince Priebus, chairman of the Republican National Committee, delivers a speech during the evening session on the fourth day of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

Win McNamee, Getty Images A delegate holds up a sign that reads "Trump is Americas Great Ball of Fire" during the fourth day of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

Brendan Smialowski, AFP/Getty Images Singer Heavenly Joy sings during at the Republican National Convention at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio on July 21, 2016.



Jim Watson, AFP/Getty Images US Representative Marsha Blackburn of Tennessee speaks on the last day of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016, in Cleveland, Ohio.

Jeff J Mitchell, Getty Images Delegates dance during the the evening session of the fourth day of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

Jim Watson, AFP/Getty Images The President of Liberty University, Jerry Falwell, Jr., speaks on the last day of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016, in Cleveland, Ohio.

Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images Pastor Mark Burns, Co-Founder & CEO of The NOW Television Network, gestures as he delivers a speech on the fourth day of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

John Locher, The Associated Press California delegate Jake Byrd reacts as New York delegate Bob Hayssen holds up a Trump flag during the second day session of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Tuesday, July 19, 2016.



Carolyn Kaster, The Associated Press New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie speaks during the second day session of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Tuesday, July 19, 2016.

John Moore, Getty Images California delegate Joy Neugebauer holds a sign in support of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump on the second day of the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

J. Scott Applewhite, The Associated Press Tiffany Trump, daughter of Republican Presidential Candidate Donald Trump, speaks during the second day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Tuesday, July 19, 2016.

Carol Kaster, The Associated Press California delegates react during the second day session of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Tuesday, July 19, 2016.

Robyn Beck, Getty Images Speaker Paul Ryan waves to the audience on the second day of the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.



Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images Delegates hold signs that read "Trump Digs Coal" on the second day of the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

Robyn Beck, Getty Images A delegate reacts during the roll call of states on the second day of the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2016 at Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

Jim Watson, AFP/Getty Imges Donald Trump, Jr., son of Donald Trump, speaks on the second day of the Republican National Convention at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland on July 19, 2016.

Jeff Swensen, Getty Images Sen. Shelley Moore Capito (R-WV) gives two thumbs up after delivering a speech on the second day of the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

John Moore, Getty Images Reince Priebus, chairman of the Republican National Committee, bangs the gavel officially ending the second day of the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.



Dominick Reuter, AFP/Getty Images A CODEPINK demonstrator struggles with convention attendees after unveiling a protest poster on the second day of the Republican National Convention at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland on July 19, 2016.

Matt Rourke, The Associated Press Eric Laykin from Los Angeles yells during the second day session of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Tuesday, July 19, 2016.

Alex Wong, Getty Images Former Republican presidential candidate Ben Carson delivers a speech on the second day of the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

Win McNamee, Getty Images Delegates take part in the roll call on the second day of the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio. Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump received the number of votes needed to secure the party's nomination. An estimated 50,000 people are expected in Cleveland, including hundreds of protesters and members of the media. The four-day Republican National Convention kicked off on July 18.

Jeff Swensen, Getty Images Former US Senator Rick Santorum speaks with Republican Vice Presidential candidate, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence on the second day of the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.



Timothy A. Clary, AFP/Getty Images Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell steps off stage after addressing the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2016 at Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump introduces his wife Melania on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland.

Alex Wong, Getty Images Delegates pose for an official convention photograph on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland. An estimated 50,000 people are expected in Cleveland, including hundreds of protesters and members of the media. The four-day Republican National Convention kicks off on July 18.

Carolyn Kaster, Associated Press Kansas delegate Beverly Gossage cheers as Sen. Pat Roberts, R-Kan., speaks during first day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Monday, July 18, 2016.

Paul Sancya, The Associated Press Former Republican presidential candidate Sen. Bob Dole and former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich chat before the evening session on the opening day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Monday, July 18, 2016.



Win McNamee, Getty Images Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump introduces his wife Melania on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland. An estimated 50,000 people are expected in Cleveland, including hundreds of protesters and members of the media. The four-day Republican National Convention kicks off on July 18.

Matt Rourke, Associated Press Jeff Barke from Orange County, Calif., walks around the convention floor during first day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Monday, July 18, 2016.

Alex Wong, Getty Images Republican candidate for U.S. Senate Darryl Glenn delivers a speech on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland.

Joe Raedle, Getty Images Milwaukee County Sheriff David Clarke salutes the crowd prior to delivering a speech on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland. An estimated 50,000 people are expected in Cleveland, including hundreds of protesters and members of the media. The four-day Republican National Convention kicks off on July 18.

Timothy A. Clary, AFP/Getty Images Florida delegate Dana Dougherty holds a Donald Trump doll on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland. The Republican Party opened its national convention Monday, kicking off a four-day political jamboree that will anoint billionaire Donald Trump as the Republican presidential nominee.



John Moore, Getty Images Former Texas Governor Rick Perry delivers a speech on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland. An estimated 50,000 people are expected in Cleveland, including hundreds of protesters and members of the media. The four-day Republican National Convention kicks off on July 18.

Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images Andrew Christie, right, takes a photo of a delegate and his father, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie while attending the first day of the Republican National Convention along with his son Andrew Christie, right, on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland. An estimated 50,000 people are expected in Cleveland, including hundreds of protesters and members of the media. The four-day Republican National Convention kicks off on July 18.

Spencer Platt, Getty Images Donald Trump supporters attend a rally in downtown Cleveland in the first day of the Republican National Convention (RNC) on July 18, 2016, in Cleveland. An estimated 50,000 people are expected in downtown Cleveland, including hundreds of protesters and members of the media. The convention runs through July 21.

Jeff J Mitchell, Getty Images Journalists talk with a man openly carrying a gun in downtown on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 in Cleveland.

J. Scott Applewhite, The Associated Press Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani speaks during the opening day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Monday, July 18, 2016.



Justin Sullivan, Getty Images CODEPINK founder Medea Benjamin along with members of the activist group Code Pink demonstrate near the site of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 in Cleveland. Protestors are staging demonstrations outside of the Republican National Convention which starts on Monday, July 18 and runs through July 21.

Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images A delegate becomes emotional while listening to the speech of Pat Smith, mother of Sean Smith, one of the four Americans killed in the Sept. 11, 2012 terror attack on the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi, Libya, on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland.

Justin Sullivan, Getty Images Protesters march during a "Dump Trump" demonstration near the site of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016, in Cleveland. Protestors are staging demonstrations outside of the Republican National Convention which starts on Monday July 18 and runs through July 21.

J. Scott Applewhite, The Associated Press Actor Scott Baio gives two thumbs up after addressing the delegates during the opening day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Monday, July 18, 2016.

Jim Watson, AFP/Getty Images Anti-Donald Trump protesters climb over a barricade as they march through closed streets in Cleveland, near the Quicken Loans Arena site of the Republican National Convention July 18, 2016.



Spencer Platt, Getty Images Police stand around a group of conservative protesters on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016, in Cleveland. An estimated 50,000 people are expected in downtown Cleveland, including hundreds of protesters and members of the media. The convention runs through July 21.

Dominick Reuter, AFP/Getty Images A Code Pink protester is surrounded by media, security and a Bikers for Trump member trying to block her view during the evening session of the Republican National Convention at the Quicken Loans arena in Cleveland on July 18, 2016. The Republican Party opened its national convention Monday, kicking off a four-day political jamboree that will anoint billionaire Donald Trump as the Republican presidential nominee.

John Moore, Getty Images Vice presidential running mate, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence claps while listening to a speech on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland.

John Minchillo, Associated Press Members of the group Bikers for Trump watch during a rally for Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump at Settlers Landing Park on Monday, July 18, 2016, in Cleveland. The Republican National Convention that starts on Monday.

John Locher, Associated Press People cheer as delegates gather on the floor during first day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Monday, July 18, 2016.



Mark J. Terrill, Associated Press Reince Priebus, Chair of the Republican National Committee, speaks at the podium on opening day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Monday, July 18, 2016.

John Locher, Associated Press Workers prepare the stage before the opening session of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Monday, July 18, 2016.

Carolyn Kaster, Associated Press Sharon Day, co-chairwoman of the Republican National Committee, speaks during first day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Monday, July 18, 2016.

John Moore, Getty Images Tom Pauken, Republican Delegate of Texas, takes off his hat before the start of the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland.

Andrew Caballero-Reynolds, AFP/Getty Images A woman gives a high-five to a police officer outside the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 in Cleveland.



Matt Rourke, Associated Press West Virginia State Trooper Sgt. Dave Williams guards outside Quicken Loans Arena during first day of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Monday, July 18, 2016.

Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images) Karen Vaughn, whose son Aaron Vaughn, a Navy SEAL, was killed in a Chinook helicopter crash in Afghanistan, delivers a speech on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland.

Robyn Beck, AFP/Getty Images Marlana VanHoose performs the Star-Spangled Banner before the eveneing session of the opening day of the Republican National Convention at the Quicken Loans arena in Cleveland, Ohio on July 18, 2016.

Joe Raedle, Getty Images Television personality and CEO of Duck Commander, Willie Robertson speaks on the first day of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland.

Jeff J Mitchell, Getty Images Protesters gather during demonstration near the site of the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2016 in Cleveland.



Jeff J Mitchell, Getty Images Protesters gather during demonstration near the site of the Republican National Convention (RNC) on July 18, 2016 in Cleveland.

Jim Watson, AFP/Getty Images Professional Golfer Natalie Gulbis speaks during the second day of the Republican National Convention at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland on July 19, 2016.

Jeff Swensen, Getty Images Balloons fall over the crowd after Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump delivered his speech on the fourth day of the Republican National Convention on July 21, 2016 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio.

Colorado’s reactions illustrate the challenge ahead for Trump.

First, he must unite the Republican faithful, who will get him elected by knocking on doors and convincing their neighbors to support him. And then he must charm the middle-of-the-road voters, reticent from his numerous missteps, who decide elections in battleground states.

“In terms of Trump in Colorado, I imagine this will be a difficult task for him,” said Seth Masket, a political science expert at the University of Denver. “The state is competitive, but many party activists started the year disliking Trump, and the convention seems to only have reinforced those feelings. There are certainly overtures he could make, but thus far he has not seemed to invest a great deal of effort in mending fences either in Colorado or elsewhere.”

The conversation started hours before Trump’s speech on the closing night of the national convention.

U.S. Rep. Ken Buck, a Windsor Republican and the chairman of rival Ted Cruz’s Colorado campaign, put the situation in blunt terms.

“We have got to suck it up. We have got to vote for Donald Trump,” he said in morning remarks to the state delegation, less than 12 hours after the Texas senator’s contentious non-endorsement speech.

In an interview afterward, Buck said the party “needs to unify sooner rather than later.”

“We fought a good fight and we lost. And we need to keep our eye focused on what the result would be if we don’t win in November,” said Buck, who helped lead the objections at the convention that spurred the walkout. “It’s a very concerning prospect — something that should unify Republicans — to think that Hillary Clinton will be appointing a Supreme Court that will have a liberal majority for 50 or 60 years.”

Whether Colorado conservatives will embrace the message remains a concern to some Republican strategists.

“What it will take to unite the party is winning in November,” said Chris Murray, the president of the Lincoln Club of Colorado, a prominent Republican organization. “I think Donald Trump has made it really clear that he’s not interested in doing things the way they’ve been done in the party, and that includes running a convention any way a convention has been done before.”

Cruz’s speech Wednesday only riled the Colorado delegation, recalling the movement to upset Trump earlier in the week, when he told delegates to “vote their conscience” instead of vote for Trump.

“I don’t know how to get the salt in the wound out, and I was hoping Ted Cruz would be a salve over the wound. But it didn’t happen,” said Brita Horn, a Colorado delegate who supported the former candidate but now backs Trump. “That’s unfortunate. It’s like they are looking at 2020 already, as if 2016 is a lost cause.”

The Cruz speech backfired in the mind of Joel Crank, who at age 18 is the youngest delegate from Colorado. He said Cruz’s speech helped him warm to Trump. “Last night really pushed me over the edge,” he said. “I think his behavior was absolutely inappropriate.”

Patrick Davis, the Trump campaign’s Colorado director, is less concerned about lingering hard-feelings.

“I’m not so much worried,” he said from the convention floor. “I think this delegation will be 95 percent united behind Donald Trump coming out of this convention, and that last 5 percent not with us, they are going to be against Hillary Clinton.”

Whether Trump can appeal to independent voters, David Flaherty is not sure. The Louisville Republican pollster expects Trump’s economic message, criticizing trade deals and stagnant wages, to resonate in Colorado. But the others parts — his offensive comments and attacks — “that’s hard for anybody to sell because we just don’t know what those parts are because it’s just not a disciplined platform and a disciplined set of messaging.”

Overall, he said, Trump will need to focus on the issues, as he started to do in his convention speech, to appeal to swing voters.

“What voters are really looking for in the middle is to know who you are, what your qualifications are and, most importantly, what do you intend to do. And unless you answer those questions for them … they are going to be reluctant to vote for you.”

Republican U.S. Rep. Mike Coffman of Aurora sat out the convention to campaign in his district. He has not endorsed Trump, and Thursday night’s speech didn’t change that.

“This convention has been like no other that I can remember,” he said. “At nearly every event I attend, people have asked me what I think of Donald Trump. I don’t like him much, and I sure don’t trust Hillary. I’ve said it before, Donald Trump has a long way to go to earn my vote.”

Denver Post reporter Joey Bunch contributed to this report.