New RTD board member eyes the agency with suspicion
FILE -- The Regional Transportation District, RTD, started testing the west rail line,Thursday, January 3, 2013, at the Decatur Station on Federal Blvd. in Denver. (RJ Sangosti, The Denver Post)

Natalie Menten won the Regional Transportation District board of directors seat for District M and has immediately set her sights on the board's finances. (Hyoung Chang, The Denver Post)

LAKEWOOD —Natalie Menten says she is a scrounger, a penny pincher and a longtime advocate of tacking every government ledger up on the town square for public inspection.

Her pennywise inclinations came to the forefront last month, during her first official session as a member of the Regional Transportation District board, which oversees one of the more expansive — and expensive — special districts in Colorado.

Menten wanted to reconsider a $21 million contract for a new fleet of 16th Street Mall shuttle buses.

(Hyoung Chang, The Denver Post)

She lobbied the board to review the bus firm for a few more weeks, fearing RTD was paying too much for shuttles that could pose problems in the future. Most of the other members of the elected board said the company — and its products — had been properly vetted because two of the company's buses had already been operating on the mall for several months.

Menten said she wasn't trying to make trouble, especially on her first day.

"But I don't want to become immune to the idea that I'm going to be spending millions of dollars that really isn't mine," she said. "I think some people lose track of that."

Menten made her point, RTD board chairwoman Lorraine Anderson said.

Advertisement

"I would imagine she will keep all of our members and our staff on their toes," Anderson said.

History of battles

Menten has a long history of fighting local governments, earning her the praise of the free-market think tank Independence Institute. Her own website nataliementen.com — explains how to petition local governments and dives into the dangers of eminent domain.

It also preaches about the dangers of government overspending.

She pushed to get Jefferson County School District to make their finances more accessible and led the effort to repeal a grocery tax in Lakewood.

Menten's had her setbacks, however. She lost in her bid for state senate in 2008 and just fell short of winning a seat on the Lakewood City Council in 2009.

She also led the fight in 2010 for the "ugly three" — cost-cutting measures Amendments 60 and 61 and Proposition 101 — which all failed at the polls.

But in November, she defeated incumbent real estate broker Matt Cohen in a tight race to represent RTD District M.

Menten claims — and campaign finance reports confirm — she barely spent $10 during the campaign and relied instead on talking to commuters coming home from late-night shifts.

"They had a lot of concerns, and they felt no one was listening to them," Menten said.

She backs public transit, especially for the poor and those who can't rely on a car. But, she said, people are concerned that RTD is spending tax dollars on unneeded projects.

"The average voter is trying to make a living, and they are not being heard," Menten said.

Menten lives simply in a Lakewood home she shares with her dog, Earl, a bunny and three chickens. She builds her own chicken coops, using wood and wire she finds in construction waste bins.

"I am a Dumpster diver for the material I need," Menten said. "I just believe in being self-reliant and being frugal.

"Besides, I don't need much."

Turf in her front yard has been surrendered to garden beds that yield fresh vegetables in summer.

"I just think you shouldn't waste water on grass," Menten said. "And I like to know exactly what I'm eating, and I want to get the freshest produce possible. So why not grow it?"

Menten will have her work cut out for her at the RTD, say both a frequent agency critic and another new board member.

"RTD has tremendous responsibilities and the expansion of FasTracks is very complex and I don't think people quite understand the depth and breadth of it all," said Longmont's Judy Lubow, who was elected to the RTD board in November along with Menten.

RTD is complex

RTD serves at least 40 municipalities in six counties over an area of 2,000 square miles. The agency manages a $536 million budget for its current light rail and bus service operations in the metro area.

The RTD board also must keep track of the $7.4 billion FasTracks project, which officials hope will become a regionwide integrated transit system of light and commuter rail, as well as an enhanced bus corridor on U.S. 36.

No doubt RTD is complex, but the agency is also adept at keeping its financial workings as murky as possible, said former RTD chairman Jon Caldara, who is now president of the Independence Institute.

"RTD is one of the best covert governments in Colorado," Caldara said. "It's hard to get straight answers from them, and it's hard for them to tell the truth.

"If Natalie Menten can shine a light of truth on RTD's financial workings, then she will be doing a heroic job."

However, Anderson said no agency or staff is more open than RTD.

"I think our staff has done an excellent job of explaining the intricacies of our finances," Anderson said. "We have a budget that is a little more complicated than most governments."

Menten, who declined to say whether she is aligned with the Tea Party, winces at the prospect of going to Washington, D.C., on an RTD-sponsored trip.

"I'm hoping we can do what we need to do here as part of a webinar and save the taxpayers some money," she said. "The last place I want to go is Washington, D.C."

Monte Whaley: 720-929-0907, mwhaley@denverpost.com or twitter.com/montewhaley

$536 million

Regional Transportation District's annual budget for light rail and bus service in the metro area

$7.4 billion

Cost of the FasTracks project on light and commuter rail

$21 million

Cost of a new fleet of shuttle buses for the 16th Street Mall that new board member Natalie Menten questioned in her first meeting

$10

What Menten spent on her RTD board election, according to campaign-finance records