Colorado’s pitch to build Hyperloop track from Pueblo to Wyoming would cost $24 billion
Colorado’s ambitious plan to build a futuristic transportation system that would sling travelers along the Front Range and into the mountains in minutes also comes with an ambitious price tag: $24 billion.

In the state’s proposed route, named one of 10 global finalists this month by the Los Angeles-based Hyperloop One, the Rocky Mountain Hyperloop team gave that estimate for the 360 miles connecting Denver to Pueblo, Vail and Cheyenne. The routes, which include several stops, would be able to handle 45 million trips in 2040, and generate $2 billion in revenues per year, according to the state’s proposal.

The impact on the area’s economy would be much greater — thanks to the ability to transfer freight between cities and Denver International Airport — to the tune of an additional $25 billion of gross regional product by 2040, about 7 percent more than the expected GRP.

Of course, this is just a proposal and has the region thinking as big as it can as it strives to figure out how to provide convenient transportation for the state’s growing population. The report, shared with The Denver Post on Friday, was put together by the Colorado Department of Transportation, DIA, engineering firm AECOM, and the cities of Denver and Greeley.

The plan proposes a “logical first phase” of building a 40-mile track between DIA and Greeley because there are “fewer complications in terms of alignment and rights-of-way, and a connection to the highest growth areas of northern Colorado,” according to the report.

A second line would include 75 miles of track through the mountains, including a stop at Silverthorne/Dillon. The main 250-mile, north-south line between Pueblo and Cheyenne would also have stops in Colorado Springs, the Denver Tech Center, Fort Collins and elsewhere.

As CDOT executive director Shailen Bhatt previously noted, Colorado must now study the feasibility of building and funding the project. That, he said, won’t be something the state pays for.

“I’ve said all along the state is not going to be the pockets for this,” Bhatt said. “The funding model will be key.”