Senate votes no on Gitmo
WASHINGTON — The Senate on Wednesday resoundingly rejected an effort to spend $80 million to close the Guantanamo Bay prison and relocate the terrorism suspects, possibly to U.S. prisons.

Considered a setback for President Barack Obama and his pledge to close the prison by January, the vote ended a day of crossed signals and Democratic infighting, including a dust-up between California Sen. Dianne Feinstein and Colorado lawmakers.

The future of the detention facility at the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, has Democrats increasingly on the defensive over the fates of the 240 terrorism suspects detained there.

In a floor speech before Wednesday’s 90-7 Senate vote, Feinstein said she knew of one federal facility that would be a perfect fit — Supermax prison in Florence, Colo.

“It isn’t in a neighborhood. It isn’t in a community. It’s an isolated Supermax facility,” said Feinstein, standing next to a large blowup photograph of Supermax.

“This facility houses not only drug kingpins, serial murderers and gang leaders, but also terrorists who have already been convicted of crimes in this country,” she said.

“I can assure Mrs. Feinstein that my constituents near the Florence prison do, in fact, live in neighborhoods and communities and are of equal value to her constituents in California,” said Rep. Doug Lamborn, whose district is home to Supermax. The Colorado Springs Republican opposes moving terrorism suspects to the United States.

“The point is, no American community, large or small, should have to house the most dangerous people on the face of the planet, terrorists who will stop at nothing to kill any and all Americans they can,” he said.

Colorado’s senators did not embrace Feinstein’s idea, and it added to an already difficult spot in which the debate has placed them.

Democratic Sens. Mark Udall of Eldorado Springs and Michael Bennet of Denver have previously said they supported the closing of Guantanamo Bay, but they both voted Wednesday to deny the administration the $80 million to do just that until officials outline a specific plan for how to deal with the former detainees.

It’s a threading of the needle being done by dozens of other Democratic senators, many of whom used the issue as a wedge in last year’s campaign but are now faced with public concerns over the fact that some of those prisoners could be sent to federal and military prisons across the United States — a possibility that Republicans have pounded home in the past several weeks.

The critics’ case was helped Wednesday morning when FBI Director Robert Mueller told a House committee that moving the detainees to prisons in the U.S. carried risks, including the possibility that a new generation of terrorists could be recruited among other inmates.

After Colorado was highlighted on the Senate floor as a good home for the detainees, the state’s lawmakers quickly shot back.

“Military detainees should not be transported to and held at Supermax because it is not a military facility,” Bennet said in a written statement, a position echoed by Udall, who blamed Obama for failing to release a detailed plan.

“The closure of Guantanamo should not be included in this bill without a detailed plan from the administration on how to deal with the remaining detainees. The Obama administration has not yet provided such a plan,” Udall spokeswoman Tara Trujillo said in a statement.

Wednesday’s vote came on the eve of a speech in which the president will try to answer some of those questions.

In what is billed as a major national-security address, Obama will talk today about how his administration plans to handle the closing and some aspects of the detainees’ future, something his spokesman conceded could remain largely unsettled for weeks or months.

“Any administration is going to have to make (decisions) based on legal cases that are coming its way,” White House spokesman Robert Gibbs told reporters, adding that “the president hasn’t decided where some of the detainees will be transferred.”

Michael Riley: 202-662-8907 or mriley@denverpost.com