Candidate Joe Coors won't endorse Colorado abortion-ban initiative
This time around Joe Coors, now a Republican candidate for the 7th congressional district, will not endorse the personhood initiative, which would ban all abortions in the state, the campaign told the Post Wednesday.

"After its two failed attempts on the ballot, Coloradans have made their decision on this issue," campaign spokeswoman Michelle Yi said. "Joe respects the voters' decision and, for the next 90 days, will continue to focus on ideas to get our economy back on track by helping job creators start new businesses and expand their payrolls."

On Monday sponsors of the ballot initiative, which would amend the state constitution to effectively ban all abortions and some forms of birth control, turned in petitions with 112,121 signatures to Colorado's secretary of state.

They will know by Sept. 5 whether they have gathered the required 86,105 valid signatures of registered voters.

Advertisement

"It's tighter this year," Personhood USA founder Keith Mason said Wednesday. "We lost seven weeks because of legal challenges, and so we have fewer signatures than the last two times (about 131,000 in 2008 and 126,000 in 2010)."

Personhood measures to ban abortions made it on the ballot both those years, but failed with voters, 3 to 1.

"We're not pursuing endorsements," Mason said. "It doesn't bother me (Coors is) sitting out this time."

Democrats think they have a winning issue in opposing personhood.

State Rep. Joe Miklosi has called on Coffman, his rival for the 6th congressional district seat, to "explain why 70 percent of Coloradans are wrong on personhood."

"Mike Coffman and other supporters of the personhood measure clearly aren't getting the message that outlawing abortions even in cases of rape and incest is far too extreme for Colorado," Miklosi said in a statement Monday.

He also accused Coffman of hiding his support for the "radical" amendment.

"I am against all abortions, except when it is necessary to protect the life of the mother," Coffman told the Post. "Given the fact I'm running for federal office, I will not be endorsing nor opposing any state or local ballot questions."

Matt Inzeo, spokesman for the Colorado Democratic Party, said Colorado voters have turned out strongly against personhood in the past two elections and that's good news for Democratic candidates.

Coors' rival in the 7th district, U.S. Rep. Ed Perlmutter , opposes the personhood measure. And Coors, although sitting this round out, donated $1,000 to support it in 2010.

"We know that people have very strong feelings about this, and they feel strongly with us (Democrats)," said Inzeo. "The Republicans seem to be avoiding going on the record with this."

Colorado Republican Committee spokesman Justin Miller declined to comment on the personhood ballot question, leaving it, he said, for individual campaigns to decide their stance.

"The Democrats have to be careful if they're going to aggressively fight us," Mason said. "It could really hurt them in some races."

Staff writer Kurtis Lee contributed to this report.

Electa Draper: 303-954-1276, edraper@denverpost.com or twitter.com/electadraper