Colorado Republicans appreciate Obama's soft touch on immigration
WASHINGTON — Calling on the House of Representatives to finish reforming the nation's immigration laws, President Barack Obama sparked at least one of Colorado's House Republicans to his feet.

"It is time to heed the call of business leaders, labor leaders, faith leaders and law enforcement — and fix our broken immigration system," Obama said. "Republicans and Democrats in the Senate have acted. I know that members of both parties in the House want to do the same ... Let's get immigration reform done this year."

Rep. Cory Gardner, R-Yuma, stood to applaud. He was mostly alone amid a sea of seated, dark-suited conservative colleagues.

"I think we can all agree that the system is broken," Gardner said after the speech.

Gardner, who was elected by rural farmers and south suburban Denver conservatives alike, was outspoken in his chagrin last summer that GOP leadership didn't push harder on immigration.

He told voters at that time that Republicans owed them an alternative to the comprehensive package passed by the U.S. Senate.

Gardner doesn't support a path to citizenship. He wants the border proven secure by an independent body outside the executive branch before even starting the conversation about what to do with the 11 million undocumented people living in the United States.

He wants to pass immigration reform in small pieces, including a border security plan coupled with reforms to the guest worker program.

Advertisement

Rep. Mike Coffman, R-Aurora, didn't grant an interview after the speech but in an e-mailed statement said he appreciated the president's softer touch on the issue.

Coffman told hundreds of constituents last year that he favored a pathway to citizenship but after a long list of qualifications that included first achieving certified border security.

"Previously, he (Obama) has laid out specific provisions for him to sign legislation," Coffman said. "I think it was positive that he did not mention any in his speech tonight since House Republicans favor a step-by-step approach."

From the other side of the aisle, Rep. Ed Perlmutter agreed.

"It wasn't a hammer," said the Jefferson County Democrat who has long supported comprehensive reform. "But he did challenge us to get something done."

GOP leaders will huddle at the end of the week to discuss their party's approach to immigration reform, which will likely include small bills to secure the border and create a guest-worker program.

The Senate's comprehensive bill, which all at once creates a guest-worker program, secures the border and creates an eventual path to citizenship for some undocumented people living in the United States, won't likely get airing in the House.

Sen. Mark Udall, a Democrat, said Tuesday he felt confident the House and Senate could find "a sweet spot" and take this "divisive issue off the table" by the end of the year.

Allison Sherry: 202-662-8907, asherry@denverpost.com or twitter.com/allisonsherry