Pathetic showing for the state GOP
Delegate to voter ratio in Colorado wsa embarrassing for GOP

Republican delegates gather at last weekend's GOP state convention in Colorado Springs. (Kathryn Scott Osler, The Denver Post)

Congratulations, Colorado Republican Party. Your process for selecting delegates to the national convention in July ranked among the least representative of all states and territories.

And now there is hard data to back up this conclusion, thanks to first-rate research by FiveThirty-Eight's Harry Enten.

Enten "collected all the votes cast and delegates allotted in every contest so far" to discover whether it was true that "some Republican votes are worth a lot more than others."

The answer: Indeed they are. Some are worth a whole lot more than others. In contests where relatively few voters participated, the ratio of convention delegates to voters has been as ridiculously low as 1 to 52 — which was the case in the Northern Mariana Islands (nine delegates). But in contests where lots of Republicans voted relative to the delegates allotted, the ratio has been as large as 1 delegate to 95,601 voters — the situation in Illinois.

Enten created a chart including every contest, even separating out congressional districts when that was how delegates were assigned.

Advertisement

So where does Colorado fall on this spectrum? Enten doesn't say because he excluded "states that award delegates through conventions, which involve a multi-tiered process that doesn't really include 'votes.' " That's understandable, but it doesn't mean we can't do the math.

About 60,000 Republicans attended their Colorado caucus on March 1, the start of a process that resulted in 34 delegates being chosen last weekend at the party convention in Colorado Springs. So the delegate-to-voter ratio was roughly 1 to 1,714 — among the smallest ratios Enten found.

Among states, only Maine, Alaska and Hawaii had fewer votes per delegate. Even most states that used a caucus rather than primary, such as Nevada and Iowa, tended to have significantly higher turnout per delegate. In Iowa, the ratio was 1 to 6,231.

"The overall ratio for the 169 contests I studied," Enten wrote, "is 21,337 voters per delegate."

In short, Colorado Republican leaders got what they wanted when they abandoned a presidential preference poll at the caucus. An extremely narrow base of activists and insiders chose the delegates in a process that ranked among the least representative and democratic in the country.

Not that Donald Trump and his supporters have any ground for their complaints. As we've said before, they knew the rules. Plus, as Enten's analysis reveals, although the playing field is tilted, overall "it's tilted in Trump's favor; he's been running downhill." He was shut out in Colorado, but nationally Trump "usually earns a higher percentage of delegates than votes."

Republican leaders in Colorado ought to be embarrassed. And state lawmakers should be spurred to support an upcoming bill that would restore presidential primaries in 2020.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.