Charlottesville Driver Wasn’t A White Supremacist, He Was Terrified – Report
Video of car hitting anti-racist protestors. Let there be no confusion: this was deliberate terrorism. My prayers with victims. Stay home. pic.twitter.com/MUOZs71Pf4 — Brennan Gilmore (@brennanmgilmore) August 12, 2017

Earlier today in the aftermath of the Unite The Right rally held in Charlottesville, Virginia, the media reported on a white supremacist callously mowing down anti-racism protesters in his vehicle.

One woman was killed, and 19 more were injured in the incident.

The driver has now been identified as James Alex Fields Jr., a 20-year-old man and Active Duty Service Member of the United States Army.

Fields faces second degree murder charges for the alleged crime.

The problem? Local police think he was terrified of leftist protesters who were blocking traffic in the street when he accelerated his vehicle into the crowd, fatally injuring a yet unidentified heavyset 32-year-old woman.

The statement from police officers comes from Taylor Lorenz, a journalist at The Hill, who spoke to multiple officers soon after the event.

Anyway several police officers at the station here think the guy running people down wasn’t malicious. They said the driver was scared — Taylor Lorenz (@TaylorLorenz) August 12, 2017

This is not the first time protesters have decided to protest in the streets. Black Lives Matter and other George Soros supported groups use this tactic to make sure they receive maximum media attention, and it has previously kept ambulances from saving lives, police officers from answering real emergencies, and disrupted commerce across entire cities.

In fact, the act of protesting while standing in the street has specifically been outlawed in North Carolina, and Texas is likely to follow suit.

Read More: 12 Times Leftists Used Political Violence Against Trump Supporters

While details are still emerging, if Fields’s vehicle was being attacked by protesters, or he merely knew no other way to go, it would seem to serve as a public service announcement.

Do not protest in the streets. Streets are for vehicles, and as today has proven, vehicles will always win in a match against humans.

Someone needs to tell these “anti-racist” protesters that there are ways to express their First Amendment rights without risking their lives.

Comments

comments