VIDEO: Protesters Attacked Charlottesville Driver’s Car With Baseball Bat
On August 12, a driver drove his vehicle into a crowd of “anti-racist” protesters, killing one woman and injuring 19 other individuals. The suspect has been identified as James Alex Fields, Jr.

Department of Memes reported that police officers in Charlottesville believed the driver was not acting maliciously, suggesting he was scared by the protesters on every side of his vehicle and he did not know what to do.

New shocking video has emerged that corroborates this theory.

Citizen researchers have slowed the video down and spotted an African American individual hitting the car with what appears to be a baseball bat before the suspect hit the crowd with his vehicle.

One such video posted to Streamable shows the driver slowing down, then accelerating quickly after his rear bumper is struck with the baseball bat.

The second video, originally posted to 4chan’s /pol/, is a thorough examination of the events that seems to suggest the driver was behaving normally until his vehicle was struck with the bat.

Researchers on /pol/ corroborate the theory that the driver was not acting maliciously and was scared. Read more: https://t.co/iQdPCd0jSq pic.twitter.com/upYVjruaxv — God Emperor Trump (@realGETrump) August 13, 2017

The video freezes at multiple stages, the first at 0:02, to show a bicyclist on the sidewalk behaving normally.

The video then freezes at 0:04 to show the car being operated and normal speeds, and again at 0:10 to show the vehicle struck by what Department of Memes believes is a baseball bat.

The video then freezes at 0:14 to show the car attempt to brake and change direction, and once more at 0:19 as the mob closes in on the car and the driver speeds through them.

Last night it was revealed by a journalist who spoke to numerous officers at a police station in Charlottesville, Virginia that numerous officers believed the act was not malicious, and was done out of fear.

Anyway several police officers at the station here think the guy running people down wasn’t malicious. They said the driver was scared — Taylor Lorenz (@TaylorLorenz) August 12, 2017

To recap: The protesters were standing in the middle of the street, blocking traffic. The car was attacked with a blunt object resembling a baseball bat by a protester. The vehicle was not speeding until a the protester attacked and the mob of people closed in on the driver.

If this story is confirmed, then the mainstream media’s narrative about the driver being a white supremacist who sought to kill people at an anti-racism event will be fully blown out of the water.

Comments

comments