Immigrant kids trickle into Iowa
CLOSE

Two Honduran women and two young children wait after being apprehended by game wardens in Mission, Texas, in June. (Photo: David Wallace/Arizona Republic)

No big buses have arrived in Iowa filled with undocumented Latino children fleeing gang violence and extreme poverty in Central America.

Although federal officials confirm that at least 139 unaccompanied immigrant children have been sent to Iowa since Jan. 1, immigrant advocates say the kids are trickling one by one into Des Moines and other Iowa communities.

The children — primarily from Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador — are being released individually by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to be reunited with their parents, aunts, uncles, other relatives, or close friends of their families. They are among a flood of more than 57,000 Central American children who have crossed the border from Mexico since Oct. 1.

RELATED: Branstad wants transparency on undocumented kids

Gov. Terry Branstad and U.S. Sen. Chuck Grassley, Iowa Republicans, have both complained about a lack of transparency from President Barack Obama's administration regarding the placement of the children in Iowa.

Groups that typically work with refugees, such as Catholic Charities of Des Moines and Lutheran Services in Iowa, aren't involved in working with these newcomers, agency officials confirm.

"We have a large influx of children," but they are not arriving in Iowa in large groups, said Sonia Parras Konrad, a Des Moines lawyer who specializes in immigration law. She added, "They are going everywhere. I have clients from Waterloo, Hampton, Des Moines, Osceola, Ottumwa" and other Iowa communities. She views them as traumatized refugees who are escaping rape, murder and other horrendous problems in their native countries.

Many of the children are being assisted by Central American relatives in Iowa who are impoverished, and they can use help from the faith community, nonprofit groups and others, Parras Konrad said. She sees a particular need for bilingual counseling and psychological help, along with volunteer legal services to assist the children, who must all appear in U.S. immigration court.

Under a 2008 federal law, most of the unaccompanied minors caught by Border Patrol agents must be handed over to the Department of Health and Human Services, which coordinates their care, finds them safe housing and helps advise them on their legal rights as their cases are decided. Critics say the law should be amended to speed up deportations because of the large number of young immigrants crossing the border.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

PREVIOUSLY: Polk County restricts ICE immigrant holds

Other unaccompanied children from Central America are also joining relatives here after escaping detection by the Border Patrol, said Joe Enriquez Henry of Des Moines, state director of the League of United Latin American Citizens. Unlike those sent to Iowa by the Department of Health and Human Services, the federal government doesn't know their whereabouts, he said.

"These people need help. They are escaping persecution and all sorts of atrocities," Henry said. "Unfortunately, they are in hiding and will not have access to all the things the government could provide and the nonprofit and religious groups might provide. So we have Latinos taking care of Latinos under the radar screen. These kids are going to be in places like Des Moines and Davenport and Storm Lake due to the kindness of extended family members who are driving to the border for them."

Connie Ryan Terrell, executive director of the Interfaith Alliance of Iowa, said an effort is underway to prepare Iowans for Central American children who don't have a relative or friend they can be placed with. "The preference would be to find a way to provide and care for those kids in a homelike situation," she added.

Pastor Alejandro Alfaro-Santiz, a native of Guatemala who heads the Las Americas program at Trinity United Methodist Church in Des Moines, said the unaccompanied children have had an incredibly difficult experience. First, they had to travel through Mexico, often being harassed by criminal gangs, then were detained by the Border Patrol and placed in detention in prison-like conditions, he said.

"The trip they made is very dangerous. There are kids who do not make it, who die during the trip," Alfaro-Santiz said. He is especially concerned the children have adequate legal representation so they can receive a fair and just hearing if federal officials try to deport them.

Most of the unaccompanied children are over 14 and about three-quarters are boys, federal officials say, although Iowa immigration advocates say they are aware of children as young as 2 who have arrived here.

In recent days, a host of Iowa faith leaders have issued statements of humanitarian concern about the children. Among them are the Iowa Conference of the United Church of Christ, the Jewish community, the Evangelical Lutheran bishops of Iowa, the Disciples of Christ, Episcopal Diocese of Iowa, United Methodist Church, and Presbytery of Des Moines.

In June, Iowa's four Catholic bishops were among the first to publicly express concern.

EDITORIALS, COLUMNS, LETTERS AT: DesMoinesRegister.com/opinion

FEDERAL RULES FOR UNDOCUMENTED KIDS

RELEASED TO SPONSORS: The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services said in a statement that the unaccompanied alien children are being released to sponsors who can include parents or other relatives, or a family friend. A background check is conducted on all potential sponsors, and steps are taken to verify a potential sponsor's identity and relationship to the child. In some cases where concerns are raised, a home study is done. Placements are not restricted based on the immigration status of a parent or other sponsor, officials said.

MEDICAL SCREENING: Federal officials said they ensure the immigrant children are vaccinated and medically screened before they are released to an adult. Children are not released to an adult sponsor if they have a contagious condition, officials said. They also said adult sponsors must agree to cooperate with all immigration proceedings.

OTHER STATES HOST CHILDREN

FEDERAL PLACEMENTS: Here is data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services showing the number of unaccompanied immigrant children placed in surrounding Midwest states between Jan. 1 and July 7, 2014: Illinois, 305; Kansas, 179; Minnesota, 173; Missouri, 121, South Dakota, 21; Wisconsin, 50. Iowa had 122 children through July 7, but Sen. Chuck Grassley's office says an updated Iowa total is 139 children through July 18, 2014.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1mTxh8a