CoOportunity Health falters, taken over by state
CLOSE

CoOportunity Health, a fledgling Iowa health insurance company set up under the Affordable Care Act, has been taken over by state regulators and could soon go under, officials said Wednesday.

CoOportunity Health is an insurance cooperative, which was set up to give consumers and small businesses an alternative in a market with few choices. The company has received about $146 million in federal money under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

Insurance Commissioner Nick Gerhart said that CoOportunity Health has about 120,000 members in Iowa and Nebraska, and saw its available money drop from $47 million to $17 million from Oct. 31 to Dec. 12.

UPDATE: CoOportunity's crisis could cost members thousands

BRANSTAD ADVISER: State will try to help CoOportunity customers

The company hasn't reached insolvency, he said, but it doesn't have enough money on hand. In layperson's terms, he said, it's as if a small business suddenly had its credit cut off by a bank, which in this case is the federal government.

"They ran into a liquidity crisis, and their lender shut the window on them," Gerhart said.

CoOportunity has stopped taking applications from new customers, but those who bought CoOportunity policies before Dec. 16 can continue using their policies for health care. However, Gerhart said people who have CoOportunity policies should consider switching to another carrier.

CoOportunity started selling insurance in 2013. Many industry analysts predicted the company would do well, largely because its founders included a former Iowa insurance commissioner and a former top executive of Iowa's dominant health insurance carrier, Wellmark Blue Cross & Blue Shield. But the cooperative struggled to set its prices to match the health risks of its customers, and its financial condition plummeted.

Cooperatives elsewhere appear to be healthy

CoOportunity is one of 23 health insurance cooperatives set up under the Affordable Care Act. Aaron Albright, a spokesman for the federal agency implementing the law, said CoOportunity appears to be in a uniquely precarious position.

"We do not believe that any other co-ops are facing immediate solvency problems," he wrote in an email to the Register.

A national expert predicted Obamacare critics will seize on CoOportunity's failure. "There's going to be fun and games on Capitol Hill," said Timothy Jost, a health law professor at Washington and Lee University in Virginia. "… I'm sure this will be the poster child."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Jost said it's not surprising that some new health insurance carriers had financial trouble. Unlike established companies, the new carriers had to set premiums without past experience of how much health care their customers would use.

"When they were setting their rates for 2014, they were just shooting in the dark," he said.

But Jost said the co-op approach appears to be working in many other markets.

The company has received about $146 million in federal money, according to documents the state filed in court. The documents said a recent move by Congress would limit how much CoOportunity could obtain in "risk-spreading" money under the Affordable Care Act. That money is supposed to help carriers that take on customers with relatively high risks. CoOportunity said the congressional move could cost it $60 million, court papers say.

Jost, the national expert, said the congressional action simply reaffirmed the federal government's commitment that the risk-sharing program in question would rely on insurers' payments, not government money. He said the outcome should not have been a surprise.

In the court papers, state officials also said federal administrators declined to provide more "solvency funding" to the company. When asked about that Wednesday, Albright said federal officials "had to prioritize" co-ops' requests for assistance, because their requests totaled more than the available money.

Gerhart said that if the company goes into liquidation, the federal government might be able to get at least some of its money back.

Customers expected to switch carriers

Gerhart said existing customers' coverage will continue, but he expects most CoOportunity members to switch to other carriers. For individual policyholders, that move must be made by Feb. 15, the national deadline for enrolling in coverage for 2015.

Dana McNeill, CoOportunity's vice president for corporate communications, said the company is working with regulators to ensure a smooth transition for customers. She said she couldn't comment further. When asked if Chief Executive Officer Cliff Gold was still in charge of the company, she replied, "Nick Gerhart is in charge of the company now."

Gold is a former longtime executive of Wellmark. He helped found CoOportunity with former Iowa Insurance Commissioner David Lyons. Lyons, who was the original CEO, remains on the co-op's board. He declined to comment Wednesday.

CoOportunity was one of just two Iowa carriers offering individual health insurance statewide on the public online marketplace, healthcare.gov, which was created under the Affordable Care Act. Wellmark has declined to participate. The only other Iowa carrier selling policies on the public marketplace is Coventry Health Care, which is owned by Aetna.

Whether a company sells on the public marketplace is especially important to moderate-income Iowans who want to obtain Obamacare subsidies for insurance. Those subsidies are available only for policies sold on healthcare.gov.

Co-op had raised premiums sharply

Signs of possible trouble for CoOportunity surfaced in October, when the co-op pulled out of a state program that uses federal Medicaid money to pay private insurance premiums for relatively poor Iowans. Gold said at the time that the company lost money on the 9,700 Iowans it had covered under that program, called the Marketplace Choice Plan. Coventry is the only carrier still participating in the program.

Many consumers who went on healthcare.gov this fall saw that CoOportunity's premiums for 2015 were significantly higher than Coventry's. CoOportunity raised its premiums for such policies by an average of 19 percent for 2015, compared to a 9 percent increase from Coventry.

Gold, the CEO, cited several issues for the large rate increase. One was his complaint that the state and federal governments decided to let Wellmark customers keep their old policies through 2016. He noted that such customers had been able to pass Wellmark's reviews of their health status. Such reviews for pre-existing conditions no longer are allowed. The fact that most of those healthy Iowans remained with Wellmark left CoOportunity with a relatively unhealthy pool of people to cover, Gold said.

Wellmark, which controls more than three-quarters of Iowa's individual and small-group health insurance markets, countered that it was only looking out for its customers when it allowed them to extend their old policies.

When asked about Wednesday's developments, Wellmark spokeswoman Traci McBee responded in an email: "This is unfortunate news and timing for CoOportunity Health policyholders. Wellmark and its authorized agents are here for anyone who has questions about the health insurance options available to them."

Jesse Patton, an independent insurance agent in West Des Moines, said that in retrospect, it appears CoOportunity made its benefits too generous. By doing that, he said, "what they ended up doing was attracting a lot of sick people."

====

Questions, answers, for co-op customers

Here are some of the questions and answers posted by the Iowa Insurance Division for CoOportunity Health members:

Q: Will I still have insurance through CoOportunity Health on Jan. 1?

A: Yes, if you enrolled on or before Dec. 15, and if you continue to make your premium payments. No, if you signed up after Dec. 16. You have until Feb. 15 to enroll in another plan.

Q: What is the state's "rehabilitation" role?

A: The company will continue in existence, but Iowa Insurance Commissioner Nick Gerhart, as rehabilitator, is granted authority to manage the company. He will oversee operations while determining if the carrier can be rehabilitated or if it should be liquidated.

Q: Should customers pay their premiums?

A: Yes, to avoid a gap in coverage, you must pay your monthly premiums when due.

Q: Can I still submit claims?

A: Yes, submit your claims to CoOportunity Health as usual. The Iowa Insurance Division will control the company and ensure that claims are paid according to the contract provisions.

Q: Will health care providers still accept CoOportunity insurance?

A: The rehabilitation order should not affect your provider's standing with CoOportunity Health. However, your provider may opt to leave the network used by CoOportunity Health, so you should contact your provider to make sure.

Q: If I want to change insurance companies, where do I go?

A: Contact a health insurance agent, navigator or application counselor, or go to www.healthcare.gov or call 800-318-2596.

Q: What happens if I cancel my policy?

A: Your coverage with CoOportunity Health will stop, and claims will not be paid after cancellation. If you do not purchase replacement insurance, you may be penalized by the federal government.

====

From thrill to sticker shock

Joan Fumetti and her husband, Tim Mlsna, of Windsor Heights signed up with CoOportunity for 2014 and initially were thrilled with the co-op's service.

"I absolutely loved them. They were so helpful," she said Wednesday.

Fumetti turned 65 this year, so she switched to Medicare. But her husband still needed private coverage. When they shopped for a 2015 policy, they saw that CoOportunity's prices had shot up — by an average of 19 percent. They reluctantly switched him to a Coventry policy.

Fumetti, a retired United Church of Christ pastor, expressed disappointment Wednesday that CoOportunity was teetering. She liked the idea of a health insurance company owned by its customers.

"To me it's really a moral issue," she said. "Health care shouldn't be for profit."

CoOportunity Health leaders bragged earlier this year that their company was well ahead of membership projections, but they acknowledged facing higher than expected costs of medical care for those people.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1B5KpPX