Christie explains why colleges 'drunk on cash' drive him crazy
CLOSE Christie remarks from West Des Moines

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie speaks about education reform Thursday at Iowa State University in Ames. (Photo: AP)

. Chris Christie kept apologizing to Iowans on Thursday.

"Didn't mean to interrupt. ... I'm sorry, enjoy your lunch, guys. ... Thanks for letting me invade your restaurant. ... Excuse me, I apologize. ... That ice cream looks good!"

The New Jersey governor, a Republican whose blunt and sometimes-confrontational style prompted Iowa conservatives to plead for him to jump into the 2012 presidential race, was meticulously polite as he did a campaign-style visit to Hickory Park, a beloved Ames eatery. He moved from booth to booth introducing himself to diners who, for the most part, seemed delighted to see him.

The small mob of reporters he'd invited to tag along with him clogged the aisles, leaned over the backs of diners' seats to get a better angle, and lighted up people's faces and plates of barbecued pork in the strong beams of their cameras.

"Excuse me, I'm Chris. Nice to meet you," Christie told one diner, Jane Mathison of Ames, as he held out a hand for a shake. Before she could say anything, he added: "What you see I am, is what you get."

Christie said he hasn't yet decided if he'll run for president in 2016, but this is his fifth trip to the presidential testing grounds of Iowa this year and his ninth trip here in the last 12 months.

On Thursday, he gave a big speech at Iowa State University on education reform — his fourth recent major policy address — and called for improving K-12 education by reforming teacher tenure, giving teachers merit pay and offering parents greater choice in where they send their kids to school.

"We need a president who will fight for parents and their children, to put them in control of their education and not the unions and the education establishment," he told the audience of 160, a mix of Republicans, independents and Democrats.

MORE:

Christie also spelled out several suggestions for making college more affordable. "Some colleges are drunk on cash and embarking on crazy spending binges, just because they know they can get huge revenues from tuition," he said.

Later Thursday, Christie did interviews with the news media, where he batted back at Iowa Democratic Party officials who accused him of cutting $1 billion for New Jersey public schools. "We never cut education in New Jersey. What happened was, Barack Obama gave a billion dollars in stimulus funds as a one-time hit. And we didn't replace that money with a billion dollars of new state money. Only Democrats would call that a cut."

CLOSE New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie stops by Hickory Park, the famous Ames eatery Jennifer Jacobs

Christie was the keynote speaker at the Polk County GOP's spring fundraiser Thursday night. And on Friday, he's in Cedar Rapids for a town hall meeting at the Iowa Startup Accelerator, a nonprofit organization that encourages entrepreneurialism.

Iowa will be a tough proving ground for Christie, who was in ninth place in a field of 16 GOP presidential contenders in a recent Des Moines Register/Bloomberg Politics poll of likely caucusgoers. Asked Thursday if he could win the Iowa caucuses, he said: "Listen, the only reason to get in is to win. ... What I know is if I get into a race, I'll compete."

He said he intends to "be who I am. And if my ideas are good enough and people connect with me, I'll change minds. ... People don't show up if they're not interested in you and they don't think you're interesting. So that's a good place to start."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Some of Chris Christie's ideas

During a policy speech Thursday in Ames, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie laid out his ideas for education reform. Here are some of his proposals for higher education:

Itemized tuition bills: Colleges should provide greater transparency about how they're spending their money, both before and after someone becomes a student, he said.

Christie said it "just drives me crazy" when colleges don't explain exactly what the tuition and fees they charge will cover.

"This is like you went to a restaurant and six of you go out for dinner and the bill comes at the end and it says '$120 for food.' That's all it says, 'Food.' Now you wouldn't accept that check, right?"

Unbundled tuition: College students should be allowed to pay just for classes and not add-ons, Christie said.

Christie, who bemoaned his daughter's $61,700 annual tuition at the University of Notre Dame, said parents should know if 2 percent of their tuition bill will go to, say, a new rock climbing wall.

"Do you guys have a rock climbing wall here?" he said, turning to the ISU students seated on risers behind him. He buried his head in his hands when they answered, "Yes."

Income share agreements: Students could get private financing to pay for college, then give a percentage of their future income for a defined period of time to pay it off.

Apprenticeships and high school training programs: Provide tax incentives to cover the cost of wages for apprenticeships, Christie said. And youths in every state should have the option to get some sort of on-the-job training before finishing high school, he said.

College credit for on-the-job training: It should be easier for people to earn college credit or certification based on knowledge earned outside the classroom, such as from work or military experience, he said.

Community service: Give taxpayers, either individuals or companies, the option to donate to a student debt reduction organization in exchange for a tax credit. The organization would then award grants to cover a student's loan debt in exchange for the student completing community service.

Reform plans resonate with some in crowd

Chris Christie is dealing with high unfavorables from the most fervent GOP activists in Iowa — 58 percent of likely Republican caucusgoers have a negative view of him, a recent Iowa Poll found.

But Thursday, several middle-of-the-road voters said they're intrigued by Christie's education reform plans and would consider voting for him in the caucuses on Feb. 1.

"Institutions need to be listing exactly what students are paying for," said Brittany Rigdon, a Democratic voter who works for a federal program that helps low-income, first-generation students go to college. "I like the idea of being able to opt out of certain things, especially for lower-income students who aren't going to use the gym membership or other things because they don't live on campus."

Rigdon said she's interested in hearing more from Christie on how he'd require universities to reveal itemized lists of college tuition and fee costs.

Zach Swailes, a 19-year-old ISU student who is studying marketing and Spanish, said he applauds Christie's ideas, especially his statement that the government shouldn't offer free higher education. Some students would just take advantage of that and not go to class, he said.

Swailes said he's an independent voter who leans Democratic, but "if I had to give my support to a candidate it would probably be Christie."

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1JIRHl1