Clinton touts gun controls after San Bernardino attack
Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speaks during a town hall meeting Friday, Dec. 4, 2015, in Fort Dodge. (Photo: Charlie Neibergall/The Associated Press)

FORT DODGE, Ia. – Hillary Clinton on Friday reiterated her support for tighter gun laws in the wake of yet another American massacre, but she acknowledged that it’s tough to know if such controls would have prevented the latest attack.

The leading Democratic presidential candidate complained to voters here and in an earlier stop Friday in Sioux City that Senate Republicans had again blocked a bill that would ban gun sales to people who are on “no-fly” lists because of concerns they might be linked to terrorism.

“I’ve got to tell you, if you are too dangerous to fly in America, you are too dangerous to buy a gun in America,” she declared in Sioux City.

Clinton’s comments were sparked by this week’s mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., which federal investigators believe is linked to terrorism.

When Clinton met with reporters after her campaign appearance here Friday, The Des Moines Register asked if she believed the proposed ban on gun sales to people on the no-fly list could have prevented the San Bernardino shootings or any of the other massacres.

“That’s like the question, ‘How do you prove a negative?’” she replied. “I don’t know exactly what it would have or could have prevented, but I do know that we’ve got to start implementing sensible gun-safety measures, and this seems like the most sensible that I know of. There have been numerous sales to people on the no-fly list for years now. And where those guns go, who ends up with them, we don’t have any idea.”

Clinton said the proposed rule would be similar to bans on gun sales to felons, people with restraining orders or those with serious mental illnesses. “I think we’ve got to be more willing to start imposing these kinds of gun-safety measures. I’m certainly going to continue advocating for them.”

She also told reporters she would support a review of the process for approving visas, such as the one that one of the attackers in this week’s shooting had. She also noted that the terrorists who flew planes into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on Sept. 11, 2001, entered the country with valid visas then overstayed them. “I think we have to take a look at all of this," she said. "I think it’s important that we take a very thorough and comprehensive look and not be pushed one way or the other by some of the inflammatory rhetoric that is occurring.”

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

She said the country’s visa policies must balance the need for security and the need to keep the country open to legitimate, productive travel.

A CNN reporter asked about the civil liberties implications of her suggestion that authorities move more aggressively to shut down terrorist groups' use of the Internet to recruit members.

“We are always trying to get the balance right between liberty and privacy and security and safety,” she replied. “That has been a balancing act from the very beginning of our country. It is tough. … We have to protect Americans’ rights. And we have to protect Americans’ lives. And that’s not always easy to do.”

She noted her support for the USA Freedom Act, a compromise 2015 law that continued some of the policies of the Patriot Act, which many civil libertarians saw as too invasive.

AT THE EVENT

SETTING: Iowa Central Community College student center

CROWD: Estimated by campaign at 350.

REACTION: Audience members, who included college students and older voters, asked a range of questions, including about health care, student debt and Social Security. They applauded several of Clinton's points, including her vows to keep the economy growing.

OTHER STOPS: Earlier Friday, Clinton spoke to about 300 people at a Carpenters' Union hall in Sioux City.

WHAT'S NEXT: Clinton is expected back in Iowa next week.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Qlm2aQ