Jeb Bush's record as governor of Florida
CLOSE

Former Florida governor Jeb Bush makes his debut trip to Iowa on Friday as a potential presidential candidate. He is slated to attend the Iowa Agricultural Summit ds in Des Moines. Regarded by some as a “conservative hero” in Florida, other conservative activists seem hardened against him. (Photo: Getty Images)

Here's a snapshot of Republican Jeb Bush's record as Florida governor from January 1999 to January 2007:

JOBS: Florida added 1.32 million jobs during Bush's eight years, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics charts. As reference points, Wisconsin added 162,000 jobs during one term under Scott Walker and Texas added 2.25 million jobs during Rick Perry's 14 years as governor there.

ECONOMIC GROWTH: Florida's GDP grew an average of 7.2 percent during Bush's tenure, according to U.S. Department of Commerce records. The average was 5.3 percent for the United States as a whole in that period.

TAXES: Bush cut Florida's taxes by $19 billion, his aides say. He imposed sales tax holidays, scrapped a $10 annual car emissions test and got rid of an "intangibles" tax that saved stock investors and money savers more than $1 billion a year.

JOB APPROVAL RATING: While George W. Bush struggled in the White House with a 37 percent approval rating in January 2007, Jeb Bush's job approval was 64 percent when he left office that month. In Iowa, that's Chuck Grassley territory. It's higher than any of Terry Branstad's job approval ratings in his latest iteration as governor.

FIND MORE:

ABORTION/LIFE ISSUES: Bush supported abortion restrictions and opposed embryonic stem cell research. Florida became the first state to have "choose life" license plates; fees went toward aid for women with crisis pregnancies. He sought court intervention in certain situations, including the case of a disabled rape victim who was the ward of the state, and he fought a prolonged legal battle to keep alive Terri Schiavo, a comatose brain-injury patient caught up in an end-of-life dispute.

CASH RESERVES: Florida's rainy day fund grew by 654 percent, from $1.3 billion to $9.8 billion under Bush's leadership, Florida records show. For comparison, Iowa's has grown 52 percent under Branstad, from $440 million to $670 million, Iowa records show.

PRIVATIZING: Bush privatized various state services, including foster care, adoption services, legal representation for death row prisoners, human resources, state purchasing and state parks. He moved Medicaid recipients into private managed-care plans.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

GOVERNMENT WORKFORCE: Bush trimmed 13,000 positions from government agencies.

BOND RATING: Florida saw multiple credit rating upgrades and had a AAA status, for the first time, when Bush left office. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie gets knocked for his state's credit rating; Standard & Poor's has docked New Jersey's general obligation bonds three times during his time in office.

VETOES: Bush used over 2,500 line-item vetoes to cut $2.3 billion of proposed spending from lawmakers' budgets.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION: By executive order, he ended affirmative action in state hiring and contracting and worked with the Board of Regents to end it in university admissions in Florida.

GUNS: He signed the nation's first "stand your ground" legislation. The law, pushed by the National Rifle Association, allows deadly force for self-defense. Bush had an A+ rating from the NRA.

TEACHERS UNIONS: Bush backers say he was one of the original state executives to take on teacher unions, years before Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker gained attention for battling government labor unions. Bush established the country's first statewide voucher program for K-12 education, broadened school choice options, expanded charter schools and instituted academic standards.

SCHOOL GRADES: Bush began A to F letter grades for schools based on student performance on a Florida test. If a school got an F in two years of a four-year period, students there could get scholarships for private school. By 2005, 88 percent of Florida's K-12 public schools were rated A or B, according to the Florida Department of Education. Eleven percent received a D or E.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1G4llLR