In Iowa, Cruz says he would vote against trade deal
Buy Photo U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, meets with supporters at a town hall in Harlan, Iowa Friday, Nov. 20, 2015. (Photo: Matthew Patane/The Register)Buy Photo

HARLAN, Ia. – U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz said Friday he plans to vote against an international trade deal that would encourage increased trade between the U.S. and 10 other countries.

Cruz, a Texas Republican, told a crowd here that he is “deeply concerned” with the Trans-Pacific Partnership. While Cruz said he supports free trade, he believes the Trans-Pacific Partnership would undermine U.S. immigration laws and the nation’s sovereignty.

“There are a number of Republicans on that (debate) stage who support TPP, who support (the Trade Promotion Authority),” Cruz said. “I voted against TPA and I intend to vote against TPP.”

For most of the campaign, Cruz has stated his concerns with the deal but has not stated whether he would vote for or against it.

The presidential candidate reiterated his support for free trade and said the U.S. should negotiate deals that don’t put the country at a disadvantage.

“I believe we can negotiate a much better agreement with a strong conservative president than we have with Barack Obama,” Cruz said.

Cruz also shot down the idea that the government should create a national registry to track Muslims in the United States.

RELATED: Trump denies suggesting Muslim database

“On the question of should the federal government keep a registry of any religious group, the answer is, of course not … at the same time we need a federal government that is vigilant in going after Islamic terrorists,” Cruz told reporters.

Friday’s stop here was among the first Cruz made in Iowa after receiving the endorsement of Iowa Congressman Steve King, who joined Cruz at two town halls Friday.

Loras Schulte, a member of the Republican Party of Iowa’s governing board, announced Friday that he would resign his position and endorse Cruz.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

“I believe Ted Cruz represents the best chance we have to restore not only what is great about America, but of providing the leadership the international community is lacking," Schulte, of Benton County, said in a statement.

AT THE EVENT

SETTING: An American Legion Hall.

CROWD: Between 130 and 140 people.

REACTION: Cruz received a standing ovation and a long round of cheers upon entering the American Legion Hall, commenting “that’s a little different than the reception I get in Washington.”

WHAT’S NEXT: Cruz is set to speak Friday night at the Family Leader’s Presidential Family Forum in Des Moines. He will make three campaign stops Saturday. For details, go to DesMoinesRegister.com/candidatetracker.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1jbipqU