Rubio addresses debt, terrorism and deregulating business
CLOSE

Buy Photo Sen. Marco Rubio speaks with a potential voter at the Hy-Vee in Grinnell Wednesday. (Photo: Mackenzie Ryan/The Register)Buy Photo

Marco Rubio offered solutions to fixing the national debt in Urbandale, fighting terrorism during a stop in Grinnell and, at his last stop of the day in Wilton, taking a "hard cap" on the costs regulations impose on the economy.

During a day-long campaign trip through eastern Iowa on Wednesday, the Florida Senator trumpeted his vision and platform to groups large and small: reinvigorating the economy, reforming higher education and taking a hawkish approach to foreign policy.

Rubio acknowledged the country's challenges. Paychecks are stagnant, young adults are saddled with student loan debt and the military is weakening in strength. But he also challenged to listeners that there are "exciting opportunities."

"The potential that this country has is largely untapped," Rubio said in Wilton. "Everything that it takes to succeed in the 21st century, we are better at it than anyone on this planet. But we need policies that gives us a chance, and we need leaders who understand how much the times have changed, and changes we must make."

As Rubio crossed the state during a three-day swing through Iowa, he spoke of how he'd approach the presidency.

Early Wednesday, Rubio called for reforms to Social Security and Medicare as a way to address the national debt. That includes a later retiring age, adjusting benefits and moving to a private plan for individuals for people of his age, 44, and younger.

"Unless we make reforms like those, these programs go bankrupt over the next nine to 12 years," Rubio said. "We have to confront this."

During a stop at the Hy-Vee grocery store in Grinnell, Rubio was peppered with questions about ISIS and Iran.

"We've got to stop their growth first, and then defeat them after," Rubio said of ISIS. "And the way to stop their growth is subjecting them to high-profile defeats."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Initially, Rubio said that will require special operation forces and more airstrikes to "show the world that these guys are not invincible, and if you join them, this will happen to you."

But he also cautioned a long-term solution is needed — and "that won't happen without our help."

"The only way ISIS is going to be defeated is for Sunnis themselves to defeat them," Rubio said. "In essence, ISIS is a radical Sunni group, and we need nonradical Sunnis to say, 'This is not what we want to live under.' "

In Wilton, Rubio called for limiting the size and scope of government, which he said is especially important for small businesses. "We don't know how many small businesses that would have started never did because of these regulations," he said. "But it is substantial."

CLOSE Presidential hopeful Marco Rubio gave his stump speech and met with Iowans at a fundraiser for Iowa House Representative Chris Hagenow on Tuesday, July 7, 2015 in Windsor Heights.

He said 40 percent of small community banks have been "wiped out" in recent years, in part because of regulations they couldn't comply with.

"Meanwhile, big banks are bigger and more powerful than ever," he said. "So we will have a hard cap — a regulatory budget — that limits the costs that regulations can impose on our economy."

Ron Lang of Grinnell said Rubio is on his "short list" of Republicans.

"He explains himself very well, his policies and what he stands for," Lang said. "It's all good, but can it actually be implemented? Can he get the consensus? Can he get the ship turned around?"

David Creighton Sr. said he first heard Rubio speak a few years ago on C-SPAN, and has been a fan ever since.

"At the time I thought, 'He's the smartest young man I've heard in a long time,' " said the 76-year-old from Clive. "He's the man for the future. He has solutions to problems."

Creighton has already decided to caucus for Rubio. But many other Republicans said they remained undecided — and are waiting to see their options in a crowded field.

"I've been very interested in having the chance to see him and hear him," said Wanda Lewis, a retired antiques dealer from West Des Moines. "We need some new leadership, someone fresh and new."

FOLLOW ALONG: Iowa Caucuses Candidate Tracker

At the event

SETTING: Rubio crossed Iowa with multiple stops, starting with the Westside Conservative Club breakfast at the Iowa Machine Shed in Urbandale. He stopped by the Hy-Vee grocery store in Grinnell mid-morning before venturing on to Cedar Rapids, Coralville and Wilton.

Rubio crossed Iowa with multiple stops, starting with the Westside Conservative Club breakfast at the Iowa Machine Shed in Urbandale. He stopped by the Hy-Vee grocery store in Grinnell mid-morning before venturing on to Cedar Rapids, Coralville and Wilton. CROWD: Rubio spoke to groups as small as 20 in Grinnell, more than 250 in Urbandale and more than 350 in Wilton.

Rubio spoke to groups as small as 20 in Grinnell, more than 250 in Urbandale and more than 350 in Wilton. REACTION: In Urbandale, the crowd laughed and applauded multiple times. In Grinnell, many nodded along, having formed a circle to hear Rubio's ideas and approach, which he discussed at length. A quip at the pool party in Coralville brought laughter and nods of agreement, when he suggested to "Tip your bartender!" a reference to his father, who worked as one. And in Wilton, he was met by a standing ovations before and after his speech.

In Urbandale, the crowd laughed and applauded multiple times. In Grinnell, many nodded along, having formed a circle to hear Rubio's ideas and approach, which he discussed at length. A quip at the pool party in Coralville brought laughter and nods of agreement, when he suggested to "Tip your bartender!" a reference to his father, who worked as one. And in Wilton, he was met by a standing ovations before and after his speech. WHAT'S NEXT: Rubio will wrap up a three-day swing through Iowa on Thursday, when he'll be in Davenport for a meet-and-greet at 7:30 a.m. with the Scott County Republican Office, located on 2322 East Kimberly Road, West Building Suite 235.

Rubio wins over 'union Democrat' with talk of his father

On his way to Cedar Rapids on Wednesday morning, Marco Rubio stopped at the Hy-Vee in Grinnell during the second day of a three-day swing through Iowa.

"Hi, I'm Marco," the Florida senator said, extending a handshake as he introduced himself to individuals gathered at tables near the grocery store's produce aisle.

One of his first exchanges was with Dee O'Brian, who described herself as "a union Democrat."

"My dad was a union Republican," Rubio replied.

As a child, Rubio said he walked the picket line with his father. And he recalled the union giving his family cheese, macaroni and peanut butter during the strike.

"I'm very disappointed with the Democratic Party," said O'Brian, 67, of Shellsburg.

"It's gone too far left," Rubio offered.

After a brief conversation — she'd voted for Ronald Reagan, as well as Bill Clinton — O'Brian gave the Florida Republican a few encouraging words.

"Get the nomination," she said. If Rubio cinches the GOP nomination for president, she told him, she'd vote for him.

In response to Rubio's comment that Democrats had moved too far left, Sam Lau with the Iowa Democratic Party said they are "putting working families before the needs of the wealthy few."

"Like the rest of the GOP field, Rubio's policies aren't just based on the fringe," he said in response. "They're rooted in the failed policy prescriptions of the past that left the middle class behind."

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1IJJyLS