Medica intends to stay in Iowa's health-insurance market, at 43% higher price
CLOSE Medica, a Minnesota based health insurer, released a statement suggesting it was close to following two larger carriers in deciding not to sell such policies in Iowa for 2018, due to instability in the market. Wochit

Buy Photo Karen Slessor, right, listens as registered nurse Lacy Kolder goes over her prescriptions from the doctor Wednesday, May 3, 2017, during an appointment at Wolfe Eye Clinic in Cedar Falls, Iowa. Slessor is worried she may lose her last insurance option if Medica pulls out of Iowa's individual health insurance market. (Photo: Michael Zamora/The Register)Buy Photo

The last carrier standing in Iowa’s individual health-insurance market said Monday that it intends to keep selling such policies here next year, but it would need to charge much higher premiums than it's collecting now.

Even after Monday's announcement, Medica still could pull out of the Iowa market, as many experts feared. That could leave no options for up to 72,000 Iowans who now buy their own insurance instead of obtaining it via an employer or government program, such as Medicare or Medicaid.

"When you find yourself as the only ones between people getting access to care and people not getting access to care, your view of the situation becomes very different," Medica Vice President Geoff Bartsh said in a prepared statement. "We've filed with the intent to provide access to insurance for all Iowans, whether they are farmers, small business owners or other individuals who need coverage."

The relatively small, Minnesota-based carrier told Iowa regulators Monday that in order to stay in the market, they would need to increase premiums by an average of 43.5 percent. Many Iowans who buy individual insurance would be protected from much of that increase by subsidies they receive under the Affordable Care Act. But others would bear the full cost.

Monday was the deadline for carriers to file proposed rates for individual health-insurance policies in Iowa for 2018. Medica was the only carrier to file, state regulators said.

The other two major carriers in Iowa, Aetna and Wellmark Blue Cross & Blue Shield, had said this spring that they didn't intend to continue selling individual health insurance in Iowa next year. Wellmark said last week that it would re-enter if the federal government approved a "stopgap" plan Iowa Insurance Commissioner Doug Ommen proposed to shore up the market for 2018.

Ommen said in a prepared statement Monday that he would press ahead with the stopgap plan, even though the Iowa market is not devoid of carriers, as had been feared.

"We appreciate and understand Medica's desire to provide coverage in all of Iowa's 99 counties. That is our goal as well," Ommen said in a prepared statement. "We are concerned that Iowa has hit a point within our market's collapse that a 43% rate increase will drive healthier, younger, and middle aged individuals out of the market. Iowa's individual market remains unsustainable and needs a fix from Congress. Iowa will continue to move forward with the proposed stopgap measure."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Medica had indicated in May that it probably would leave Iowa's individual health-insurance market, after Aetna and Wellmark said they would stop selling such policies here. That put Iowa on the verge of becoming the first state to lose all individual health-insurance options amid carriers' complaints of an unstable market full of unpredictable costs. Medica officials said that in order to stay in Iowa’s market, they would need assurances about government actions, including a commitment by the Trump administration to continue billions of dollars in payments to help moderate-income Americans cover their deductibles and other costs related to health insurance.

If no carriers sell individual insurance here, moderate-income Iowans would be unable to use premium subsidies they qualify for under the Affordable Care Act. But the problem is broader than that. Even Iowans with higher incomes, who could pay full price, would be unable to buy full-fledged health insurance on the individual market.

Joey Norris, a young entrepreneur who relies on an individual health insurance policy, expressed measured relief Monday evening after learning that there likely will be at least one carrier offering such plans here next year. “It’s a step in the right direction,” he said.

Norris, who is a co-owner of a small engineering firm in Red Oak, currently qualifies for an Obamacare premium subsidy to pay for a policy from Aetna. The subsidy would rise to cover much of the increased cost of a Medica policy for next year. But if Congress votes to repeal Obamacare, he could lose that subsidy, meaning he’d have to cover the steep premium increase himself. “You’d have a choice, but if you’re priced out of it, is it really a choice?” he asked.

Iowa’s insurance commissioner last week proposed a stopgap plan to try to keep carriers from abandoning the market. The plan, which needs federal approval, would change several rules from the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. It would use about $80 million in federal money to set up a “reinsurance” program, which would help carriers shoulder costs of members who need more than $100,000 per year in health care.

Ommen’s stopgap plan also would tweak subsidies to give young people more help than they receive now and older consumers less help than they receive now. The goal would be to attract more young people to insurance pools, which are now weighted down with too many older consumers, who tend to have more expensive health needs, Ommen has said. The Iowa plan also would spend more federal money on helping pay premiums and would stop using federal money to help poorer consumers cover their deductibles.

Iowa’s plight and Ommen’s stopgap plan have received national attention. Some national experts have said Trump administration officials could effectively change Obamacare by approving the Iowa plan without needing Congress to pass a controversial health-reform bill. Ommen was appointed by former Gov. Terry Branstad, a Republican. The commissioner has portrayed his proposal as an imperfect patch to keep carriers in Iowa’s individual insurance market through 2018 while Congress works on a broader revamping of the health-care system.

Wellmark has said it would return to the market if federal officials approve Ommen's plan. Either way, Wellmark will continue to cover more than 70,000 longtime customers who bought individual insurance policies before 2014. The third major current carrier, Aetna, has said it would pull out either way. A small Wisconsin carrier, Gundersen, sold a few dozen policies for 2017 in five counties in northeast Iowa. It did not file proposed 2018 rates by the Monday deadline.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/2tlHVQX