Braley unleashes minimum wage attack ad on Ernst
The theme for Tuesday's war of words in Iowa's neck-and-neck U.S. Senate race? The minimum wage.

Democratic U.S. Senate candidate Bruce Braley started "an aggressive effort" Tuesday to accuse Republican rival Joni Ernst of supporting economic ideas that hurt Iowa's working families, his campaign aides said.

A new TV advertisement, his second since the general election began in early June, argues that Ernst's positions on the minimum wage are "wrong for Iowa."

That prompted a volley of opposing responses, including one from a group that represents about 10,000 small-business owners, which called on Braley to clarify his position on raising the minimum wage, which it says would increase the costs of hourly labor for those workers by 40 percent.

"We'd like Congressman Braley to explain his theory on how Iowa small businesses and family farms can absorb such an increase without having to make difficult cuts elsewhere," National Federation of Independent Business Vice President Lisa Goeas said in a statement.

In Braley's ad, a male narrator says: "Is Joni Ernst too extreme for Iowa? On the minimum wage."

An audio clip of Ernst on Iowa Public Radio in June: "I do not support a federal minimum wage."

Narrator: "Joni Ernst doesn't think there should be a national minimum wage. And what does she think is right for Iowa?"

A videotape clip of Ernst at a GOP primary forum: "I think $7.25 is appropriate for Iowa."

Narrator: "That's right. Ernst believes Iowans can survive on $15,000 a year. Joni Ernst. Extreme ideas, wrong for Iowa."

A bill stalled in Congress would increase the wage to $10.10 per hour.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The business federation's Goeas said in a news release: "Iowa small businesses can't wave a wand and increase their sales by 40 percent. They can't reduce their other expenses. So how is it possible, as a matter of common sense, to raise their labor costs by 40 percent without forcing them to make other cuts in payroll."

The federation's PAC supports almost exclusively Republican candidates, records show.

The Iowa GOP also chipped in with a statement: "Braley's politically driven wage rhetoric suggests that he actually thinks Iowans can survive on an annual salary of $21,000 — which is what his plan would do. ... Ernst wants to create good-paying, permanent jobs for Iowa workers by keeping taxes low, cutting red tape on small business and family farms, and investing in job-training initiatives so Iowans can compete for higher-wage jobs."

In response, the Braley campaign offered a written statement from Mike Draper, founder and owner of Raygun in Des Moines.

"Small-business owners are not against raising the minimum wage; massive organizations like NFIB claiming to speak for 'small business' are against the minimum wage," Draper said. "Small businesses want to take care of their employees, recognize the value of work and the value of fairly paid citizens living in their community. I support an increase in the minimum wage, and so do the other small- business owners I talk to. A higher wage not only means a happier workforce, but it means more Iowans will have more money to spend."

Braley, a lawyer and seven-year congressman from Waterloo, and Ernst, a military commander and three-year state senator from Red Oak, are vying for Iowa's first open U.S. Senate seat in 40 years. The seat will be open because Democratic U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin is retiring this winter.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1vyDRZE