Marco Rubio opposes climate change measures
Buy Photo Marco Rubio responds to a crowd question in Cedar Rapids on Saturday. The Florida senator is seeking the GOP nomination for president. (Photo: Mackenzie Ryan/ The Register)Buy Photo

CEDAR RAPIDS, Ia. — Marco Rubio told a crowd here that he does not support policy aimed at curbing climate change, saying Sunday it will “destroy” the American economy without helping the environment.

During a town hall meeting, Bob Klause of Cedar Rapids told the Florida senator he believes global warming is a “hoax,” a word that Rubio countered.

“It’s not in this following sense: The climate has always changed," Rubio said. “There’s never been a time when the climate has not been changing.”

Rubio said that, as a lawmaker, he's been shown policies that would do nothing to change the sea level or the Earth's temperature, yet would cost “hundreds of thousands” of jobs and make America less competitive.

He also spoke against the Paris climate change conference in December, when 195 countries committed to measures to lower greenhouse gas emissions and lower the effect of climate change.

Rubio noted that the meeting came just weeks after terrorist attacks in Paris left 130 people dead and wounded hundreds more.

“I would have turned that into a world summit on defeating ISIS,” Rubio said. “Which is like, an immediate threat, like right in front of you. Like, they’re burning people alive in cages right now. They’re, like, beheading people tonight. We would have dealt with it that way.”

ENDORSEMENT: Marco Rubio can chart new direction for GOP

COMPARE CANDIDATES: See issue and stances for the presidential candidates

He also called a provision in the agreement, that the U.S. and other developed countries agreed to, which will send billions to developing countries, “outrageous.” Rubio said “wealthy countries” such as China and India qualify for the money. “We’re not sending money to anyone like that when I’m president of the United States.”

Rubio also addressed those who are worried about carbon emissions, saying solutions are being discovered by the "American innovator," who’s already “figured out how to get access to natural gas we never thought we’d get our hands on.”

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

“And guess what? Natural gas is very clean, very carbon-free,” he said.

Rubio called environmental groups who oppose such solutions “radical,” adding that options such as nuclear energy “is the cleanest, carbon-free, but you can’t build a nuclear power plant.”

“We are going to fully utilize our energy resources in a responsible way,” Rubio said.

Rubio also said he supports solar, wind and biofuels.

“If you’re overly dependent on any one source of fuel, then you become vulnerable to disruption,” he said. “I want America to truly have a truly all-of-the-above strategy.”

WHERE IN IOWA?: Track presidential campaign visits across the state

AT THE EVENT

SETTING: An event at the Best Western in Cedar Rapids and an evening stop at the Electric Park Ballroom in Waterloo.

CROWD: More than 250 in Cedar Rapids and more than 150 in Waterloo.

REACTION: The crowd in Cedar Rapids gave Rubio a standing ovation, and applauded multiple times.

WHAT’S NEXT: Rubio will campaign Monday and Tuesday in Iowa, including a rally in Des Moines.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Vjd9yY