Ernst introduces bills aimed at ending federal funding for Planned Parenthood
CLOSE Anti-abortion activists say they are united at the Iowa Capitol with the goal of passing legislation in the 2017 session.

Buy Photo Joni Ernst (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

U.S. Sen. Joni Ernst filed legislation on Monday eliminating federal funding for Planned Parenthood and overturning an Obama administration rule barring states from defunding the women’s health organization.

The moves were cheered by organizations that oppose abortion and the use of federal dollars in aiding family-planning organizations that also provide abortion services. The moves also drew protests on Monday from abortion rights advocates at Ernst’s downtown Des Moines office.

Ernst, R-Iowa, will be the lead sponsor on a bill prohibiting federal funding for the Planned Parenthood Federation of America and affiliated organizations. The bill maintains funding for services like prenatal and post-natal care and breast and cervical cancer screenings, but redirects it to health care providers that do not also perform abortions.

“We as a pro-life community honor the civil liberties, independence and strength of a woman — all women,” Ernst said last Friday during a speech at the March for Life in Washington where she announced the bills. “And that means both supporting mothers and rising up to protect the most vulnerable in our society — the innocent babies who are unable to defend themselves.”

RELATED COVERAGE:

Similar legislation has been introduced in previous years but is seen as much more likely to become law now that Republican President Donald Trump is in office. Federal law already bars funding for abortion services directly.

A separate bill sponsored by Ernst and U.S. Rep. Diane Black, R-Tenn., would roll back a federal rule enacted in the waning weeks of the Obama administration preventing states from withholding federal Title X family-planning funds from Planned Parenthood and other abortion providers.

“Rarely do the American people benefit when the federal government attempts to subvert the will of the people's elected representatives and substitute its judgment for that of state or local governments,” Ernst and Black wrote in column published by the Washington Examiner on Friday. “State legislatures around the country have spoken out about their preference for prioritizing more comprehensive primary and preventative care providers for the receipt of Title X funding, and their voice should be respected by bureaucrats in the federal government.”

Ernst’s bills drew a couple of dozen protesters to the Federal Building in downtown Des Moines on Monday.

Buy Photo Planned Parenthood supporter Karen Herwig of West Des Moines speaks Monday to Clarke Scanlon, state director for Sen. Joni Ernst's office in Des Moines. Herwig was one of two dozen protesters who came to the Federal Building Monday to protest Ernst's bill to strip Planned Parenthood of its federal funds. (Photo: Toney Leys/The Register)

The protesters, 21 women and three men, held signs with messages such as “I stand with Planned Parenthood and so do 74 percent of Iowans,” and “Joni Ernst’s Priority … Ideology, not healthcare.”

The protesters contended that by cutting access to birth control services, the bill would lead to more unintentional pregnancies and more abortions. Several protesters said they didn’t participate in activism much in the past, but they are determined to do so in the face of drastic measures being pushed through by Trump and his allies.

“We can’t be silent anymore. Things have changed,” said Karen Lauer, 53, of Des Moines. “I’m not going to be one of those people who sits back and says, ‘Oh well, everything will turn out OK.’ I’m afraid it won’t.”

The protesters trooped into the Federal Building, showed guards their driver’s licenses, and passed through a metal detector. They were met in the lobby by Ernst’s state director, Clarke Scanlon.

COMMENTARY: Basu: Defunding Planned Parenthood could increase abortions

Scanlon listened patiently to the protesters’ points about the need to protect access to birth control options to prevent the need for abortions. He asked them what they thought of making birth-control pills available without prescriptions, as Ernst has recommended. The protesters said they were open to the idea, but that it wouldn’t be enough to make up for the loss of other Planned Parenthood services, such as physical exams and prevention of sexually transmitted diseases.

Scanlon assured the protesters that Ernst would not favor repealing the Affordable Care Act without replacing it with solid measures to help Americans find health care, including family planning services.

“One of Sen. Ernst’s principles is not to pull the rug out from people,” he said. He added that she would take a measured, independent approach to considering the alternatives, and she would not be “a marionette” blindly doing the bidding of her party leaders.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/2jMP6ig