Small businesses ask Braley how to pay for higher minimum wage
Lisa Goeas of the National Federation of Independent Business (Photo: NFIB)

A group that represents about 10,000 small business owners in Iowa is calling on U.S. Senate candidate Bruce Braley to clarify his position on raising the minimum wage, which it says would increase the costs of hourly labor for those workers by 40 percent.

"We'd like Congressman Braley to explain his theory on how Iowa small businesses and family farms can absorb such an increase without having to make difficult cuts elsewhere," National Federation of Independent Business Vice President Lisa Goeas said in a statement today.

Braley's newest TV ad criticizes his Republican rival, Joni Ernst, for saying during a NFIB forum that she thinks a minimum wage of $7.25 an hour is appropriate for Iowa and that she opposes the idea of a federal bill to increase the wage to $10.10 per hour.

"If the congressman believes that small businesses can handle a 40 percent increase in labor costs, then he needs to explain how that's possible," Goeas said in a news release. "It's not a rhetorical question and the voters deserve an answer that goes deeper than his political commercials."

Goeas added: "Iowa small businesses can't wave a wand and increase their sales by 40 percent. They can't reduce their other expenses. So how is it possible, as a matter of common sense, to raise their labor costs by 40 percent without forcing them to make other cuts in payroll."

The National Federation of Independent Business's PAC supports almost exclusively Republican candidates, records show.

In response, the Braley campaign offered a written statement from Mike Draper, founder and owner of Raygun in Des Moines.

"Small business owners are not against raising the minimum wage, massive organizations like NFIB claiming to speak for 'small business' are against the minimum wage," Draper said. "Small businesses want to take care of their employees, recognize the value of work and the value of fairly-paid citizens living in their community. I support an increase in the minimum wage, and so do the other small business owners I talk to. A higher wage not only means a happier workforce, but it means more Iowans will have more money to spend."

Braley, a lawyer and seven-year congressman from Waterloo, and Ernst, a military commander and three-year state senator from Red Oak, are vying for Iowa's first open U.S. Senate seat in 40 years. It's a closely watched race that has taken on national significance as Republicans seek to regain power in the Senate. Ernst and Braley are tied in the polls here, potentially making Iowa one of the states that will slip from Democratic hands into GOP control.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The seat will be open because Democratic U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin is retiring this winter.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1mZqbPh