Debate: Braley, Ernst attack over billionaire bogeymen
State Senator Joni Ernst, and U.S. Representative Bruce Braley, discuss political ads being ran in Iowa, at the U.S. Senate candidate forum at St. Ambrose University, Galvin Fine Arts Center, in Rock Island, Iowa, Saturday, Oct. 11, 2014. (AP Photo/Quad-City Times, Louis Brems) (Photo: Louis Brems, AP)

Call it the battle of the bogeymen.

Democrat Bruce Braley and Republican Joni Ernst populated their arguments in tonight's U.S. Senate debate with chilling references to dueling billionaires who have spent millions in Iowa's race.

Braley, a four-term congressman, brought up wealthy industrialists Charles and David Koch in the first few minutes of the debate and repeated their names throughout the debate.

"The truth is, you attended two secret donor meetings in California that were hosted by the Koch brothers. You called them 'wonderful' at that meeting. You credited them for launching your Senate campaign," Braley said, speaking directly to Ernst.

Ernst gave a brittle laugh before denying she had signed a pledge for the Koch brothers, but did not dispute Braley's allegations about secret donor meetings or campaign support from the Kochs.

Ernst, in turn, made repeated references to Tom Steyer, a California billionaire who has funded attack ads against Ernst. "Now, Bruce Braley supported that overreach with the E.P.A. because he is being backed by California environmentalist Tom Steyer," Ernst, a state senator from Red Oak, said.

Braley denied Ernst's allegation, saying he voted against Environmental Protection Agency regulation of ditches and farm ponds. He brushed aside her later contention that Steyer and other liberal interest groups had outspent her campaign by $2 million.

"I stand with Iowans who want secret donor money out of politics forever," Braley said, drawing applause from the audience in what was probably his best moment of the debate. The new Des Moines Register/Bloomberg Politics Iowa Poll, released today, shows that half of Iowa likely voters think the Koch brothers' support has hurt Ernst more than helped.

MORE COVERAGE: The race for Senate

Ernst also frequently cited her "good friend and supporter" Gov. Terry Branstad. The Republican governor's support was seen as beneficial by 67 percent of likely voters. Even Braley invoked Branstad, saying he worked with him on Iowa's Medicaid expansion legislation.

One of Ernst's strongest jabs at Braley invoked not a bogeyman, but Iowa's most popular politician. She reminded voters that Braley had disparaged Sen. Chuck Grassley by suggesting an Iowa farmer who never went to law school shouldn't chair the Senate Judiciary Committee.

Braley responded, "Senator Ernst, you know I apologized to Senator Grassley right away," and turned to his efforts to support farmers.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

That was one of Braley's weaker responses in the debate. He also attempted a lighter moment that fell flat, reporting the score of the Orioles' baseball game to one of the debate panelists before answering a question about Social Security. It seemed canned and out of place, particularly considering the priority he has given to retirement security in the campaign.

Braley, asked about a National Rifle Association ad trying to associate him with former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, responded he had never met Bloomberg. Republicans tried to discredit his answer, pointing to a press release from Braley that said both men attended an event by No Labels, a non-partisan issue advocacy group.

Ernst has seen a 6-point lead over Braley, reported in the Register's Iowa Poll at the end of September, dwindle to just 1 percentage point in the Register/Bloomberg Politics poll released today. She spent more time on the attack in this debate and Braley parried more effectively. At one point, the moderator suggested she drink some water after she began to cough during an answer.

While the candidates have been well-matched in their debates in terms of delivering attacks, they have offered few new ideas or solutions. The last debate of the campaign is scheduled for Thursday night in Sioux City. Let's hope the candidates bring their plans for the future and leave the bogeymen at home.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1xEEe4t