Journal on Migration and Human Security
Book Reviews

Diaspora Lobbies and the US Government: Convergence and Divergence in Making Foreign Policy, edited by Josh DeWind and Renata Segura, Social Science Research Council and New York University Press, 2014

by Thomas Ambrosio

Ethnic groups in the United States have long advocated on behalf of their countries of origin and their interests. Our understanding of ethnic group influence on the American foreign policy process, however, remains tentative. Diaspora Lobbies and the US Government, a collection of essays edited by Josh DeWind and Renata Segura, makes a fresh contribution to this area of study through its focus on policy convergence/divergence between the US government and ethnic interest groups.

International Migration, US Immigration Law and Civil Society: From the Pre-Colonial Era to the 113th Congress, edited by Leonir Mario Chiarello and Donald Kerwin, Scalabrini International Migration Network, 2014

by Breana George

International Migration, US Immigration Law and Civil Society: From the Pre-Colonial Era to the 113th Congress, published by the Scalabrini International Migration Network in collaboration with the Center for Migration Studies of New York, offers an overview of immigration law and policy that contextualizes the present challenges in reaching policy consensus in the immigration debate. This book review highlights the debate on executive action in relation to a chapter on the evolution of US immigration laws by Charles Wheeler and a chapter on the role of civil society in immigration policymaking by Sara Campos.

Mrs. Shipley’s Ghost: The Right to Travel and Terrorist Watchlists, by Jeffrey Kahn, University of Michigan Press, 2013

by Susan Ginsburg

Since 9/11, migration-related security measures, including a growing reliance on watch-lists, have limited the right to travel. Jeffrey Kahn’s book, Mrs. Shipley’s Ghost: The Right to Travel and Terrorist Watchlists, examines the legal and policy questions raised by prohibitions on travel by US citizens.

The Price of Rights: Regulating International Labor Migration, by Martin Ruhs, Princeton University Press, 2013

by Susan Gzesh

Migrant workers, particularly those classified as “low-skilled,” find that the denial of their rights is the “price of admission” to labor immigration programs. This is the global phenomenon described and analyzed by Martin Ruhs in The Price of Rights: Regulating International Labor Migration. This book review provides an in-depth discussion of Ruhs's comprehensive study of labor immigration policies and the substantial questions it raises for the global migration debate.

Waiting for José: The Minutemen’s Pursuit of America, by Harel Shapira, Princeton University Press, 2013

by Maryann Bylander

Waiting for José uncovers the practices and motivations of those who form the ranks of the Minutemen—a US anti-immigration movement that has garnered attention over the last decade. Whether readers are sympathetic to or enraged by the Minutemen’s political bravado, they will be captivated by Harel Shapira’s work helping us understand them.