Editorial: Telecommute in dispute
State Auditor Mary Taylor's routine of working most days from an office in Canton, near her hometown of Green, instead of in Columbus is not by itself reason for criticism.

Because she is in Columbus only one or two days a week, political opponents call Taylor an "absentee auditor." But they are ignoring both the prevalence of telecommuting today and the nature of the state auditor's work.

State Auditor Mary Taylor's routine of working most days from an office in Canton, near her hometown of Green, instead of in Columbus is not by itself reason for criticism.

Because she is in Columbus only one or two days a week, political opponents call Taylor an "absentee auditor." But they are ignoring both the prevalence of telecommuting today and the nature of the state auditor's work.

As long as the auditor's office is effectively managed, Taylor's location isn't of primary importance.

The same might not be true of all statewide officeholders; a policy leader such as the governor has a greater need to be where the General Assembly does its work.

But the auditor's function of overseeing the operation of government entities throughout the state means its employees and work are dispersed: 653 of Taylor's 833 employees work in regional offices away from Columbus. They can electronically communicate with Taylor in Canton as easily as if she is in Columbus.

People in the private sector can attest to the effectiveness of e-mail, instant messaging, teleconferencing and Webinars in keeping people connected across distance. Some companies with geographically scattered offices are using the technology to save the money they once spent sending people to face-to-face meetings.

Taylor's choice to telecommute is new territory for a statewide officeholder and likely stirs discussion because of its presumable purpose: to allow her to spend most nights with her family, which includes two teenage sons. The arrangement no doubt has sparked water-cooler and kitchen-table debates about whether mothers have to make greater sacrifices than fathers for their careers, and whether employers -- in this case the state of Ohio -- are well-served by accommodating family needs.

The alternative to telecommuting isn't always preferable. Witness the criticism former Ohio Attorney General Marc Dann got for racking up miles between Columbus and his Warren-area home in a state-paid SUV with state-paid driver. That's not even to mention the office hijinks, including sexual harassment and extramarital affairs, that ensued in Dann's Columbus office and eventually forced him to resign. For him, telecommuting from Warren might have worked out much better.

If arrangements such as Taylor's become more common among elected officials, ultimately voters will be the judge of whether they are acceptable. If an office-holder working away from the capital can't get the job done, voters know how to deal with that.