Kasich alters order on work rights
Gov. John Kasich signed an executive order yesterday setting an anti-discrimination policy for state-government employment and announced the retirement of a cabinet appointee after two weeks on the job.

Gov. John Kasich signed an executive order yesterday setting an anti-discrimination policy for state-government employment and announced the retirement of a cabinet appointee after two weeks on the job.

Kasich said in his campaign that he would continue a 2007 order from former Gov. Ted Strickland that prohibits discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity, but Kasich's order leaves out "gender identity."

The new governor's order protects state employees or candidates for state employment from discrimination based on "race, color, religion, gender, national origin (ancestry), military status (past, present or future), disability, age (40 years or older), genetic information, or sexual orientation."

Lynne Bowman, the former executive director of Equality Ohio, said gender identity is not covered in any definition of sexual orientation. She said she hopes Kasich still can be "fully educated" and add gender identity to a revised order.

"It is disappointing that the governor feels it is appropriate to discriminate on the basis of gender identity," Bowman said.

Kasich had said in response to a Dispatch questionnaire that he would continue Strickland's 2007 order, and the question specifically mentioned gender identity.

Asked why Kasich decided to omit it, spokesman Scott Milburn replied: "The governor is opposed to discrimination in state employment and has made that clear in this executive order in the way that he feels is most appropriate."

Kasich also signed two other executive orders: One requires executive-branch employees to comply with Ohio's ethics laws with annual training. The second continues a 2008 order requiring each agency to provide resources for victims of domestic violence and directs supervisors to accommodate their needs, including allowing them to take leave or modifying work assignments, Kasich's office said.

Meanwhile, Christine Money, who was interim director of the Ohio Department of Youth Services for Strickland and was named two weeks ago to be director for Kasich, is retiring effective Monday "for personal health reasons."

No other details were released. Kasich's office said an interim director will be named shortly.

In other personnel moves, W. Craig Zimpher, who was a top official with Nationwide Insurance until his retirement in December, has been appointed chairman of the State Employment Relations Board.

Kasich picked the Columbus resident to fill a term ending in 2016. Zimpher also was named chairman.

He was vice president for government relations at the Columbus-based insurance giant.

The state board handles matters related to public-employee union disputes and issues at the state and local level. It was established in connection with the state's collective bargaining law of 1984.

Kasich also appointed Terry L. Casey of Columbus to head the State Personnel Board of Review, which hears appeals from employee personnel matters. Casey, a former executive director of the Franklin County Republican Party and now a media consultant, was appointed to a full term ending in February 2017. Kasich named Casey chairman of the panel.

mniquette@dispatch.com

ajohnson@dispatch.com