Governor's budget fix would hurt needy, human services advocates say
About 14,400 low-income children enrolled in state-funded preschool learning programs would be dropped.

About 1,500 of Ohio's 8,000 workers who investigate child abuse and neglect would lose their jobs at least for now.

Community health-care centers would be forced to reduce hours, cut staff and eliminate services , while some county mental-health programs face shutting their doors because they would lose$1 of every $3 in state money.

Those are just a few examples of what advocates are calling a shredded safety net as a result of Gov. Ted Strickland's proposed budget cuts.

A fiery backlash has started.

Advocates for nursing homes, who would see funding rolled back by hundreds of millions of dollars in Strickland's plan, will rally Tuesday at the Statehouse, where a prayer vigil for school funding also is scheduled. Backers of mental-health programs willdemonstrate there Wednesday.

Others are bombarding Strickland and lawmakers with phone calls and e-mails.

Despite Strickland's claim that he is protecting Ohio's most vulnerable citizens, his blueprint for filling a $3.2 billion budget hole would cripple services for the poor and needy, advocates say.



Strickland's proposal, unveiled late Friday, would cut out state aid to food pantries, slash funding to community health centers, abolish the state preschool program for poor youngsters and reduce eligibility for state-subsidized child care.

On paper, Strickland's plan also calls for more than 1.1 million of Ohio's poor to lose health insurance for vision, dental and other types of care. But administration officials say they plan to continue these services and restore the child abuse caseworkers by utilizing unspecified funds temporarily, in the hope the state eventually will win a court case to free $258 million of tobacco settlement money.

What happens if the state doesn't get the judge's OK is not known.

A House-Senate conference committee has until next Tuesday to agree on a plan - that's the deadline for passing a two-year state budget.

"We implore the governor to rethink this budget framework with the House and Senate conference committee and to propose something that does not shred the safety net," said Gayle Channing Tenenbaum, chairwoman of the Campaign to Protect Ohio's Future, a coalition of health, human-services and education organizations.

The coalition is urging state leaders to raise taxes to avoid cutting such basic needs.

Strickland and legislative leaders have repeatedly ruled out a tax hike.

"I don't want to sugarcoat what we're suggesting here," Strickland said Friday. "There will be painful decisions made. Some services that people have received in the past will no longer be available to them."

Strickland also said he hoped those who provide services at the local level will "rise to the occasion" and work together to do more with less.



Local officials say responding to the cuts will be a challenge.

"It's possible children could well fall through the cracks," said Crystal Ward Allen, executive director of the Public Children Services Association of Ohio, regarding the potential loss of child-protection case workers.

"We're concerned about providers going out of business," commented Cheri Walters of the Ohio Association of County Behavioral Health Authorities, representing 54 county mental-health boards faced with the loss of $116 million.

"When you take that much money out of the system, people are going to have less access."

Julie DiRosse-King, of the Ohio Association of Community Health Centers, called a potential 80 percent cut in state aid "devastating."



The centers, including four in Franklin County, would be forced to reduce hours, cut staffing, scale back services such as counseling and dentaland charge higher co-pays.

Strickland would abolish the state's Early Learning Initiative that now serves 12,000 youngsters and slash another 2,400 public preschoolers.

"What's at risk is the future of our state's economy and the academic success of our most vulnerable students," said Lori McClung, a lobbyist for early learning advocates.

Strickland's plan, which would cut funding to private schools by about 15 percent, drew the ire of officials with the Catholic Conference of Ohio, who noted that state aid to public schools was not proposed to be cut.

"I know times are tough, but let's treat us the same way," said Jim Tobin, associate director. "If you're going to prioritize K-12 education, then our kids should be included."

Strickland also has proposed a 30 percent cut for Ohio libraries, totaling $227 million over two years. When combined with revenue losses from Ohio's declining economy, Ohio libraries would operate with 50 percent less state funding in 2009 as 2008.

Linda Murray of the Ohio Library Council said the cuts could close some libraries and force most to significantly reduce operations. About 70 percent of the state's 251 public libraries rely solely on state funding.

Dispatch reporters Jim Siegel and Mark Niquette contributed to this story.

ccandisky@dispatch.com

ajohnson@dispatch.com