Strickland signs new state budget; tax cut delayed
Gov. Ted Strickland made it official today, signing a bill that fills an $851 million budget shortfall by delaying this year's 4.2 percent income tax cut. "This bill balances the education budget and protects our schools from devastating cuts," Strickland said.

Gov. Ted Strickland made it official today, signing a bill that fills an $851 million budget shortfall by delaying this year's 4.2 percent income tax cut.

"This bill balances the education budget and protects our schools from devastating cuts," Strickland said. "It advances construction reform at University System of Ohio institutions. And it affirms that education is the foundation of our plan to strengthen our economy and create opportunity for all Ohioans."

In addition to the tax cut delay, which was to be the final year of the 21-percent income tax cut approved by Republicans in 2005, the bill allows three university projects to be completed under an overhaul of Ohio's 132-year-old construction law. It also makes it easy for schools to delay until the 2011-12 school year a requirement to offer all-day, everyday kindergarten.

Senate Republicans removed from the bill a provision that would have cut legislative salaries by 5 percent. It was placed into a separate bill, which has not yet passed.

Republican John Kasich, who is expected to face Strickland in the 2010 election, criticized the plan for raising taxes and not addressing an anticipated future budget shortfall.

"With this agreement between the Governor and the legislature, we are continuing the cycle and culture of tax and spend. It is a cycle I intend to break," said Kasich, who repeatedly refused to comment or offer alternatives during the budget fix debate.

Legislative Democrats, joined by seven Republicans, including Senate President Bill M. Harris of Ashland and Sen. David Goodman of New Albany, voted for the plan last week, ending more than two months of debate. Most Republicans characterized it as a tax increase because the current rates are going up, while Democrats called it a tax freeze, because rates will be the same as in 2008.

Under the bill, a family of four earning $60,000 will pay $78 more in income tax this year than if there was no change. The same family will pay $7 less than 2008, because of an increase in the personal exemption.

The state's dire budget situation, fueled by an unprecedented drop in tax revenue, has led both Strickland and Harris to reverse major policy positions this year.

Strickland in June proposed that the state place thousands of slot machines at Ohio's seven racetracks, after saying in April that "expanding gambling without the participation of the people of this statewould be a very wrong action."

The Ohio Supreme Court later ruled the slots plan could be subjected to a November 2010 statewide referendum, which caused the $851 million shortfall.

Republicans also say Strickland went back on his opposition to tax increases, though the governor disagrees.

Harris, meanwhile, told an audience of Statehouse insiders in November 2008: "I and our members feel so strongly that tax reform is essential to revitalizing our economy that no matter how tight the next budget, the Senate will not let me say it one more time the Senate will not support any effort to raise taxes."

Many around Capitol Square question if this is the last time state leaders will be forced to deal with a budget hole. Though revenue estimates have been on target through the first half of the fiscal year, worry remains that a continuing rise in unemployment could knock that off track over the next 18 months.

And the state is in jeopardy of losing another court case, this one regarding the use of $258 million in tobacco-settlement funds to help balance the budget.

jsiegel@dispatch.com