Kasich warns colleges to cut the fat, or else
While complimenting higher education leaders for working to restrain student tuition costs, Ohio Gov. John Kasich today asked them to work even harder. The Republican gave the state's higher education system nine to 10 months "to change its culture ... before we take an axe to them."

Gov. John Kasich is threatening to "take an ax" to state funding of Ohio's public universities and colleges if they fail to cut costs and make tuition more affordable.

"I reserve the right ... to say that within the course of the next year, if they do not enact these changes ... I think you just start cutting funding and tell them to deal with it," Kasich said after meeting privately for an hour with presidents of two- and four-year colleges and universities in his cabinet room.

But, saying he was among friends committed to the same cause, Kasich said he doubts he will need to play the heavy.

>>Follow @OhioPoliticsNow on Twitter

He said he would give higher-education leaders "a chance to do this before we take an ax to them."

"But to me, that's not the best way to do things," the Republican said. "The best way to do things is to have a team of people committed to this common goal, which is exactly where we are."

Kasich implored the higher-education leaders to make access and affordability central to their missions and reduce student costs to earn a degree.

"Mom and dad and students need to know we're very, very aware of these costs ... we're all worried about these costs," Kasich said of tuition rates that leave an average graduate with $29,000 in loans to pay.

Kasich signed an executive order forming the Task Force on Affordability and Efficiency in Higher Education to propose ways to cut costs in other areas to hold down tuition.

The task force will consist of university leaders, legislators and "smart business people," the governor said, and will be led by Ohio State University's Geoffrey Chatas, the school's chief financial officer.

The governor wants schools to consider moves such as privatizing non-academic assets, sharing services, killing low-enrollment courses, expanding summer school and other moves.

Ohio's colleges have been "largely resistant to significant change," but have adapted to cooperating in the allocation of state construction dollars and basing state aid on student course completion and degrees awarded, Kasich said.

"In the past, every university grabbed the last piece of pizza out of the pizza box," he said. "They're not doing it now."

The Inter-University Council says Ohio is the only state in the nation where public-school tuition and fees have grown slower than the rate of inflation over the past decade. Ohio college costs dropped 2.5 percent when adjusted for inflation.

"I appreciate and value Gov. Kasich's leadership that challenges universities and colleges to do more with less," Ohio State University President Michael V. Drake said in a statement. "Ohio State is committed to these goals of ensuring that students have access to an affordable education."

Ohio State again froze tuition and fees at $10,037 this school year for a full-time, in-state undergraduate. Although housing and fees for out-of-state students have increased, OSU last raised in-state tuition, by 3.2 percent, in 2012-13.

Columbus State Community College raised its tuition 2.5 percent to $2,446 per semester for an Ohio resident taking 18 credit hours of classes this school year.

Wright State University President David Hopkins acknowledged the governor's call for cost reforms.

"We embrace that challenge. ... We care about the same things," he said. "We've got more work to do."

Kasich's budget proposal would allow colleges to increase tuition by up to 2 percent in 2015-16 but would freeze tuition rates in 2016-17. He would give $20 million to colleges to enact "dramatic" ideas to decrease tuition costs.

Majority Senate Republicans have called for colleges to reduce tuition by 5 percent beginning next year and want to give $100 million in grants to students who obtain degrees needed to land in-demand jobs.

rludlow@dispatch.com



@RandyLudlow