Huckabee, McCain keep rivalry in motion
GOP RALLIES IN COLUMBUS, CINCINNATI

Huckabee, McCain keep rivalry in motion

THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

Sen. John McCain had support at a Cincinnati rally from former Sen. Mike DeWine, left, and the Rev. Rod Parsley of World Harvest Church in Columbus.

Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee said a victory in Ohio for John McCain won't clinch the GOP nomination.

The battle for the Republican presidential nomination isn't over "until Ohio says it's over," Mike Huckabee said at a rally yesterday in Columbus.

And maybe not even then, the former Arkansas governor hinted later.

On a day when all four major presidential candidates spent the day in Ohio, Huckabee, who is running a distant second to Arizona Sen. John McCain in the GOP race, told a family-friendly crowd of about 250 at the Hyatt Regency Downtown that this is "not a coronation but an election." He urged Ohio supporters to "shock America" by helping him win Tuesday's primary.

Meanwhile, McCain campaigned yesterday in Cincinnati, where he appeared with the Rev. Rod Parsley of World Harvest Church of Columbus. McCain called Parsley a "spiritual guide," while Parsley later labeled McCain a "strong, true, consistent conservative."

In Columbus, Janet Folger, former director of Ohio Right to Life and now head of Florida-based Faith 2 Action, introduced Huckabee by saying she is "pro-choice in presidential elections. I think Ohioans should have a choice for who they vote for president."

"I don't want a president who will quit and walk away when times get tough," Folger added. "The thing I like about Mike Huckabee is you don't have to talk him into doing what's right."

Slade and Angela Hutchinson of Clintonville were among many parents who brought their children to see Huckabee. One son was cradled in his father's arms, the other played at his mother's feet as Huckabee spoke.

"He's a good man with strong character," Mr. Hutchinson said afterward. "He has American values."

Values were the dominant theme of Huckabee's speech. He said if he doesn't win the GOP nomination, there won't be a true conservative left to challenge the Democrats in the fall on the bedrock issues of abortion, same-sex marriage and immigration.

In his first campaign appearance in Ohio with just a week to go before the primary, Huckabee repeated his call to abolish the federal tax code.

"We've got to kill the IRS before it kills the very last American business," he said to cheers and chants of "We want Huck! We want Huck!"

Talking with reporters later, Huckabee was asked, given his comments at the rally, if he would throw in the towel if he doesn't win in Ohio.

He hesitated.

"Well, whoever wins Ohio still won't have the 1,191 delegates need to win the nomination," he said.

Huckabee said he won several states that will be important to Republican fortunes in the fall, including Arkansas, Georgia, Iowa, Kansas and West Virginia. He said many of the states McCain has won, including California and New York, will not be GOP strongholds in the fall.

In Cincinnati, Parsley shared the stage with McCain during a rally at Hamilton County Memorial Hall in Cincinnati but didn't speak.

In a later interview, Parsley said he supports McCain because the senator will be tough on national security and "protect the unborn."

The megachurch pastor, criticized in the past for mixing religion and politics, acknowledged that McCain isn't the ideal candidate for evangelical Christians, who overwhelmingly backed President Bush in 2004.

"Yet at the same time, when you put John McCain up against Hillary Clinton or Barack Obama, the ideological and philosophical differences are overwhelming," Parsley said.

McCain did not call on Huckabee to exit the race and even mentioned his name when quizzed on his vice presidential prospects.

Some McCain supporters at the Cincinnati rally said the nominally competitive race brings some attention to McCain, rather than leave his candidacy in the shadow of the Democratic race.

"As long as Huckabee stays in, it keeps John McCain in the spotlight," said Ed Leisure, 73, of Cincinnati. "It gives him more news coverage and it's a good deal."

The morning rally generated some unwanted attention for McCain when one of the speakers brought in to fire up the crowd, WLW (700 AM) talk-radio host Bill Cunningham, sliced into Obama in personal terms. Repeatedly referring to Obama by his full name, Barack Hussein Obama, Cunningham said the media has anointed Obama without looking into his dealings with indicted Chicago developer Antoin "Tony" Rezko. Cunningham also called Obama a crony of Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley's political machine and said Obama would do business with dictators in Iran and North Korea.

"The world leaders who want to kill us will be sitting around the table singing Kumbaya with Barack Obama," Cunningham said.

The crowd lapped it up, but McCain later disavowed the remarks. In remarks to reporters, McCain said he didn't know who invited Cunningham to speak but he wouldn't be asked back. McCain said he doesn't think it's appropriate to dwell on Obama's middle name.

"We will have a respectful debate, as I've said on many occasions," McCain said.

Obama campaign spokesman Bill Burton said in a statement: "We appreciate Sen. McCain's remarks. It is a sign that if there is a McCain-Obama general election, it can be intensely competitive but the candidates will attempt to keep it respectful and focused on issues."

Dispatch reporter Meredith Heagney contributed to this story.

ajohnson@dispatch.com

jnash@dispatch.com