Issue 2 ad wars: Nearly $24 million spent so far on TV commercials
If you think your TV already has lit up with ads for state Issue 2, just wait.

Spending on those spots is rapidly expanding starting this week on the prescription drug price ballot proposal voters will decide in the Nov. 7 election.

The TV battle so far is very lopsided, with Issue 2 opponents outspending supporters roughly 5 to 1. That isn't expected to change much over the seven weeks remaining before Election Day because the opposition, Ohioans Against the Deceptive Rx Ballot Issue, is funded by the deep pockets of the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA), the trade association representing drugmakers.

Ohioans for Lower Drug Prices, the proponents of Issue 1, is funded largely by the AIDS Healthcare Foundation of Los Angeles.

Information from television stations around the state and adjacent cities shows Issue 2 opponents have spent and purchased about $19.5 million in airtime, including about $1.7 million in the week from Wednesday to Tuesday. Those numbers include ads on both broadcast and a variety of cable channels in 11 cities, including three in West Virginia.

The anti-issue spending this week was highest in the three Cs: Cleveland ($380,261), Cincinnati ($354,119), and Columbus ($284,147), records show.

By contrast, Issue 2 proponents have spent or purchased about $4 million on television advertising, including roughly $1 million in the current week, according to television station records.

Issue 2, known as the Drug Price Relief Act, is an initiated statute, not a constitutional amendment. If approved by Ohio voters Nov. 7, it would require Medicaid — the state-run program for low-income and disabled people — and state retirement systems, state employees, prisons and other state programs to pay no more for prescription drugs than is paid by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, which receives a discount of at least 24 percent.

Backers estimate that the drug price spending cap would would affect about 4 million Ohioans, including 164,000 children. Proponents say it would save taxpayers between $164 million and $536 million annually, with the most likely savings about $350 million. Opponents vigorously dispute the savings estimates, saying the plan is cumbersome and unworkable and might backfire, resulting in drug shortages and higher prices for consumers.

>> Join the conversation at Facebook.com/dispatchpolitics and connect with us on Twitter @OhioPoliticsNow

PhRMA gave $15.8 million to the opposition campaign as of the June 30 deadline for filing campaign-finance reports, while the AIDS Foundation contributed nearly all of the $3.6 million Issue 2 proponents reported receiving. The next filing deadline in not until late October, a couple of weeks before the election.

Ohio's issue is almost exactly the same as California's Proposition 61, which was defeated last year, 53 percent to 47 percent. PhRMA contributed nearly $110 million to defeat the proposition while the AIDS Healthcare Foundation spent about $19 million supporting it.

Recent TV ads by the two campaigns struck hit vastly different themes, with proponents using the cases of two Ohio mothers who point to the high cost of EpiPens, which contain drugs used to combat life-threatening allergic reactions. The ad, which is running statewide, says EpiPens contain less than $1 worth of epinephrine, but cost $600. The ad also notes that the chief executive officer of the EpiPen company was paid $97 million.

Issue 2 opponents have run several different ads, including one aimed at Michael Weinstein, president of the AIDS foundation. The ad notes that Weinstein's organization has filed 52 lawsuits of various kinds in seven states, including Ohio, and suggests that Weinstein's "gang" would not be a safe bet for Ohio deciding how to vote on Issue 2.

ajohnson@dispatch.com

@ohioaj

Listen to the latest Buckeye Forum politics podcast: