How ECOT founder William Lager cooked up a lucrative charter school
After making and losing his first fortune in the office supply business, William Lager hatched a plan for Ohio’s first online charter school on the back of napkins over countless cups of coffee at a West Side Waffle House.

“He was flat, busted broke, worse than we were. He would sit there all day long drawing on napkins,” said Chandra Filichia, a former waitress at the Waffle House on Wilson Road who was tapped to help recruit Electronic Classroom of Tomorrow’s first class of students and worked 16 years for Lager.

In financial ruin after the bankruptcy of his company and a five-year divorce and custody battle, Lager, Filichia recalled, would photocopy $5 coffee cards — each good for 10 cups of coffee — to save money while working on his business plan with longtime friend and ECOT co-founder Kim Hardy.

The two of them attended state-run classes on how to start a charter school, where they met Coletta Musick. The former principal brought an actual education background to the team. Lager already had connections for obtaining computers and office equipment. David Brailsford, a Toledo ticket broker, provided the early financing.

Voila: ECOT was born. The name was a variation on ACOT, the Apple Classrooms of Tomorrow, a pilot project that, starting in the mid-1980s, studied the integration of computers in classrooms.

>> Join the conversation at Facebook.com/dispatchpolitics and connect with us on Twitter @OhioPoliticsNow

At first, Lager failed to get the Ohio Department of Education to sponsor the school. But in 2000, he persuaded the Lucas County Educational Service Center to grant the charter required to launch the tax-funded, privately operated school.

But Lager was so down and out that he needed a ride to Toledo to pick up the paperwork.

“He borrowed my Nana’s car to get the charter from (service center Superintendent) Tom Baker,” Filichia said. “The muffler on his car was hanging on by a hanger.”

But once Lager inked that deal, his financial woes didn't last long. ECOT — and his affiliated for-profit companies that provide instructional materials, services and marketing — have brought Lager a fortune.

From 2001 to 2016, ECOT took in more than $1 billion from Ohio taxpayers, and of that total paid more than $170 million to Lager's companies to run the day-to-day operations of the school and provide it with educational software. During that time, Lager amassed millions in real estate holdings and made $2.1 million in political contributions to influential state officials.

Two years after opening ECOT, Lager bought a $300,000 condominium in the Waterford Tower Downtown, property records show. In 2010, he purchased a $433,500 home on Senecaville Lake in Noble County. In 2013, Lager bought a $995,000 house in Upper Arlington where his daughter, Jessica Lager Harris, and her family now live.

But his crown jewel is a $3.7 million home in Key West, Florida, purchased in 2014, featuring a pool and two-story cabana.

And over the years, ECOT graduations drew a GOP who's-who of commencement speakers, including former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and Ohio Gov. John Kasich.

Lager refused through a spokesman to talk to The Dispatch. But in his 2002 book, "The Kids That ECOT Taught," he detailed the hardships he has faced in his personal and professional life and how he started ECOT after reading in the paper about Ohio's new charter school law.

"I had my mind stuck on the notion that children needed an opportunity for a better education and that technology was somehow the key," he wrote.

It's a remarkable rags-to-riches tale for the 1968 Bishop Ready High School graduate whose financial troubles included the 1982 bankruptcy in of his office-supply company, Officeworks Inc., and eight court judgments in the mid-'90s granted to his creditors because of delinquent taxes and mortgage payments.

"When we started, we had three chairs, three desks, a coffee pot and a wastebasket," Filichia recalled.

Recruiting students

During the months before ECOT opened, Filichia and her sister and mother were hired by Lager to call potential students and persuade them to enroll. She said they made $5 per enrollee, $10 on the last weekend. "They gave us a list and told us to call these kids and told us if we got to 2,200 enrolled, we’d have a good job," she said.

None had a background in education, but they and other family members have worked years for Lager.



Now, 17 years after ECOT’s founding, Lager is fighting to keep his online school in business as the Ohio Department of Education begins collecting more than $60 million in taxpayer funding that officials say the school never should have received.

ECOT's board last week approved plans to slash spending by $56 million and lay off 250 employees in the coming school year.

An Education Department audit found that ECOT grossly inflated its enrollment for the 2015-2016 school year, claiming 15,322 full-time students, nearly 60 percent more than the 6,313 verified by state investigators. Whether the school has done the same thing for the following and current school years is under investigation.

ECOT, which received about $106 million in state aid that year, rejects the findings and has taken the dispute to the courts, sought legislative intervention, and tried to gain public support through a television ad blitz, all so far unsuccessful.

State Auditor Dave Yost, who has spoken at three ECOT commencements, recently ordered school officials to stop using tax dollars on ads attacking the Department of Education and urged the agency to hold a portion of ECOT's state-aid payments in an escrow account in case they are still inflating enrollment.

In May, ECOT's rarely seen leader vowed during a rally outside the Statehouse to continue fighting to keep the school open.

Lager told the crowd of students, parents and teachers that he started ECOT after his chronically ill step-daughter, an insulin-dependent diabetic, failed to get the support she needed in both traditional public and private schools. He said the schools refused to give him books so he could teach her at home and marked her as truant when she missed class because she was in the hospital.

"Every time I sought help, I was rejected. ... I got angry and upset, and a bunch of us went to work to create this dream and made it what it is today," Lager said.

But Filichia and others dispute that motive, arguing that Lager was driven much more by profit. "His phrase was, 'It's not about the (expletive) kids, Chandra; it's about the money,'" she said.

A Lager spokesman denied that was his motive.

Initial struggles

Plagued by technological issues, difficulty justifying enrollment and the firing or defections of top leadership, it appeared as if ECOT might not survive beyond its first two or three years.

One key factor was in its favor: Lager and Hardy hand-picked the ECOT board that employed their company. In fact, the man who signed the school’s agreement with Lager’s Altair Management, ECOT board chairman Donald Wihl, was a friend who owned the condo where Lager was staying. Wihl’s daughter was employed as the ECOT board’s secretary.

But friendly faces went only so far. With the school under state investigation, disputes with Altair Management prompted three ECOT board members to quit in May 2001. That group included Douglas Lumpkin, who later became head of the state Department of Job and Family Services, and Harry A. Beale, then president of Applied Coatings, who said he met Lager at the Waffle House.

“Do I think ECOT is in trouble? Yes. The potential for serious trouble is great," Beale said at the time.

Numerous families were complaining they were unable to log in or receive responses from teachers.

Gail Davenport, ECOT director of educational services, also resigned in May 2001, remarking, "none of us want to do anything that will hurt the students."

Martha Thomas, director of academic affairs, quit the same day. Six months earlier, Musick, who had become ECOT’s first superintendent, was dismissed after a feud with Lager over enrollment reporting and other management issues.

Musick went on to start her own management company, eSchool Consultants, which was hired to run the new Reynoldsburg-based Virtual Community School of Ohio. Her husband, Donnie Musick, was named superintendent of the school, which paid her company $43.8 million over 12 years.

Beale said he sympathized with ECOT employees who complained that operations were still disorganized eight months after opening. He also called the contract between ECOT and Altair a “terrible agreement” that favored Lager’s company over the school.

Hardy, Lager’s partner, also saw problems with the lack of control. "If there's anything the legislature should take a look at, it's that," he said at the time, referring to the cozy relationship between Lager and the ECOT board. Hardy split from Lager in early 2001 after the two feuded over the distribution of consulting fees.

After receiving complaints, state Auditor Jim Petro investigated ECOT’s enrollment, starting with a special audit in 2001 that found the school in its first year had no policies for processing student enrollment or withdrawals, and the state paid $1.9 million over two months for students with no documented hours of instruction.

Petro also found 99 students who were enrolled despite being younger than 5.

An April 2002 audit said the school was overpaid $1.7 million in 2001 after ECOT “did not utilize an internal audit function to monitor the hours of educational opportunity.” Petro also found the school had no procedures for withdrawing students and no policy on how enrollment would be counted, nor was information available on whether all students got appropriate computer equipment.

In that audit, Petro also noted that the school was suffering significant operating losses that “cause substantial doubt about its ability to continue.”

Lack of experience

Though unique in some ways as the state’s only online charter school, the situation at ECOT was indicative of an Ohio charter school system that got too far out over its skis. Early on, GOP leaders and many who had too little educational experience rushed to develop a school-choice movement that too often was known for conflicts of interest, closing schools and poor academic performance.

Petro, who later became a Lager ally and spoke at ECOT's 2006 commencement, wrote to the Department of Education in March 2000 that “community-school boards are made up primarily of employees and board members from management companies and are not representative of the particular community."

The department wrote a paper arguing that with an unclear law and blurred lines between charter schools and operators, “the potential for abuse is substantial.”

But the legislature wouldn’t take action to significantly limit conflicts of interest and provide stricter oversight of charter school operations and sponsors for 13 more years. Meanwhile, two things grew: Ohio's poor reputation among national education experts as the Wild West of charter schools, and political contributions from for-profit charter school operators, particularly Lager and David Brennan, founder of another charter school operation, White Hat Management.

There was little to stop for-profit operators from largely controlling the boards that oversaw the schools, while board members and charter sponsors could have direct financial interests in school operations.

Former Rep. Sally Perz, a Toledo Republican who wrote Ohio’s initial charter school legislation in the mid-1990s, defended the flow of taxpayer dollars and the decision to exempt charter boards from some state ethics laws.

"Everybody is making money off of schools, off traditional public schools,” she said at the time.

Perz, who consulted for Altair for a short time, went on to earn a six-figure salary working for the Ohio Council of Community Schools, a top state charter school sponsor founded by her daughter, Allison Perz.

While the future of ECOT is uncertain, Lager made this prediction about Columbus schools in his 2002 book: “No business could suffer results that any school in Columbus Public delivers and not be driven out of business. You would not continue as the president of a company with those results for very long.”

Today, Columbus' four-year graduation rate is 73.7 percent. ECOT's is 39.6 percent.

ccandisky@dispatch.com

@ccandisky

jsiegel@dispatch.com

@phrontpage