Q&A: Danny O'Connor and Troy Balderson respond to the Dispatch Voters Guide
In March 2018, The Columbus Dispatch asked candidates for the 12th congressional district a series of questions for the voters guide. Here are their responses.

Q: Why do you believe you’re the most qualified candidate for the 12th congressional district seat? What qualifications do you feel make you stand out?

Danny O'Connor: Voters are looking for a candidate with a track record of getting things done. I have proven through my time at the Franklin County Recorder's office that I'm able to enact pragmatic solutions to problems without compromising on my progressive values. I've enacted paid family leave for all of my employees. I have made the office one of the most efficient county recorder offices in the state, and I have expanded opportunities for veterans.



Troy Balderson: As a family farmer and former businessman, I am the only candidate in this race who has signed both the back and the front of a paycheck. I know what it’s like to make decisions for a business that have real-life implications for employees. And as a state legislator, I know my decisions have real-life impacts for those I have the honor of representing. This district is incredibly diverse with urban centers, suburbs and rural communities. I have told people throughout this campaign that I am the one candidate that can get on a John Deere combine or tractor in the morning (and know how to operate it!) and then seamlessly put on a suit and talk tax policy with CEOs of Fortune 1000 companies in the afternoon. I know how to govern but I spent the majority of my life in the private sector. That’s a powerful combination. I’m the most qualified candidate for this seat because I care about results, I’m the most accessible, and I get things done.

>> Read more: For more 2018 election coverage visit Dispatch.com/Election-News

Q: What do you feel is the top issue facing your district. Why? How would you address it?

Danny O'Connor: Health care because it is more than a political issue, it's literally life or death for many families. I will address this by fixing the Affordable Care Act and make sure that Ohioan has access to quality affordable health care that they deserve.

Troy Balderson: The top issues facing our district all deal with the economy: spending, taxes, and jobs. Under President Obama, our national debt doubled to nearly $20 trillion – that means nearly $175,000 of debt per taxpayer in the United States and is completely unsustainable. On taxes, our federal leadership has made great strides this past year in returning more of your money to you. I’ve actually implemented conservative policy as a state legislator: voted for $5 billion in tax cuts and eliminated Ohio’s deficit without raising taxes, which has helped create nearly 500,000 jobs in Ohio. If we reduce spending at the federal level and put more money back into the pockets of the hardworking Ohioans in the 12th District, we can continue to create good-paying jobs in Central Ohio.

Q: Describe, in a line or two, what sort of lawmaker you would be if elected.

Danny O'Connor: I will be a lawmaker that works across the aisle to end the great debate society our Congress has become. I will work with anyone to advocate for my constituents.

Troy Balderson: Ensuring people have access to their elected officials is critically important to me. I currently represent a seven-county district in the Statehouse – one with strong people and great diversity. I would continue to be a lawmaker who listens, responds, is visible and who takes action on behalf of my constituents to achieve results. As a former tri-athlete and extreme sports enthusiast, I work hard, never stop and that’s exactly the mantle I’ll continue to live by if elected to serve in Congress.

Q: Obamacare has been partially undone by President Trump, and questions remain on how to stabilize it. To what degree is health care a priority in your platform, and can you describe what the federal government's role should be in helping to keep health care affordable? Do you support the expansion of Medicaid?

Danny O'Connor: Health care is more than a political issue, it's literally life or death for many families. When my mother was diagnosed with breast cancer, that lesson became very real for me. Thanks to a new drug and good health insurance, my mom is alive today, but I understand how important it is that every Ohioan have access to quality, affordable health care that they can rely on when they need it most.

Troy Balderson: I have always believed the federal government should have a very limited role in health care. As a state legislator, I support work requirements for able-bodied individuals before they can utilize Medicaid and have worked to help streamline the state’s Medicaid program, saving taxpayers over a billion dollars. I refused to support efforts to bring Obamacare to Ohio because it’s an unsustainable, big-government program that is hurting small businesses and families by forcing them to pay more for their care. As a member of Congress, I would vote to repeal and replace Obamacare once and for all and bring true market reforms to the health care industry that increase competition and drive down the cost of premiums for consumers.

Q: President Trump has imposed tariffs on steel imports, which should protect jobs of steelworkers but may lead to higher prices for cars, trucks and anything else built in Ohio with steel. Do you support the tariffs?

Danny O'Connor: We need to stand up to China and others who cheat but we shouldn’t be applying tariffs on our allies who play by the rules. We also need to balance the agricultural interests of our state. We should not allow our farmers to be the victims in a trade war. We also, should not allow President Trump to pit steelworkers against farmers. We need a fair trade solution that benefits all Ohio workers.

Troy Balderson: I have very serious concerns with the recently imposed tariffs. I support free trade as long as it’s fair. Our country has consistently been ripped off by unfair trade deals, particularly by China, and that must end to protect American jobs.

Q: The $1.5 trillion tax cut signed by Trump will lead to higher deficits approaching $1 trillion a year during the next decade, according to the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office. Because entitlements such as Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid consume well over 50 percent of the annual budget, is the only way to reduce deficits is by scaling back the growth of these programs or raising taxes?

Danny O'Connor: The answer isn’t to give $1.4 trillion in tax cuts to millionaires and big corporations—we should be providing tax cuts for middle class and working families and protecting social security and medicare, not cutting them. We need to ask corporations and the wealthy to pay their fair share, not ask middle class families to pay more.

Troy Balderson: We have already seen how the tax cuts signed by the President have allowed companies to give back to their employees in the form of bonuses and higher wages, which will help them and our economy. I don’t believe scaling back Social Security or Medicare are options – people have paid into these programs with the expectation that they will be made available to them as they age and retire. However, as a state legislator, I have voted to streamline and reduce the cost of the state’s Medicaid program and I believe implementing some of those items at the federal level can help reduce spending. Able-bodied people who can work should not be utilizing the state’s Medicaid program, which is designed to help the most vulnerable among us.

Q: What do you view as the biggest inhibitor of job or economic growth in the district, and how would you work to reverse that?

Danny O'Connor: The biggest inhibitor to economic growth is not having the skilled workforce our employers need. That’s why we need to make vocational and trade school available to every young person in Central Ohio, apprenticeships with unions like the city of Columbus is doing, and bring down the cost of college. Our economy will only grow as far as our workforce can take us and we need to prepare for the 21st century.

Troy Balderson: Federal regulations are some of the biggest inhibitors of job growth in 12th District and throughout our country. As a former small-businessman, I saw first-hand how federal regulations and oversight, in many instances, simply prevented people from doing business and did not aid in the health and safety of workers. The President and the current Congress are right to have slashed government regulations and red tape recently. If elected, I will continually examine federal regulations and gauge whether they are pragmatic. If they aren’t, they should be scrapped.

Q: In the wake of a spate of devastating mass shootings, what policy initiatives do you feel the federal government should embrace to end this violence? Would you support arming teachers? Do you feel additional gun control measures are warranted and if so, could you list some examples of policies you would support? Are there additional measures you would support?

Danny O'Connor: I grew up in rural Ohio, and I appreciate the sportsmen tradition of our state. I support banning bump stocks, implement universal background checks, and an assault weapons ban. I have been given the recommendation of Moms Demand Action in this campaign.

Troy Balderson: We have seen some unimaginable tragedies in our country caused by people who have no absolutely no regard for the law. I do not believe that banning or regulating guns from law-abiding citizens will do anything to end gun violence. We must address mental health and devote resources to identify and treat individuals with mental health problems. While I am supportive of arming teachers, that decision should be left up to individual school districts – not decided as blanket federal policy for the entire nation.

Q: Do you support or oppose an extension of the federal Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals? Do you support a border wall? Can you briefly explain your belief on how to best reform an immigration system that both sides believe is broken?

Danny O'Connor: America is a nation of immigrants, and this should be a time honored value of our society. We should support everyone who comes to our great country seeking the opportunity to create a better life for their family. I also support DACA and will oppose the president's efforts to overturn it. We must work together to make sure our existing laws are properly enforced, and our compassion is balanced properly. This is another issue that we must seek higher common ground to create a long lasting solution.

Troy Balderson: The safety of all Americans is one of my top priorities, which is why I am supportive of tighter border security, including the construction of a border wall to stem the flood of illegal immigration. We should encourage people to come to this country legally. I have a friend in my hometown who assisted a family member with legally immigrating to the United States. Thanks to the ridiculous federal bureaucracy, the process took almost five years! That type of time frame for people to become legal citizens only encourages people to immigrate here illegally. I am not in favor of amnesty and believe we must first secure our border before other major immigration reforms are implemented.

Q: What should the federal government be doing to stem the opioid epidemic?

Danny O'Connor: We need dramatically more funding for prevention and treatment. Many people are facing severe addiction and need help to get into recovery and a treatment plan that will help them get back on their feet. The single biggest source of treatment for opioid addiction is Medicaid, and yet Republicans in Congress and the Trump Administration have repeatedly tried to cut Medicaid funding, which would lead to more opioid overdoses. Ohio wisely chose to expand Medicaid which is helping save lives, but I’ll fight any efforts to roll back Medicaid funding in Ohio or across the country. Finally, we have to provide funding for our first responders to equip them with opioid overdose antidotes like Naloxone that can be administered in an overdose emergency and save lives. Every first responder should have ready available access to these life-saving shots.

Troy Balderson: In Ohio, we have taken major steps to stem the opioid epidemic, and I voted to support all of those efforts, including more money for drug prevention programs and drug courts, among other policy initiatives. At the federal level, we should be providing more financial resources to the states to combat the crisis as early as possible and treat the addicted. We must also ensure the right people are at the table to help combat this epidemic: doctors, nurses, law enforcement, DEA officials, and educators – all people on the front-lines.

Q: Should the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau be abolished?

Danny O'Connor: No. We must have a watchdog in place to prevent another financial meltdown.

Troy Balderson: Yes, the CFPB in its current form should be abolished. This is another example of exactly what’s wrong with Washington: a bureaucrat-run organization of over 1,000 employees with no Congressional oversight or any type of checks and balances that claims to protect consumers. This is ripe for abuse which will only cost Americans more in the long run.