DeWine files suit seeking millions from Lager, other ECOT employees
After getting permission from a Franklin County judge to move forward, Attorney General Mike DeWine filed a lawsuit Tuesday seeking to recover state money from ECOT founder Bill Lager and other officials at the now-closed school.

The lawsuit seeks to recover the remaining $62 million owed from the original $80 million the state ordered the school to repay for unverified enrollment over two years. It also seeks to recover all profits Lager received via his two companies, Altair Management and IQ Innovations, which were paid about $200 million total for their work managing and providing software to the online school.

>>Read more: How ECOT founder William Lager cooked up a lucrative charter school

Arguing in the lawsuit that "real kids suffered real deprivations," from the millions of dollars diverted from traditional public schools to ECOT for students that were not participating in classwork, DeWine argues that Lager and others had a fiduciary duty to the school.

DeWine argues that Lager, through his involvement in day-to-day school operations and his role representing the school in public, was an agent and public official of ECOT, which prohibited him from doing business with the school through his two for-profit companies.

"Other ECOT officials stood by, or actively participated, as ECOT overbilled the public on a massive scale to keep the money flowing," the lawsuit alleges.

Lager's attorney, Karl Schneider, said the ECOT founder and his companies have kept quiet on recent legal proceedings involving the school, but that will change.

"Given today’s filing by the Ohio attorney general, Altair, IQ and Mr. Lager now look forward to finally setting the record straight regarding all of the facts, many of which have been repeatedly misstated, as well as finally being able to address the misapplication of existing law and legal theories," Schneider said in a written statement.

ECOT closed in January after its sponsor determined it would run out of money due to the state’s efforts to recover overpayments. Franklin County Judge Michael Holbrook, who is overseeing the liquidation of the school, gave permission for DeWine to proceed with the lawsuit.

“My office has been in court for over two years working to hold ECOT accountable,” DeWine said. “I will continue to be aggressive in seeking to recover public funds from ECOT, its affiliates, and Mr. Lager that they improperly received.”

Democrats have been critical of DeWine and other GOP officeholders for not acting sooner on ECOT, and that continued Monday.

“Because public pressure and bad headlines have backed Mike DeWine into the smallest political corner, he has only now felt it important to recover millions of stolen taxpayer dollars," said Rep. Teresa Fedor, D-Toledo.

In addition to Lager, other former school officials named in the lawsuit:

- Rick Teeters of Daytona Beach, Florida; superintendent.

- Michelle Smith of Bristolville, treasurer.

- Christopher Meister of Worthington, vice president of accounting

- Ann Barnes of Grove City, Education Management Information System (EMIS) director.

- Regina Lukich of Upper Arlington, director of federal programs.

Travelers Casualty and Surety, the school's bonding company, also was named.

jsiegel@dispatch.com

@phrontpage