Trump tweet denounces Kasich, who counters with Putin
Nothing like having the president of the United States whack you in a tweet to help you raise campaign cash.

Even though he is a frequent critic of Donald Trump, Ohio Gov. John Kasich seldom mentions the president by name.

Trump has no such reservations and with his Monday morning tweet attacking Kasich, it was on.

Following a recent series of TV news appearances featuring Kasich's take on the apparent narrow win by Republican Troy Balderson in the 12th Congressional District, Trump pounced.

The president tweeted, "The very unpopular Governor of Ohio (and failed presidential candidate) @JohnKasich hurt Troy Balderson’s recent win by tamping down enthusiasm for an otherwise great candidate. Even Kasich’s Lt. Governor lost Gov. race because of his unpopularity. Credit to Troy on the BIG WIN!"

The very unpopular Governor of Ohio (and failed presidential candidate) @JohnKasich hurt Troy Balderson’s recent win by tamping down enthusiasm for an otherwise great candidate. Even Kasich’s Lt. Governor lost Gov. race because of his unpopularity. Credit to Troy on the BIG WIN!

— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 13, 2018

Kasich has said Balderson's less-than-1-percent advantage over Democrat Danny O'Connor was a reflection on Trump's "chaos" disenchanting Republican voters, particularly moderate suburban women in last Tuesday's special election.

Kasich responded to Trump's tweet with just a GIF of Russian President Vladimir Putin laughing.

pic.twitter.com/wqtmN9SwhT

— John Kasich (@JohnKasich) August 13, 2018

Kasich belatedly endorsed Balderson and cut a TV commercial late for the state senator from Zanesville. Many analysts credit the governor's support in a district that includes many moderate Republicans as key, although Trump also was given kudos for generating greater GOP interest with his personal appearance three days before the vote.

Kasich political strategist John Weaver called Trump's tweet "ridiculous," while he labeled Kasich's response "humorous."

Lt. Gov. "Mary Taylor chose to run on a Trumpian agenda in the primary, and got beat, and many experts give Gov. Kasich and his team credit for helping Troy over the hump in that special election," Weaver said.

"Trump would be so lucky" to have Kasich in his corner and "he will never have him because he is a divider — not a uniter," Weaver said.

Trump's tweet also referenced Taylor, a Trump fan who lost badly to Attorney General Mike DeWine in the GOP gubernatorial primary.

She attempted to distance herself from Kasich, repudiating some of his policies and even saying she had gone months without talking to him. Kasich, to her chagrin, had endorsed her over DeWine.

Michael Duchesne, Taylor's campaign spokesman, said Monday her association with Kasich hurt her among GOP voters, but it was not the deciding factor.

"There were absolutely some 'ride or die' Trump voters in Ohio upset with Gov. Kasich who were unable to separate Lt. Gov. Taylor from her two-time running mate, despite their obvious policy differences. That being said, there are any number of factors during a campaign that contribute to the outcome on election day and I don't think this was the deciding one." Taylor is excited about Trump's agenda and the direction the economy is heading, Duchesne said.

As for Trump's take on Kasich's popularity, recent polling by Quinnipiac University placed Kasich's job approval rating at 52 percent, with 36 percent disapproving. He was more popular with Democrats (75 percent to 33 percent) than Republicans (46 percent to 44 percent).



In the same poll, Trump's approval rating was much lower at 43 percent, with 55 percent disapproval. However, he topped Kasich among their fellow Republicans.

In a mid-afternoon email to supporters, Kasich enclosed a copy of Trump's tweet in an appeal for campaign cash.

"Today started off like any other and then the President of the United States decided to attack me on Twitter," said the email signed by Kasich. "If you had any doubt at all that our message is working, this should put that to rest — no matter how laughably inaccurate his statements are."

The Ohio Republican Party did not respond to a request for comment on the Trump and Kasich tweets.

But in her own tweet, GOP Chairman Jane Timken wrote: "Did you hear the one about the reporter who asked the Ohio Republican Party Chair to criticize two fellow Republicans who don’t always agree with each other?"

It was unclear if she was referring to The Dispatch, but the paper's reporter simply asked whether the party had comment — not whether Timken had criticism for Kasich or Trump.

Did you hear the one about the reporter who asked the Ohio Republican Party Chair to criticize two fellow Republicans who don’t always agree with each other? pic.twitter.com/lXiClD5uuc

— Jane Murphy Timken (@JaneyMurph) August 13, 2018// //

rludlow@dispatch.com

@RandyLudlow

// // </p> //