Group that gave Kucinich $20K praises Putin, accuses US of war crimes
Dennis Kucinich, a Democratic candidate for governor, faced a blast of criticism Wednesday over the revelation he received $20,000 last year from a California group that defends Syrian dictator Bashir al-Assad and his Russian sponsors.

Meanwhile, the treasurer of the group, Paul Larudee, told The Dispatch, "I don't care whether he's (Assad) a dictator."

On its website, Larudee's group in December praised "President Putin of the Russian Federation ... We regard the US occupation of any part of Syria as a war crime and we call upon the USA and its Coalition partners to get out of Syria now."

Kucinich called the organization a "civil rights advocacy group."

Larudee said he views groups such as Amnesty International and the White Helmets, which are reporting atrocities by Assad, as tools of the U.S. and other Western nations.

He said — as has Kucinich — that it should be left to the Syrian people to pick their government. Asked how the Syrian people can pick their government if they can't cast a meaningful vote, Larudee said, "It's not my business and it's not your business to decide whether they can vote."

Larudee said the California group was founded by San Francisco Bay Area volunteers who are trying to end the violence in the Middle East and that its funding comes through donations, including some electronic gifts from unknown donors.

Former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland said Kucinich tried to hide the $20,000 stipend for a speech in Cambridge, England, and called on him to disclose any other such payments.

Strickland said he knew and liked Kucinich, but, "I question what I consider his erratic behavior over the years."

Kucinich, a former Cleveland mayor who is seeking the Democratic nomination for governor, was required by the Ohio Ethics Commission to disclose who paid him for the speech. It turned out to be from the Association for Investment in Popular Action Committees of El Cerrito, California.

The group runs the Syria Solidarity Movement, which opposes “imperial interests” such as the U.S. intervening in the Syrian civil war. As a congressman and just after he left office in 2013, Kucinich visited Syria to meet with its president, attracting criticism in some circles. Kucinich says he supports efforts to bring peace to the war-torn nation.

"It looks crystal clear that Dennis was trying to hide where this money was coming from," said Strickland, a Democrat who is supporting former U.S. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Director Richard Cordray in the May 8 primary. "We wouldn't have known this if the Ethics Commission hadn't requested this information."

Assad has been accused by the international community of being a ruthless dictator who has repeatedly gassed his own people, but Kucinich has questioned those accusations.

Kucinich's campaign didn't answer a question about whether he had received any other money from that group or others with ties to the Syrian or Russian governments. It also didn't answer whether he believed Assad had used chemical weapons against Syrians or whether he believes Assad is a bad guy — questions that Kucinich has steadfastly refused to answer on the campaign trail.

"Ted Strickland's remarks are reprehensible in their distortions and outright lies," Kucinich said in a statement. "He has obviously been enlisted into a vicious smear campaign launched by a desperate Richard Cordray whose only clear, unequivocal, and consistent position is to protect deadly assault weapons on behalf of the National Rifle Association."

The pro-Syrian-government group that gave to Kucinich lists as its president Kamal Obeid, an engineer who recorded a video questioning the U.S. government's explanation of the 9/11 attacks, which Strickland called "shocking."

On the campaign trail, Kucinich also has faced questions about how he has taken to Fox News to defend President Donald Trump and downplay the investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election.

One of his opponents, Ohio Sen. Joe Schiavoni, D-Boardman, on Wednesday called on Kucinich to come clean on Assad.

"It's simple," Schiavoni said in a statement. "Mr. Kucinich needs to explain his ties to one of the world's worst dictators. Bashar al-Assad has been gassing his own people to death. Friendly connections to Assad or related groups would be unacceptable. Mr. Kucinich must condemn Assad and explain himself, quickly."

Kucinich's association with the group is beyond the pale, said Strickland.

"Dennis has chosen to associate himself with the most despicable people imaginable," Strickland said, adding that if Kucinich wins the Democratic nomination, Ohio Republicans will rip him to pieces in the fall.

One Democrat in the governor's race called Kucinich's involvement with the pro-Assad group a non-issue.

"It's a distraction and we have very important issues that I've brought to the fore," said Ohio Supreme Court Justice Bill O'Neill.

mschladen@dispatch.com

@martyschladen