ECOT officials could face fraud charges; FBI investigating donations
State Auditor Dave Yost says ECOT officials deliberately inflated how much time students were engaged in learning so the school could be paid millions more in taxpayer money than it deserved — and the Department of Education didn't do enough to stop it.

Yost, in an audit of the Electronic Classroom of Tomorrow released Thursday, found that the now-closed charter school provided "junk" data that purported to show how much students were engaged in learning but really just showed how long computers were turned on. He referred the matter to the U.S. attorney’s office and Franklin County Prosecutor Ron O'Brien for possible criminal prosecution for fraud.

“For the first time, we can prove ECOT submitted information to (the department) in order to get paid that it knew to be false when it was submitted,” Yost told the media Thursday. “When (the department) went to confirm that information, ECOT hid the truth beneath meaningless and unreliable information — fake proof that (the department) inexplicably accepted.”

Meanwhile, ECOT founder Bill Lager's campaign contributions have gone from coveted to toxic for Ohio Republicans who have taken more than $2.1 million from him and other school executives over the years.

"Bill would give people money and ask them to set it aside for campaign contributions," said Chandra Filichia, who worked for ECOT for 16 years. That situation, The Dispatch has learned, has drawn the attention of the FBI because it is illegal for employers to reimburse employees for political donations.

Last August, the Ohio Republican Party abruptly returned $76,000 — $38,000 each from Lager and Melissa Vasil, his director of operations — made to the party's state candidate fund.

Filichia said she never made campaign contributions but knows of at least eight former ECOT employees who wrote checks at Lager's urging.

Yost and other GOP statewide candidates, Attorney General Mike DeWine, Rep. Keith Faber and Sen. Frank LaRose, announced Thursday that they were donating their ECOT-related contributions to charity or to other charter schools.

Yost acknowledged Thursday that ECOT likely has been getting taxpayer money it did not deserve for years, operating since 2000 within a weak oversight system. Laws were crafted largely under years of Republican rule, and were tightened in 2015 under a bill Yost advocated.

"It's great to hear that Auditor Yost has finally realized the significance of the ECOT scandal after all these years," said state Sen. Joe Schiavoni, D-Boardman.

Yost said ECOT submitted hours of time that did not detail what students were doing while computers were turned on. For one student, the data compiled by ActivTrak, the tracking software that ECOT started using in the 2016-17 school year, reported 8,857 hours, more time than actually exists in a year.

Last school year, the Department of Education gave ECOT credit for 81.5 percent of its students, but Yost said the true number was likely significantly lower.

"By withholding information, ECOT misled state regulators at the Department of Education and ECOT was paid based on that information. I believe this may rise to a criminal act," Yost said.

“With the level of incompetence displayed by both the school and (the Education Department), the regulator, it’s amazing that any money went to education whatsoever,” Yost said.

The report also suggested that Education Department investigators, most of whom have little technical-data background, failed to follow their own manual for determining enrollment by tracking "learning opportunity participation."

"I would not have accepted the watered-down, blanked-out spreadsheets that were submitted to (the department)," Yost said. "I think they have the technical personnel to do it. Whether they have the bandwidth or the will to do it are separate matters."

ECOT attorney Christopher Hogan said the school gets blamed no matter what it does.

"Last year, ECOT was unfairly criticized for not providing the student data in a form ODE (Department of Education) wanted after ODE changed the funding rules midyear. This year, the auditor is criticizing ECOT for providing the information in the form found acceptable by ODE," he said.

ECOT has challenged the attendance review in a lawsuit pending before the Ohio Supreme Court. The school has lost in two lower courts.

Ohio law does not specify how much online inactivity is permitted before a school must stop counting a student as engaged.

"There is no standard, and ECOT is thrown into a perpetual catch-22," Hogan said.

The Department of Education rejected Yost's criticism of its handling of ECOT's enrollment review.

"No one has held ECOT more accountable for the education of students than the Department of Education, and our work to return approximately $80 million to Ohio’s taxpayers continues," said Brittany Halpin, department spokeswoman.

"It is well documented in public hearings that the department repeatedly questioned and subsequently rejected portions of ECOT’s data," she said.

Yost also is ordering three for-profit companies owned by Lager or his daughter to repay the school nearly $250,000 for improperly spending taxpayer money on political attack ads.

Yost’s investigation concluded that ECOT officials utilized Lager's Altair Learning Management, the school’s management company; IQ Innovations, the school’s software provider; and Third Wave Communications, the school’s video production company run by Lager's daughter, Jessica Harris, to hide the source of payment for ads last summer aimed at the Department of Education.

The ads urged the department to keep ECOT open and accused it of wanting to end school choice and not caring about ECOT students.

After The Dispatch reported last June that an ECOT spokesman said the school was paying for the ads, Yost ordered the school to stop. He later discovered that officials with Lager’s for-profit companies then worked together to utilize Third Wave to pay a $250,000 invoice for the ads with money from a fund built up with $45,000 in monthly payments from ECOT to the company.

Karl Schneider, attorney for Third Wave Communications, called it a "meritless finding for recovery" that will be challenged. He disputes that public money was used to pay for the ads and that they were political in nature.

"Politics has infected the entire ECOT lawsuit, which has become center stage for every politician running for office, and no one is taking the time to learn the facts," Schneider said in a statement.

ECOT, formerly the largest charter school in Ohio, collected about $1 billion of state funding since its inception in 2000. It was shut down by its sponsor in January as it fell into a financial death spiral as the state recovered $80 million from the school for students who failed to get the state-minimum 920 hours of annual educational opportunities.

Even before the audit, Democrats had criticized Yost for not acting faster on ECOT last year. Yost has said his office experts needed to finish their investigation before turning over a report for potential charges.

Prosecutor O'Brien acknowledged receipt of the referral and said it will be reviewed.

"This is just the latest attempt by Republicans in the Statehouse to whitewash their ECOT scandal," said Democratic gubernatorial candidate Richard Cordray. "They willfully looked the other way as a billion of our taxpayer dollars went to a politically connected for-profit charter school instead of to educating Ohio students."

Democrat Steve Dettelbach, a former U.S. attorney who is challenging Yost for attorney general in November, said Yost should not have audited Lager after taking contributions from him.

“Cash-strapped public schools that are trying to educate kids lost tens or hundreds of millions of dollars for services that were never provided,” Dettelbach said.

Yost said ECOT officials in April declined to sign a routine letter attesting that they provided accurate information and made auditors aware of any potential fraud. ECOT had signed the letter after previous audits.

ECOT attorney Hogan said school officials refused to sign in April because they no longer had ECOT records in their possession.

"I cannot sign the Representation Letter dated April 25th because ECOT’s operations have been under the control of a court appointed Master and Interim Master since January 24, 2018," ECOT treasurer Michele Smith wrote in email Monday to Yost's office.

But Yost sees it differently.

"They specifically mentioned they had an issue with (the paragraph) that refers to no knowledge of fraud," he said.

Dispatch Reporter Randy Ludlow contributed to this story.

jsiegel@dispatch.com

@phrontpage

ccandisky@dispatch.com

@CCandisky