Mike DeWine TV ad: Mary Taylor a 'slacker ... unfit and unqualified'
After months of withering criticism from his opponent, the Republican gubernatorial campaign of Mike DeWine no longer is ignoring Mary Taylor, labeling her as a "slacker" in a new TV commercial.

The heavily favored DeWine largely had avoided attacking Taylor — or responding to the lieutenant governor's attacks — as their contrasting campaigns play out ahead of the May 8 primary.

But that changed Tuesday, with the attorney general's campaign commercial suggesting Taylor is "a slacker whose work schedule is almost untraceable ... Mary Taylor — unfit and unqualified."

The 30-second spot was unveiled after a super PAC supporting Taylor took to the air earlier in the day with a commercial attacking DeWine.

Employing partial quotes from years-old newspaper articles, the DeWine campaign spot asks: "Is Mary Taylor ready to be governor?"

"Taylor can’t keep her staff, raising questions about her leadership and oversight," an announcer says. "She was busted using the state airplane for personal use, and Taylor is dogged by rumors that she skips out on work."

The commercial ends with images of DeWine, saying he is a "proven conservative" and endorsed by the Ohio Republican Party and Ohio Right to Life.

The commercials will air statewide and be accompanied by a digital campaign, a campaign spokesman said. It includes a bare-bones website, marydoesnotwork.com The amount of airtime being purchased will match that of Taylor's super PAC buy, the spokesman said.

Taylor campaign spokesman Michael Duchesne responded: "I guess Mike DeWine isn't looking or talking past Mary Taylor anymore. The fact is, our campaign has been reminding Ohioans of DeWine's liberal record on defending the Second Amendment and illegal immigration and apparently that's hitting close to home. All DeWine has in response is to call Ohio's highest-ranking female elected official a 'slacker.' I hope (DeWine's wife) Fran sits him down tonight and explains what a bad look that is."

The DeWine campaign commercial refers to Taylor paying $1,039 to the state in 2011 after it was found a state airplane went out of its way to drop her off and pick her up at an airport 6 miles from her home in Green.

Taylor was faulted for failing to adequately supervise her staff in 2014 after her chief of staff quit for having her nails and hair done while on state time and falsifying time sheets. Another Taylor employee turned in false time sheets as well. An investigation by The Dispatch also found that Taylor's former chief of staff Laura Johnson worked on state time on the 2014 re-election campaign of Taylor and Gov. John Kasich.

Meanwhile, the commercial aired by the pro-Taylor super PAC Onward Ohio, opens, "If you like President Trump, then you won't like Mike DeWine."

Onward Ohio began airing the 30-second commercial in Ohio TV markets beginning Tuesday in a buy that totals nearly $700,000, according to Medium Buying, a Columbus firm that places political advertising.

OH-Gov: Onward Ohio (Pro-Mary Taylor group) is up on TV today with this spot attacking Mike DeWine. We've tracked nearly $700K in spending behind it pic.twitter.com/BWVictcBTt

— Medium Buying (@MediumBuying) March 20, 2018

The commercial contrasts some of DeWine's votes as a U.S. senator and actions as attorney general with the policies of Trump.

The spot portrays DeWine as soft on illegal immigration, saying as a U.S. senator he voted with Hillary Clinton, as part of a bipartisan bill, to allow illegal immigrants to receive Social Security and as attorney general found that so-called DACA "dreamers," who came to the U.S. as children, were entitled to obtain Ohio driver licenses.

The commercial says that as a senator, DeWine favored free trade with China in one bill vote and received an "F" rating from the National Rifle Association after voting to renew the federal assault weapons ban in 2006

DeWine campaign spokesman Ryan Stubenrauch countered with a statement that was the most withering against Taylor to date. "Mike DeWine pushed to build a wall, hire more than 15,000 new border agents and crack down on employers hiring illegal aliens. Taylor did nothing. DeWine fought to defend President Trump’s executive orders on immigration all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court. Taylor did nothing. Mike DeWine defended President Trump’s executive order defunding illegal sanctuary cities. Again, Taylor did nothing.

"Mike DeWine is the only candidate who has taken action to defend his conservative positions and President Trump.​ Ohio voters see a lieutenant governor whose 15-plus years in politics are defined by scandals, inaction, and empty rhetoric. She is unfit and unqualified to be governor.​"

More on the gubernatorial race:

>> GOP candidates for governor offer positions on issues

>> Governor's race Q&A | Mary Taylor

>> Governor's race Q&A | Mike DeWine

>> Democratic candidates for Ohio governor offer positions on issues

>> Governor's race Q&A | William M. O'Neill

>> Governor’s race Q&A | Joe Schiavoni

>> Candidates on video: Watch Democratic and Republican candidates for Ohio governor answer questions posed by The Dispatch

rludlow@dispatch.com

@RandyLudlow