DeWine says Issue 1 impact 'devastating,' Cordray calls it smart policy
Saying state Issue 1 would bring devastating consequences and lead to fewer addicts getting treatment, Attorney General Mike DeWine on Monday came out firmly against the proposed constitutional amendment that seeks to reduce criminal penalties for drug possession.

The measure “takes vital tools away from judges — tools that are used by judges to get people into treatment,” said DeWine, the Republican candidate for governor, adding that it would soften drug laws, attracting even more drug dealers to the state.

Without a threat of prison time, DeWine and others — including Franklin County Prosecutor Ron O’Brien and retired Franklin County Judge Scott VanDerKarr, who started the county’s first drug court — said there would be little legal incentive to push addicts into treatment.

“This threat, carefully used by our judges, has saved thousands and thousands of lives,” DeWine said. “The truth is, some people just don’t go into treatment unless they are pushed to do it.”

The proposed amendment would reclassify low-level felonies of possession of any drug, including fentanyl and heroin, to misdemeanors carrying no jail or prison time. Jail time is an option only on a third offense within two years.

DeWine's stance is starkly at odds with that his Democratic opponent for governor, Richard Cordray.

During a July criminal justice forum with former U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder, Cordray said the proposal would “set the way toward a policy of being smart on crime in the future, smart on how we use taxpayers' dollars, smart on how we build people's potential to be productive citizens in our society.”

Monday, the Democrat said, "As governor, I will work with law enforcement to make sure drug dealers are convicted and serve long prison sentences while people who need substance abuse treatment can get it in our communities."

The Cordray campaign said, "This not about letting criminals run free — its about cracking down on criminals, dealers and traffickers. This is about locking up those who are plaguing our communities and getting addicts in recovery."

DeWine said that Cordray “could not be more wrong about anything. If Issue 1 passes, lives would be lost that could have been saved.”

The Ohio Prosecuting Attorneys Association and the Ohio Common Pleas Judges Association have come out against the measure, as has Ohio Supreme Court Chief Justice Maureen O'Connor, who said it would have "catastrophic consequences," leaving Ohio with some of the nation’s most lenient drug laws.

O’Brien, who worked with VanDerKarr to start Franklin County’s drug court, called the proposal poorly drafted. He and others also oppose a provision that would reduce criminal sentences, excluding rape, murder and child molestation, by up to 25 percent for inmates who complete rehab or educational programs, which would extend beyond drug users.

O’Brien and DeWine said the issue could seriously hurt drug courts operating across the state that now can use a “carrot and stick” approach.

VanDerKarr said he agrees with those who think there are too many fourth- and fifth-degree felons in Ohio prisons, and he initially agreed with Issue 1. But he changed his mind as he investigated further, noting the impact on drug courts, including his, which had a 70 percent success rate.

Issue 1 supporters say the proposal will help drug courts, making them eligible to apply for grants from the savings generated by "reducing the state's bloated prison budget," said Stephen JohnsonGrove, deputy director with the Ohio Justice and Policy Center, who helped craft the language for the amendment.

"A yes vote on Issue 1 prioritizes treatment for addicted people by reducing our overcrowded prisons and investing the savings in expanded treatment options,” JohnsonGrove said. "Drug court judges will also have the ability to put people in jail if they are rejecting treatment options."

Gov. John Kasich supports parts of Issue 1, but "it goes too far and misses the mark in ways that could lead to serious, unintended consequences," said spokesman Jon Keeling. "These complex issues deserve a full discussion in the Ohio General Assembly."

Issue 1 also is dividing candidates in other statewide races.

Rob Richardson, the Democratic nominee for treasurer, said he sees state Issue 1 as “a good opportunity for the state of Ohio to move forward and take a really big step when it comes to criminal justice reform. ... Our focus and obsession with incarceration is not working.”

Asked about concerns about the leniency of the proposal — such as no possibility of a prison sentence for someone possessing enough fentanyl to kill thousands of people — Richardson said the current approach isn't working.

“If that was solving the problem, it would be solved right now,” he said. “Treatment is better than incarceration.”

State Rep. Robert Sprague, R-Findlay, the GOP nominee for treasurer, said Issue 1 “gives up Ohio’s fight against heroin addiction.”

Lawmakers, he said, have shut down pill mills, curtailed doctor shopping and expanded treatment and drug courts. “Ohio needs real solutions to the heroin epidemic that work and move our state forward, not backward.”

Dispatch Public Affairs Editor Darrel Rowland contributed to this story.

jsiegel@dispatch.com

@phrontpage