Editorial: Rules improving charter schools
A recent Dispatch story notes that the pace at which new charter schools are being opened has dropped significantly in recent years. That’s not a bad thing.

In fact, it’s just the opposite. Ohio’s charter schools have been receiving copious and well-deserved bad press for years, prompting belated legislation to improve standards and oversight. If more stringent regulations are the cause of the slowdown, then it means that the era of fly-by-night schools that rip off taxpayers and shortchange Ohio’s students is fading. Good riddance.

In this school year, the Ohio Education Department reports, just seven new charter schools have been launched. The previous school year, there were eight. The story contrasted these modest numbers with the 15 that opened in Franklin County alone back in the fall of 2010.

The department says there are now 362 charter schools in Ohio, down from the peak of 395 in the 2013-14 school year, when 120,893 students attended. Not surprisingly, the number of charter students is down, too, totaling 117,126 last school year.

The decrease in schools also can be attributed to the fact that many have closed. At least 21 schools closed in 2016. The previous year, 14 closed.

Meanwhile, the education department remains locked in a battle with the Electronic Classroom of Tomorrow, an online charter school, because the school has failed to ensure that students are receiving the full 920 hours of instruction that are required. The school maintains that it is only required to make instruction available, not for ensuring that students take advantage of it, and it wants to be paid regardless of how many hours students actually spend learning. If the education department prevails, ECOT might have to refund $60 million of the $106 million it received from taxpayers in the prior school year. Other schools have had to refund taxpayer money when it was discovered that they had lower enrollment than they claimed.

Schools face more stringent rules since House Bill 2 was passed in 2015. That law clamped down on conflicts of interest in the business relationships between schools and their sponsoring organizations and evaluates school sponsors on student achievement. If students aren’t learning, sponsors are barred from opening new schools, and if a sponsor is rated ineffective for three years in a row, it loses its sponsoring authority.

Some charter advocates accuse the education department of persecuting charter schools. On the contrary, the department is acting, at last, like a good steward of taxpayer money and looking out for the welfare of students.

Far from doing harm to charter schools, HB 2 and the education department are weeding out the bad actors and clearing the way for better schools. A report from the Thomas B. Fordham Institute, an education analysis and advocacy group that also sponsors 11 Ohio charter schools, credits HB 2 with driving improvements in Ohio’s charter schools. Noting the recent slowdown in the launch of new charter schools, the Fordham authors express hope that this is simply a temporary result of the charter community adjusting to the new requirements of HB 2.

Since the first Ohio charter school opened its doors in 1998, the charter experiment has been blighted by poor oversight, shady practices and the willingness of state legislators to look the other way in return for generous campaign contributions from charter sponsors. HB 2 appears to be changing that.