Governor Crist Celebrates Open Government
Office of Open Government and Plain Language

Initiative ensure citizens have access



TALLAHASSEE (March 12) – Governor Charlie Crist today restated his commitment to Florida’s open government and public records laws. Governor Crist addressed news reporters, newspaper editors and other members of the media at the First Amendment Foundation’s annual legislative luncheon. Governor Crist also released his “A Week of Sunshine” proclamation recognizing March 11-17, 2007, as Sunshine Week, designated by the American Society of Newspaper Editors.

Gov. Charlie Crist “Government’s business is public service, and as public servants, we work for the people of Florida,” said Governor Crist. “Florida’s Sunshine Law creates a window for Floridians to look through to observe the democratic process and participate in it.”

In one of his first official acts after his inauguration, Governor Crist issued Executive Order 07-01 on January 3, 2007, and created the Office of Open Government and the Plain Language Initiative. Both are designed to help Floridians access information about state government and ensure that government’s actions are always transparent and accountable to taxpayers.

The Office of Open Government is charged with assuring full and expeditious compliance with the open government and public records laws of Florida and providing training to all government agencies on transparency and accountability. As a first step, the office has arranged for 500 state employees to receive training from the Florida Institute of Government about Florida's open government laws.

In February, Governor Crist announced the launch of Web sites for both the Office of Open Government and the Plain Language Initiative. The Open Government Web site lists state agency contacts selected by agency heads to ensure compliance with public record laws. Also, consumers can e-mail the Office of Open Government directly from the Web site.

The Open Government Web site also contains training resources for state agencies, including a link to the Florida Institute of Government Web site, which offers training in Florida’s Code of Ethics, Sunshine Law and Public Records Act and a link to the Government-in-the-Sunshine Manual. Visitors to the site can also access the Attorney General’s Open Government Mediation Program and the First Amendment Foundation.

The Plain Language Web site contains examples of correspondence before and after plain-language editing and information about how citizens can request a translation of a state government document either online or by fax. Individuals submitting requests should receive a response within seven days.

As part of the Plain Language Initiative, Governor Crist has directed executive state agencies to conduct thorough reviews of their communication and customer service strategies, and then establish new standards and guidelines. The Executive Order calls for agency reviews to be completed and procedures to be in place by April 2, 2007.

In 2005, then-Attorney General Charlie Crist received the First Amendment Foundation’s Pete Weitzel/Friends of the First Amendment Award for his support of Florida’s open government and public records laws.

“Governor Crist firmly believes that open government is the best way we can respect the public trust that is bestowed upon all of us who serve the people,” said Lt. Governor Kottkamp. “Florida’s open government laws are among the strongest in the nation, and these Web sites help make government even more accessible to the people.”