Lake Erie Public Access sites in Ohio
brochure outside

brochure inside



Explore Ohio’s 312-mile Shore

Ohio's Lake Erie Public Access Guide is your resource for exploring Ohio’s Great Lake coast. From tranquil nature preserves and scenic vistas to sandy swimming beaches and prime fishing spots, Ohio’s coast has something for everyone.

As of May 1, 2012 - Ohio has 169 public access sites along Lake Erie.

Each of the 169 public access locations in the 8 coastal counties along Ohio’s 312-mile coast that were open to the public as of July 1, 2012, are illustrated with a map, narrative, list of amenities, photographs, address and location coordinates in the guide which is avalialbe as a:

Printed Guidebook: Sized to fit in backpacks, glove boxes and tackle boxes at 8.5" tall by 5.5" wide. (currently out of print).



Printed Brochure: This 8.5" tall by 3.75" wide brochure unfolds to 17" tall by 18.5" wide to reveal a map numbered with each access site, basic Lake Erie-related information, a listing of each access site by county (west to east) with site name, address, latitude/longitude coordinates, amenity listing and references to web addresses for the online guide for more information about each site. This brochure (printed July 2012) is available at various sites across the coast, can be downloaded at right and you can also request a copy by contacting the Office of Coastal Management at 419-626-7980.



Online Webpages and PDFs: Download and print the entire guide or download PDFs of each chapter or individual sites on their respective pages and linked at right via county.

Entire Guidebook (97 MB - Time: About 5 minutes on a high speed connection. This is the 2010 version of the guide and does not include all of the new sites. See " updates " for sites opened to the public after August 2010.)

Introduction Chapter PDF (1,394 KB)

Text from the individual Introduction Chapter pages are below along with links to download each page's PDF.



Online Maps: Maps of Ohio's coast can be downloaded and printed from the links below and from the "Coastal Atlas & GIS" page.

Updated August 2012 : Map of all public access sites (228 KB);

: Map of all public access sites Online Interactive Map Viewer of all public access sites

Maps of sites within each county as of August 2010 can be downloaded and printed on each county's page;

A map of each site can be downloaded and printed from each site's page.

Ohio's 169 sites that are open to the public as of October 1, 2013, are reflected in the statistics below.

County Land Area State Rank

(by land area) Access Area

(land acres) Miles of Coast Access Miles Access Sites Lucas 340.4

square miles 85 of 88 2,364.29

acres 25 miles 8.6 miles 15 sites Ottawa 255.1

square miles 86 of 88 4,779.51

acres 94 miles 14.5 miles 32 sites Sandusky 409.2

square miles 66 of 88 2,679.87

acres 13 miles 3.5 miles 1 site Erie 254.5

square miles 87 of 88 2,524.39

acres 68 miles 9.9 miles 41 sites* Lorain 492.6

square miles 29 of 88 145.81

acres 23 miles 2.1 miles 15 sites Cuyahoga 458.3

square miles 40 of 88 716.19

acres 30 miles 6.1 miles 26 sites Lake 228.2

square miles 88 of 88

smallest Ohio county 1,534.82

acres 31 miles 8 miles 28 sites Ashtabula 702.7

square miles 1 of 88

largest Ohio county 940.13

acres 28 miles 3.9 miles 11 sites TOTALS

(March 2012) 3,141

square miles 19,777

acres** 312 miles 56.3 miles 169 sites*

* One site in Erie County has been acquired but has not yet opened to the public.

** The "Access Area" for individual counties has not been updated; however, the total access area for all sites is correct as of August 1, 2012.



About the Guidebook and Website

The environments along Ohio’s Lake Erie shore range from lush wetlands and a Western Basin island archipelago to a Central Basin with impressive dunes and high shale bluffs. The shore boasts pristine natural sand beaches, cobble beaches, dunes, estuaries and many constructed points of interest including commercial and recreational harbors, industrial ports and fishing piers.



Stretching from Toledo to Conneaut, Ohio's 164 public access sites along Lake Erie total nearly 53 miles of publicly accessible shore, which is approximately 17 percent of Ohio’s coast and collectively over 15,000 acres.



Public access sites include state, city, village and township parks; county metropark preserves and reservations; state and local nature preserves; state wildlife areas; public cemeteries; memorials and monuments; light-houses; dead-end road rights-of-way and scenic vistas.



OCM created the guidebook and website to encourage exploration of Ohio’s shore and to fulfill duties assigned in Ohio Revised Code §1506 and the federally approved Ohio Coastal Management Program (OCMP).



ORC §1506.05: “The director of natural resources shall prepare and maintain a current inventory of public access facilities and areas for the Ohio shoreline of Lake Erie, including, without limitation, shoreline parks, cultural resources, natural areas, wildlife refuges, harbors of refuge, boat launch ramps, shoreline fishing areas and beaches.” (read ORC)



Policy 21 of the OCMP: “It is the policy of the state of Ohio to provide lakeshore recreational opportunities and public access and encourage tourism along Lake Erie.” (read full policy)



(Print this information as it appears in the Guidebook)



(top of page)

How to use the Guidebook - Map Legend and Amenity Key





Within each chapter, mainland public access sites are arranged geographically from west to east (west listed at the top); island sites are arranged clockwise by island.







By clicking on the amenity key and map legend (shown left), a new browser window should open with a readable legened and key. Or you can download the introductory chapter page which includes the key and legend



(Print this information as it appears in the Guidebook)



(top of page) The Lake Erie Public Access Guidebook and this website are divided into nine chapters – an introductory chapter and one chapter for each of Ohio’s coastal counties. Online, the county chapters are arranged geographically from west to east and listed on the right side of the page.Within each chapter, mainland public access sites are arranged geographically from west to east (west listed at the top); island sites are arranged clockwise by island. Site pages include a brief description, a symbolical listing of location amenities, a location map, pictures and contact information to learn more about the destination.By clicking on the amenity key and map legend (shown left), a new browser window should open with a readable legened and key. Or you can download the introductory chapter page which includes the key and legend (click here)

Data Collection and Sources

Information in the Lake Erie Public Access Guidebook was collected by the ODNR Office of Coastal Management between 2005 and 2009. The primary data collection method was through fieldwork, supplemented by these other sources:

Parcel data from coastal county auditors.

ODNR Division of Real Estate and Land Management’s 2008 Statewide Comprehensive Outdoor Recreation Program (SCORP) data.

ODNR Division of Watercraft’s 2004 Boating Access data.

The state of Ohio’s 2006 Statewide Imagery Program aerial photography.

County and local maps.

Orthometric photography

Internet resources.





(Print this information as it appears in the Guidebook)



(top of page) In 2009, coastal staff verified locations and amenities with local officials, including recreation directors, public works and service departments, park managers and other local authorities. As a result, some sites were excluded from the public access inventory and other sites were added.

Beach Safety Tips

Throughout Lake Erie there is an interconnected circulation system powered by wind, waves, the sun, river flow and water density differences. The shape of Lake Erie’s lakebed, its shore and the human-made structures along the shore influence the path of circulation.



Winds blowing across Erie’s 127.7 trillion gallons of water create waves. When the waves interact with the lakebed, shore and human-made structures, various phenomena may occur which do not happen on inland lakes or in swimming pools. By making oneself aware of these conditions and what to do in an emergency, one can help ensure they explore the shore safely.



Learn more: Ohio's Beaches



Rip Currents Due to lakebed variations, waves may break strongly in some locations and weakly in others causing the water to converge in narrow, river-like currents moving away from shore. These are known as rip currents and can occur at any beach with breaking waves.



Rip currents do not pull people under the water; they pull people away from shore. The size and lakeward pull of rip currents varies. Drowning usually occurs when people panic and are unable to keep themselves afloat. Signs of rip currents can include a channel of churning, choppy water; an area of water of a different color; a line of algae or debris moving steadily offshore; or a break in the incoming wave pattern (waves usually do not break as readily in a rip current as in adjacent water).



Rip currents are more likely to form near beaches with a sand bar and channel system in the near shore. They can also occur when a water current traveling along the shore is interrupted by a structure such as a groin or jetty. Extra precaution should be taken when swimming near shore structures. If caught in a rip current, you will feel yourself being pulled away from the shore.



The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) recommends taking the following actions: Remain calm to conserve energy and think clearly.

Never fight the current. Instead, swim out of the current in a direction parallel to the shore or float/tread water until the current stops pulling you lakeward.

When out of the current, swim at an angle away from the current toward the shore.

If you are still unable to reach shore, draw attention to yourself by • waving your arm and yelling for help.

If you see someone in trouble, get help from a lifeguard, or call 9-1-1; throw the victim something that floats and yell instructions on how to escape. Learn more: NOAA National Weather Service Rip Current Safety





SwimSafe! and Wear It Ohio! beach safety tips: Swim only in designated areas.

Encourage children and those who are not strong swimmers to wear life jackets - especially while swimming during high wave action.

Designate one person to remain on the beach to watch those who are swimming.

Exercise caution since lakes may have unseen drop-offs in the lakebed.

Take a cell phone to make an emergency call if necessary.

Be aware of heavy wave action and strong currents. (Print this information as it appears in the Guidebook)



(top of page)

Water Quality Monitoring at Bathing Beaches

Lake Erie Boating





People born on or after January 1, 1982, who operate a boat on Ohio water that is powered by greater than a 10 horsepower







Learn more:

watercraft.ohiodnr.gov/safetytips



(Print this information as it appears in the Guidebook)



(top of page) Registrations are required for every recreational boat in Ohio, including canoes, kayaks, pedal boats and inflatable boats with two or more cells. Boat owners renewing their registration may do so online; new registrations can be obtained at any ODNR Division of Watercraft office and at more than 150 independent Watercraft Registration Agents throughout the state.People born on or after January 1, 1982, who operate a boat on Ohio water that is powered by greater than a 10 horsepower engine, must successfully pass a NASBLA-approved (National Association of State Boating Law Administrators) boating education course or proficiency exam. Ohio boating laws require life jackets to be worn while riding a personal watercraft, while waterskiing or while being towed on a similar device, and by children less than 10 years of age on any vessel less than 18-feet long. Additionally, it is particularly important to wear a life jacket when the boater cannot swim or is a weak swimmer; when boating alone; when the water is dangerously cold (October through May in Ohio); during rough water/waves and severe weather conditions; when boating at night; in emergency situations and in swift and fast currents.Learn more: ohiodnr.com/watercraft

Clean Marinas





The program’s goal is environmental stewardship by making marinas more aware of environmental laws and rules and to get marinas to follow best management practices and to be designated as a “Clean Marina.” More than 40 of Ohio’s coastal marinas (commercial and public) have made a commitment to follow voluntary practices that protect the coastal environment including clean water and fresh air.



Learn more: www.ohiocleanmarina.osu.edu The Ohio Clean Marinas Program benefits the Lake Erie environment and economy. The program is a proactive partnership designed to encourage marinas and boaters to use simple, innovative solutions to keep Ohio’s coastal and inland waterway resources clean.The program’s goal is environmental stewardship by making marinas more aware of environmental laws and rules and to get marinas to follow best management practices and to be designated as a “Clean Marina.” More than 40 of Ohio’s coastal marinas (commercial and public) have made a commitment to follow voluntary practices that protect the coastal environment including clean water and fresh air.



Boat Shrink-Wrap Recycling Program



Learn more: www.ohioseagrant.osu.edu/cleanmarinas/shrinkwrap Since 2006, the Ohio Clean Marinas Program, together with Ohio company Mondo Polymer Technologies Inc. , has recycled more than 1 million pounds of boat shrink-wrap. Marinas save an average of $500 annually in reduced waste disposal costs. The recycled material has produced nearly 150,000 guardrail blocks, enough to line almost 200 miles of Ohio highway.





Clean Boating



Learn more: www.ohioseagrant.osu.edu/cleanboaters The Ohio Clean Boater Program is a proactive partnership designed to en-courage marinas and boaters to use simple, innovative solutions to keep Ohio’s coastal and inland waterway resources clean. The basic goal of the program is environmental stewardship by making marinas and boaters more aware of environmental laws, rules and jurisdictions, and to get as many boaters as possible to follow best boater practices and to be designated as “Clean Boaters.”





(Print this information as it appears in the Guidebook)



(top of page)

Ohio Water Trails

Lake Erie Public River Access

Fishing, Hunting and Trapping

Fish Consumption Advisories





The Ohio EPA examines the results of the tests and determines if restrictions are needed based on the Great Lakes risk assessment protocol for the consumption of fish by those most at risk (women of child-bearing age and children). The general trend shows that contamination levels have been decreasing considerably since a few decades ago. There are still several locations and several fish species that warrant special concern. Sport fish consumption advisories are periodically updated. The 2013 updated information is found online.



Learn more:

Ohio EPA Sport Fish Consumption Advisory

– Web page Fish consumption advisories have been issued for certain Lake Erie fish species and locations in Ohio. The ODNR Division of Wildlife in cooperation with the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (OEPA) collects and analyzes samples of fish from Ohio’s portion of Lake Erie. Samples are routinely collected by Fairport Harbor and Sandusky Wildlife staff, and prepared according to a standard procedure. The samples are then frozen and shipped to OEPA for analysis.The Ohio EPA examines the results of the tests and determines if restrictions are needed based on the Great Lakes risk assessment protocol for the consumption of fish by those most at risk (women of child-bearing age and children). The general trend shows that contamination levels have been decreasing considerably since a few decades ago. There are still several locations and several fish species that warrant special concern. Sport fish consumption advisories are periodically updated. The 2013 updated information is found online.Ohio EPA Sport Fish Consumption Advisory

Coastal Ohio Trail





The National Scenic Byways Program within the U.S. Department of Transportation designates roads as National Scenic Byways or All-American Roads based on their archaeological, cultural, historic, natural, recreational and scenic qualities. Spurred by grass-roots initiatives, 150 routes have been designated America’s Byways® in 46 states. The Lake Erie Coastal Ohio Trail is one of only five nationally recognized Ohio byways. It was designated an Ohio State Scenic Byway in December 2004 and as a National Scenic Byway in the America’s Byways® program in September 2005.



Learn more:

U.S. Department of Transportation

Ohio Department of Transportation





( Print this information as it appears in the Guidebook)



(top of page) The Lake Erie Coastal Ohio Trail is a state and federally recognized path for vehicle traffic that primarily follows roads closest to Lake Erie from Toledo to Conneaut. The trail links harbors, lighthouses, natural wonders, historical attractions, tourist destinations and scenic views of Lake Erie.The National Scenic Byways Program within the U.S. Department of Transportation designates roads as National Scenic Byways or All-American Roads based on their archaeological, cultural, historic, natural, recreational and scenic qualities. Spurred by grass-roots initiatives, 150 routes have been designated America’s Byways® in 46 states. The Lake Erie Coastal Ohio Trail is one of only five nationally recognized Ohio byways. It was designated an Ohio State Scenic Byway in December 2004 and as a National Scenic Byway in the America’s Byways® program in September 2005.U.S. Department of Transportation National Scenic Byways Program Ohio Department of Transportation Lake Erie Coastal OhioTrail

Ice on Lake Erie