Youth & Labor

Agricultural Employment

In farm work, permissible jobs and hours of work vary by age.

Parental exemption: Minors of any age may be employed by their parents at any time in any occupation on a farm owned or operated by his or her parent(s).

All exemptions to agricultural employment rules are statutory in nature and the Department's regulations reflect laws enacted by the U.S. Congress.

Many states’ statutes and regulations place tighter restrictions on farm work hours performed by minors. Consult your state department of labor for specific information.

DOL Web Pages on This Topic

Child Labor Requirements in Agricultural Occupations Under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)

Child Labor Bulletin 102

State Child Labor Laws Applicable to Agricultural Employment

Chart displaying major rules pertaining to minors employed in agriculture.

Occupations in Agriculture Particularly Hazardous for the Employment of Children Below Age 16

Regulations on hazardous occupations.

Youth Rules!

A gateway providing quick access to information about federal and state labor laws that apply to young workers. The web page includes information designed to educate teens, parents, educators, and employers about the hours youth can work, the jobs youth can do, and how to prevent workplace injuries.

elaws Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) Advisor — Child Labor Rules

This Advisor answers questions about workers and businesses that are subject to the FLSA's child labor rules.

State Labor Offices/State Laws

Information on state minimum wage rates and other state child labor topics.

State Departments of Labor Web Sites

Links to state departments of labor web sites and contact information for each department.

Related Web Pages on This Topic

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)

Federal institute responsible for conducting research and making recommendations for the prevention of work-related illnesses and injuries.

Health and Safety for Kids on the Farm

Young worker safety pamphlet from NIOSH.

Laws & Regulations on This Topic

Regulations

29 CFR §570.2

Hazardous Occupations in Agriculture

29 CFR §§579.1 through 579.9

Minimum Age Standards for Non-Hazardous Employment

29 CFR §570.119

14-year Minimum Age for Certain Occupations