List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor

Country Good Child Labor Forced Labor Exploitation Type

Afghanistan Bricks X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Afghanistan Carpets X Child Labor

Afghanistan Coal X Child Labor

Afghanistan Flowers (poppies) X Child Labor

Angola Diamonds X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Argentina Blueberries X Child Labor

Argentina Bricks X Child Labor

Argentina Cotton X Child Labor

Argentina Garlic X Child Labor

Argentina Garments X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Argentina Grapes X Child Labor

Argentina Olives X Child Labor

Argentina Strawberries X Child Labor

Argentina Tobacco X Child Labor

Argentina Tomatoes X Child Labor

Argentina Yerba Mate (stimulant plant) X Child Labor

Azerbaijan Cotton X Child Labor

Bangladesh Bidis (hand-rolled cigarettes) X Child Labor

Bangladesh Bricks X Child Labor

Bangladesh Dried Fish X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Bangladesh Footwear X Child Labor

Bangladesh Furniture (steel) X Child Labor

Bangladesh Garments X Child Labor

Bangladesh Glass X Child Labor

Bangladesh Leather X Child Labor

Bangladesh Matches X Child Labor

Bangladesh Poultry X Child Labor

Bangladesh Salt X Child Labor

Bangladesh Shrimp X Child Labor

Bangladesh Soap X Child Labor

Bangladesh Textiles X Child Labor

Bangladesh Textiles (jute) X Child Labor

Belize Bananas X Child Labor

Belize Citrus Fruits X Child Labor

Belize Sugarcane X Child Labor

Benin Cotton X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Benin Granite (crushed) X Child Labor

Bolivia Brazil Nuts/Chestnuts X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Bolivia Bricks X Child Labor

Bolivia Cattle X Forced Labor

Bolivia Corn X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Bolivia Gold X Child Labor

Bolivia Peanuts X Forced Labor

Bolivia Silver X Child Labor

Bolivia Sugarcane X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Bolivia Tin X Child Labor

Bolivia Zinc X Child Labor

Brazil Beef X Child Labor

Brazil Bricks X Child Labor

Brazil Cashews X Child Labor

Brazil Cattle X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Brazil Ceramics X Child Labor

Brazil Charcoal X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Brazil Cotton X Child Labor

Brazil Footwear X Child Labor

Brazil Garments X Forced Labor

Brazil Manioc/Cassava X Child Labor

Brazil Pineapples X Child Labor

Brazil Rice X Child Labor

Brazil Sisal X Child Labor

Brazil Sugarcane X Forced Labor

Brazil Timber X Forced Labor

Brazil Tobacco X Child Labor

Burkina Faso Cotton X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Burkina Faso Gold X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Burkina Faso Granite There are reports that children ages 5 to 17 work in granite quarries in Burkina Faso. These children are primarily found in granite quarries located in Pissy and Yagma, on the outskirts of the capital, Ouagadougou. According to Government of Burkina Faso officials, NGOs, and the U.S. Department of State, numerous incidents of child labor have been reported in these granite quarries, including hundreds of children working in the Pissy quarry, and NGOs report that the problem is increasing. Children work for long hours breaking large rocks by hand and carrying heavy loads of dirt, rock, and gravel. Children in granite quarries are at high risk of physical injury, and are exposed to large quantities of dust and smoke, which can cause respiratory diseases. Some children also experience physical abuse in the quarries. French translation X Child Labor

Burma Bamboo X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Burma Beans (green, soy, yellow) X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Burma Bricks X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Burma Jade X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Burma Palm Thatch X Forced Labor

Burma Physic Nuts/Castor Beans X Forced Labor

Burma Rice X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Burma Rubber X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Burma Rubies X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Burma Sesame X Forced Labor

Burma Shrimp X Forced Labor

Burma Sugarcane X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Burma Sunflowers X Forced Labor

Burma Teak X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Cambodia Alcoholic Beverages X Child Labor

Cambodia Bricks X Child Labor

Cambodia Cassava X Child Labor

Cambodia Fish X Child Labor

Cambodia Meat X Child Labor

Cambodia Rubber X Child Labor

Cambodia Salt X Child Labor

Cambodia Shrimp X Child Labor

Cambodia Sugarcane There are reports that children ages 5 to 17 produce sugarcane in Cambodia. Child labor in the sugarcane sector occurs on both commercial plantations and smallholder farms. Children from families that have lost land through concessions to sugar companies are particularly vulnerable to exploitative labor on plantations. According to international organizations, NGOs, and media reports, child labor in the Cambodian sugarcane sector is a widespread concern, with numerous incidents reported across the country, including reports of hundreds of children cutting cane on plantations in the Koh Kong province. Children laboring in the sugarcane fields often work long hours under the hot sun and report difficulty breathing, headaches, and dizziness as a result. Child workers in this sector perform hazardous tasks such as carrying heavy bundles of sugarcane, using dangerous tools, and spraying toxic pesticides. Many children incur injuries on the job, including skin infections and cuts from sharp cane leaves or knives. Khmer translation X Child Labor

Cambodia Textiles X Child Labor

Cambodia Timber X Child Labor

Cambodia Tobacco X Child Labor

Cameroon Cocoa X Child Labor

Central African Republic Diamonds X Child Labor

Chad Cattle X Child Labor

China Artificial Flowers X Forced Labor

China Bricks X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

China Christmas Decorations X Forced Labor

China Coal X Forced Labor

China Cotton X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

China Electronics X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

China Fireworks X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

China Footwear X Forced Labor

China Garments X Forced Labor

China Nails X Forced Labor

China Textiles X Child Labor

China Toys X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Colombia Bricks (clay) X Child Labor

Colombia Coal X Child Labor

Colombia Coca (stimulant plant) X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Colombia Coffee X Child Labor

Colombia Emeralds X Child Labor

Colombia Gold X Child Labor

Colombia Pornography X Child Labor

Colombia Sugarcane X Child Labor

Costa Rica Cattle There is evidence that children ages 5 to 17 are engaged in cattle raising in Costa Rica. A 2015 analysis by international organizations of the Government of Costa Rica’s National Household Survey (ENAHO) 2011 indicates that 13.8 percent of child laborers in the country, or 2,230 children ages 5 to 14, were engaged in cattle raising, which includes dairy. The ENAHO 2011 counts as child labor all work performed by a child below age 15. In addition, the analysis indicates that 9.3 percent of working adolescents, or 2,905 adolescents ages 15 to 17, were also engaged in cattle raising. The analysis noted that 78 percent of children and adolescents in child labor in Costa Rica work with their families. Although more recent national surveys have shown a 65 percent decrease in the number of children ages 12 to 17 working in agriculture from 13,866 in 2011 to 4,853 in 2015these surveys do not provide the number of children in child labor in cattle raising. Data from the 2016 ENAHO, which included a child labor module, is expected to be released in early 2017. Spanish translation X Child Labor

Costa Rica Coffee There are reports that children ages 5 to 17 cultivate coffee in Costa Rica. Based on an analysis by international organizations of the Government of Costa Rica’s National Household Survey (ENAHO) 2011, published in 2015, 8.8 percent of child laborers in the country, or approximately 1,422 children ages 5-14, were in child labor in coffee production in Costa Rica. The ENAHO 2011 counts as child labor all work performed by a child below age 15. In addition, the analysis indicates that 5.2 percent of working adolescents ages 15 to 17, or 1,625 adolescents, were also engaged in coffee production. The analysis noted that 78 percent of children and adolescents in child labor in Costa Rica work with their families. Although more recent national surveys have shown a 65 percent decrease in the number of children ages 12 to 17 working in agriculture from 13,866 in 2011 to 4,853 in 2015, these surveys do not provide the number of children in child labor in the coffee sector. Data from the 2016 ENAHO, which included a child labor module, is expected to be released in early 2017. Spanish translation X Child Labor

Cote d'Ivoire Cocoa X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Cote d'Ivoire Coffee X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Democratic Republic of the Congo Tin ore (cassiterite) X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Democratic Republic of the Congo Tantalum ore (coltan) X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Democratic Republic of the Congo Copper X Child Labor

Democratic Republic of the Congo Diamonds X Child Labor

Democratic Republic of the Congo Cobalt ore (heterogenite) X Child Labor

Democratic Republic of the Congo Gold X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Democratic Republic of the Congo Tungsten ore (wolframite) X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Dominican Republic Baked Goods X Child Labor

Dominican Republic Coffee X Child Labor

Dominican Republic Rice X Child Labor

Dominican Republic Sugarcane X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Dominican Republic Tomatoes X Child Labor

Ecuador Bananas X Child Labor

Ecuador Bricks X Child Labor

Ecuador Flowers X Child Labor

Ecuador Gold X Child Labor

Egypt Cotton X Child Labor

Egypt Stones (limestone) X Child Labor

El Salvador Coffee X Child Labor

El Salvador Fireworks X Child Labor

El Salvador Shellfish X Child Labor

El Salvador Sugarcane X Child Labor

Ethiopia Cattle X Child Labor

Ethiopia Gold X Child Labor

Ethiopia Textiles (hand-woven) X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Ghana Cocoa X Child Labor

Ghana Fish X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Ghana Gold X Child Labor

Ghana Tilapia (fish) X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Guatemala Broccoli X Child Labor

Guatemala Coffee X Child Labor

Guatemala Corn X Child Labor

Guatemala Fireworks X Child Labor

Guatemala Gravel (crushed stones) X Child Labor

Guatemala Sugarcane X Child Labor

Guinea Cashews X Child Labor

Guinea Cocoa X Child Labor

Guinea Coffee X Child Labor

Guinea Diamonds X Child Labor

Guinea Gold X Child Labor

Honduras Coffee X Child Labor

Honduras Lobsters X Child Labor

Honduras Melons X Child Labor

India Bidis (hand-rolled cigarettes) X Child Labor

India Brassware X Child Labor

India Bricks X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

India Carpets X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

India Cotton X Child Labor

India Cottonseed (hybrid) X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

India Embellished Textiles X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

India Fireworks X Child Labor

India Footwear X Child Labor

India Garments X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

India Gems X Child Labor

India Glass Bangles X Child Labor

India Incense (agarbatti) X Child Labor

India Leather Goods/Accessories X Child Labor

India Locks X Child Labor

India Matches X Child Labor

India Rice X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

India Silk Fabric X Child Labor

India Silk Thread X Child Labor

India Soccer Balls X Child Labor

India Stones X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

India Sugarcane X Child Labor

India Thread/Yarn X Child Labor

Indonesia Fish There are reports that adults, predominantly men, are forced to work in the fishing industry in Indonesia. Forced labor often occurs on fishing vessels operating in Indonesian territorial waters, especially around the remote island ports of Benjina and Ambon. The majority of exploited fishermen are Cambodian, Lao, and Burmese nationals. Since March 2015, the International Organization for Migration, in collaboration with the Indonesian Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries, has identified approximately 1,500 new labor trafficking cases in the Indonesian fishing industry, with media sources reporting the rescue of more than 2,000 trafficked fishermen during 2015. Victims report being coerced or tricked in their home countries into working on Thai fishing vessels by brokers who promise jobs in other sectors, and then being held in forced labor for up to 10 years. Often fishermen are locked in cells to prevent their escape. Some men have been forced to fish for 20 to 22 hours a day, with little or no pay, and have been subjected to threats and severe physical abuse while at sea. Indonesian translation X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Indonesia Footwear (sandals) X Child Labor

Indonesia Gold X Child Labor

Indonesia Oil (palm) X Child Labor

Indonesia Rubber X Child Labor

Indonesia Tin There are reports that children ages 5 to 17 work in tin mining in Indonesia. Child labor in this sector is concentrated in the tin-producing islands of Bangka-Belitung province, in ASM. According to a 2014 ILO sectoral survey on child labor in informal tin mining, published in 2015, an estimated 6,300 children are engaged in child labor in tin mining. Children work at dangerous heights and in deep, slippery pits where there are high risks of landslides and injuries. Children’s tasks include operating pressurized-water machinery to separate tin from other materials, digging in the earth to find tin deposits, and panning for tin in bodies of water where children are exposed to extreme weather conditions and are at risk of drowning. Indonesian translation X Child Labor

Indonesia Tobacco X Child Labor

Iran Bricks There are reports that children ages 7 to 17 produce bricks in Iran. Media reports indicate that most brick kiln workers are Afghan migrants whose children work alongside them in the summer months. There are reports of child labor in the production of bricks in various parts of the country, including Tehran, Shahr-e Rey, and Gorgan. For example, available data indicates that there are 25,000 workers in brick kilns in Tehran Province, and news articles report that in one town in Tehran Province, the majority of the brick kiln workforce consists of school-aged children who do not attend school. According to Iranian news outlets, children in the brick kilns work more than 8 hours a day and are exposed to injuries, dust, and extreme heat. Persian translation X Child Labor

Iran Carpets X Child Labor

Kazakhstan Cotton X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Kenya Coffee X Child Labor

Kenya Fish X Child Labor

Kenya Miraa (stimulant plant) X Child Labor

Kenya Rice X Child Labor

Kenya Sisal X Child Labor

Kenya Sand There are reports that children ages 10 to 17 mine or “harvest” sand in Kenya. These children reportedly work in Busia, Homa Bay, Kilifi, Kitui, Machakos, and Nakuru counties. It is reported that boys are more likely to work in harvesting sand than girls. In a study from Kenyatta University, sand harvesting was the most frequently reported reason for primary school students to drop out in Kathiani Division in Machakos. Among 80 students interviewed, all said they were involved in sand harvesting to some degree. Similarly, a survey of local residents and interviews with community stakeholders in Magarini determined that sand harvesting was a leading form of child labor for boys. In addition, according to the ILO, academics, NGOs, local government officials, and the U.S. Department of State, numerous incidents of child labor have been reported in sand production across the country. In many cases, children drop out of school to dig and shovel sand in and along rivers and load and unload sand onto and from large trucks. Children harvest sand during school hours and at night, and are at risk of accidents from collapsing mine walls that can result in loss of life. Swahili translation X Child Labor

Kenya Sugarcane X Child Labor

Kenya Tea X Child Labor

Kenya Tobacco X Child Labor

Kyrgyz Republic Cotton X Child Labor

Kyrgyz Republic Tobacco X Child Labor

Lebanon Potatoes There are reports that children ages 7 to 17 harvest potatoes in Lebanon. Most children are Syrian refugees who live and work in Lebanon’s Bekaa Valley. Based on information from international humanitarian organizations, thousands of children are engaged in child labor in the cultivation and harvesting of potatoes. Many of these children work long hours carrying heavy loads, are exposed to extreme temperatures, and lack access to potable water and toilet facilities. Some are beaten by their employers if they do not behave as expected or work slower than required. Many of these children do not attend school. Arabic translation X Child Labor

Lebanon Tobacco X Child Labor

Lesotho Cattle X Child Labor

Liberia Diamonds X Child Labor

Liberia Rubber X Child Labor

Madagascar Sapphires X Child Labor

Madagascar Stones X Child Labor

Madagascar Vanilla X Child Labor

Malawi Tea X Child Labor

Malawi Tobacco X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Malaysia Electronics X Forced Labor

Malaysia Garments X Forced Labor

Malaysia Oil (palm) X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Mali Cotton X Child Labor

Mali Gold X Child Labor

Mali Rice X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Mauritania Cattle X Child Labor

Mauritania Goats X Child Labor

Mexico Beans (green beans) X Child Labor

Mexico Chile Peppers X Child Labor

Mexico Coffee X Child Labor

Mexico Cucumbers X Child Labor

Mexico Eggplants X Child Labor

Mexico Melons X Child Labor

Mexico Onions X Child Labor

Mexico Pornography X Child Labor

Mexico Sugarcane X Child Labor

Mexico Tobacco X Child Labor

Mexico Tomatoes X Child Labor

Mongolia Coal X Child Labor

Mongolia Fluorspar (mineral) X Child Labor

Mongolia Gold X Child Labor

Mozambique Tobacco X Child Labor

Namibia Cattle X Child Labor

Nepal Bricks X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Nepal Carpets X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Nepal Embellished Textiles X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Nepal Stones X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Nicaragua Bananas X Child Labor

Nicaragua Coffee X Child Labor

Nicaragua Gold X Child Labor

Nicaragua Gravel (crushed stones) X Child Labor

Nicaragua Shellfish X Child Labor

Nicaragua Stones (pumice) X Child Labor

Nicaragua Tobacco X Child Labor

Niger, Niger Cattle X Forced Labor

Niger, Niger Gold X Child Labor

Niger, Niger Gypsum (mineral) X Child Labor

Niger, Niger Salt X Child Labor

Niger, Niger Trona (mineral) X Child Labor

Nigeria Cocoa X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Nigeria Gold There are reports that children as young as age 8 mine gold in Nigeria. This practice is especially common in Zamfara state, which has significant gold deposits. Media outlets report hundreds of children work in artisanal and small-scale gold mining (ASGM) throughout Nigeria, causing them to abandon school. ASGM involves physically demanding work due to the un-mechanized nature and often many occupational safety and health risks. Children use their bare hands and tools to dig for gold in tunnels hundreds of meters below ground, without any protective equipment. Children face additional health risks during the processing stage when they handle mercury, a highly toxic substance, using it to extract gold from ore. Crushing ore to extract gold exposes children to lead-contaminated dust. This exposure can lead to acute lead poisoning and in May 2015 the Government announced the deaths of 28 children from lead poisoning as a result of the illegal mining of gold in Nigeria. X Child Labor

Nigeria Granite X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Nigeria Gravel (crushed stones) X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Nigeria Manioc/Cassava X Child Labor

Nigeria Sand X Child Labor

North Korea Bricks X Forced Labor

North Korea Cement X Forced Labor

North Korea Coal X Forced Labor

North Korea Gold X Forced Labor

North Korea Iron X Forced Labor

North Korea Textiles X Forced Labor

North Korea Timber X Forced Labor

Pakistan Bricks X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Pakistan Carpets X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Pakistan Coal X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Pakistan Cotton X Forced Labor

Pakistan Glass Bangles X Child Labor

Pakistan Leather X Child Labor

Pakistan Sugarcane X Forced Labor

Pakistan Surgical Instruments X Child Labor

Pakistan Wheat X Forced Labor

Panama Coffee X Child Labor

Panama Melons X Child Labor

Panama Sugarcane X Child Labor

Paraguay Bricks X Child Labor

Paraguay Cattle X Forced Labor

Paraguay Cotton X Child Labor

Paraguay Pornography X Child Labor

Paraguay Stones (limestone) X Child Labor

Paraguay Sugarcane X Child Labor

Peru Brazil Nuts/Chestnuts X Forced Labor

Peru Bricks X Child Labor

Peru Coca (stimulant plant) X Child Labor

Peru Fireworks X Child Labor

Peru Fish X Child Labor

Peru Gold X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Peru Timber X Forced Labor

Philippines Bananas X Child Labor

Philippines Coconuts X Child Labor

Philippines Corn X Child Labor

Philippines Fashion Accessories X Child Labor

Philippines Fish X Child Labor

Philippines Gold X Child Labor

Philippines Hogs X Child Labor

Philippines Pornography X Child Labor

Philippines Pyrotechnics X Child Labor

Philippines Rice X Child Labor

Philippines Rubber X Child Labor

Philippines Sugarcane X Child Labor

Philippines Tobacco X Child Labor

Russia Pornography X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Rwanda Tea X Child Labor

Senegal Gold X Child Labor

Sierra Leone Cocoa X Child Labor

Sierra Leone Coffee X Child Labor

Sierra Leone Diamonds X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Sierra Leone Granite X Child Labor

Sierra Leone Oil (Palm) X Child Labor

South Sudan, South Sudan Cattle X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Sudan. Sudan Gold There are reports that children as young as 10 years old mine gold in Sudan. Children engage in ASGM throughout the country, particularly in River Nile, Blue Nile, West Darfur, and North Darfur states, some of which are currently zones of civil conflict. According to Sudanese government officials, academics, mining sector representatives, international organizations, NGOs, and the U.S. Department of State, thousands of children are working in ASGM throughout the country, resulting in large numbers of students dropping out of school. Artisanal mining poses significant physical and psychological risks to the health and safety of child miners, including exposure to mercury, working underground in confined spaces that risk collapse, transporting heavy loads in high temperatures, inhalation of dust during milling and grinding, and working at night. Children also experience threats and, at times, sexual harassment or abuse. Arabic translation X Child Labor

Suriname Gold X Child Labor

Tajikistan Cotton X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Tanzania Cloves X Child Labor

Tanzania Coffee X Child Labor

Tanzania Gold X Child Labor

Tanzania Nile Perch (fish) X Child Labor

Tanzania Sisal X Child Labor

Tanzania Tanzanite (gems) X Child Labor

Tanzania Tea X Child Labor

Tanzania Tobacco X Child Labor

Thailand Fish X Forced Labor

Thailand Garments X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Thailand Pornography X Child Labor

Thailand Shrimp X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Thailand Sugarcane X Child Labor

Turkey Citrus Fruits X Child Labor

Turkey Cotton X Child Labor

Turkey Cumin X Child Labor

Turkey Furniture X Child Labor

Turkey Hazelnuts X Child Labor

Turkey Peanuts X Child Labor

Turkey Pulses (legumes) X Child Labor

Turkey Sugar Beets X Child Labor

Turkmenistan Cotton X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Uganda Bricks X Child Labor

Uganda Cattle X Child Labor

Uganda Charcoal X Child Labor

Uganda Coffee X Child Labor

Uganda Fish X Child Labor

Uganda Gold There are reports that children as young as age 7 mine gold in Uganda. This practice is especially common in eastern Uganda and in the northeastern Karamoja region, where children typically work alongside family members. According to international organizations and the media, thousands of children abandon school to work in ASGM. One research study found approximately 1,000 children working in gold mines in central Uganda. Boys work in dangerous conditions in the mines, collecting soil from deep, open pits. Children mine gold in riverbeds, use toxic mercury to process gold ore, and carry water from long distances to sift and wash sediment. Swahili translation X Child Labor

Uganda Rice X Child Labor

Uganda Stones There are reports that children as young as age 7 work in stone quarries in Uganda. Children, primarily boys, quarry and break stone in 3 of the 4 regions of Uganda. Areas of particular concern for children working in quarries include the northeastern Karamoja region and Central Uganda. The Uganda Bureau of Statistics estimates that 2,124 workers are involved in formal employment in stone quarrying; the majority of these work in quarries in Central Uganda. However, many workers are also known to quarry stone in informal, artisanal quarries, including many children. According to international organizations, media sources, and the U.S. Department of State, numerous incidents of children quarrying and breaking stone have been reported across the country and most notably in the northeastern Karamoja region. This work prevents children from attending school. In addition, children are exposed to loud noises, dust, long hours in extreme heat, and injury from flying stone fragments. Accidents from quarrying stone have resulted in loss of limbs, broken spinal cords, and loss of sight. Swahili translation X Child Labor

Uganda Sugarcane X Child Labor

Uganda Tea X Child Labor

Uganda Tobacco X Child Labor

Uganda Vanilla X Child Labor

Ukraine Coal X Child Labor

Ukraine Pornography X Child Labor

Uzbekistan Cotton X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Uzbekistan Silk Cocoons There are reports that adults are forced to cultivate silk cocoons in Uzbekistan. A silk cocoon is the protective casing a silkworm spins around itself before metamorphosing into a moth. Silk cocoons can be processed and unwound to produce silk thread. Forced labor in cocoon production predominantly occurs among farmers in the south of the country, although evidence suggests that other rural families are also subjected to forced labor in this sector. Based on estimates from the Uzbek-German Forum, a majority of the over 45,000 farmers in Uzbekistan who produce silk cocoons each year do not have the freedom to refuse this work; they are compelled to perform it by government officials. Regional- and district-level officials assign each farmer a quota for the production of silk cocoons, and threaten farmers with fines, the loss of their leased farmland, or physical violence if they fail to meet the quota. Farmers are required to sell their silk cocoons back to the government at an official procurement price, which can be too low to offset the cost of cultivating the cocoons, and often experience underpayment, delayed payment, or receive no payment at all. Regional- and district-level governments also impose quotas on neighborhood councils called mahallas, which use their authority over distribution of social benefit payments to force neighborhood residents to cultivate silk cocoons. Because silkworms require constant attention and the maintenance of a carefully controlled environment in order to survive, farmers and rural families often cultivate cocoons in several rooms of their own homes and many work more than 20 hours a day during the approximately month-long cultivation period. Uzbek translation X Forced Labor

Vietnam Bricks X Child Labor

Vietnam Cashews There is evidence that children ages 5 to 17 grow cashews in Vietnam. According to the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, the results of which were published in 2014, an estimated 14,469 child laborers work to grow cashews. Approximately 55.7 percent, or 8,059, of these child laborers are under 15 years old, which is the minimum age for employment in Vietnam. Of the estimated 14,469 child laborers who grow cashews, 24.3 percent are 5-11 years old, 31.4 percent are 12-14 years old, and 44.3 percent are 15-17 years old. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Coffee There are reports that children ages 5 to 17 in Vietnam cultivate coffee. The results of the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, published in 2014, show that an estimated 34,131 child laborers grow coffee. Approximately 36.7 percent, or 12,526, of these child laborers are under 15 years old, which is the minimum age for employment in Vietnam. Of the estimated 34,131 child laborers who grow coffee, 9.2 percent are 5-11 years old, 27.5 percent are 12-14 years old, and 63.3 percent are 15-17 years old. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Fish There is evidence that children ages 5 to 17 are engaged in fishing and fish processing in Vietnam. Based on the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, the results of which were published in 2014, an estimated 49,390 child laborers work in fishing. Approximately 90 percent of children involved in child labor in fishing are boys. Of the 49,390 child laborers working in fishing, 19,629 children worked in fishing for more than 42 hours a week. In addition, 38,753 of the total number of child laborers working in fishing were involved in work that could be considered hazardous according to national legislation. The National Child Labor Survey also indicates that an estimated 15,720 child laborers are involved in the production, processing, and preservation of fish and fish products. Of the 15,270 child laborers involved in these activities, 11,591 children worked for more than 42 hours a week. In addition, 13,230 of the total number of child laborers working in the production, processing, and preservation of fish products, were involved in work that could be considered hazardous. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Footwear There is evidence that children ages 5 to 17 in Vietnam manufacture footwear. Based on the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, the results of which were published in 2014, an estimated 9,756 child laborers work in footwear manufacturing for over 42 hours per week. Approximately 2.2 percent, or 215, of the total number of child laborers who manufacture footwear for over 42 hours per week are 12-14 years old, while 97.8 percent, or 9,541, are 15-17 years old. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Furniture There is evidence that children ages 5 to17 produce furniture in Vietnam. According to the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, the results of which were published in 2014, an estimated 24,377 child laborers work in the production of furniture, including beds, wardrobes, chairs, and tables. Nearly three-quarters of child laborers involved in this activity are boys. Of the 24,377 child laborers engaged in the production of furniture, 13,670 children worked in furniture production for more than 42 hours per week. In addition, 21,873 of the total number of child laborers working in the production of furniture were involved in work that could be considered hazardous according to national legislation. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Garments X X Child Labor, Forced Labor

Vietnam Leather There are reports that children ages 5 to 17 in Vietnam produce leather. The results of the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, published in 2014, show that an estimated 1,426 child laborers work in the leather industry, primarily in the tanning and pre-processing stages and in dyeing animal skins. Approximately 74 percent of children involved in child labor in leather production are girls. Out of the estimated 1,426 child laborers who produce leather, about 580 are 12-14 years old and 846 are 15-17 years old. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Pepper There is evidence that children ages 5 to 17 grow pepper in Vietnam. Based on the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, the results of which were published in 2014, an estimated 9,833 child laborers are involved in growing pepper. Approximately 49.9 percent, or 4,907, of these child laborers are under 15 years old, which is the minimum age for employment in Vietnam. Of the estimated 9,833 child laborers who grow pepper, 10.4 percent are 5-11 years old, 39.5 percent are 12-14 years old, and 50 percent are 15-17 years old. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Rice There is evidence that children ages 5 to 17 are engaged in the cultivation of rice in Vietnam. Based on the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, the results of which were published in 2014, an estimated 278,884 child laborers grow rice. Approximately 32.9 percent, or 91,753, of these child laborers are under 15 years old, which is the minimum age for employment in Vietnam. Of the estimated 278,884 child laborers who grow rice, 13.6 percent are 5-11 years old, 19.3 percent are 12-14 years old, and 67.1 percent are 15-17 years old. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Rubber There is evidence that children ages 5 to 17 in Vietnam cultivate rubber. The results of the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, published in 2014, show that an estimated 10,224 child laborers are involved in growing rubber. Approximately 42.5 percent, or 4,345, of these child laborers are under 15 years old, which is the minimum age for employment in Vietnam. Of the estimated 10,224 child laborers who grow rubber, 22.1 percent are 5-11 years old, 20.4 percent are 12-14 years old, and 57.5 percent are 15-17 years old. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Sugarcane There is evidence that children ages 5 to 17 grow sugarcane in Vietnam. The results of the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, published in 2014, show that an estimated 28,303 child laborers are involved in growing sugarcane. Approximately 32.6 percent, or 9,227 of these child laborers are under 15 years old, which is the minimum age for employment in Vietnam. Of the estimated 28,303 child laborers who grow sugarcane, 3.9 percent are 5-11 years old, 28.7 percent are 12-14 years old, and 67.4 percent are 15-17 years old. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Tea There are reports that children ages 5 to 17 in Vietnam grow tea. Based on the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, the results of which were published in 2014, there are 5,933 child laborers involved in the cultivation of tea. Approximately 22.9 percent, or 1,359, of these child laborers are under 15 years old, which is the minimum age for employment in Vietnam. Of the estimated 5,933 child laborers who grow tea, 13.2 percent are 5-11 years old, 9.7 percent are 12-14 years old, and 77.1 percent are 15-17 years old. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Textiles There is evidence that children ages 5 to 17 in Vietnam produce textiles. Based on the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, the results of which were published in 2014, an estimated 6,049 child laborers work in textile production, mainly in the fabrication and finishing stages of the process. About 42.9 percent, or 2,595, of these child laborers are under 15 years old, which is the minimum age for employment in Vietnam. Of the estimated 6,049 child laborers who produce textiles, about 448 are 5-11 years old, 2,147 are 12-14 years old, and 3,454 are 15-17 years old. Approximately 96 percent of child textile workers are female. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Timber There is evidence that children ages 5 to 17 engage in the production of timber in Vietnam. The results of the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, published in 2014, show that an estimated 58,079 child laborers are involved in logging, including carrying and loading timber. Of the 58,079 child laborers involved in the production of timber, 6,428 children worked in timber production for more than 42 hours per week. Approximately 89 percent of child laborers working in this sector, were involved in work that could be considered hazardous according to national legislation. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Vietnam Tobacco There is evidence that children ages 5 to 17 grow tobacco in Vietnam. The results of the Government of Vietnam’s National Child Labor Survey 2012, published in 2014, show that an estimated 2,555 child laborers are involved in growing tobacco. Approximately 26.4 percent, or 675, of the total number of child laborers who grow tobacco are 5-11 years old, while 73.6 percent, or 1,880, are 15-17 years old. The survey considers a child to be engaged in child labor if the child is working an excessive number of hours per week for his or her age, or if the child is engaged in work that is prohibited for underage employees according to national legislation. Vietnamese translation X Child Labor

Yemen Fish X Child Labor

Zambia Cattle X Child Labor

Zambia Cotton X Child Labor

Zambia Gems X Child Labor

Zambia Stones X Child Labor

Zambia Tobacco X Child Labor