Republican Party of Randall County pulls support for Joe Straus as House Speaker
The Republican Party of Randall County is pulling support from Texas Rep. Joe Straus, R-San Antonio, as Texas Speaker of the House in favor of anyone more conservative.

Brennan Leggett, precinct chair 415, said the group did not have a recommendation to replace Straus — they just want him out.

“We did not give any specific instruction on who to support other than someone who is not him and who is more conservative than he is,” Leggett said.

“If someone steps out and they’re a firebrand conservative like Ted Cruz or Donald Trump that can seriously challenge him … we might see someone that our precinct chairs can actually tell John Smithee and Four Price to vote for that guy.”

The group made public it’s intent to pull support for Straus in a Facebook post.

“It is our job to report what we do at Republican HQ for our county,” the post reads. “Transparency is the best and always will be a part of our beliefs. This week the precinct chairs of Randall County came together and passed a resolution to instruct our representatives to vote against Joe Straus as speaker of the Texas Congress.”

Rep. Price, R-Amarillo, declined to comment. Requests for comment from Reps. Smithee, R-Amarillo, and Straus went unreturned.

Speaking to the Texas Tribune at its recent Texas Tribune Festival, Straus said: “We did a lot of underreported and as of yet unappreciated work that will benefit millions of Texans and our economy.”

Straus was elected to the Texas House of Representatives in a special election in February 2005. He has served five terms as Speaker of the Texas House since January 2009. He was elected to current term unanimously and has publicly stated he plans to run for an unprecedented sixth term in 2019.

He has at least one challenger, Republican Rep. Phil King of Weatherford.

Among those grievances Leggett listed include Straus not allowing more conservative legislation to go through the House, not being austere on abortion legislation and being bi-partisan.

Leggett said executive committees of Republican Party organizations in 55 counties have voted to instruct their representatives to vote against Straus’ leadership, though Leggett said Straus’ 12 years serving Texas as a representative and eight as speaker have yielded some results the group favors.

“There is legislation that he did get through, he is a well-oiled machine and if you’re part of that machine, legislation gets through and things get done,” Leggett said. “There is no doubting that. He can get things done.”