Rep. Jolly introduces House measure extending Florida’s Gulf of Mexico drilling moratorium
Seminole, FL – Congressman David Jolly (FL-13) introduced the Preserving Florida’s Coastal Communities Act this week, extending the current ban on oil drilling in the eastern Gulf of Mexico through 2027.

“It is paramount that we take steps to continue protecting our pristine beaches, our fisheries, our marine sanctuaries, and coastal communities from the impact of drilling in the eastern Gulf and devastating events like the Deepwater Horizon oil spill of 2010. An oil spill off the Coast of Pinellas County would be disastrous to our quality of life and our local economy. We must ensure that we do not put our Gulf Coast at greater risk by drilling closer to our shores,” Jolly said.

“The bottom line is the economic benefits simply do not outweigh the risks. We can achieve energy independence and national energy security without jeopardizing our natural resources,” Jolly continued.

The current ban on offshore drilling extends 125 miles off much of Florida’s Gulf of Mexico coast and as far as 235 miles in some areas. However, the moratorium is set to expire in 2022. The legislation, H.R. 2630, would extend the moratorium another 5 years.

H.R. 2630 was introduced with U.S. Rep. Gwen Graham (FL-2) as an original sponsor.

“The panhandle knows all too well the devastating effects an oil spill can have on our state,” Graham said. “Keeping our Gulf waters and beaches free from drilling is vital to protecting our economy and military in North Florida.”

A bill extending the moratorium has also been introduced in the Senate.

However, a separate Senate measure filled last month aims to open up parts of the Gulf of Mexico to additional oil drilling as soon as next year. That bill would allow drilling 50 miles from the Florida coastline.

Of note, drilling in the eastern Gulf of Mexico would interfere with mission-critical Department of Defense activities like training and weapons testing. Pensacola’s Eglin Air Force Base is now the training site for the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, which demands thousands of acres of airspace over the Gulf’s open water.