Marijuana Legalization and Regulation
There is more public support for marijuana law reform than ever before with new polls showing more than half the country is in favor of legalizing marijuana. The Drug Policy Alliance (DPA) believes marijuana should be removed from the criminal justice system and regulated like alcohol and tobacco.

Current Marijuana Laws in the U.S.

Where in the U.S. is marijuana legal?

See where medical marijuana is legal.

What do we know so far about marijuana legalization in 8 states and Washington, DC?

Read our January 2018 report to learn how and why marijuana legalization is working so far.

2019 Legalization Initiatives

Federal Initiatives

Senator Cory Booker (NJ) introduced the Marijuana Justice Act in the U.S. Senate and Representatives Barbara Lee (CA-13) and Ro Khanna (CA-17) introduced the companion bill in the U.S. House to end federal marijuana prohibition, support racial justice, and help repair communities most devastated by the war on drugs.

Learn more about the Marijuana Justice Act.

State Initiatives

DPA is currently working on marijuana legalization campaigns in New Jersey, New Mexico and New York. Learn more about these campaigns and join us to support marijuana reform.

New Solutions Marijuana Reform Campaign

We are working to legalize, tax and regulate marijuana like alcohol for adults in New Jersey. New Jersey’s marijuana laws have had a disproportionate impact on communities of color. Marijuana legalization in New Jersey must be fair and equitable and must address past disproportionate harms to communities of color.

Grow New Mexico

DPA has been advocating at the state legislature for passage of a Constitutional Amendment allowing the possession, use, and sales of marijuana in New Mexico. This will increase tax revenue, generate commerce and support the agricultural economy.

Start SMART NY – Sensible Marijuana Access through Regulated Trade

This campaign is dedicated to ending marijuana prohibition in New York. We believe that it is time to stop the ineffective, racially biased, and unjust enforcement of marijuana prohibition and to create a new, well-regulated, and inclusive marijuana industry that is rooted in racial and economic justice.

Why Should We Legalize?

Reduce harm

The criminalization of marijuana use disproportionately harms young people and people of color, sponsors massive levels of violence and corruption, and fails to curb youth access.

Create jobs

Legalizing and regulating marijuana will bring one of the nation's largest cash crops under the rule of law. This will create jobs and economic opportunities in the formal economy instead of the illicit market.

Save money

Scarce law enforcement resources will be better used to ensure public safety while reducing corrections and court costs. State and local governments would acquire significant new sources of tax revenue from regulating marijuana sales.

Promote consumer safety

Marijuana product testing is becoming a standard requirement for legalized marijuana markets. This means consumers are better informed about the marijuana they use.

Cannabis flowers with quality testing results on display at a dispensary.

DPA product safety recommendations