NEW DSCC AD: Joni Ernst Wants To End The Medicare Guarantee
Congressional Research Service: Seniors Wouldn’t Be Able To Enroll In The Current Medicare Program. “Individuals who become eligible (based either on age or disability) for Medicare in 2022 and later years would not be able to enroll in the current Medicare program.” [CRS Report, 4/13/11 ]

McClatchy: The House Republican Budget “Effectively Would End Medicare.” In April 2011, McClatchy reported that the Ryan Budget “effectively would end Medicare for seniors, revamp Medicaid for the poor, scrap the 2010 health care law, roll back nonmilitary federal spending overall and lower individual and corporate tax rates.” [McClatchy-Tribune News Service, 4/5/11 ]

Reuters: 2011 Ryan Budget “Would Have Ended Medicare For People Under 55.” In March 2012, referring to Rep. Paul Ryan’s attempt to reintroduce his budget plan in 2012, Reuters wrote, “Still, Ryan is expected to include in next week's budget outline a proposal similar to the plan he included last year that would have ended Medicare for people under 55. Those future retirees would get an allowance to purchase medical coverage from private insurers on a special exchange.” [Reuters, 3/16/12 ]

AARP: Paul Ryan Budget’s Medicare Voucher Plan Removes Medicare’s Promise of Secure Health Coverage. “On Medicare: “By creating a ‘premium support’ system for future Medicare beneficiaries, the proposal will increase costs for beneficiaries while removing Medicare’s promise of secure health coverage—a guarantee that future seniors have contributed to through a lifetime of hard work.” [AARP, 4/7/11 ]

Former Bush CMS Director: GOP Plan “Gets Rid of” Medicare. Tom Scully -- former Bush administration director of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said: "It gets rid of -- and I would do that -- gets rid of the current Medicare program where the government is the insurance company and the government sets the prices.” [TPM, 6/14/11 ]

Bloomberg: Ryan Budget “Phases Out Traditional Medicare.” In April 2011, Bloomberg reported, “House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan is scheduled today to release a plan that would cut more than $6 trillion from President Barack Obama’s budget over 10 years, phase out traditional Medicare and call for a revamp of the tax code … Ryan’s proposal to end traditional Medicare calls for new beneficiaries, starting in 2022, to instead be provided subsidies to buy private health insurance.” [Bloomberg, 4/5/11 ]

TIME: “Extreme” Republican Budget Changes Medicare “From a Guaranteed Benefit Into A System In Which Private Insurers Would Cover Americans.” In April 2011 TIME Swampland’s Kate Pickert wrote, “[Paul Ryan’s Republican budget] plan for Medicare, the insurance program for seniors that’s on an unsustainable path and accounts for about 13% of the federal budget, is extreme by any measure. His proposal would turn the program from a guaranteed benefit into a system in which private insurers would cover elderly Americans, whose premiums would be subsidized by the federal government.” [TIME, 4/6/11 ]

Wall Street Journal : GOP Plan Would “End Medicare.” According to the Wall Street Journal , “The plan would essentially end Medicare, which now pays most of the health-care bills for 48 million elderly and disabled Americans, as a program that directly pays those bills.” [ Wall Street Journal , 4/04/11 ]

Ernst Voted Against A Senate Resolution Expressing Opposition To Paul Ryan’s Medicare And Medicaid Proposals In His FY2012 Budget . On June 27, 2011, Ernst voted against adoption of SR 15, “A Resolution opposing proposed Congressional changes to the Medicare and Medicaid programs… the United States House of Representatives has recently adopted House Concurrent Resolution 34 encompassing the budget proposal of Budget Chairman Paul Ryan which would make fundamental changes to the Medicare and Medicaid programs…BE IT RESOLVED BY THE SENATE, That the Senate respectfully expresses its opposition to the budget proposal encompassed in House Concurrent Resolution 34 and any proposals to change the Medicare or Medicaid programs that are projected to lead to fewer Americans, especially those most vulnerable due to age, disability, or poverty, being able to obtain or retain health care coverage.” The resolution was adopted by a vote of 26-21. [Senate Vote on SR 15, Iowa State Senate Journal, 6/27/11 ; Senate Resolution 15 ; HCR 34, introduced 4/11/11 ]

BOB GLASS : Pay into Medicare. And you get it back. It seems only fair. Joni Ernst wants to cut Medicare and end its guarantee.

BOB GLASS: Seniors are going to pay thousands more while insurance companies rake in bigger profits. TEXT: Costing Seniors Thousands More a Year Source: Quad City Times, 8/19/12; New Republic, 9/8/12