Josh Mandel for U.S. Senate – Official Campaign Website
Columbus, Ohio -- Today’s Supreme Court decision sets the stage for the November election. Now, the only way the American people can stop the federal government’s takeover of health care is to change the people we send to Washington. Sherrod Brown cast the deciding vote for the Affordable Care Act that Ohio voters overwhelmingly rejected last November. Josh Mandel believes that the legislation must be fully repealed in order to reduce costs, protect access, and prevent this bill from doing further harm to the economy.

Please see the below statement:

“Sherrod Brown staked his 38-year political career on casting the deciding vote for what will likely go down as the biggest tax increase in history. This is not just any old tax increase, it is a tax increase that falls squarely upon the shoulders of the poor, the middle class, and small businesses that can least afford to pay it. Even worse, this law increases the cost of care, puts government bureaucrats between patients and their doctors, and hurts the ability of private sector job creators in Ohio to give their workers the benefits they deserve. The voters of Ohio overwhelmingly rejected this one-size-fits-all approach last November, and I am confident they will do so again this November.

We can fix the problems in our health care system without a federal takeover and without a massive new tax on the poor and middle class. As Senator, I will fight for market-based solutions that allow patients to choose their doctor without government interference. I will fight to reduce the cost of insurance by increasing competition, encouraging innovative ideas like association health plans and health savings accounts, and reducing junk lawsuits that drive up the cost of everyone’s medical care. The choice in this election is between taxing the uninsured to pay for a big government plan that takes away freedom and a free market plan that reduces costs, increases access to high quality care, and protects the relationship between doctors and their patients.” -- State Treasurer Josh Mandel, Republican Candidate For U.S. Senate

SHERROD BROWN FAVORS GOVERNMENT TAKEOVER OF HEALTH CARE

Brown Said He was "Concerned" The Supreme Court Would Rule Against Obamacare

In November 2011, Sherrod Brown Said He Was “Concerned” The Supreme Court Would Rule Against The Health Care Law Because The Justices “Decide For Insurance Companies, They Decide For Oil Companies, They Decide For The Wealthy Too Often.” “While the lawmakers are not second-guessing the administration’s legal strategy, some are clearly bracing for defeat. ‘Of course I’m concerned,’ said Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio). The justices ‘decide for insurance companies, they decide for oil companies, they decide for the wealthy too often.’” (Julian Pecquet, “Dems Fear Supreme Court Will Rule Against Obama On Healthcare Reform,” The Hill’s Healthwatch Blog, 11/14/11)

Brown Supported The Individual Mandate

Brown Pushed A Senate Bill That Would Require Every American To Have Insurance. “Brown is pushing a Senate bill that would require every American to have insurance, mandate that businesses offer coverage to their employees and prevent insurers from turning away those with pre-existing conditions.” (Jim Siegel and Jonathan Riskind, “Health-Care Supporters Rally,” The Columbus Dispatch, 9/2/09)

Brown Said “Maybe” The Mandate Is “Not Ideal,” But “It’s The Best Way For The Most People In The Country.” “‘Maybe it’s not ideal – it’s certainly not communism,’ said Mr. Brown, who voted for the reform measure and wrote part of the law. ‘It’s the best way for the most people in the country.’” (Julie M. McKinnon, “Sen. Brown Defends Rule Requiring Insurance,” Toledo Blade, 1/3/11)

Brown Voted To Kill An Amendment That Would Have Removed The Individual Mandate From The Health Care Bill. “Baucus, D-Mont., motion to table (kill) the Ensign, R-Nev. amendment no. 3710 that would repeal provisions of the 2010 health care overhaul law that provide for IRS penalties for certain taxpayers that do not obtain basic health insurance coverage.” (H.R. 4872, CQ Vote #101: Motion agreed to 58-40: R 0-40; D 56-0; I 2-0, 3/25/10, Brown Voted Yea)

Brown Opposed Ohio's Attorney General Joining The Lawsuit Against Obamacare

In January 2011, Brown Criticized Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine For Joining The Lawsuit Against Health Care Reform, Saying “I Think He Should Stay Out Of It.” “Ohio’s DeWine also campaigned on his opposition to the law and said the lawsuit will be a priority. … That brought criticism Tuesday from Sen. Sherrod Brown, the Ohio Democrat who defeated DeWine in the 2006 U.S. Senate election. ‘I’m sorry my tax dollars are going to be used to take benefits away from seniors,’ Brown said in a conference call with reporters, referring to the law’s discounts on prescription drugs for seniors who fall into the Medicare prescription drug doughnut hole. ‘I think he should stay out of it.’” (Jane Norman, “Health Care Law Faces Attacks In The Courts From New Republican AGs,” Congressional Quarterly, 1/4/11)

Brown Said He Hoped Republicans “Will Focus More On Job Growth Than On Scoring Political Points.” “‘The American people want us to focus on jobs, not on re-debating a health-care law that is already providing benefits to seniors and already is providing benefits to people with pre-existing conditions,’ Ohio Sen. Sherrod Brown said. ‘I hope they (Republicans) will focus more on job growth than on scoring political points.’” (Jack Torry and Jonathan Riskind , “The Reign Of Boehner Will Begin Today,” The Columbus Dispatch, 1/5/11)



Brown Said Obamacare Was "A Huge Step Forward For Our Country"

Brown Voted To Pass The Senate Version Of The $2.5 Trillion Obama-Reid Health Care Bill. (H.R. 3590, CQ Vote #396: Passed 60-39: R 0-39; D 58-0; I 2-0, 12/24/09, Brown Voted Yea)

Brown Provided The 60th Vote To Invoke Cloture On The Senate Health Care Bill. (H.R. 3590, CQ Vote #395: Motion agreed to 60-39: R 0-39; D 58-0; I 2-0, 12/23/09, Brown Voted Yea)

Brown Voted To Remove The Ben Nelson Amendment From The Health Care Bill. (H.R. 3590, CQ Vote #369: Motion agreed to 54-45: R 2-38; D 50-7; I 2-0, 12/8/09, Brown Voted Yea)

Brown Voted To Pass The Health Care Reconciliation Bill. (H.R. 4872, CQ Vote #105: Passed 56-43: R 0-40; D 54-3; I 2-0, 3/25/10, Brown Voted Yea)

BROWN: “[I] Think That This Bill Is Such A Huge Step Forward For Our Country. Of Course I Wanted The Public Option. I Wanted Medicare For All. But This Is Huge Progress, And We’re Going To Continue To Improve It. Senator Kennedy Always Said The Fight For Reform Never Ends, And There Are Lots Of Things We’ll Want To Do As We See How This Bill Unfolds In The Next Four Years.” (MSNBC’s, “Morning Joe,” 3/24/10)

Brown Praised, And Voted To Confirm, Elena Kagan And Sonya Sotomayor

Brown Voted To Confirm Sonia Sotomayor’s Appointment To The Supreme Court. “Confirmation of President Obama’s nomination of Sonia Sotomayor of New York to be an associate justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.” (CQ Vote #262: Confirmed 68-31: R 9-31; D 57-0; I 2-0, 8/6/09, Brown Voted Yea)

Brown Said Sotomayor Would Be “Tough, Fair And Thoughtful.” “‘Judge Sotomayor has demonstrated that she will be a tough, fair and thoughtful justice while bringing new insight to the U.S. Supreme Court,’ he said after the vote. ‘Combined with her impressive experience - more federal judicial experience than any other nominee in more than a century - I am confident that Judge Sotomayor will be an outstanding addition to the court.’” (Malia Rulon, “Ohio, Ky. Senators Split On Sotomayor,” The Cincinnati Enquirer, 8/7/09)

Brown Voted To Confirm Elena Kagan’s Appointment To The Supreme Court. “Confirmation of President Obama’s nomination of Elena Kagan of Massachusetts to be an associate justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.” (CQ Vote #229: Confirmed 63-37: R 5-36; D 56-1; I 2-0, 8/5/10, Brown Voted Yea)

Brown Said Kagan Showed “A Deep Respect For The Law And A Thorough Understanding Of The Critical Issues Of The Day.” (Sen. Sherrod Brown, “Brown Statement On Kagan Confirmation,” Press Release, 8/5/10)