High anxiety
AN NBC News/Wall Street Journal opinion poll this week revealed a collapse in American public confidence that the country is safer than before the September 11th attacks. Analysts traced that collapse directly to news reports of the beheading of two American journalists by the murderous fanatics of the Islamic State (IS).

The shift in sentiment was dramatic enough when viewed as rows of numbers on a pollsters’ table. Unexpectedly, Lexington was then able to see that mood of alarm in the flesh. While in Texas researching a piece about long-term trends on the southern border, your columnist was able to tour Customs and Border Protection (CBP) stations on the bridges between El Paso and its Mexican neighbour, Ciudad Juárez, on September 11th. Travelling to each of the four bridges, it became clear that something was up. Each crossing was all but deserted (pictured above). The cause, it turned out, was an internet-fuelled panic that IS terror cells are hiding in Juárez and planning attacks, possibly to coincide with the 13th anniversary of the September 11th attacks.

Upgrade your inbox Receive our Daily Dispatch and Editors' Picks newsletters.













Border queues and delays are something of an obsession in El Paso. Home to thousands of bi-national families and commuters, this Texan city relies on Mexican shoppers for about half of its retail sales. Its private schools are filled with Mexican children, who cross the border each morning and afternoon in their neat uniforms. Conversations in downtown stores invariably begin with a report on how long a shopper has just waited on the foot-crossing coming in from Juárez. When Lexington mentioned wait-times to his neighbour in a crowd, a complete stranger pulled out a smartphone and consulted the city internet page, which carries real-time images from webcams on all crossings.

On September 11th, you did not need a webcam. Great stretches of empty asphalt were visible on ordinarily busy downtown crossings such as the Paso del Norte. Cargo inspection bays were empty. “Very, very unusual,” said CBP officials. It was almost as quiet on September 12th, when Lexington headed across the border on foot. On a normal day, between 12,000 and 15,000 pedestrians might head north on the Paso del Norte. Now, people were staying home.

All panics are confounding for outsiders, but this one was especially odd because a key piece of evidence cited by the rumour-mongers is that border officers are on high alert in El Paso. But this reporter found CBP officers in El Paso as puzzled by the alarm as anyone. One burly, armed officer chatted about how his own young son had woken and fearfully protested he could not go to school, as he had heard that terrorists might attack it. The boy was told to get dressed and head to school.

This is not to say that IS would not like to attack America. Terrorism is taken seriously at America’s southern border crossings. Vehicle lanes bristle with radiation detectors, lorries and buses are driven through X-ray machines, and licence plates and identity documents checked against watch-lists. But the border’s own custodians in El Paso are not panicking.

El Paso hosted a big border conference on September 12th, drawing members of Congress, government officials from Washington and Mexico, business types and academics. The rumours came up, and were strenuously denied. Beto O’Rourke, the Democratic congressman whose district covers El Paso, told reporters that an original source seemed to be a conservative pressure group, Judicial Watch. That group has published blog postings accusing the Obama government of covering up evidence of terrorists plotting in Juárez to cross the “porous” southern border, citing security alerts on the border and at the nearby Fort Bliss army base. These were picked up in the local press and on Fox News, which cited Texas police bulletins about known jihadists expressing interest in a cross-border attack.

After some scoffing, Judicial Watch, whose founder has called President Barack Obama an “evil” man “bent on furthering an Islamic caliphate in the Middle East and around the globe”, claimed vindication when a senior official from the Department of Homeland Security told a Senate hearing that chatter had been detected on social media among global jihadists discussing the possibility of crossing into America from Mexico.

On September 12th Mr O’Rourke said that he had called the FBI special agent in charge of the El Paso area, as well as the commanding general of Fort Bliss, asking them for all and any information they had on possible terror threats. They told him, categorically, there was “no evidence” for the rumours about the Islamic State.

Mr O’Rourke draws philosophical lessons from the fuss. “Whatever the threat of the day is, we tend to project it onto the border,” he said. He noted that in 1981, the front page of the El Paso Herald Post carried a story about a Libyan hit squad lurking over the frontier in Juárez, though no evidence of such a squad was found.

Others draw more partisan lessons. The Republican governor of Texas, Rick Perry, a putative 2016 presidential candidate, has talked of the risks of terrorists crossing a border that he complains has not been secured by the federal government. Other Texas Republicans have called the border a “war zone”. A Democratic congressman at the conference, Joaquin Castro of San Antonio, charged Mr Perry of playing politics, and asked aloud how investors were going to be attracted to border districts of Texas unfairly tagged as war zones.

Shopkeepers in El Paso’s Segundo Barrio district, where a happily scruffy collection of stores sell clothes, shoes, children’s toys and household goods to Mexican shoppers, were too worried by lost business to waste time pointing fingers. Some questioned whether Islamic terrorists would actually be able to operate in Juárez, a city riddled with violence linked to drug cartels. Even the worst Mexican criminals would hand terrorists in, half-joked one shopkeeper: the cartels’ access to America is too important to let anyone ruin it. With grim levity, the shopkeeper could bat away the idle rumours. But as the half-empty streets around him showed, in a jumpy time, even discredited rumours have real consequences.

(Photo credit: David Rennie)