So, is it suppressing voters?
ANYONE who hopes to vote in Texas this year needs an approved form of government-issued photo ID. Concealed handgun licences count; student IDs do not. The state’s Republican lawmakers introduced this requirement in 2011, arguing that it would prevent fraud and ensure the integrity of elections. They passed it over the objections of Democrats, who maintained that voter-ID laws are merely a cynical way to suppress turnout—especially among African-Americans, Hispanics and poor people—and who have continued to fight the law in court on that basis.

The legal wrangling has thus far been inconclusive, and confusing. Texas was finally able to implement its voter-ID law in time for this year’s primaries, as a result of Shelby County v Holder, the Supreme Court decision in 2013 that struck down part of the Voting Rights Act (meaning that a number of states with a history of discriminating against minority voters, including Texas, no longer need the federal government to clear new voting restrictions). But then on October 8th a federal judge struck down Texas’s law on its own merits, ruling that insofar as some 600,000 registered voters in the state lacked the relevant forms of ID—about 4.5% of the state's registered voters—the requirement was tantamount to a “poll tax.”

Upgrade your inbox Receive our Daily Dispatch and Editors' Picks newsletters.













On October 18th, though, with the early voting period set to begin about 48 hours later, the Supreme Court allowed the law to remain in place for the general election. Debate over the law promises to continue. But this year, for the first time, Texans will finally be able to assess its impact in practice.

So, is Texas's voter-ID law deterring voters? The answer, so far, is hardly clear. Let's look at the early-voting period, which ended on October 31st: 19.11% of the registered voters in Texas’s 15 most populous counties weighed in, either in person or by mail. During this same period in 2010—the last non-presidential election year—the figure was 20.76%. Though the state has seen a steep rise in registered voters in recent years, the total number of early votes cast had ticked down, from 1,731,589 in 2010, to 1,715,731 this year.

Texas is known for its low turnout rate. Gerrymandered districts ensure few of the legislative races are competitive, and polls suggest that Republicans will once again win all the major races this year by whopping margins. Yet the decline in early voters is notable, as the state’s elections are busier and more exciting than usual this year. After more than a decade with Rick Perry at the helm, the state is getting a new governor; all of the top jobs in state government, in fact, are changing hands. And despite more than two decades of disarray, the Democrats started the cycle in a fighting mood. With Wendy Davis, a Fort Worth state senator, they have a high-profile candidate at the top of the ticket, and a number of impressive other candidates. In 2010 the party didn’t even have a candidate for comptroller; this year they chanced upon one with a sterling record from the private sector. National Democrats have also made a splashy effort to rally the troops via an initiative called Battleground Texas, which reportedly raised about $6.6m so far this year. Yet Texas voters are apparently failing to respond to all of this hubbub.

Perhaps this means the state's new law is suppressing turnout. Several details seem to confirm this possibility. For starters, the figures from Texas are consistent with patterns evident in other states. As Nate Silver wrote in 2012, laws requiring photo ID “seem to decrease turnout by about 2 percent as a share of the registered voter population.” It is also intriguing that while fewer Texans voted early in person this year, there has been a spike in the number voting by mail, which allows people to evade the photo-ID regulation as long as they can prove they are either disabled, aged 65 or older, travelling or confined in jail.

Anecdotal evidence also supports the argument that Texan voters are being thwarted by the new law. The Brennan Center for Justice has rounded up several examples of would-be voters whose efforts to vote have been frustrated. One woman, for example, had planned to use a student ID from her Texas college only to discover that student IDs are not accepted. Others couldn’t vote because their driver’s licenses had expired. The Guardian reported about a man from Austin named Eric Kennie who owns a voter registration card, but not one of the required forms of ID. Mr Kennie’s efforts to acquire a Texas driver’s license required him to make several elaborate bus journeys and spend $23 for a copy of his birth certificate, a serious outlay given his limited income. The story should be required reading for anyone who breezily dismisses the time and expense involved in getting the appropriate documentation to vote.

On closer inspection, though, the picture is more complicated. The spike in voting by mail is not surprising, considering that both parties have encouraged voters who are eligible to vote by mail to do so. The individual reports, though troubling, have been few (though most voters without valid ID will presumably simply stay home, ensuring their frustration goes unchronicled).

More importantly, it is hard to draw a lesson from the decline in voters. The 15 most populous counties in Texas include three predominantly Hispanic and heavily Democratic border counties. Early turnout in El Paso County declined significantly (9.51%, compared to 11.13% in 2010). But in Cameron County, at the other end of Texas’s long southern border, it was basically static (12.08% in 2014, compared to 12.33% four years earlier). And in Hidalgo County, which adjoins Cameron County in the Rio Grande Valley, early turnout was up (18.61% in 2014, 17.48% in 2010).

That kind of discrepancy among counties that are demographically and politically similar suggests that something other than voter ID may be discouraging participation in Texas’s elections. A closer look at the numbers does indeed suggest another explanation. In counties where races are competitive, more voters are bothering to vote. Tarrant County, for example, has a couple of highly competitive legislative races, including the contest to replace Ms Davis in the Texas Senate. Sure enough 21.26% voted early this year, compared with 18.28% in 2010. Something similar may explain the uptick in turnout in Hidalgo County, in the Rio Grande Valley. Mr Abbott, somewhat unusually for a Republican candidate, has actively sought votes from this heavily Hispanic area, which seems to have boosted attendance at the polls. (As Texas’s attorney general, Mr Abbott has also been a leading proponent of voter ID; but if his motive was to suppress Hispanic turnout, his strategy is a puzzling one.)

Statewide, then, Texas’s general election turnout may be lagging for the same reason it always lags: largely uncompetitive races and widespread disinterest. The areas that buck this trend are the few places where individual votes seem to matter. This means that even if the new law deters around 2% of voters from heading to the polls, few of the races in Texas are close enough for this to make a real difference.

This is hardly an endorsement of Texas's voter-ID law. Reports from the general election and the primaries indicate that at the very least the law has unleashed a wave of administrative headaches. The jury may still be out on racial discrimination, but there isn’t a scrap of evidence to support the Republican argument that the law has somehow improved the integrity of the process. There never has been. The type of electoral fraud that voter ID supposedly guards against is theoretically possible, but if it was going on before the voter-ID law took effect, it was vanishingly rare. And if Texas Republicans were seriously worried about fraud, they would be more sceptical of voting by mail, which is far more liable to be abused. Yet, as noted above, both parties are actively encouraging mail-in voting.

Ultimately, and regardless of its effect, Texas's law restricts the right to vote. This is troubling, even if the choices at the polls inspire Texans to stay at home anyway.