The dealmakers
IN THE federal capital, fiscal-cliff negotiations seem stalled, each party blaming the other for intransigence and half-hearted bargaining. Those who hoped the conclusion of election season would break America’s poisonous partisan gridlock have been sorely disappointed. But anyone who wishes to see what successful bipartisanship looks like in action should look south, to Georgia, where the state’s Republican governor and the Democratic mayor of its biggest city are compiling an impressive record of co-operation.

That is no mean feat. The Atlanta region is home to most of Georgia’s people and generates most of its growth; yet (or perhaps therefore), relations between it and the rest of the state have seldom been smooth. Atlanta is more liberal than the rest of Georgia, the sole big urban outpost in a largely rural state. As for the men themselves, Nathan Deal, the governor, is a white man raised in rural Georgia who was 21 years old when the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed. During his nine terms in Congress he opposed stem-cell research, gay marriage, and adoption by gay couples; he supported the Iraq war and prayer in schools.

Upgrade your inbox Receive our Daily Dispatch and Editors' Picks newsletters.













Kasim Reed, the mayor, is a black man who was born one year after Martin Luther King was murdered and was brought up in suburban Atlanta. During two terms in the Georgia House and three in the state Senate he opposed voter-ID laws, mandatory ultrasounds before an abortion and the loosening of restrictions on firearms. Mr Deal publicly supported Mitt Romney; Mr Reed was a tireless advocate for Barack Obama.

Yet they have not let all that come between them. Mr Reed took office in January 2010, Mr Deal a year later. Both look set to win re-election, and both are limited to two terms. So for seven of their eight presumptive years in office, they are stuck with each other. As Mr Deal noted in a joint speech with Mr Reed on December 3rd, “Mayor Reed and I didn’t vote for the same guy last month. We don’t necessarily support the same health-care or fiscal policies. But that doesn’t stop us from tag-teaming for Georgia.” A week earlier they appeared at the groundbreaking of Porsche North America’s new headquarters next to Atlanta’s airport. The firm’s general counsel noted how “rare it is today to find one jurisdiction led by a liberal Democrat and another led by a conservative Republican that actually work together.”

The two also worked together to win federal approval for the deepening of the Port of Savannah, which was granted in October. Curtis Foltz, who heads the Georgia Ports Authority, said that elected officials from opposite parties going “hand-in-hand to Washington and arm-in-arm to our congressional delegation in Washington to convey support for a project that clearly benefits not just Georgians but the entire south-east is what politics should look like.”

It helps that Messrs Reed and Deal both come from a legislative background, where—elected officials in Washington take note—compromise breeds progress. It helps also that neither is an ideologue: tea-partiers have called Mr Deal a RINO (Republican In Name Only), just as Mr Reed has taken heat from his party’s left wing. And it helps, as Mr Reed says, that he and Mr Deal share the view that “if you are not going to accomplish as much as you can because the person sitting across the street is from a different party, you’re eliminating one-third of what you can do.”