Elaine Phillips for Senate
Elaine Phillips is the Mayor of the Village of Flower Hill. She and her husband, Andy, have three daughters Kate, Hannah and Sarah.

Elaine, was raised by working parents in Pennsylvania, her father worked in the steel mills and her mother was the head cook in an American Legion. The hard work that defined her parents is what shaped Elaine’s work ethic from a young age.

The first from her family to attend college, Elaine graduated from Penn State University in 1981 and received her MBA in Finance from Penn State in 1984. After receiving her MBA, Elaine spent the next 25 years building a career in finance on Wall Street. She worked as a Financial Analyst for Met Life and JP Morgan Securities and as a vice president in Institutional Sales for Goldman Sachs.

Like so many working mothers, Elaine would take the 5:43 am train, return home 7:30 pm and then care for her family. After the birth of her third daughter, Sarah, Elaine stayed home for two years to raise their children. After returning to work on September 11, 2001, Elaine worked part time at Goldman Sachs until the end of 2008.

Elaine has trained in the traditional Korean martial art Soo Bahk Do Moo Duk Kwan for 18 years. She has obtained a Masters Level and is a 4th Degree Black Belt. Elaine continues to train and teaches children and adults at Kwon's Karate. She donates her time teaching 5 classes a week, as well as women’s fitness.

After serving as a Village Trustee, in 2012, Elaine was elected Mayor of Flower Hill. She was reelected mayor in 2014 and 2016. Under Elaine’s leadership, the Village corrected serious deficiencies and tax issues identified in the 2008-2009 audit conducted by the New York State Comptroller and has had 4 consecutive years of decreasing tax rates, a rarity these days. She rewrote the Village’s ethics policy, created an Ethics Board for the village, spearheaded transparency efforts in the village with all public documents available on its website, developed a multi-year strategic plan, and instituted a General Fund policy. As Mayor, Elaine has appointed trustees to the Village Board without regard to party affiliation to ensure that the Village is governed by the most capable and committed public servants.

Because of Elaine’s passion for the environment, she created a committee through which more than 265 new trees have been planted. She also instituted a tree giveaway program through which the Village plants trees in Village rights-of-way for residents who submit requests. As a result, Flower Hill was named Tree City USA by the national Arbor Day Committee.

Elaine also worked with state and local governments to spearhead beautification projects and transportation projects, including traffic calming projects throughout the Village, and led the Port Washington and Roslyn Fire Departments’ effort to reform Length of Service Award Programs for volunteer firefighters. Currently, Elaine chairs a committee with the Village of East Hills and the Town of North Hempstead to upgrade investment advisory services for the Roslyn Length of Service Award Program and to write a new investment policy.