Elon School of Law
Enrique Armijo, associate professor of law

(336) 279-9327, earmijo@elon.edu



Enrique Armijo, Assistant Professor of Law and an Affiliate Fellow of the Yale Law School Information Society Project, teaches and researches in the areas of the First Amendment, constitutional law, torts, administrative law, media and internet law, and international freedom of expression. Professor Armijo’s current scholarship addresses the interaction between new technologies and free speech. His scholarly work has recently appeared in the North Carolina Law Review, the Cardozo Arts & Entertainment Law Journal, the Fordham Urban Law Journal,Communication Law and Policy, and other journals. He also has provided advice on media and internet law reform to governments, stakeholders and NGOs located around the world, including in Africa, Asia and the Middle East. Most recently, he has worked on media and communications reform projects in Myanmar (Burma) for the U.S. Department of State with Annenberg’s Center for Global Communications Studies at the University of Pennsylvania. His commentaries on these and other topics have appeared on NPR's On the Media, Voice of America and WUNC-FM.

Prior to joining Elon Law, Armijo practiced with Covington & Burling LLP in Washington, D.C., where he advised journalists, news organizations and trade associations on media law-related issues. As an appellate lawyer, Armijo briefed cases in the U.S. Supreme Court and briefed or argued cases in the federal and state courts of appeal. His appellate work included cases concerning broadcast indecency and the First Amendment (FCC v Fox Television Stations, S. Ct. 2011), Guantanamo detainees’ rights to habeas corpus (Boumediene v. Bush, S. Ct. 2008), and foreign sovereign immunity for cultural property (Odyssey Marine Exploration v. Spain, S. Ct. 2012).

Before entering private practice, Armijo was a Visiting Scholar at the Programme for Comparative Media Law and Policy at the University of Oxford’s Centre for Socio-Legal Studies. There he worked on international media law projects and comparative research on media ownership regulation in the US and Europe.

Armijo clerked for the Honorable Karen LeCraft Henderson at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit after law school. He also worked as a law clerk at Brooks Pierce and Smith Moore (now Smith Moore Leatherwood LLP), both in Greensboro and Raleigh, NC. He earned a B.A. from the University of Florida, an M.A. from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and a J.D. from the University of North Carolina where he was Editor-in-Chief of the North Carolina Law Review.

RECENT NEWS

Enrique Armijo named an Affiliated Fellow at Yale Law center

Enrique Armijo engages FCC urging First Amendment rights for users of government-run online networks

Enrique Armijo's scholarship in the Cardozo Arts & Entertainment Law Journal posits new approach to application of First Amendment in State-provided virtual public space

Enrique Armijo advances international freedom of expression

Enrique Armijo presents on First Amendment and online communications at Stanford and Santa Clara

Enrique Armijo to participate in U.S.-sponsored delegation advising Myanmar on press law

WFMY News 2 story on copyright law features Elon Law Professor Enrique Armijo

Enrique Armijo speaks on digital communications law at UNC Center for Media Law & Policy