Dolly Elizondo
A trailblazing businesswoman

Dolly Elizondo was born, raised, and attended public schools in Mission, Texas. After finishing college, she chose to begin her career as a teacher in the Rio Grande Valley. Dolly raised her two daughters as a single mother, and worked a second job in real estate to provide for her family. After several years, she bought her first real estate company and went into business full-time. Dolly is a trailblazing entrepreneur who was the first woman south of San Antonio to become a real estate Certified Commercial Investment Manager, and she has successfully created several residential and commercial real estate developments that have helped grow Hidalgo County’s economy. Dolly co-founded and served as the first president of the Hidalgo County Democratic Women, and after many years of serving on community boards, she ran for Hidalgo County Democratic Party Chair — and defeated an incumbent. Today she serves on the board of Annie’s List, a statewide organization committed to achieving equality for women by changing the face of power in Texas politics. When elected, she will change the face of power in Washington and fight for women and families.

A champion for education

As a mother, an educator, a business leader, and an elected official, Dolly has always firmly believed in the power of education to transform lives and communities. When elected, she will champion policies that empower students and working families to get ahead. Dolly’s experience as a teacher will make her a forceful advocate for education in Congress. As an entrepreneur, Dolly understands how to increase economic opportunity for women and families in Texas. When elected, she’ll fight tirelessly for all Texans to have a fair shot. She understands that Texas women and families need more access to health care, not less, and when elected she will defend a woman’s right to make her own health care decisions — and her right to access that care. As Texans’ voting rights have come under attack, Dolly has stood up to the Republicans trying to roll back this fundamental right. She will never stop fighting to ensure Texans’ government is representative of the people it serves.

Poised to break a glass ceiling for Latinas in Texas

The Lone Star State is home to millions of Latinas, but it has never elected a Latina to Congress. When elected, Dolly will be a champion for the Texas women and families whose voices aren’t being heard in Washington. EMILY’s List knows that when we have more diverse perspectives in government, we get better policies. When elected, Dolly will fight back against the dangerous anti-woman, anti-family Republican agenda that hurts Texas Latinas and their families because she knows how high the stakes are. Dolly is the only woman running in a crowded primary for an open seat, and she needs the full support of the EMILY’s List community to win for Texas working families. With your help, Dolly will shatter the glass ceiling for Texas Latinas to fight for Lone Star State women and families in Washington.