National Alliance to End Homelessness: Veterans
In 2009, the Obama Administration committed to ending veteran homelessness in the U.S. by the end of 2015. According to data collected during the 2014 Point-in-Time Count, 49,933 veterans experienced homelessness on a single night in January 2014. That estimate represents a 14 percent decline compared to the Department of Housing and Urban Development's 2013 estimate, and a 33 percent decline compared to its 2009 estimate. The veteran homelessness population is made up of veterans who served in several different conflicts, ranging from World War II to the recent conflicts. Though research indicates that veterans who served in the late Vietnam and post-Vietnam era are at greatest risk of homelessness, veterans returning from the recent conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq often have severe disabilities, including traumatic brain injuries (TBIs) and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) that are known to be correlated with homelessness. And as the military evolves, so too do the challenges. Homeless women veterans, for instance, are far more common now than in any other time in the past. In 2009, then-VA Secretary Eric Shinseki set the bold goal of ending veteran homelessness by the end of 2015. Since then, the Obama Administration, the new VA Secretary Robert McDonald, and Congress have shown their support of this goal by devoting substantial funding to the problem, with the Administration proposing and Congress approving increases in funding for fiscal years 2013 and 2014. As with the general homeless population, rapid re-housing and Housing First strategies are critical for many veterans experiencing homelessness. However, those veterans with the most severe physical and mental health disabilities – often caused by their military service – require permanent housing with supportive services. On June 4, 2014, First Lady Michelle Obama announced a new program that aims to end veteran homelessness in the U.S. by 2015, the Mayor’s Challenge to End Veteran Homelessness. The Alliance has created an interactive map tracking progress in the cities and states where mayors, governors, and local government officials have committed to the challenge of ending veteran homelessness in their communities: “Mayors Challenge to End Veteran Homelessness Map.” Spotlight Sample Veteran Homelessness Master List Best Practice | April 28, 2015 This sample master list is meant to serve as a model for communities following the Alliances “Five Steps to End Veteran Homelessness.” Creating and maintaining a master list of homeless veterans in your community is meant to ensure that service providers and partners that are working together to end veteran homelessness are on the same page and have a clear set of people who require housing. Also included with the sample list are answers to several frequently asked questions. Veteran Homelessness in America from 2013 to 2014 Fact Sheets | April 23, 2015 This data snapshot presents national and state trends of the veteran homeless population in the U.S. from 2013 to 2014. Ending Veteran Homelessness Map Interactive Tool | April 14, 2015 This interactive map identifies and provides details on the current state of veteran homelessness in the U.S. The map provides details on changes in the number of veterans experiencing homelessness in a community from 2013 to 2014, data on communities that have ended veteran homelessness, and details on the 78 communities that could receive a new, one time "surge" of an additional $300 million in funding over the next three years under the Department of Veterans' Affairs (VA) Supportive Services for Veteran Families (SSVF) program. Five Steps to End Veteran Homelessness Best Practice | February 25, 2015 This one-page document outlines the five major steps that communities must take to end veteran homelessness. Alliance Comments on SSVF Proposed Rule Federal Policy Brief | June 24, 2014 On June 23, the Alliance submitted comments on the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) proposed rule for the Supportive Services for Veteran Families (SSVF) program. The proposed rule largely aligns the definitions, data collection, and reporting requirements with rapid re-housing programs within the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), which will ultimately lead to an SSVF program that is well integrated within the Continuum of Care. Library Resources Five High Impact Steps Other | October 15, 2015 This resource is meant for mayors who have signed on to the Mayors Challenge to End Veteran Homelessness by 2015. It lays out the five key tasks that mayors should undertake to achieve the goal of ending homelessness in their cities, and provides numerous links to helpful resources on the Alliance website and elsewhere. Webinar: Identifying Housing and Supportive Services for Homeless Veterans and their Families Webinar | June 19, 2015 This video is a recording of a webinar that originally streamed, June 18, 2015, that covered steps two and four of the Alliance's "Five Steps for Ending Veteran Homelessness" resource. Presenters from the Alliance and UNITY of Greater New Orleans discussed strategies for recruiting landlords, identifying housing stock and supportive services, and matching veterans with them to ensure that they are successfully and permanently housed. Fact Sheet: Veteran Homelessness Fact Sheets | April 22, 2015 This veteran homelessness fact sheet presents information on the number of of veterans experiencing homelessness, the demographics of the population, causes of homelessness among veterans, and federal programs that address the issue. The Continuum of Care’s Role in the New SSVF NOFA Federal Policy Brief | February 12, 2014 This resource looks at new Supportive Services for Veteran Families Program (SSVF) funding opportunities. It provides tips for Continuums of Care (CoCs) to use in selecting an organization to receive Priority 1 funding under the new NOFA.