Start Saving
Everyone can play their part in preserving our nation's water resources. With the simple steps and informational tools below, you'll find that it's easier than ever.

Indoors You've purchased some WaterSense labeled products and started down the road to savings, but don't stop there. There are lots of things you can do in your own home to reduce water use and get more from less. Just follow our simple tips below to get started! Here, there, and everywhere: Fix a Leak: Small household leaks can add up to gallons of water lost every day. That's why WaterSense reminds Americans to check their plumbing fixtures and irrigation systems each year in March during Fix a Leak Week. In the bathroom—where over half of all water use inside a home takes place: Turn off the tap while shaving or brushing teeth.

Showers use less water than baths, as long as you keep an eye on how long you've been lathering up!

Learn tips on how to Shower Better here! In the kitchen- whip up a batch of big water savings: Plug up the sink or use a wash basin if washing dishes by hand.

Use a dishwasher; and when you do, make sure it's fully loaded!

While you're at it, scrape that plate instead of rinsing before loading it into the dishwasher.

Keep a pitcher of drinking water in the refrigerator instead of letting the faucet run until the water is cool.

Thaw in the refrigerator overnight rather than using a running tap of hot water.

Add food wastes to your compost pile instead of using the garbage disposal. In the laundry room—where you can be clean AND green: Wash only full loads of laundry or use the appropriate water level or load size selection on the washing machine. Outdoors Of the estimated 29 billion gallons of water used daily by households in the United States, nearly 9 billion gallons, or 30 percent, is devoted to outdoor water use. In the hot summer months, or in dry climates, a household's outdoor water use can be as high as 70 percent. In the yard—be beautiful and efficient: Create a water-smart landscape that is both beautiful and efficient to give your home the curb appeal you desire.

Timing is everything! Knowing when and how much to water allows you to keep a healthy landscape.

Upgrade to a WaterSense labeled controller if you have an in-ground irrigation system.

Find a certified irrigation professional to install, maintain, or audit your irrigation system to ensure it is watering at peak efficiency.

Take a look at the Landscape Photo Gallery for inspirational examples of beautiful, water-smart landscapes from across the country. Other outdoor uses—drop that hose and keep it covered: Sweep driveways, sidewalks, and steps rather than hosing off.

Wash the car with water from a bucket, or consider using a commercial car wash that recycles water.

If you have a pool, use a cover to reduce evaporation when pool is not being used.

Make this your year to save water Join thousands of your friends and neighbors in making a commitment to save water. Take the “I’m for Water” pledge and use our 2017 monthly resolutions checklist to help you use less water (and spend less on your utility bills!) year round. By taking one or two simple steps each month, it’s easy to do your part to protect our water for future generations. Be sure to follow WaterSense on Facebook and Twitter to help spread the word yourself. Every person counts! Be for Water!

Use this simple calculator to estimate how much water, energy, and money you can save by installing WaterSense labeled products in your home or apartment building. Calculate Your Water Savings 1. How many people live in your house? Choose One 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 2. Select the WaterSense labeled products you are interested in installing: When were the existing toilets installed?

Not replacing: Click to Select Before 1980 (5.0 GPF) Between 1980 & 1994 (3.5 GPF) After 1994 (1.6 GPF) Not replacing (installing new) Don't know Not sure?

Learn more. How will the water be heated?

Not replacing: Click to Select Natural Gas Electricity Don't know Not sure?

Learn more. How will the water be heated?

Not replacing: Click to Select Natural Gas Electricity Don't know Not sure?

Learn more. My Water Savings By replacing your current fixtures with the WaterSense labeled fixtures you selected, you'd save... Water: gallons saved annually

Equivalent to washing loads worth of laundry

Greenhouse Gas Emissions: pounds of greenhouse gas emissions annually

Equivalent to taking 1 car off of the road for Money: in utility bills annually Recalculate your results by clicking the link above and changing the information you provide. Tell your friends about your savings

your friends about your savings Ready To Save? ▶ Find a WaterSense labeled product

a WaterSense labeled product ▶ Discover more ways to save

more ways to save ▶ Pledge to save water