Throwing stones in social science: Non-violence, unarmed violence, and the first intifada
Social scientists treat stone-throwing as a non-violent act or argue that protest movements may be primarily non-violent despite stone-throwing. However, this study of an iconic example, the first intifada (Palestinian uprising, 1987–1993), demonstrates that stone-throwing is better characterized as unarmed violence. Definitions of violence underscore that throwing rocks is a violent act. Moreover, informed observers and data collected on stone-induced injuries during four years of the intifada illustrate the bodily harm caused by stones. The throwing of stones was central to the intifada and its identity and definition. Stone-throwing was the most visible tactic Palestinians used in the first intifada. Lastly, most scholars emphasize the protestors’ perceptions when it might be that the targets’ perceptions matter more for understanding definitions of (non-)violence and subsequent policy changes. These findings challenge important social science work and the mainstream Israeli and Palestinian narratives about the first intifada.

I have a rock from Jerusalem sitting in my office; it is somewhat larger than a baseball. In the fall of 1989 during the first Palestinian intifada (uprising), I was riding Bus 23 from downtown Jerusalem back to Hebrew University on Mt Scopus. Route 23 was usually a faster trip back to Mt Scopus because, unlike other routes, it cut through Palestinian neighborhoods in East Jerusalem, such as Sheikh Jarrah and the American Colony.1 Other routes avoided these neighborhoods and instead took a circuitous route via Mea She’arim, an ultra-Orthodox Jewish neighborhood, and French Hill, one of the first large settlements Israel built across the green line on land it captured from Jordan in 1967. I still remember the thump-thump of the rocks hitting the bus as we passed Jerusalem’s Old City, the driver speeding up, and the woman whose now-bloody hand had been perched on a slightly open window.

How should we categorize protest movements that use stone-throwing? Many scholars have counted such movements as non-violent campaigns by relying on at least one of three arguments. First, rock-throwing is not a violent act. Second, rock-throwing may be violent but did not constitute the majority of protest actions; the majority of actions utilized non-violent tactics. Third, the way to determine how to characterize a campaign, non-violent or violent, is based on the range of protestor actions rather than on how the targets perceived those actions.

Each of these arguments is problematic, as a close study of the first intifada demonstrates. First, a look at scholarly definitions, the views of knowledgeable observers of the first intifada, and numerical evidence of injuries during the first intifada make clear that groups of protestors throwing rocks is a form of unarmed violence. It is an unarmed but violent act. Second, almost no one has put forward data for the first intifada that comprehensively distinguishes between different tactics. An oft-cited Israel Defense Forces (IDF) report does not support the claim that the intifada was predominantly non-violent. Third, the protestors’ distribution of tactics may vary significantly from the impression different tactics leave on the target. Even if one assumes the mix of Palestinians tactics was meant to be largely non-violent, Israeli Jews felt they faced a largely violent uprising. When tactics are mixed, violent ones will often stand out and overwhelm any other tactical pathways.

Thus, the primary purpose of this article is to delve into stone-throwing and how the characterization of stone-throwing affects social science categorization and conclusions. The article suggests we treat stone-throwing as unarmed violence, one stop along the non-violence/violence spectrum. Moreover, the article brings into the open the potential of a meaningful perception gap. The gap may be of two types: (1) two or more actors with different perceptions of reality (Krause, 2013; Wohlforth, 1993) or (2) one actor with a different perception than reality (Christensen and Snyder, 1990). On the question of stone-throwing in the first intifada, scholarly coding conflicts with target perceptions, affecting important works such as Chenoweth and Stephan (2011) and Pearlman (2011).

From a theoretical perspective, this article illuminates the categories of (non-)violence by being more intentional about the meaning and shadings of different terminology. Armed/unarmed and violent/non-violent are not interchangeable terms. By drawing on existing social science definitions of violence, we are able to better specify and categorize different types of protest actions and (non-)violent interactions, including stone-throwing. Nuance helps lessen ambiguity.

The disagreement about categorizing stone-throwing as violent or non-violent action also illustrates that certain tactics are better suited to mass protest while others are based on more selective participation, a point noted by Chenoweth and Stephan (2011) in relation to non-violence. Unlike gunfire, stone-throwing was a tactic that could work hand-in-hand with mass participation.

Also, the disagreement about naming violence is ultimately about what actors depict as good or at least legitimate forms of political protest. If stone-throwing is seen as non-violent, it is also likely to be widely accepted as legitimate protest. If it is seen as violent, even unarmed but violent, the media or public associate it with negative and illegitimate protest. In this article, I seek to disentangle the decision about how to characterize stone-throwing from its normative baggage.

Thus, this article’s interpretation highlights contradictory risks for the Palestinian and Israeli mainstream understandings of the first intifada, not to mention stone-throwing today. For Palestinians, it means that stone-throwing, however unarmed, is still a form of violence that opens the door to associating Palestinian protest with the tag of illegitimacy, thereby overshadowing the mass character of the uprising and the goal of statehood. It obstructs the dramatic imbalance in military capabilities between the Israeli military and Palestinian protestors and the organizations of the Palestinian national movement. Israelis face the opposite problem: a more differentiated view of violence means that merely noting that throwing a rock is violent is not enough to delegitimize an entire Palestinian national movement, given everything else that Palestinians did and did not do in the first two years of the first intifada. That stone-throwing meets most definitions of violence does not negate the Palestinian push for self-determination. The imbalance of military power lingers.

Protestor versus target The last challenge to the notion of a non-violent intifada is about whose perception of the movement matters in terms of defining it as (primarily) non-violent or not. What are we to do with the disparity between the mainstream Palestinian and Israeli perceptions of the first intifada? Can a non-violent campaign be effective as a non-violent campaign if the targets of that campaign see it as a violent or mixed (violent and non-violent) campaign? Even some Palestinians, as well as other observers, noted that the key to a successful intifada would be how it affected Israelis. That seems to reinforce the notion that the perception of the target of a protest campaign is at least as important in coding that given series of events. In terms of stone-throwing during the first intifada, there is a meaningful perception gap between scholars and some Palestinians versus the Israeli mainstream and leadership. Israeli leaders considered the intifada to be violent. For Yitzhak Rabin, the Minister of Defense, it was ‘mass violent demonstrations without weapons’ (Rabin et al., 1988: 154). Another time, Rabin said ‘stone-throwing demonstrations were “terrorism and violent disturbances”’ (Hunter, 1991: 85). The Israeli prime minister, Yitzhak Shamir, labeled it ‘“violent” agitation’ and a ‘war against the existence of Israel’ (Hunter, 1991: 85–86; Kaufman, 1991: 19). The then military deputy chief of staff, Ehud Barak, saw it as ‘a violent popular riot’ (Bregman, 2002: 187). Israel treated the first intifada as ‘violent rioting’ not as a ‘political struggle’ (King, 2007: 5). Israeli soldiers ‘regarded this conflict as a war’ (Hunter, 1991: 95). Sharp spoke more broadly: ‘In Israeli minds, because of the stones, petrol bombs and killings, the Intifadah becomes yet another attempt to kill Jews’ (quoted in Kaufman, 1991: 8). In 1990, a survey of the Israeli public found that 96% felt that the intifada ‘uses force (violent acts) often (and mainly very often).’ More specifically, 74–78% believed that ‘stone-throwing at civilians and/or soldiers constitutes unrestrained violence’ (Kaufman, 1991: 10–11). Even in the early days of the first intifada, Israelis saw the violence and were ‘unaware of its nonviolent aspects’ (Peretz quoted in Kaufman, 1991: 24). That lack of awareness directly illustrates the perceptual gap. The government and people of Israel during the first intifada would be looking to highlight the violence to justify their own violent tactics and to delegitimize the protestors’ struggle. That means it is incumbent upon the protestors to be highly disciplined and tactically selective if they truly want to advance their cause through a non-violent campaign. I am not suggesting they should choose a fully non-violent campaign. However, I am saying that if the protestors do not make that choice, tactics that are violent, even if unarmed, will significantly obscure the nature of the intended non-violent message. Mixed tactics might provoke a very different response than the desired one (Sharp, 1989: 5). Aggressive retaliation can be justified based on the perception of the protests as violent (Maoz and McCauley, 2008). The nature of protest and the perceptions about those protests, created in part through the media, may place the burden, however unfairly, on the protestor to consider how the choice of tactics affects the movement’s optics. In addition, the case for seeing stone-throwing as unarmed violence does not solely rest on Israeli perceptions. Throughout this article, I have brought a range of evidence and analysis that, taken together, should mitigate concerns that the more powerful party, Israel, has been allowed to determine how a certain Palestinian tactic should be categorized. As the target, the Israeli view is a piece of the puzzle, but the consideration here is much wider than just that. Sometimes Palestinians also acknowledged the centrality of influencing Israel in order to bring about change in Palestinians’ national status. It is not just a scholarly or Israeli insight. Arafat (1989: 209) himself thought about the needed impact on Israel: ‘We had hoped that the sight of children yielding stones to confront armored vehicles, gunfire, and suffocating gas would be sufficient to arouse the conscience of the Israeli occupiers and to open their minds to the future…’ In 1990, Sari Nusseibeh, a Palestinian academic, noted, ‘Our own road to statehood is through Israel, through Israeli public opinion’ (King, 2007: 342). To Dajani (1995: 125), a Palestinian-American academic, whether the pressure was on Israel directly or indirectly through Washington, ‘Palestinians have long been aware that there will be no movement to address their rights to independence and sovereignty unless and until Israel is convinced that it simply cannot continue to govern these areas.’ Dajani (1999: 60) later added, ‘In the final analysis, the success of the intifada should be evaluated in terms of its impact on Israel.’ To J Kuttab (1988b: 35), a Palestinian attorney and human rights advocate, ‘Palestinians realize the need to reach out to Israeli society.’ The Israeli perception of stone-throwing was even more important than the Palestinian perspective for understanding whether the stones would have any political impact on Israel’s desire to maintain or wind down the occupation. This need to consider the views of the other side is doubly frustrating for a national liberation movement; the oppressor not only oppresses but also often holds the key to ending that oppression.

Scholarly impact For scholarly work, the common stone-throwing of the first intifada is at odds with the event’s treatment as a non-violent or predominantly non-violent episode. This could lead to a modified understanding of Pearlman (2011) and Chenoweth and Stephan (2011).4 In Pearlman (2011), if stone-throwing is unarmed violence, then Palestinians resorted to violence from the start of the first intifada in December 1987, regardless of the level of Palestinian organizational cohesion or fragmentation. They did not turn to violence only when Palestinian fragmentation commenced. Yet, Pearlman would still have an important point that the nature of the violence intensified from the early years of the intifada to the later ones – stones to lethal violence – on the basis of national cohesion or the lack thereof. It was a shift from unarmed violence to armed violence. That correlation is probably the more important point: cohesion and a lower form of violence versus fragmentation and (more) lethal violence. To look at it another way, a modified version of her puzzle would remain an intriguing question. After decades ‘of exaltation of armed struggle,’ why, did Palestinians use only unarmed violence and refrain from guns at the start of the first uprising (Pearlman, 2011: 105)? That would still leave the door open to an answer based on cohesion and fragmentation. In Chenoweth and Stephan (2011), the first intifada is one of hundreds of cases. Coding this one case does not change their overall conclusion about the greater efficacy of non-violent protest. However, the first intifada was one of four case studies they used to illustrate their argument and assess why non-violent campaigns succeed or fail; in that sense, it might not be the best fit with the larger findings. This also suggests to me a related question about work on non-violence: What do readers have in mind when scholars tell them about non-violent events or campaigns? I doubt that they assume such interactions involve unarmed violence, an analytically distinct category from non-violence.

Conclusion This article has argued that stone-throwing is a form of unarmed violence. Rather than thinking of protest tactics as violent or non-violent, I situate stone-throwing along a continuum of six categories of human action: non-violence; verbal violence; property violence; unarmed violence; armed violence; and catastrophic violence. A close study of the first intifada, paired with general definitions of violence, illuminates how this approach differs from previous writings. From a theoretical perspective, this more nuanced scaling of protest tactics in relation to (non-)violence allows for greater precision in understanding protest movements and resistance to occupations or other governmental activity. This spectrum might be usefully applied to the study of other protest movements, their tactical choices, and their likelihood of success or failure. Reality is difficult to capture, and scholars regularly face a trade-off between parsimony and accuracy in doing so. The more detailed categories have the potential to yield a fuller understanding of moments of protest. In addition, the argument here is a push for disentangling the categorization of a particular protest tactic from the legitimacy of the act. Often the desire has been to insert the context into the act itself and thereby prevent the weighing of both factors as a valid way of unpacking action by political actors. More specifically, the context in which Palestinians are throwing stones against Israeli targets and the Israeli occupation is crucial to a full understanding of the situation, the tactic, and the Palestinian–Israeli relationship. However, that context should not be used to eliminate the possibility of analyzing the acts involved from a social scientific perspective. From an empirical perspective, the mis-categorization or minimization of stone-throwing has at least three implications. As noted already, it may affect the conclusions of scholarly work that use the first intifada as a case study, as with the work of Pearlman or Chenoweth and Stephan. One implication is that stone-throwing as unarmed violence affects how we think about consequent shifts in public opinion and policy. In addition to other factors, like the end of the Cold War and the 1991 Gulf War, the first intifada was one element that helped Israeli Jews realize that holding the occupied territories carried a price; Palestinian nationalism was real and would not easily be marginalized or managed (Dowty, 2006: 14; Matar, 2011: 159; Schiff and Ya’ari, 1990: 79; Tessler, 1990: 50). As a result, a slight majority of Israelis swung behind Israel’s left-of-center parties, resulting in Yitzhak Rabin and Labor’s victory in the 1992 elections and, the following year, the Oslo breakthrough that led to the Oslo process, 1993–2001. From April 1987 – before the intifada – until March 1989, Israeli support for giving up ‘at least some territory in return for suitable guarantees’ rose from 41% to 54%; support for conducting negotiations with the PLO rose from 42% to 58% (Tessler, 1990: 53–54, 56). Since rocks were an important Palestinian tool in the uprising and featured prominently in Israeli understandings of the uprising, that means unarmed violence contributed to a shift in Israeli opinion and policy. Lastly, seeing stone-throwing as unarmed violence challenges how both Israelis and Palestinians talk about the legitimacy or not of Palestinian protest. Abu-Nimer (2003: 144–145) succinctly expressed this point: ‘Many times governments, particularly those of the United States and Israel, will label actions violent and call for non-violence as a means of discrediting and squelching resistance to oppression. Many times nonviolent theorists and activists maintain the dichotomy to insist on the “purity” of nonviolent resistance.’ By calling stone-throwing violent, the Israeli and US governments hoped to undermine the entire Palestinian national movement, as if to say how could such a violent people want or deserve national rights. A taxi driver said with a shrug: ‘It’s a war. It should be treated the same as a war. They don’t have rifles, so they use rocks. They don’t have bombs, so they use Molotov cocktails. It’s a war just the same’ (Kifner, 1988). Yet, by distinguishing unarmed violence from armed violence, it makes the Israeli and US position weaker. Unarmed violence does not automatically carry with it the same sense of political illegitimacy or invalidate the underlying claim to Palestinian self-determination. At the same time, Palestinians face risks associated with the unarmed violence tag. It is not the same as armed violence, but it is violence nonetheless. Of the first intifada, King (2007: 264) writes, ‘the stones fed Israeli fear and let antagonists criticize the uprising as inherently violent, thus diminishing its political results.’ Had Palestinian youth avoided stones, they could have had a more powerful argument: we do not use violence but the Israelis attack us with violence. Instead, the argument becomes somewhat weaker: we both use violence but the Israelis use a disproportionate amount. In short, thinking of stones in terms of unarmed violence rather than non-violence or armed violence creates a challenge for each side’s basic understanding and presentation of the battle in which they are engaged. When considering the use of unarmed violence, demonstrators do not face simple trade-offs. For example, Hunter (1991: 119, 208) argues that the initial, harsh Israeli suppression of stone-throwing and street demonstrations led wider segments of Palestinian society to join the struggle against the occupation and for national self-determination. If he is correct, the very same stone-throwing that was alienating the targets, Israelis, was also facilitating a broader mobilization of Palestinian society. Further research on cases like Israeli stone-throwing against Palestinians; ultra-Orthodox Jewish stone-throwing in Israel; and stone-throwing in Northern Ireland might help illuminate the trade-offs and other aspects of this tactic, as well as the whole category of unarmed violence.

Acknowledgements Thanks for comments to Max Abrahms, Boaz Atzili, Erica Chenoweth, Alise Coen, Bryan Daves, Ehud Eiran, Amaney Jamal, Peter J Krause, Ranan Kuperman, Fred Lee, Idean Salehyan, Raffe Sundberg, Mark Tessler, and Cyrus Ernesto Zirakzadeh. Thanks to Castella Copeland, Blake Giosa, Evan Jean Guillaume, Rohit Kandala, Matthew Lipson, Pratik Parikh, Andrea Rosato, Emily Roth, and S’ha Siddiqi for research assistance. I alone am responsible for the viewpoints and any errors.

Funding

Funding support was provided by Alan R Bennett.

Notes 1.

Thank you to Deborah A Starr for sharing a Jerusalem bus map (1987). 2.

Contact the author for additional details on property damage. 3.

The Global Nonviolent Action Database, http://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu, codes the campaign as non-violent only from December 1987 to the fall of 1988, arguing that rock-throwing became more central to the campaign as time passed. See ‘Palestinians wage nonviolent campaign during First Intifada, 1987–1988,’ http://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/palestinians-wage-nonviolent-campaign-during-first-intifada-1987-1988. 4.

In a different geographic context, India, Gupte et al. (2014) does treat stone ‘pelting’ as an example of violence during communal riots.