A Multivariate Comparison of Family, Felony, and Public Mass Murders in the United StatesJournal of Interpersonal Violence
Introduction Section: Choose Top of page Abstract Introduction << Method Results Discussion Conclusion References

Although mass murder—initially defined by the FBI as the killing of four or more victims in a single location within one event1—is a major area of public concern, academic research on this rare form of homicide remains in its infancy (Fox & Levin, 1998). Most previous work on mass murder has estimated the prevalence of the crime, developed a basic offender profile, or attempted to differentiate mass murder from other types of homicide. Noting systematic differences across incidents, some scholars have crafted typologies to group mass murderers by motive, victim–offender relationship, and/or location choice; yet, no classification scheme has been universally embraced by the academic community.

Early efforts to classify mass murder were based on Dietz’s (1986) first known typology and Fox and Levin’s (1996, 1998) motive-based categories (see Holmes & Holmes, 1992, 1994, 2001; Kelleher, 1997; Petee, Padgett, & York, 1997). Despite repeated attempts at developing consensus groupings of mass killings, these early typologies have been widely criticized for not being exhaustive and/or mutually exclusive and for overusing the same, highly publicized cases as examples of each type, despite the use of different substantive criteria (Duwe, 2005; Gresswell & Hollin, 1994). In some cases, types are briefly described in a few sentences, and vague criteria such as offender “lifestyle” are established to distinguish among categories or guide classification of ambiguous cases (Dietz, 1986; Holmes & Holmes, 1992, 2001). Others are subject to a high degree of interpretation (especially motive-based typologies) or fragment a rare phenomenon into so many small groups that complete disaggregation seems a better alternative (Levin & Fox, 1996; Fox & Levin, 1998; Petee et al., 1997). Although they are infrequently used in modern studies due to the above limitations, these pioneering typologies provided a foundation for future classification work.

Addressing the shortcomings of previous classification schemes, more recent research has dealt with the categorization problem in several ways. Some scholars have simply avoided the issue altogether by describing offender, victim, and incident characteristics independent of type (Aitken, Oosthuizen, Emsley, & Seedat, 2008; Duwe, 2000, 2004; Hempel, Meloy, & Richards, 1999; Lankford, 2015; Palermo, 1997) or by honing in on a single type of interest, typically public mass shootings (Follman, Aronsen, & Pan, 2016; Lankford, 2016a). Others have developed new, empirically based typologies by expanding the scope of data to include all forms of multicide or single-victim murder-suicides (Harper & Voight, 2007; Vaughn, DeLisi, Beaver, & Howard, 2009). These approaches are somewhat problematic, however, as they fail to recognize heterogeneity among mass murders, arbitrarily exclude known types, or change the underlying phenomenon of study by including offenses not traditionally considered mass murder.

As a result, most scholars have instead adopted broad categories that represent an amalgamation of previous typologies. Since the late 1990s, the most common scheme for categorizing mass murder has included family killers, who target their spouses and children before committing suicide; public killers, who attack strangers in a public space; and felony killers, who eliminate witnesses to another crime (Duwe, 2004, 2007; Krouse & Richardson, 2015; Overberg et al., 2016). Elements of these three types are described in almost all early typologies, albeit with different names.2 Although this de facto classification scheme benefits from being broad, multidimensional, and easy to apply, it remains somewhat ad hoc due to its lack of exclusivity and use of different criteria to define each type. Despite its common usage, differences among the three types have only been examined with case studies and other qualitative analyses. Moreover, most studies on mass murder typologies are neither generalizable to the entire population of mass murderers nor replicable. This study seeks to quantitatively test differences among family, felony, and public mass killings with the USA TODAY database.

Felony Killings Whereas familicides are defined by the victim–offender relationship and public massacres by location, felony killings are distinguished by motive. Murder is used to achieve some primary criminal objective, typically involving financial gain. In most instances, the murders serve to eliminate witnesses of a robbery, drug crime, or gang-related attack. Due to their general lack of sensationalism, felony killings are not widely publicized despite representing the second largest category of mass murder (Krouse & Richardson, 2015). Furthermore, although some form of family and public killings are incorporated in most typologies, felony killings are sometimes excluded, illustrating the emphasis on the most notorious cases and lack of exhaustivity (Dietz, 1986; Holmes & Holmes, 1992, 2001). For this reason, previous research on profit-related mass murders is sparse, yet suggests a profile not unlike the average single-victim homicide offender (Fox & Levin, 2015). Perpetrators of felony mass murders tend to be young Black or Hispanic males with extensive criminal records (Lankford, 2016b). With frequent ties to the drug trade or gangs, they operate in pairs or small groups in urban areas (Fox & Levin, 2015; Petee et al., 1997). As the primary purpose of murder is to cover up another crime, felony killers leave few survivors and generally claim four or five victims on average, similar to family killers (Duwe, 2007). These offenders are rarely suicidal, instead intending to survive to reap the benefits of their crime, and thus typically are arrested. Victims are typically male acquaintances, criminal associates, or strangers who are approximately the same age as the offender(s). As with homicide in general, most victims are the same race as the offender(s), and more than three quarters of incidents involve firearms due to their efficacy in intimidating victims to comply with the perpetrator(s)’ demands. Due to the dearth of research on this type, the theoretical underpinnings of felony mass murder are relatively unclear in comparison with their family and public counterparts. Although murder is the ultimate goal of the other two types, killing is only a means toward an end for felony assailants. Considering their overall similarities to more common instrumental homicides, a wide variety of theoretical frameworks can be applied to felony killings. It is likely that a combination of individual (i.e., low self-control, disconnect between aspirations and expectations) and community-level factors (i.e., social disorganization and low collective efficacy) help to explain felony-related mass murders.