Domina, Sasse differ on Social Security, tax reform : Politics
Senate candidates Dave Domina and Ben Sasse continued to disagree Thursday about retention of the Affordable Care Act, but voiced more nuanced differences about Social Security and tax reform.

The two major-party nominees made separate presentations to the Independent Insurance Agents of Nebraska during its annual convention in Lincoln.

Domina, the Democratic nominee, referred to Sasse as the "most extreme candidate" in the Republican Senate primary field during his closing remarks, then remained to listen to Sasse after the Republican nominee entered the room.

The Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, is "not going away," Domina said, and it has "not caused the decline and fall of the United States."

But the health care reform law "does need to be fixed," he said, cleaning up problems that were unaddressed or created by the new law.

What needs to be preserved, Domina said, is the "focus on prevention and wellness," a huge change in health care policy that ought to be emphasized and expanded.

Sasse said the country "needs real health care reform, and it's not Obamacare."

When Democrats "too often propose Washington-centric, one-size-fits-all solutions" and Republicans seem to offer no solutions, Sasse said, "a bad idea trumps no idea at all."

Sasse said his ideas for Social Security reform would "protect those already retired or near the retirement age," while shoring up the program for middle-age and younger Americans with reforms that may include gradually indexing the age of eligibility and "means-testing lots of benefits."

Domina said Social Security should not be privatized, and its funding challenges are relatively easy to fix.

"It's not broke," he said, and options for reform include lifting the cap on wages subject to the payroll tax and changing its annual cost-of-living adjustment, or COLA.

Domina said tax reform should be aimed at the largest corporate taxpayers "who escape paying their fair share" through a series of exemptions, exceptions and credits.

"Make everybody pay," he said.

Sasse said he would lower the marginal tax rates and provide "much fewer deductions, exemptions and special interest carve-outs."

"I don't think we need tax increases," he said.

Also in the Senate race are independent candidates Jim Jenkins and Todd Watson.