Housing, Employment & Public Accommodations
Discrimination Against Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and Transgender People is Generally Legal in Ohio

It is legal in Ohio to be fired from your job, denied an apartment, or refused service at a movie theater, restaurant or hotel because of your sexual orientation or gender identity. In many cities and counties in Ohio and for many government employees, these practices are prohibited, but there are no statewide anti-discrimination protections that protect all Ohioans.

21 of the 50 states currently protect people from discrimination based on their sexual orientation and/or gender identity, putting Ohio at a competitive disadvantage for recruiting and hiring the best and brightest professional talent. Many employers across the country and here in Ohio have extended non-discrimination policies to cover LGBT people, but millions of Ohioans remain unprotected. Protections are needed for everyone.

Follow these links for more information on existing protections:

How Ohio compares to other states in equality laws // Human Rights Campaign Worknet



Ohioans Overwhelmingly Oppose Discrimination



In recent surveys, Americans -- and Ohioans in particular -- overwhelmingly oppose discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity.

Nationally, 76% of people believe there should be laws protecting gays and lesbians from discrimination in job opportunities, and 74% said there should be laws to protect gays and lesbians from discrimination in housing.

The opinion of Ohio voters is consistent with this national trend:

79% of Ohio registered voters believe that laws should be passed banning discrimination in employment, housing and public accommodations based on both sexual orientation and gender identity (according to a 2013 poll by Goodwin Simon Strategic Research).

Ohio Should Pass the Equal Housing and Employment Act

Equality Ohio is working with a bi-partisan group of legislators to pass the Equal Housing and Employment Act to end discrimination in employment, housing and public accommodations on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity.

In the last five sessions of the Ohio General Assembly, legislation was introduced to protect all Ohioans from losing their job, being denied housing, or being refused public accommodations based on their real or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity. On September 15, 2009, by a vote of 56 to 39, the Ohio House of Representatives passed the Equal Housing and Employment Act. The historic vote marked the first time the Ohio General Assembly has voted on legislation to protect lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people. The bill unfortunately was not given testimony or a vote in the Senate and died with the end of the 2008-2009 legislative session. A new bill for 2013 is in both houses (S.B. 125 and H.B. 163).

LGBT Ohioans face discrimination on many levels. EHEA would prevent LGBT Ohioans from being judged on anything other than their job performance; it would allow all LGBT Ohioans the ability to obtain the housing of their choice; and, it would permit LGBT Ohioans to be served at restaurants, movie theaters and hotels everywhere in the state.