Donald Trump August 2004 Esquire Interview
Do you mind if I sign these contracts while we talk? Ever since The Apprentice, my life has gotten so much busier.

It's been an interesting run. Some people say, "The Apprentice has made you even bigger." To a certain extent, it has. Now young kids see me and come running over, screaming, "You're fired! You're fired!" I'm not sure kids knew who I was before The Apprentice.

It's sort of interesting when you think about it. What I do on the show essentially is analyze people and then fire somebody—sometimes pretty viciously. And that makes people think I'm a nice guy. Whereas before, they viewed me as a bit of an ogre. Maybe it's because people knew me only through the press; they didn't know the person behind the name.

The audience either likes you or it doesn't. Obviously, the audience likes me.



Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

One thing about television, it brings out personality. People are able to watch me in action. They hear my voice and see my eyes. There's nothing I can hide. That's me. Television brings out your flaws, your weaknesses, your strengths, and you truths. The audience either likes you or it doesn't. Obviously, the audience likes me.

In the history of the business, there's never been anything like this—a businessman has the highest-rated show on television. Businessmen don't even get on TV, let alone have the number-one show. What can I—[phone interrupts]. Hold on, I want to take this....Reeeeeg! How are you? ... I'm sitting here with Esquire magazine. They're putting me on the cover. It's a story about...wait, I'll let him tell you. [Turns on speakerphone.]

Esquire: What it feels like to be an American icon.

Regis Philbin: Honest to God? When is this going to end? He's invaded my territory, pushed me right off the television screen. Now he's the great American icon?

Trump: Hey, why only American? Why not the world?

Regis: Now, look, Trump. Remember to smile when they photograph you—

Trump: You know, Reeg gave me some tips—

Regis: I told Trump, "Don't let them make you scream and yell at these people when you fire them. Do it quickly, succinctly, and with a little kindness." And he's done it to a tee.

Trump: Who knows better than my man Reeg?

Regis: Anyone who's ever driven to Atlantic City knows that Trump's got a big billboard. For years, you used to see his angry face on it. I said, "Trump, that expression is making people afraid to go to the Taj Mahal. Why don't you give them a big smile.? 'C'mon in, folks! Spend your money here!'" I think we got that corrected. Listen, he's an all-time superstar. You're lucky that you're with him right now. You're getting the Trumpster at the height of his television career.

Trump: Which may be only another two months, right? [Smiles to himself, turns off speakerphone, chats privately with Reeg for a minute, then resumes.]

You know, I don't kid myself about the show. If it doesn't get ratings, it's off. Look, if I came up with a cure for cancer and it didn't get ratings, they wouldn't put it on. That's how vicious that business is. I was talking to Lorne Michaels, who's been doing Saturday Night Live for close to thirty years, about ratings. I said, "You know how it goes, Lorne. Someday they'll call you and say, 'Your ratings are slipping rapidly and your show is going to be canceled.'" And he said, "Donald, you're wrong. They won't even bother calling."