DOMA and Prop 8: Financial costs of being gay (Photos)
Edith Windsor, the plaintiff in the Defense of Marriage case being heard this week by the Supreme Court, is a New York native (though not from the Capitol Region). She lived in a committed relationship with Thea Spyer for 44 years. The couple married in Canada and when Thea died in 2009, she left property to Edith.

View slideshow: Supreme Court and gay rights

Because the federal government, unlike the state of of New York, didn't recognize their same-sex relationship, Windsor was sent a notice. She did not qualify for the IRS marital deduction and owed $363,000 in federal estate taxes. Widowed heterosexual spouses don't get tax bills like that.

Gay and lesbian couples in the Capitol Region will be watching as the United States Supreme Court hears arguments this week on the constitutionality of the Defense of Marriage Act and the related, but separate, California Proposition 8 law in opposition to same-sex marriage there.

The Supreme Court hears oral arguments on marriage equality, this week, including financial unbalances. Photo credit: Wikimedia commons Location: Schenectady NY 42.81224822998 ; -73.941017150879

Other discrepencies seem more trivial, but more concrete. For example, car rental companies don’t charge for a second driver if you are married or in a domestic partnership. While such a savings or expense might seem insignificant during the course of one year, it becomes significant over the span of a relationship.

More important, other significant financial issues arise when one partner passes away and the other survives, such as the access of a surviving partner to a spouse's work benefits, pensions, and 401(k). Basic rights, with rare exceptions, not available to gay and lesbian couples include:

access to spousal social security and veterans benefits

social security and veterans benefits coverage on a spouse's employer-sponsored health plan

employer-sponsored health plan rights under the Family and Medical Leave Act

Family and Medical Leave Act ability to file joint tax returns at the federal and state levels

joint tax returns at the federal and state levels spousal contributions to Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs), not available to stay-at-home gay partners, resulting in smaller retirement accounts

Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs), not available to stay-at-home gay partners, resulting in smaller retirement accounts and much more.

One New York gay couple profiled in a 2009 New York Times article, "The High Costs of Being Gay," identified a manilla folder they keep nearby at all times. It contains their living wills, living trusts, and durable powers of attorney, among other documents. Their worst nightmare is being caught in a medical emergency and denied access to each other and their children due to laws that recognize only heterosexual marriage or blood relationships.

The same New York Times article estimate the extra costs of marriage inequality to gay and lesbian couples to lie between $40,000 and $400,000 over a lifetime.

Says Fred Elia, Capitol Region gay community activist, "Until we reach total financial equity in taxes and employment--all gay Americans--single or couples--need air-tight financial plans for the future. And there's the emotional and physical toll of worrying. I wouldn't count, necessarily, on the Supreme Court to take care of us. We must take care of ourselves."

Dave Balog teaches financial basics to families and indviduals, including gay couples. 355-0967, dbalog99@gmail.com