Exelon Corporation: About Us
Exelon Corporation (NYSE: EXC) is the nation’s leading competitive energy provider, with 2014 revenues of approximately $27.4 billion. The Exelon family of companies participates in every stage of the energy business, from generation to competitive energy sales to transmission to delivery .

Headquartered in Chicago, Exelon does business in 48 states, the District of Columbia and Canada. Exelon is one of the largest competitive U.S. power generators, with more than 32,000 megawatts of owned capacity comprising one of the nation’s cleanest and lowest-cost power generation fleets. The company’s Constellation business unit provides energy products and services to more than 2.5 million residential, public sector and business customers, including more than two-thirds of the Fortune 100. Exelon’s utilities deliver electricity and natural gas to more than 7.8 million customers in central Maryland (BGE), northern Illinois (ComEd) and southeastern Pennsylvania (PECO). Follow Exelon on Twitter @Exelon.

How We Rank

Exelon has been the top-ranked electric and gas utility on the FORTUNE 500 every year since 2008. Exelon was named to Fortune magazine’s 2015 list of the “World’s Most Admired Companies.” Exelon ranked among the top five U.S. utility companies in Newsweek's 2015 Green Rankings. Exelon was named to the Dow Jones Sustainability North America Index for the ninth year in a row in 2014. View Awards & Recognition List

Key Stats for 2014

Operating Revenues: $27.4 billion

$27.4 billion Assets: $80 billion

$80 billion Employees: Approximately 29,000

Approximately 29,000 Owned U.S. Generating Capacity: More than 32,000 megawatts

More than 32,000 megawatts Electric and Natural Gas Delivery Customers: 7.8 million

Leadership

Chairman, Mayo A. Shattuck III

President & CEO, Christopher M. Crane

Exelon Leadership Team

Exelon Board of Directors

Family of Companies

Service Areas & Power Plant Host Communities

Guiding Principles

Driving Competition and Customer Choice

As the leading U.S. competitive energy provider, Exelon maintains a strategic presence in key competitive markets and believes that competition drives choice, innovation and savings for businesses and residential customers alike. The company champions competitive power markets as the best framework for meeting important economic and environmental policy objectives, including ensuring the nation’s shift to a cleaner energy supply in the most cost-effective manner.

Benefits of Competition | PDF

Advancing Clean Energy

Exelon has one of the nation’s cleanest and lowest-cost power generation portfolios, with 59 percent nuclear, 21 percent natural gas and 10 percent hydro, wind, solar and other clean generation. In addition, Constellation provides customers with clean energy solutions including natural gas supply, solar energy solutions, energy efficiency services and real-time energy management. $0$0 $0 $0Exelon 2020, an industry-leading program to eliminate 17.5 million metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions per year by 2020, demonstrates the company's commitment to a clean energy future. In 2013, Exelon reduced or avoided more than 18 million metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions, surpassing its goal seven years ahead of schedule. $0