Julián Castro hammers Sanders on Latino issues
Photo: JERRY LARA, Staff / San Antonio Express-News U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Julian Castro,...

WASHINGTON - Hillary Clinton may be unstoppable in her quest for the Democratic nomination, but Latinos remain up for grabs in remaining contests and Julián Castro is working to persuade them on Clinton’s behalf.

On the eve of the Univision-Washington Post Democratic debate in Miami Wednesday night, Castro, secretary of Housing and Urban Development, offered a scorching assessment of Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders' record on immigration.

“Bernie Sanders voted with Republicans to protect the minutemen, a hate group that used military tactics against our community. Thousands of families have been torn apart due to destructive behavior by Republicans and we cannot have a president who stands by their side,” Castro said Tuesday in a statement put out by the Clinton campaign.

Castro, mentioned often as a potential Clinton running mate on the 2016 Democratic ticket, also is expected to travel on Clinton's behalf this week. He campaigned for her in several states previously.

The strength of the former San Antonio mayor's statement Tuesday may be a reflection of the Clinton campaign’s frustration over failing to corral Latinos, a voting bloc she is counting on not only in primary contests but also in November if she secures the nomination.

In Texas, the Latino vote closely matched her 2-1 victory on March 1. Elsewhere, Sanders’ message on economic issues has appealed to many Latinos.

In Colorado’s Democratic caucuses on March 1, Sanders relied heavily on Latinos in easily defeating Clinton. In Nevada, like Colorado a battleground state in November, Sanders won Latinos by 8 percent in Feb. 20 caucuses despite losing overall to the former secretary of state.

The Latino vote could be a factor in primaries in Florida and Illinois on March 15 and in Arizona on March 22.

In a conference call with reporters on Tuesday, Sanders' strategists contended they are seeing Latinos drawn to the Vermont senator’s call for a $15 hourly minimum wage, single-payer health insurance system and other issues to the left of Clinton.

“Our campaign has learned that Latinos are sick and tired of establishment politics because of the countries we come from,” said Arturo Carmona, Sanders’ deputy political director.

Earlier in the campaign, Sanders brushed aside assertions like Castro’s that he voted with Republicans catering to the Minutemen, a private militia that spurred controversy in border areas.

The issue dates back to Sanders’ days in the U.S. House, when Minutemen claimed that U.S. officials were tipping off the Mexican government about their whereabouts. They won an amendment prohibiting Homeland Security officials from supplying a foreign government with information on activities of civilian groups operating in Texas, California, New Mexico or Arizona.

Sanders campaign spokeswoman Erika Andiola said Democrats who joined with Republicans to pass the amendment were told by Customs and Border Patrol that it would have no effect.

“The senator did not protect the minutemen,” she said by email. “He does not think private militias are the way to police or protect borders.”

bill.lambrecht@hearstdc.com