Lavish gifts a perk for Attorney General Greg Abbott
Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 Attorney General Greg Abbott is the front-runner for the GOP gubernatorial nod. Attorney General Greg Abbott is the front-runner for the GOP gubernatorial nod. Image 2 of 3 Attorney General Greg Abbott leads a get out the vote rally at Rita's on the River on February 26, 2014. Attorney General Greg Abbott leads a get out the vote rally at Rita's on the River on February 26, 2014. Photo: For The San Antonio Express-News Image 3 of 3 Attorney General Greg Abbott leads a get out the vote rally at Rita's on the River on February 26, 2014. Attorney General Greg Abbott leads a get out the vote rally at Rita's on the River on February 26, 2014. Photo: For The San Antonio Express-News Lavish gifts a perk for Attorney General Greg Abbott 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

AUSTIN — Being a top-ranked Texas politician with growing influence has its perks — like getting showered with lots of freebies.

Just ask Attorney General Greg Abbott.

Abbott, the front-runner for the Republican gubernatorial nod, earns a state paycheck of $150,000 a year and annually collects a six-figure lump sum from a legal settlement after a fallen oak tree left him in a wheelchair.

Yet, Abbott and his family have been on the receiving end of more than 30 personal gifts — many from high-powered donors and influential movers and shakers — during his term as Texas' chief lawyer.

The list includes hunting trips, a new gun, football tickets and free travel and lodging for the family.

More Information Lt. governor clash Analysts say Republican hopeful Dan Patrick's primary performance could prove a path to victory for Democrat Leticia Van de Putte. Metro, A3

The gifts are disclosed in personal financial statements Abbott has filed with the state since coming into elected office in 1993 as a district court judge in Houston.

His first reported gifts were equivalent to trinkets: an ink stand in 2004 from Sen. Kevin Eltife, followed the next year by a framed argument from the U.S. Supreme Court given by staff at the state attorney general's office, including then-Solicitor General Ted Cruz.

In subsequent years, and as Abbott's political stock continued to rise, the gifts magnified in volume and often flow from donors with hefty pockets.

Among them are San Antonio's James Leininger, beer distributing baron Barry Andrews and Marvin Rush, who owns the largest U.S. network of commercial truck dealerships.

Personal gift-giving long has been in the DNA of Texas politics, and watchdog groups say the practice, which is legal in the state, is akin to buying access in exchange for future favors.

Texas laws place some prohibitions on personal gifts — those specifically coming from outside the lobby — but a number of exceptions provide enough wiggle room for the office holders to accept presents.

With Abbott being groomed for the state's highest office for some time, those same watchdog groups say the personal gifts from people with power are no coincidence.

“When you are the heir apparent to the governor, currying favor is a very important component of big business,” said Tom “Smitty” Smith, director of the Texas chapter of Public Citizen. “The gifts can pay off either in decisions on whether to pursue a legal action, whether to make an appointment or whether to endorse a particular legislative proposal.”

When it comes to gift-giving, Texas isn't alone in allowing its elected officials to be showered with presents, though exceptions make gift laws different in all 50 states.

Nine states have enacted so-called “no-cup-of-coffee” laws that completely ban gifts, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.

But a handful of states also allow officeholders to take personal gifts of unlimited value from donors and other special interests outside the lobby, according to NCSL.

In Texas, Gov. Rick Perry, who has been in office since 2000, has racked up the longest and most impressive list of personal gifts of any officeholder in the state — more than 100 in all.

They include a variety of custom cowboy boots, sporting tickets, trips and lots of hunting excursions, including three in 2013. In Perry's case, the gift-givers are also made up in many instances by political appointees and big donors.

“It's almost impossible to trace the quid pro quo given to the gift donor,” Smith said. “But if it didn't continue to pay off for the smartest business men in Texas, they wouldn't continue to make these gifts.”

Abbott's gifts

Abbott's catalogs of gifts over the past six years largely is made up of hunting trips — eight total — and football tickets.

There also are vacations paid for by 1-800 Contacts CEO Jonathan Coon, who along with his wife, Kristen, covered expenses in 2012 to take Abbott's teen-aged daughter on a “Spring Break trip with family.” Abbott also disclosed a 2011 gift of food and lodging for a trip with the Coon family.

Leininger, the influential Republican mega donor who has pushed aggressively in the Legislature for public school vouchers, also paid for Abbott and his family's travel and accommodations on three separate occasions between 2008 and 2010, according to the filings. Abbott has steered clear from taking a position on public school vouchers so far in the campaign.

And while almost half of the free hunting trips Abbott disclosed since 2007 came from his friend Rickey Fain, who owns a ranch southwest of Fort Worth, the attorney general's most recent free hunting excursion was comped last year by Rush, the truck dealer from Seguin.

Also last year, Abbott was gifted a Walther .380 revolver, a popular gun for those who carry a concealed pistol. It came from Austin developer Blake Byram, who has given Abbott $10,000 in campaign cash and another $9,500 worth of in-kind contributions in the form of “airplane use.”

State law allows officeholders to accept personal gifts but they have to report them if valued at more than $250, making Texas one of at least 32 states that require officials to report gifts over a certain amount, according to the NCSL.

Abbott spokesman Avdiel Huerta said the attorney general “has made it his mission to report every gift as required by law.”

“As governor, he will continue to be a strong advocate for transparency in government,” Huerta said.

Trips, private airplanes

Abbott's gift-givers also happen to be some of his biggest financial backers. More than $1 million has been pumped into Abbott's political coffers by just five names on the list. One other donor who also gifted tickets to a sporting event contributed nearly twice as much alone.

In that mix is San Antonio's Leininger, who has contributed more than $230,000 to Abbott, along with a 2006 in-kind contribution valued at more than $10,000 for use of his airplane.

Rush, the heavy-duty truck impresario from Seguin, paid for an Abbott hunting trip last year and has contributed a total of $130,500 to the attorney general since 2010, including $50,000 last year.

There have been free football tickets for Abbott and his family from oil and gas tycoon James “Jim Bob” Moffett and his wife, Lauree. Abbott's wife, Cecilia, also was gifted a purse in 2012 from Lauree. Moffett has given Abbott $185,000 in campaign contributions.

Steven Hicks, vice chairman of the University of Texas Board of Regents, has donated $193,000 to Abbott and, along with his wife, Donna, gave the gift of a “travel guide membership” in 2009.

North Texas insurance dealer Al Boneker has contributed $168,000 to Abbott and paid for a 2007 hunting trip for the attorney general.

And Harold Simmons, the recently deceased Republican mega donor who covered Abbott's food and football tickets for a game in 2010, contributed a total of $1.86 million, including a $250,000 injection in October for Abbott's gubernatorial campaign.

Ethics experts say that even in states where personal gift giving is legal, it's hard to shake the public perception of a quid pro quo.

“The vast majority of officeholders are ethical and these gifts don't mean anything, but to the public outside looking in, it just plains look bad,” “said Peggy Kerns, a former Colorado state lawmaker who's now the director of the Center for Ethics in Government at the National Conference of State Legislatures.

State laws vary

As attorney general for the past 12 years, Abbott has largely been detached from the daily dealings of the Legislature when it is in session.

He's also been somewhat removed from the lobby machine that dominates the Texas Capitol, but still has reaped thousands of dollars in free stuff from lobbyists, state data show.

Abbott's likely general election opponent, Democratic state Sen. Wendy Davis, has not reported receiving any personal gifts on her financial disclosure forms since getting elected in 2008.

Like Abbott, however, Davis also has been the recipient of thousands of dollars of freebies from the lobby, mostly in the form of meals and flowers. In August, just weeks after Davis filibustered on the floor of the Senate for 11 hours, Austin super lobbyist Andrea McWilliams gave her a framed copy of a newspaper article valued between $100 and $150, state filings show.

While Texas lawmakers have shown no interest in further regulating lobby gifts, officials in some other states are moving in the opposite direction, said Kerns.

In New York, for example, lawmakers are required to provide detailed disclosure information if the present is worth more than $1,000 from a single donor, according to the NCSL. But even in California, where the gift limit is $440, special interests have found effective ways to skirt around that rule.

Watchdog groups in Texas have called for an outright ban on personal gifts or to limit them to no more than $5.

The idea of curtailing meals and gifts from special interests like lobbyists and big donors sounds appealing but “it isn't all perfect and wonderful” when states impose stricter gift limits, said Kerns.

“My concern is always with lavishness of a lot of freebies, there is no question once some of gifts and some of the social things are eliminated it does change the culture,” she said. “It could restrict some lawmakers and others from getting together and establishing relationships.”

drauf@express-news.net