Abbott’s first response to Jade Helm more measured, records show
AUSTIN - Before he directed the Texas State Guard to monitor Jade Helm 15, Gov. Greg Abbott’s office offered a more measured response to scores of people who wrote or called with worries that the military exercise could mean martial law, gun seizures and the use of shuttered Walmarts for nefarious purposes.

“Rest assured, this is not a martial law exercise,” his office said in the earlier response, which went out by email and in a letter signed by Dede Keith, deputy director of Abbott’s constituent communication division.

“Law enforcement agencies in the training areas are fully aware of the exercise and will be coordinating with military officials to ensure the safety of residents and exercise participants,” said the response provided to the Express-News under the Public Information Act.

Then came a packed community meeting in Bastrop where a military officer faced many of the same questions and concerns that had flooded Abbott’s office.

On its heels, Abbott made headlines with an April 28 directive saying the Texas State Guard would monitor the federal military exercise in part to ensure Texans know their “civil liberties will not be infringed.”

The federal exercise is planned across seven states.

Abbott’s office had no comment about why his message changed, but a number of those who wrote had asked him to weigh in.

“Was our collective vote for Greg Abbott a mistake? I don’t think so. I know about all the lawsuits you filed against the Obama Administration; everyone does. It’s why we voted you in,” wrote a Lakehills man in late March, wondering why he hadn’t received an Abbott response within a week of emailing him about his concerns. “We expect something from you.”

Abbott said earlier this month that it was clear from the Bastrop meeting and inquiries to his office that people had questions about the exercise.

“I think we have an obligation to answer questions of citizens and by us working with the special operations forces, we’re able to provide information to citizens who are concerned about it,” Abbott said then.

Abbott has repeatedly expressed his respect and support for the military, saying his directive intends for the Texas State Guard to serve as a “communication facilitator between the special operations forces and the people of the state of Texas.”

Trinity University political scientist David Crockett said Abbott’s April 28 response, which drew national attention and some mockery, was a political error.

“I certainly think that he would have been better served sticking to the original plan of downplaying it and calling it what it is - it’s an exercise,” Crockett said Thursday.

At the same time, Crockett emphasized that Abbott doesn’t face re-election until 2018 and Jade Helm 15 is likely to be a distant memory by then.

“If there is a pattern that develops of this kind of obsequiousness toward the fringe faction, then that could be a problem,” Crockett said, but otherwise, “It’s a fairly minor blip.”

Documents provided to the Express-News by Abbott’s office show emails and phone calls to his office tracked the public, national response to his unusual directive to the volunteer Texas State Guard.

Those extremely distrustful of the federal government in general, and President Obama in particular, applauded his move. Others were shocked and upset, accusing Abbott of pandering to people with fringe views.

About 270 calls, letters and emails voiced opposition to the Jade Helm 15 exercise, with more than 170 of those coming before Abbott’s letter to the Texas State Guard.

“Please do what you can to keep military ops on military bases. Scramble the Texas Air National Guard if need be. Citizens of Texas don’t need further, and continued intimidation from our Marxist president,” wrote a San Antonio man.

A Deer Park woman wondered, “Is there anything we can do to prepare, other than lock and load?” A Hemphill woman, whose letter was dated before Abbott’s decision but arrived afterward, raised the rumor of closed Walmarts “being prepared to be detention camps.”

The operation advertised as a military exercise “could turn into a full fledged effort by the Federal Government to take guns away from law abiding citizens,” wrote a Houston woman, who asked Abbott what he planned to do about it.

A number of people thanked Abbott for his April 28 directive to the Texas State Guard, although some said he should have barred the exercise from the state or gone even further.

“I believe you can support our state military forces a whole lot better,” wrote a man from Porter. “Governor Abbott, I’m asking you to properly train, arm and equip our state military forces so we can truly defend out state.”

More than 50 additional people expressed questions or concerns that stopped short of asking Abbott to stop Jade Helm.

More than 90 others were upset at Abbott’s action, with many saying he had disrespected the military while embarrassing himself and his state.

“Keep this up and, if there are any informed Texans left in this state, we will vote you out of office,” wrote a Dallas couple. “For God’s sake, act like an adult.”

A number said Abbott had made Texas a “laughingstock.” Some suggesting that they believed his predecessor, former Gov. Rick Perry, had done the same, and that they had hoped they were done with that when Perry left office.

“You may have to get some horn rimmed glasses like your predecessor so people think you are smarter than your decisions would lead them to believe,” wrote a Coppell man, referring to the eyewear Perry donned sometime in the wake of his ill-fated run for the 2012 GOP presidential nomination.

But those who liked Abbott’s action suggested he might follow Perry’s example in another way.

“I heard about the excellent decision to send the State Guard to monitor Jade Helm,” wrote a Springtown man. “All I can say is Greg Abbott for president 2024!”

pfikac@express-news.net

Twitter: @pfikac