GOP isn't in rush to revise school funding
AUSTIN — School districts, teacher groups and advocates for Latino interests are pressing the Legislature to start work on a public education funding fix, though GOP leaders await word from the state Supreme Court.

That could take a year or two, depending on the route Attorney General Greg Abbott takes in appealing state District Judge John Dietz's decision Monday that the school funding system is unconstitutional and would require billions of dollars and a tax increase to fix.

That's time students don't have, education groups and advocates said Tuesday. Democrats and supporters of the National Council of La Raza and lawyers for school districts that sued Texas gathered at the Capitol to push for action.

“Children in the first grade today will not receive the benefit of a Legislature responding to the trial judge's findings possibly until they are in the third grade,” said Rep. Mike Villarreal, a San Antonio Democrat who serves on the House Public Education Committee.

The National Council of La Raza said its representatives were urging immediate action on education as well as immigration reform.

Sonia Troche, NCLR regional director, said decisions by Texas leaders on the key issues “will impact Hispanic youth and families, as well as the state as a whole, for years to come.”

The group pointed to $5.4 billion cut from public education spending in 2011, compared to previous two-year spending levels, in the face of Comptroller Susan Combs' prediction of a massive revenue shortfall. It said bigger class sizes and cuts in some programming disproportionately affected Latino youth.

“The state's lawmakers need to realize that Latinos will soon make up half of the state's population. If this future labor force is not equipped with the proper education, skills and training, it will severely harm the state's economic future,” Troche said.

Dietz ruled the system isn't adequately funded and that it fails to provide substantially equal access to the necessary revenues to meet the constitutional standard for public education.

He also found property tax levy amounts to an unconstitutional statewide property tax.

The public education system is funded by state money, local property tax revenue and federal dollars.

Some top Republicans were taken aback at Dietz's suggestion that it could take $10 billion to $11 billion — and a tax boost — to fix the system.

“My sense is that we should wait until we get a final decision (from the high court). Otherwise we could spend a lot of time and energy coming up with a plan that the Supreme Court might reject,” said Senate Education Committee Chairman Dan Patrick, a Houston Republican who also serves on the Finance Committee.

Teacher group advocates also have urged lawmakers at least to restore the funding cut from education. pfikac@express-news.net

Twitter: @pfikac