Texas Ag Commissioner Sid Miller calls Hillary Clinton C-word on Twitter, blames staffer
Texas Agriculture Commissioner Sid Miller, a Republican statewide office holder, walked back the idea that his Twitter account was hacked Tuesday, telling mySA.com that a since-deleted Tweet calling Hillary Clinton a “c--t” was a mistake made my a campaign staffer.

In the Tweet, which was deleted roughly 10 minutes after it was posted, Miller was citing a “new auto alliance poll,” which had Donald Trump, the Republican nominee for president, up by one point in the polls at 44 and Clinton, or as the Tweet referenced her, “c--t,” was at 43. He then cheered on the reality star with a week left to go until Election Day by saying: “Go Trump Go!”

"You can tell by reading it it's not something I sent out. I hadn't read it," Miller said when reached by phone.

Miller, a prolific Tweeter, said he had not looked at his Twitter feed all day since he was in meetings. But he asserted that "nearly everything was retweets" in the past 48 hours.

RELATED: Texas Ag Commissioner Sid Miller compares snakes to refugees, likes 'dead ones won't bite' comment

Mark Loeffler, communications director for the Texas Department of Agriculture, initially told mySA.com that Miller's account had been hacked, but Miller said minutes later that wasn't the case.

"We weren't hacked," Miller said.

An official statement from Miller's office has no mention of hacking and says "the campaign was retweeting information on Twitter today and inadvertently retweeted a tweet that they were not aware contained a derogatory term."

Miller said he was "sorry it happened."

"We dealt with it. It was a simple mistake, an oversight," Miller said. "It should have never happened.

Gov. Greg Abbott said Miller's language is "reprehensible and is an embarrassment. No true Texas gentleman would ever talk this way."

RELATED: Ag Commish takes down FB post about Muslims

Miller told mySA.com that the governor was correct.

"I would never talk that way," Miller said. "By the way, those weren't my words. It was a retweet."

Miller lists himself as a "deplorable" in his Twitter bio, which references his support for Trump.

Crystal K. Perkins, executive director of the Texas Democratic Party, said the incident could "not be swept under the rug."

"It's not about one tweet, it's about a consistent pattern where the Republican Party fails to show even the most basic sense of human decency," Perkins said in a statement. "While Sid Miller's disgusting tweet is now deleted, the hate towards women and Texas' diverse new majority in the Republican Party persists."

kbradshaw@express-news.net

Twitter: @kbrad5