Murder defense: Escort's shooting was legal
Attorneys for Ezekiel “Zeke” Gilbert readily conceded as his murder trial began Friday that he hired an escort on Christmas Eve 2009 and later shot her with an assault rifle as she and another man drove away from his North Side apartment.

But the early morning shooting was a legal attempt to recover the $150 that Lenora Ivie Frago, 23, and her pimp stole by refusing to either provide sex or issue a refund, the defense contended.

“She was there to rip him off,” attorney Bobby Barrera told jurors in 175th state District Court during opening statements, contending his client's only intent was to shoot out the tires of the vehicle. “If he wanted to fire in anger, he would have filled this car full of holes.”

But a bullet did hit Frago as she crouched in the passenger seat, leaving her paralyzed until her death seven months later. The cause of her death, according to the medical examiner, was complications from a gunshot wound.

Read More

According to Texas law, lethal force can be justified when preventing a theft in the nighttime or during a pursuit to recover property immediately following a nighttime theft.

But a theft never took place, prosecutor Matt Lovell suggested during his opening statement.

“This case is about a man who got upset about the services he felt he deserved,” he said. “He felt he deserved sex.”

In reality, said witness Christopher “Topher” Perkins, who posted ads for Frago and took a cut of her earnings, the $150 Gilbert paid for a half-hour with her did not include a guarantee of sex.

“Lenora normally would do lap dances and hanging out. That was her thing,” he said. “Her regular customers were all quiet, reserved guys and she would hang out.”

The former bar bouncer was soft-spoken and articulate as he repeatedly rejected the label “pimp,” instead referring to himself as “management.”

While many women who call themselves escorts are “glorified prostitutes,” employees of his now defunct E-Street Girls Inc. business knew he had policies against sex, he said.

In general, he said, customers realize there's a roughly 50 percent chance when meeting a new escort that she might not be of the “glorified prostitute” variety.

Perkins, who waited for Frago in the parking lot of the Camino Real Apartments that morning, recalled Gilbert confronting him about a refund about 20 minutes into the transaction.

“His whole posture was trying to appear bigger than he was,” Perkins said. “His face was stone cold — kind of a gangster swagger. Everything about his appearance seemed hostile.”

The confrontation ended abruptly with Perkins saying the only way Gilbert would get his money back would be to physically take it from him. Perkins got nervous, he said, when Gilbert then turned and walked to his nearby BMW.

“He's got a gun! Go! Go! Go!” Perkins recalled Frago screaming moments before shots rang out.

He wept as he recalled Frago only being able to murmur and blink as he asked if she was OK.

ckapitan@express-news.net

Twitter: @HearsaySA