Scaremongering ignores Hardberger opinion
Six years before Phil Hardberger became mayor, he wrote an opinion as chief justice of the Fourth Court of Appeals that should serve to cool at least one heated objection to the city's proposal to update its nondiscrimination ordinance.

The proposal would add protections for sexual orientation and gender identity.

Among its local foes, the Justice Foundation is waving a laundry list of objections, including this claim: “Business owners will be forced to open their restroom and locker room facilities to members of the opposite sex. For example, they will not be able to prohibit a transgender individual from using the women's bathroom or locker room despite the business owner's religious beliefs.”

That's false.

And it's legally false due to Hardberger, who concluded in Littleton vs. Prange that even if a man has medically altered sexual organs to become a woman, that person remains a man.

“The male chromosomes do not change with either hormonal treatment or sex reassignment surgery,” Hardberger wrote. “Biologically a post-operative female transsexual is still a male.”

This conclusion would apply to the nondiscrimination ordinance, City Attorney Michael Bernard said. If the proposal passes, a business owner in San Antonio would still have the right to stop someone from going into a bathroom — regardless of that person's gender identity.

“The law in this jurisdiction is a man who's born a man is a man,” Bernard said, “so you wouldn't be able to prosecute someone for stopping a transgender person from going into a bathroom.”

It's worth exploring how the former mayor, who served from 2005 to 2009, arrived at this opinion, which, in vintage Hardberger style, is far from a dry regurgitation of case law.

“This case involves the most basic of questions,” Hardberger wrote. “When is a man a man, and when is a woman a woman? Every schoolchild, even of tender years, is confident he or she can tell the difference, especially if the person is wearing no clothes. These are observations that each of us makes early in life and, in most cases, continue to have more than a passing interest in for the rest of our lives.

“It is one of the more pleasant mysteries.”

Hardberger was obliged to consider this mystery in the case of Christie Lee Littleton.

Born a boy in San Antonio, Littleton began considering herself female as early as 3 or 4. By 25, she was taking female hormones, and soon after underwent surgical procedures: Her penis, scrotum and testicles were removed, and a vagina and labia were constructed.

About 10 years later, Christie married a man, Jonathon Mark Littleton, who died in 1996. Claiming medical malpractice, Christie sued a doctor in her capacity as Jonathon's surviving spouse. The doctor argued that Christie was a man and couldn't be the spouse of another man, especially in Texas, which doesn't permit same-sex marriages.

“If Christie is a woman, she may bring this action,” Hardberger wrote. “If Christie is a man, she may not.”

Hardberger went on to define a transgender person as someone who “experience(s) a separation between their gender and their biological/anatomical sex,” and he accepted that Christie believed she was a woman.

“She has made every conceivable effort to make herself a female, including a surgery that would make most males pale and perspire to contemplate,” he wrote.

Yet, “Christie was created and born a male,” Hardberger concluded. “We hold, as a matter of law, that Christie Littleton is a male.”

Therefore, the city's bathrooms and locker rooms are “safe,” contrary to an email blast, sent this week by the wife of Pastor Charles Flowers, listing various affronts to constitutional freedoms.

“The ordinance will cause safety hazards to women and children using womens (sic) restrooms and fitting rooms,” reads one. Another threatens that “the ordinance will avail sick men who want to prey upon women the opportunity to do so at will, under the law.”

Such scaremongering, however, has no legal basis, as proven by its ignorance of the Littleton case.