Indicted lawyer has altered the lives of many key Democrats
Photo: AP This undated photo released by the Watt Senate campaign shows San...

On Nov. 6, 2013, Mikal Watts was in a familiar position. He was the center of the local Democratic Party’s solar system.

As the host of a fundraiser for a pro-Hillary Clinton political action committee, the deep-pocketed personal-injury attorney sat on a table in his downtown law office and held court, surrounded by a who’s-who of prominent San Antonio Democrats: Leticia Van de Putte, Carlos Uresti, Nelson Wolff, Joe Farias, Ruth Jones McClendon, etc.

By that point, Watts already had a federal investigation hanging over his head. Nine months earlier, the Secret Service had raided two of his law offices, digging for evidence that Watts filed false claims and committed identity theft in relation to the 2010 BP oil-spill case.

This week, San Antonio Express-News Staff Writer Guillermo Contreras broke the news that Watts, 48, has been indicted by a federal grand jury in Mississippi over his handling of BP litigation.

Even with legal headaches dogging him, Watts was the picture of Zen-like calm at the Clinton fundraiser, casually describing his first meeting with the Clintons in 1991, and recounting how he was instantly “awed by their brilliance.”

Watts’ political star has dimmed somewhat since that night.

A political sugar daddy who has put more than $7 million into the Democratic Party’s coffers over the years, Watts kept an unusually low profile during the 2014 election cycle. Well-connected politicos say Van de Putte (the party’s lieutenant-governor nominee) and Wendy Davis (the gubernatorial nominee) were conscious of the federal investigation and determined not to risk scandal by associating their campaigns with him.

But it was impossible to watch Watts at that Clinton fundraiser and not be struck by all the lives he’s affected.

With a reported seven-figure referral fee on a drunken-driving case, Watts gave former Mayor (and current HUD Secretary) Julián Castro the financial security to build his political career. That windfall not only allowed Castro to loan $215,000 to his successful 2009 mayoral campaign, it gave him a monetary cushion that allowed him to comfortably live on a $4,000-a-year mayor’s salary, without needing to find outside income.

In 2006, Watts donated more than $47,000 to the campaign of Texas House candidate Juan Garcia, helping the Corpus Christi attorney pull off an upset victory in a GOP-dominated district.

In 2008, Watts salvaged Davis’ political career (essentially enabling her to make her career-defining 2013 filibuster on the floor of the Texas Senate against restrictive Republican anti-abortion legislation), with a $25,000 donation in the final days of a Senate race she won by only 7,000 votes.

In 2010, he hosted a fundraiser at his Dominion home for U.S. Sen. Harry Reid, D-Nevada, as Reid fought for his political life against a tea-party tsunami.

Watts even provided Spurs players with the use of his basketball gym during the 2011 NBA lockout. (That same gym served as the site of a $35,800-a-plate fundraiser for President Barack Obama in 2012.)

This is the way Watts and his friends define him. A pitbull in the courtroom and a pious, soft-spoken family man outside his work environment, Watts sees his hyper-competitive streak not as a manifestation of greed or ego, but as part of a commitment to get justice from irresponsible pharmaceutical, automotive or petroleum companies — to help people, in the same way he helped the Spurs or politicians he believed in.

Watts’ narrative on the BP case is that he entered the class-action chaos surrounding the Gulf Coast oil spill because overwhelmed attorneys referred clients to him. Then, when impatient shrimp-boat workers tried to get emergency help by filing complaints at the Gulf Coast Claims Facility, they found they couldn’t, because claims already had been filed on their behalf by an attorney they’d never met: Watts.

In his drive to be the Michael Jordan of personal-injury lawyers, Watts has made some Machiavellian moves.

In 2001, he warned rival attorney Don Schauer to settle or face “good Democrats” on an appellate court who had accepted donations from Watts.

He also has drawn scrutiny for his connections with Corpus Christi case runner Mauricio Celis.

Time will tell if Watts’ Machiavellian streak led him to commit fraud in the BP case, or if he simply was a casualty of mass confusion. But his legal problems already have forced him off the political playing field. And that’s not a place where he’s used to residing.

ggarcia@express-news.net

Twitter: @gilgamesh470