Texas GOP set for war over immigration plank
Photo: Mike Fisher

AUSTIN — Texas Republicans are girding for what promises to be a politically explosive debate packing the potential to ignite a GOP civil war over an issue critical for the state party's future aspirations of wooing Hispanic voters: immigration.

Months ahead of the state Republican Party convention, a faction of the Texas GOP is galvanizing to replace an unprecedented immigration plank adopted in 2012 that called for a guest worker program to bring laborers to Texas.

Viewed by some Republicans as a giant leap forward in the public relations play for the hearts and minds of Hispanic voters, the guest worker plan was dubbed the “Texas Solution” and earned overwhelming approval as the official party platform on immigration.

It provided somewhat of a Republican calling card for immigration reform, declaring “we seek common ground to develop and advance a conservative, market and law-based approach to our nation's immigration issues.”

The language was rolled into the state party's platform just one year after Republicans in the Legislature launched an all-out blitz on immigration issues, filing more than 100 Arizona-style crackdown bills during the 2011 session.

But some tea party activists and influential outside groups are jockeying to revert to hard-line language the state party consistently adopted in conventions before 2012. Two years earlier, GOP delegates voted in favor of a lengthy plank advocating, in part, for a state law that would bar undocumented immigrants from “intentionally or knowingly” living in Texas.

State Sen. Dan Patrick, the front-runner to become the Republican nominee for lieutenant governor, said he unequivocally supports removing the guest worker language from the party's platform.

One of the proposals being floated to the Republican Party of Texas comes from the Texas Eagle Forum and, in part, says: “illegal employment and illegal immigration have a negative effect on American workers actively seeking jobs, and taxpayers who are saddled with paying illegals' health care, education and welfare benefits.”

“We've never supported a guest worker program,” said Cathie Adams, a former chairwoman of the state GOP who currently heads the conservative forum. “We see it as a path to citizenship and are not accepting of that.”

Equivalent to a blueprint of the policies that GOP activists want elected officials to pursue, the party platform generally contains dozens of nonbinding resolutions on issues ranging from guns to voting rights to abortion.

The state GOP will hold its convention in June in Fort Worth. The committee overseeing the official platform will use prior planks as a starting point but will also consider hundreds of resolutions approved in districts across the state.

That a showdown over immigration would consume much of the debate at the convention this year is nothing new, said Republican Party of Texas Chairman Steve Munisteri.

“It's always a big fight,” he said.

What's novel this time, some say, would be the state party undoing a platform many viewed as pragmatic on a hot-button issue. The issue's importance is magnified at a time when Latinos are poised to represent a majority of the state's population and when a handful of Republicans running for statewide office continue to use strong immigration rhetoric that has upset Democrats and even some GOP Hispanics.

Leading up to 2012, efforts to get guest worker language tagged onto the party platform continually failed, said Art Martinez de Vara, the co-founder of the Texas Federation of Hispanic Republicans and a former chairman of the GOP's platform subcommittee.

But at the last Republican Party convention, Martinez de Vara, the mayor of Von Ormy, said there was “momentum to get it to the floor,” where the vast majority of the convention's roughly 9,000 attendees voted in favor.

“It's just a natural pushback from the monumental shift that happened two years ago,” he said of efforts to undo the immigration plank. “There's an element of the party that feels that way. But they're not the majority. They clearly lost on this issue in the last convention.”

The 2012 immigration plank calls for a temporary worker program “to bring skilled and unskilled workers into the United States for temporary periods of time when no U.S. workers are currently available.” It also calls for required elements such as a criminal background check and the ability to speak English.

Land Commissioner Jerry Patterson, who ran a failed GOP bid for lieutenant governor in the March 4 primary, says he was the only statewide elected official to speak in favor of the plan at the 2012 convention.

Since then, most Republicans running for statewide office have refused to embrace the platform.

Patrick, the most bombastic on immigration issues during the primary election season, said the guest worker language is irrelevant because Texas does not have the legal authority to enact such a program.

“In 2012, I was opposed to adding the guest worker language to our platform, and I will support its removal in 2014,” he said.

Patrick's opponent in the runoff, Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst, said through a spokesman that a guest worker program can't even be considered until “the border is secure and an effective E-Verify system is in place.”

“Lt. Gov. Dewhurst supports instituting a limited guest worker program for the positions that citizens and legal residents have shown they do not want to fill,” spokesman Travis Considine said.

drauf@express-news.net