Straus airs first TV ads in primary battle
Photo: TOM REEL / SAN ANTONIO EXPRESS-NEWS Joe Strauss has purchased enough air time for at least 550 TV spots...

AUSTIN — House Speaker Joe Straus has started airing television ads in San Antonio, according to public data, in what marks the first round of TV buys in a three-way Republican primary for the District 121 seat.

The 30-second spot , which began airing Monday, features the owner of a Northeast Side auto repair shop praising Straus for “fighting for lower taxes and less regulation to help businesses like ours grow.”

“As speaker of the Texas House, Joe Straus championed economic growth and helped cut taxes for families and businesses by $4 billion,” a narrator says. “That’s proven leadership.”

Flush with a roughly $8 million war chest, Straus has already spent at least $215,000 to reserve air time for at least 550 spots on local broadcast and cable through February, according to public records (those are incomplete numbers as WOAI and KABB have yet to disclose TV contracts online).

The GOP primary is March 1, and Straus is facing multiple challengers in a Republican primary for the first time since winning office in 2005.

Former San Antonio tea party director Jeff Judson has a deep background in politics and public policy. He's a current member of the Republican Party of Texas' executive committee, has been a registered lobbyist in Texas in the past, served in President George H. W. Bush's administration and also is an ex-president of an influential Austin-based conservative think tank.

Sheila Bean, a former school teacher and political novice who has helped run a family aviation business, is also challenging Straus.

Judson and Bean reacted sharply Wednesday.

Judson said Team Straus’ TV ad buy “proves that they are in panic mode.”

“Joe Straus could buy wall-to-wall infomercials on all the San Antonio TV stations, but he can’t fool the voters. He is a Jeb Bush establishment Republican and everyone knows it, no matter how many ads he buys telling people he is a conservative,” Judson said.

Bean, in an email statement, said: "Speaker Straus has spent millions on each of his re-election campaigns and can afford to hire enough consultants to tell the voters exactly what they want to hear. This ad fails to mention that Straus was the biggest obstacle to property tax relief, and instead he wanted to cut sales taxes, putting him at odds with most Republicans in our District."

Straus spokesman Jason Embry shot back.

"Speaker Straus is proud to talk about the accomplishments of last year's legislative session, which Governor Abbott has called the most conservative ever, and to share his positive vision for the future," he said.

drauf@express-news.net