Riffing on Reagan, Straus speaks his mind on special session agenda





















Photo: Ron Cortes / Image 1 of / 6 Caption Close Image 1 of 6 House Speaker Joe Straus prepares to address about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference in San Antonio. Readers commend the speaker for his comments that were critical of the GOP leadership in Austin. less House Speaker Joe Straus prepares to address about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference in San Antonio. Readers commend the speaker for his comments ... more Photo: Ron Cortes / Image 2 of 6 House Speaker Joe Straus talks to the media after addressing about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio Marriott Rivercenter less House Speaker Joe Straus talks to the media after addressing about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio ... more Photo: Ron Cortes, Freelance / For The San Antonio Express-News Image 3 of 6 House Speaker Joe Straus address about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio Marriott Rivercenter House Speaker Joe Straus address about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio Marriott Rivercenter Photo: Ron Cortes, Freelance / For The San Antonio Express-News Image 4 of 6 House Speaker Joe Straus address about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio Marriott Rivercenter House Speaker Joe Straus address about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio Marriott Rivercenter Photo: Ron Cortes, Freelance / For The San Antonio Express-News Image 5 of 6 Texas business leaders opposed to transgender bathroom legislation have thrown their weight behind House Speaker Joe Straus of San Antonio, who opposes the proposed law. Texas business leaders opposed to transgender bathroom legislation have thrown their weight behind House Speaker Joe Straus of San Antonio, who opposes the proposed law. Photo: Ron Cortes / Image 6 of 6 House Speaker Joe Straus enters the ball room to address about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio Marriott Rivercenter less House Speaker Joe Straus enters the ball room to address about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio Marriott ... more Photo: Ron Cortes, Freelance / For The San Antonio Express-News Riffing on Reagan, Straus speaks his mind on special session agenda 1 / 6 Back to Gallery

House Speaker Joe Straus took a hard swipe Wednesday at his fellow Republican leaders, comparing Gov. Greg Abbott’s special-session agenda to a pile of manure and saying Texas is sending the wrong message about its priorities with proposals such as the bathroom bill championed by Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick.

“One of my biggest concerns coming out of this year’s (regular legislative) session is that we are starting to send the wrong signal about who we are as a state,” Straus, R-San Antonio, said at a Texas Association of School Boards conference, where he repeatedly drew applause.

“Too often, we knowingly walk right into controversies that repel jobs and opportunity. We seem determined to repeat the mistakes that other states have made,” Straus said.

“I want Texas to be known for making decisions that attract jobs, that attract families, and attract opportunities for our citizens. And that begins in our public schools.”

Abbott spokesman John Wittman responded sharply.

“It’s disappointing that Speaker Straus dumps on issues like property tax reform, helping students with special needs, finding solutions for Texas’ maternal mortality rate, and increasing teacher pay. Texas taxpayers deserve better. When the Legislature returns, we look forward to working with members of the House and Senate to enact the governor’s agenda,” Wittman said.

Patrick’s spokesman didn’t immediately offer a comment when asked about Straus’s remarks.

Straus said the House remains committed to revamping and putting more money into the school funding system, an effort that died in the recently ended regular session. It’s an ambitious goal since lawmakers typically aren’t inclined to make big changes in the school finance system without a court order requiring them to do so.

The speaker’s comments Wednesday are a clear indication that the special session called by Abbott to begin July 18 will be plagued by the divisions that marked the regular session.

A special session can last up to 30 days, and Abbott has set 20 items for lawmakers’ consideration, including some contentious issues that already have been thoroughly discussed and disagreed upon. Abbott can call additional special sessions if he chooses.

Citing the “very long list” of Abbott’s priorities for the summer session, Straus said he was reminded of the story told by Ronald Reagan about an optimistic boy who, when presented with a room full of horse manure, said delightedly, “There must be a pony in here somewhere!”

“I’m going to take the optimistic approach to the special session,” Straus said to laughter and applause. “I’m going to keep looking for that pony.”

Abbott, who alone determines the timing and agenda of the special session, has put a school finance reform commission on his to-do list for lawmakers. Straus said he appreciated the attention to the matter, but that the House already has thoroughly studied school finance.

The Abbott agenda also includes property tax reform, as Wittman pointed out.

Patrick and Abbott support requiring automatic rollback elections to allow voters to nix city and county property tax revenue increases above a certain level.

The House in the regular session didn’t vote on that idea, which is opposed by city and county officials who say it would impair their ability to pay for public safety and other services. The House instead approved a proposal to give taxpayers more information about their tax bills.

Straus on Wednesday reiterated his view that putting more state money into public schools is the best way to lower local property tax bills. Public schools are funded by state aid, local property tax revenue and some federal funding.

School districts in 2013 accounted for nearly 55 percent of the property tax levy, compared with 16.7 percent for counties and 16.2 percent for cities, according to the state comptroller’s office.

The school finance reform effort died in the regular session after senators added a voucher proposal for students with disabilities to a House-approved bill. Patrick, who presides over the Senate, has long pushed a proposal to allow parents access to tax money for private school tuition, saying it would empower them to choose the best place for their children.

The House, however, has opposed the idea of vouchers, siding with educators who say such proposals would drain money from public schools that will continue to serve the overwhelming majority of students. Straus said senators also stripped too much funding for public schools from the House proposal.

Abbott’s agenda for the special session includes school choice for special-needs children.

Straus also showed no change in his opposition to a bill pushed by Patrick and approved by senators to require people to use the restrooms, dressing rooms and locker rooms in government buildings, schools and universities that align with the sex on their birth certificates. Supporters including Patrick say it’s important for privacy and safety.

The speaker joined business groups in opposing the measure, expressing concern over the potential for boycotts that would affect the state’s economy if they pass a measure viewed nationally as discriminatory — including the possibility that San Antonio could lose its spot as host of the NCAA Final Four championship next year. North Carolina this year revised its bathroom law after facing a backlash from groups including the NCAA.

During the regular session, Abbott praised a House bill that would ban city and school district policies that protect transgender people from discrimination in the use of restrooms, locker rooms and changing facilities.

But the House instead passed a proposal that related only to schools and was judged to be ambiguous or to have no practical effect by Patrick and others. Straus said during the regular session that he would go no further and said again Wednesday that his focus is elsewhere.

“We have a responsibility to empower our kids to compete in a fast-changing marketplace. Innovative public schools, cutting-edge colleges and universities, reliable infrastructure: All of them form the foundation of a vibrant economy,” Straus said.

“In contrast, telling Texans that our schools are beset by problems in the bathroom is not only inaccurate, but it sends the wrong signal about our priorities,” he told the school board group, drawing enthusiastic applause when he added, “I don’t know exactly what all the issues are with bathrooms in our schools. But I’m pretty sure that you can handle them, and I know that you have been handling them.”

He urged school board members to speak out on the education issue, and even suggested some would be “great members” of the Texas Senate.

“However you engage, it’s time for school board members to be heard.

It’s time for educators to be heard. And it’s time for parents and taxpayers to be heard,” Straus said. “This is a defining moment for public education in Texas, and we cannot squander it.”

He added, “I hope that you will never hesitate to contact me, because the Texas House wants to keep working with you. And maybe, together, we will find that pony.”

pfikac@express-news.net