Analysis shows property tax bills likely to rise despite relief package
AUSTIN — Texas homeowners in the most populous counties are likely to see their property tax bills go up despite more than $1.2 billion in relief approved by lawmakers after hard-fought negotiations.

The final say on the tax relief won’t come until November, when voters get a chance to approve an extra $10,000 homestead exemption from school property taxes. If they OK it, the relief will apply to this tax year.

But an analysis of 14 populous counties indicates that even if the proposal passes, the school district levy still would be poised to increase in many large school districts.

The analysis, which was provided by the state House Ways and Means Committee, looks at the tax on a home worth the 2014 statewide average of $151,435 and assumes that tax rates will stay the same.

It’s a safe bet the rates won’t be lowered, said budget expert Dale Craymer of the business-based Texas Taxpayers and Research Association.

“It’s very rare,” Craymer said. “I don’t think they are going to lower their rates.”

A key reason is that schools are funded with a combination of federal, state and local funds. Under school formulas, he pointed out, state aid goes down when property values rise. “Everybody’s values are going up,” Craymer said.

In Bexar County, where appraisals rose 11.63 percent, the net increase in school property taxes in San Antonio Independent School District is expected to be $105 if the tax rate stays the same. That’s after taking into account $138 in savings under the new law.

In Harris County, where the appraisal increase was an average 9.5 percent, the net increase in Houston ISD property tax bills would be $52 after $120 in savings.

In county after county, the story is the same, according to the analysis done at the committee’s request by the Brazoria County tax assessor-collector.

The analysis bears out House leaders’ repeated warnings that for many Texas homeowners, the new measure just means their taxes will go up a bit less than they otherwise would have because the state doesn’t control rising property appraisals and because rates are set locally.

Homeowners’ bills would vary, depending on their circumstances and on what school district officials decide to do with tax rates.

It’s estimated that the annual relief to an average homeowner under the package statewide would be $126 a year.

Whether Texans feel relief “is going to depend on where you live and what the value of your home is,” said House Appropriations Committee Chairman John Otto, R-Dayton.

“If you’re in a home that’s valued at $60,000 to $80,000, you’re probably going to recognize or actually feel like you got something,” Otto said. “If you’re in a home that’s valued over $200,000 and going up at $10,000 to $12,000 a year, you’re probably not going to see much relief.”

Ways and Means Chairman Dennis Bonnen, R-Angleton, sounded the message throughout the legislative session, as he lofted a counterproposal of a sales tax cut as the Senate and Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick championed property tax relief.

Negotiations resulted in a business tax cut, which both chambers favored in some form, and a decision to drop the late-arriving idea of cutting sales taxes in favor of the extra $10,000 homestead exemption. Patrick campaigned on property tax relief, and many senators of both parties said the issue was a key concern of their constituents. The overall package, including the $1.2 billion in property tax relief, is worth $3.8 billion over two years.

Whether the relief will be meaningful “depends on where you are. It depends on how much your appraisal went up,” Bonnen said. “In most of our major metro areas of the state, the appraisal increases will wipe out any reduction anyone would have seen, and they will simply have their overall bill go up less than it would have gone up.”

Bonnen said that with the focus on property taxes, “there was really no way we wouldn’t do property tax relief in some form.” But he said it was lawmakers’ responsibility to have a healthy discussion.

Patrick said he would keep working to stem property tax increases.

“I have been fighting against high property tax increases long before I was ever elected to the Senate. I will never stop,” Patrick said.

While the tax relief is likely to be eclipsed, the state will remain on the hook for it every year. That’s because when the state restricts the amount of local property tax revenue to school districts, it makes up the difference in state aid.

The $600 million-plus annual cost of the property tax reduction will be added to the nearly $8.4 billion that state budget experts say the state already pays every year to subsidize past property tax relief.

Legislative Budget Board figures show the cost of a buy-down of local taxes approved in 2006 costs the state $7.1 billion a year. A 1999 change still costs the state an estimated nearly $685 million annually, and a 1997 increase in the homestead exemption costs the state about $600 million a year.

Figures from the board also show that total property tax levies from all entities — including cities, counties, school districts and special districts — historically have risen despite legislative action to hold down school property tax bills.

The levies increased nearly 5 percent in calendar year 1997 and 11 percent in 2000, the first year that the 1999 relief was in effect. Levies dropped a bit in 2007, the first year that 2006 tax relief was in effect, but rose again the next year by 11 percent.

Dissatisfaction was compounded after the 2006 tax relief because then-Gov. Rick Perry ran ads promising a $2,000 cut for the average homeowner.

This time, the message was shaped by Bonnen and the House.

“We were careful in the House,” said Speaker Joe Straus, R-San Antonio, saying Bonnen “did a very, very fine job of spelling out exactly what the policy implications are, what the fiscal implications are.”