Misinformation Directory
A

America’s Freedom Fighters

Americasfreedomfighters.com doesn’t have a disclaimer on its website, but it does say on one of at least five associated Facebook pages:

“We Provide Truthful News To Patriots That The MSM Refuses To Report! Give Us A Like! You Won’t Be Disappointed!”

The site is registered through The Endurance International Group, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

But it is run by a father and son in California, Dino Porrazzo Sr. and Dino Porrazzo Jr., who incorporated AFF Media Inc. in 2017.

They write under the pseudonyms Johnny Davis and Dean James, and they also run the website Rightwingtribune.com.

America’s Last Line of Defense

Americaslastlineofdefense.org is the central website in a network of sites that describe their content as satire aimed at provoking conservatives. All of the sites — including trumpbetrayed.us, worstpot.us and nofakenewsonline.us — provide this disclaimer on the “About” page:

“Everything on this website is fiction. It is not a lie and it is not fake news because it is not real. If you believe that it is real, you should have your head examined. Any similarities between this site’s pure fantasy and actual people, places and events are purely coincidental and all images should be considered altered and satirical.”

However, the stories that appear on those sites are often copied and reposted by websites that have no such disclaimer.

The sites are registered through Who is Guard, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

The American News

Theamericanews.co doesn’t have a disclaimer, but it does say on its “About Us” page:

“News & opinion on politics without the PC BS from typical mainstream media. We aim to bring you the latest in important news without all the fluff. We want to help American citizens TAKE BACK AMERICA and MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!”

The site is registered to an owner in Pakistan.

American Journal Review

Americanjournalreview.com doesn’t have a disclaimer, but it does say on the “Fair Use and Copyright Policy” page that its content is:

“news reporting, criticism and comment, parody, education, research, et al.”

The site is registered through Domains By Proxy, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

America Talks

Americatalks.com and another website called thepedogate.com are run by David Zublick. Both sites spread misinformation, including about the widely debunked “Pizzagate” conspiracy theory. Zublick writes on the “About” page for Americatalks.com:

“He leans libertarian on most issues, and is not a shill for the Republican party. He believes in limited government and the principles upon which this constitutionally limited republic was founded.”

Americatalks.com is registered through Domains By Proxy, a company that hides the identity and location of the website owner.

B

Banned Information

BannedInformation.com has this disclaimer on its “About” page:

“BannedInformation.com should not be considered an unbiased news source, rather we publish opinions and interpretations of the day’s news by Conservative and Libertarian bloggers. Again, BannedInformation.com publishes commentary and opinion by conservatives and libertarians, not unbiased news reporting.”

The site is registered through Domain Privacy Service, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

According to the site’s “About” page, it is owned by Power To The Publisher LLC, which is based in Florida. Power To The Publisher also owns FBnewscycle.com.

BlingNews.com

BlingNews.com posts largely partisan clickbait stories and has no disclaimer.

The site is registered through Domains By Proxy, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

C

CBINFO24.com

Cbinfo24.com posts clickbait stories copied from other websites. It doesn’t have a disclaimer, but it does have this on its “terms and conditions” page:

“This Website is provided ‘as is,’ with all faults, and V&J express no representations or warranties, of any kind related to this Website or the materials contained on this Website. Also, nothing contained on this Website shall be interpreted as advising you.”

Several other similar sites have the same language on their terms and conditions pages.

The site is registered to an owner in Macedonia.

Channel 23 News

Channel23News.com is a prank site that encourages readers to “Create A Story & Trick Your Friends!”

Conservative Angle

Conservativeangle.com aggregates stories from conservative websites. It has no disclaimer.

The site is registered through Domains By Proxy, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

Conservative Nation

Consnation.com has this disclaimer:

“All the information on this website is published in good faith and for general information purpose only. Conservative Nation does not make any warranties about the completeness, reliability, and accuracy of this information.”

The site is registered through Proxy Protection, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

Conservative Post

Conservativepost.com has this disclaimer on its “Terms Of Service” page:

“The website disclaims any responsibility for the accuracy of the content of this website. Visitors assume the all risk of viewing, reading, using, or relying upon this information. Unless you have otherwise formed an express contract to the contrary with the website, you have no right to rely on any information contained herein as accurate. The website makes no such warranty.”

It describes itself this way on its “Contact” page:

“The Conservative Post exists to spread freedom of information, conservative values, and truth to the public through various media forms. We are an organization committed to upholding the First Amendment right of the Freedom of Speech and make every effort to lend to our readers—and Americans everywhere—strength, compassion, and honor. We welcome input and engagement from you, our online community, in mutual respect and courage to face our America, together.”

The site is registered through Domains By Proxy, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

The Conservative Tree House

Theconservativetreehouse.com posts conservative-leaning stories that sometimes include misinformation. It has a lengthy description on its “About Us” page, including:

“Fear is at the core of liberalism, and love/trust is at the core of conservatism. Liberalism is about control. Conservatism is about self-empowerment.”

The site is registered through Domains By Proxy, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

D

Daily Vine

Daily-vine.com often posts exaggerated or misleading headlines and stories that are slanted with opinion. It doesn’t have a disclaimer, but it has the same writers as the now-defunct, but once prolific, website Freedom Daily, which used to say on its “About” page:

“Freedom Daily exists to present a forum for discussing meaningful conservative American and world news, from a perspective that is not your normal agenda-based Beltway bull. Articles on Freedom Daily are posted by members who are warriors for America’s freedom. We post and decipher content to a level that is consistent with a common sense approach and falls in line with the ideals of American liberty and freedom.”

The site is registered through Domains By Proxy, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

E

Empire News

empirenews.net has this disclaimer on its “About / Disclaimer” page:

“Empire News is intended for entertainment purposes only. Our website and social media content uses only fictional names, except in cases of public figure and celebrity parody or satirization.”

The site is registered through 1&1 Internet, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

enVolve

En-volve.com has this disclaimer on its “Website Terms of Use” page:

“The information presented on or through the Website is made available solely for general information and entertainment purposes. We do not warrant the accuracy, completeness or usefulness of this information. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk. We disclaim all liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on such materials by you or any other visitor to the Website, or by anyone who may be informed of any of its contents.”

The site is registered through 1&1 Internet, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

F

FB News Cycle

Fbnewscycle.com has this disclaimer on its “About” page:

“FBNewsCycle.com should not be considered an unbiased news source, rather we publish opinions and interpretations of the day’s news by Conservative and Libertarian bloggers. Again, FBNewsCycle.com publishes commentary and opinion by conservatives and libertarians, not unbiased news reporting.”

The site is registered through Domain Privacy Service, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

According to the site’s “About” page, it is owned by Power To The Publisher LLC, which is based in Florida. Power To The Publisher also owns BannedInformation.com.

Fellowship of the Minds

Fellowshipoftheminds.com has an extensive “Conspiracies/False Flags” section on its website and says on its “About” page:

“We are Conservatives in the undying tradition of America’s Founding Fathers, deeply concerned about the sorry state of our country and the ruinous path our government, political, and cultural elites have taken. That is why we have formed this fellowship of the minds despite our very different backgrounds, but a deep love for God and country in common.”

The site is registered through Domains By Proxy, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

G

Geller Report

Gellerreport.com is run by Pamela Geller, an anti-Islamic activist.

The site is registered through Geller’s nonprofit organization, the American Freedom Defense Initiative.

I

Info Wars

Infowars.com is the website for the popular conspiracy theory radio show by the same name. On its “About” page, it says in part:

Owner Alex Jones “believes that informing people about the true nature of power, we can foster a real debate about humanity’s destiny and allow the species to evolve towards a more orderly singularity that has humans at the core of a system which is based around maintaining free will and integrity – defying the transhumanist goal of Social Darwinism and scientific dictatorship.”

The site is registered through Jones’ Texas-based limited liability company, Free Speech Systems.

K

Keep America Great!

KAGfeed.com posts conservative-leaning stories and appears to be related to Truthfeednews.com, since it refers to a related domain on its “Privacy Policy” page. It has this disclaimer on its “Terms of Service” page:

“Your use of the Service is at your sole risk. The Service is provided on an ‘AS IS’ and ‘AS AVAILABLE’ basis. The Service is provided without warranties of any kind, whether express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, non-infringement or course of performance.”

The site is registered through Domains By Proxy, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

L

Liberty Raise

Thelibertyraise.com posts stories copied from other sites. Sometimes those sites have labeled their content as “satire,” but Liberty Raise does not include the disclaimer.

The site is registered to an owner in Macedonia.

London Web News

Londonwebnews.com posts clickbait political stories. It has this disclaimer on its “Privacy Policy And Disclaimer” page:

“While we endeavour to keep this information up to date and correct, we make no representations or warranties of any kind, express or implied, about the completeness, accuracy, reliability, suitability, or availability with respect to the website or the information, products, services or related graphics and images contained on the website for any purpose.”

The site is registered through Who is Guard, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

M

MMinfo24.com

MMinfo24.com posts clickbait stories copied from other websites. It has no disclaimer.

The site is registered to an owner in Macedonia.

N

Neon Nettle

Neonnettle.com is a British website that posts inflammatory political stories, many with misinformation, about the U.S. and U.K. — it has a “conspiracy” section in its “news” category. It says on its “About Us” page:

“At Neon Nettle, we believe the mainstream has become less valid as it continues its ongoing practices of censorship and engineered narratives.”

The site is registered through Tucows, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website. But incorporation papers filed in the U.K. show that Neon Nettle is based on the outskirts of London.

News Punch

Newspunch.com is the new site for Yournewswire.com, which has been a prolific poster of misinformation and conspiracy theories.

Both sites are registered by a company called The People’s Voice, which is run by Sean Adl-Tabatabai in California.

Newslo/Politicops.com

Newslo runs two sites, politicops.com and politicot.com, and publishes what it calls “News/Satire.” Newslo articles contain “show facts” and “hide facts” buttons. Generally, the “show facts” button highlights the first part of the story, which is often lifted from a reputable news outlet. The rest of the story is fabricated.

The “About Us” page on politicops.com says:

“JUST ENOUGH NEWS… Newslo is the first hybrid News/Satire platform on the web. Readers come to us for a unique brand of entertainment and information that is enhanced by features like our fact-button, which allows readers to find what is fact and what is satire.

“Newslo’s ‘No Need to Satirize’ brings you completely factual stories that are so ridiculous, they don’t need our trademark touch. Whenever you see #NNTS, you’re reading COMPLETELY real news that only seems too absurd to be true.”

While Newslo articles are clearly labeled as satire, we have found that several other websites republish Newslo articles without labeling the stories as satire and without providing the hide/show facts buttons for readers. This is part of the problem with the spread of misinformation. Stories that are intended as satire circulate without proper labeling.

NY Evening News

NYeveningnews.com posts clickbait stories and has a section for conspiracy theories and alien-themed stories. It has no disclaimer.

The site is registered through Tucows, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

P

Patriotswalk

Patriotswalk.us posts stories copied from other websites and has no disclaimer.

The site is registered to an owner in Kosovo.

Police Task

Policetask.com posts stories copied from other websites and has no disclaimer.

The site is registered to an owner in Kosovo.

PoliticsFocus

Politicsfocus.com began by posting liberal-leaning stories, then switched and started posting conservative-leaning stories. And then it started posting general interest stories. There are at least a dozen — 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 — identical sites on different URLs. None of them has a disclaimer.

The site is registered through Who is Guard, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

The Postillon

The-postillon.com is a satirical website that has this disclaimer on its “FAQ” page:

“everything you can read here is satire and therefore all made-up. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, or actual events is purely coincidental.”

However, the stories that appear on this are sometimes copied and reposted by websites that have no such disclaimer.

Puppet String News

Puppetstringnews.com posts right-leaning articles that sometimes include false information. It describes itself as “Anti msm news” on the homepage and says on its “About” page:

“Puppet String News was created by a US NAVY vet, who served four years in the military, got out because he was tired of the world and it’s current state. Decided to get into alternative news to tell the truth to best of ability.”

The site is registered through Perfect Privacy, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

R

Real News Right Now

Realnewsrightnow.com doesn’t have a disclaimer but is intended to be satire, the site’s owner, Robert Shooltz, told us in an interview. Shooltz drops subtle hints that the site is a spoof, such as listing the “Stephen Glass Distinction in Journalistic Integrity” among his awards — Stephen Glass was a writer for the New Republic who left the magazine in disgrace after it was revealed that he had fabricated many of his stories.

However, the stories that appear on the site have been copied and reposted by websites that give no indication that the stories are supposed to be a joke.

Right Wing Tribune

Rightwingtribune.com doesn’t have a disclaimer, but it does say on one of at least five associated Facebook pages:

“If You Are A Right Winger And PISSED You’re In The Right Place. We Provide High Quality Journalism With Viral Memes and Video In Between! So Give Us A Like! You Won’t Be Dissapointed.”

The site is registered through The Endurance International Group, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

But it is run by a father and son in California, Dino Porrazzo Sr. and Dino Porrazzo Jr., who incorporated AFF Media Inc. in 2017 and also run the website Americasfreedomfighters.com.

Right Wing News

RWNofficial.com posts right-leaning articles that sometimes include false information. It says on its “About Us” page:

“Right Wing News publishes content that is traditional news, opinion based and is consistent with conservative values.”

The site is registered through Domains By Proxy, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

The Rightists

Therightists.com describes itself as a “HYBRID site of news and satire.” It says on its “About-Us” page:

“This is HYBRID site of news and satire. part of our stories already happens, part, not yet. NOT all of our stories are true!”

The site is registered to an owner in Israel.

S

Special News USA

SpecialNewsUSA.com posts clickbait stories and has no disclaimer.

The site is registered through Domain Protection Services, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

7 News Political

7newspolitical.site posts clickbait stories and has no disclaimer.

The site is registered through Who is Guard, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

St. George Gazette

Stgeorgegazette.com doesn’t have a disclaimer.

The site is registered through Who is Guard, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

Stuppid

Stuppid.com doesn’t have a disclaimer, but it does say this on its “About” page:

“Stuppid.com reports stupid news we find around the web and from other sources. We aim to publish the stupidest, craziest stuff we can find.”

The site is registered through Domains By Proxy, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

T

Teddy Stick

Teddystick.com posts conservative-leaning stories and says on its “About” page:

“Because of the internet, a new political energy has taken America by storm (the same energy that carried Trump to the White House). No longer are citizens tied to the biased information of mainstream news outlets. Instead, emerging alternative publishers have been able to connect with audiences in a much more authentic and factual way.”

The site is registered through Who is Guard, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

Top Alert News

Topalertnews.com is likely related to Donald Trump News (they have the same contact information). It has this disclaimer:

“Top Alert News does not make any warranties about the completeness, reliability and accuracy of this information.”

The site is registered through Who is Guard, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

TRUTHFEED

Truthfeednews.com posts conservative-leaning stories and appears to be related to kagfeed.com, which refers to TRUTHFEED’s domain on its “Privacy Policy” page. TRUTHFEED has this disclaimer on its “Terms of Service” page:

“Your use of the Service is at your sole risk. The Service is provided on an ‘AS IS’ and ‘AS AVAILABLE’ basis. The Service is provided without warranties of any kind, whether express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, non-infringement or course of performance.”

The site is registered through Domains By Proxy, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

U

Universale Info

Universaleinfo.com doesn’t have a disclaimer.

The site is registered to an owner in Macedonia.

USA Train News

Trainnews.info posts conservative-leaning stories, many of which are copied from other sites, and has no disclaimer.

The site is registered to an owner in Venezuela.

USSA News

Ussanews.com calls itself “the Tea Party’s front page” and says on its “About” page:

“This site is here directly because of the direction this country, the USA, is headed. Too much government!”

The site is registered through Tucows, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

V

Viral Cords

Viralcords.com doesn’t have a disclaimer.

The site is registered through Data Protected, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

Viral News PBS

Viralnewspbs.site posts clickbait stories copied from other websites. It has no disclaimer and no information about who runs it. It is not affiliated with the Public Broadcasting Service.

The site is registered through Who is Guard, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

Virality Things

Viralitythings.us posts stories copied from other sites. It has no disclaimer.

The site is registered to an owner in Kosovo.

W

WebViners.com

Webviners.com posts right-leaning stories that have been copied from other sites. It has no disclaimer.

The site is registered to an owner in Kosovo.

World News Daily Report

World News Daily Report is a self-described satirical website. It includes a disclaimer at the bottom of each page that says: “World News Daily Report assumes all responsibility for the satirical nature of its articles and for the fictional nature of their content. All characters appearing in the articles in this website – even those based on real people – are entirely fictional and any resemblance between them and any person, living, dead or undead, is purely a miracle.”

The World News Press

Worldnews-24.press posts clickbait stories and has no disclaimer.

The site is registered through Who is Guard, a company that hides the identity and location of the owner of the website.

Y

Your News Wire

Yournewswire.com has been a prolific poster of misinformation and conspiracy theories. The website now redirects to newspunch.com — another domain that Your News Wire has used in the past.

Both sites are registered by a company called The People’s Voice, which is run by Sean Adl-Tabatabai in California.

Update, Oct. 1, 2018: This story has been updated to place the websites in alphabetical order and add new entries, as well as remove some websites that are no longer active. We also changed the headline to better reflect the focus of the story. We will periodically update this file with additional websites and new information, as necessary.