FairDistrictsFlorida.org
What is redistricting?

Every ten years, after the census, the boundaries of our Congressional, state house and state senate districts are redrawn. This was originally intended to be sure that districts are roughly equal in population -- to make sure that every vote counts equally. But the process has been hijacked by self-interested politicians.

Who makes the districting decisions?

The Florida Legislature redraws districts in the second year after the census.

How do they rig districts?

Politicians who control the Legislature control redistricting. They design districts to protect incumbents and to make sure they can maintain power. They make deals to draw favorable districts for their allies and they try to draw their political adversaries out of office. Politicians use sophisticated computers, voter registration data and past election returns to predict how particular voters will vote in the future. Then they choose which voters are most likely to vote for them and their party and place just enough of those voters in "safe" districts -- ones they are sure they can win. Those in charge also pack large numbers of unfavorable voters in into a few districts to minimize the opposition’s chance to win.



Here is what has happened to Florida's Congressional districts as a result of these tactics:

Why do they rig districts?

Politicians rig districts to keep themselves in power. No matter which party has control of redistricting, that party's main goal is to protect its majority in as many districts as possible while concentrating the strength of the other party into as few districts as possible. This is called partisan political gerrymandering. It is like allowing the fox to guard the henhouse or getting to choose your own cards in a poker game!

What’s wrong with rigging districts?

Our present system permits politicians to choose their voters instead of voters having a fair chance to choose their representatives.



Each district is rigged to accomplish a particular result. Districts are set up to be either Democratic or Republican and opposing party candidates or Independents do not have a chance. Voters do not have a real choice in selecting their representatives because the elections are rigged before they even start.



Districts are bizarrely shaped. Some go on for hundreds of miles, dividing cities and counties. Communities are often split among several representatives and districts often include multiple counties. Presently, the law only requires that districts be roughly equal in population and that they consist of contiguous territory. That means that all parts of the district must touch. But the legislators even stretch that rule to the max. A connecting strip a yard wide and miles long satisfies that requirement. An example is Senate District 27 which is considered "contiguous". Sometimes contiguity is accomplished by crossing bodies of water -- like Congressional District 11 which covers parts of Hillsborough, Pinellas and Manatee counties.



Another result is that there are rarely serious challenges to incumbents. In the last 6 years, there have been over 420 elections for State Senator and State Representative. Only three incumbents have been defeated! After all, each district is specially designed to achieve a particular result! With virtually certain re-elections, legislators have no incentive to be responsive to their constituents and they see no reason to compromise for the public good.



I want to help stop the unfair political gerrymandering!

How do the legislators get away with rigging their districts?

There are no rules to prevent politicians from putting themselves ahead of Florida voters.

What can we do to stop politicians from rigging districts?

Vote YES on Amendments 5 and 6! These amendments will create rules for legislators to follow when drawing legislative and Congressional districts so that they cannot draw districts that favor themselves. Districts would have to protect minority representation, be compact, and follow existing local boundaries – like city or county lines whenever possible.



I want to contribute to stop the unfair power grab!

How can we make the legislators follow the standards?

In order to stop the legislators from this self interested power grab, we must amend the Florida Constitution by voting YES on Amendments 5 and 6! We need your help to get the word out. Tell everyone you know about how we can bring real fairness to elections in Florida.