The Facts About Higher Utility Costs
Charlie Crist claims that Rick Scott sides with utilities over consumers, when in fact the record shows the exact opposite is true.

2008: Charlie Crist signed a law expanding the Nuclear Cost Recovery Act, allowing utilities to pass on the costs of transmission lines and other construction to consumers.

Charlie Crist signed a law expanding the Nuclear Cost Recovery Act, allowing utilities to pass on the costs of transmission lines and other construction to consumers. 2013: Rick Scott signed a law amending the Nuclear Cost Recovery Act, making it tougher for utilities to increase electricity bills. An environmental organization called Rick Scott’s bill “an important step toward reigning in the utilities’ access to consumers’ wallets.” See the background below.

The truth is Charlie Crist favors a big government mandate that would raise energy prices.

Charlie Crist’s energy policy would take more from Florida families’ pocketbooks. Crist wants to require that a significant portion of Florida’s electricity be generated from renewable sources like solar, but states that have such standards have electricity prices that are over 30 percent higher than states that don’t have those standards.

Crist wants to require that a significant portion of Florida’s electricity be generated from renewable sources like solar, but states that have such standards have electricity prices that are over 30 percent higher than states that don’t have those standards. Charlie Crist wants to turn Florida into California when it comes to energy. The problem with that is that residential customers in California pay 40 percent more than Floridians do per kilowatt-hour.

The problem with that is that residential customers in California pay 40 percent more than Floridians do per kilowatt-hour. That means for a family that pays $200 per month in electric bills today that means their bill will be close to $280 per month under Charlie Crist.

BACKGROUND

Charlie Crist Is The Only Governor Who Signed Law Expanding Nuclear Cost Recovery Law, Allowing Utilities To Recover Costs Regarding Transmission Lines And Other Related Costs Of Nuclear Plants, Increasing Their Ability To Hike Customers’ Bills. (HB 7135, 2008 Legislature)

It Was Governor Scott Who Signed Legislation Last Year That Makes It Harder For Utilities To Charge Floridians More For “Nuclear Cost Recovery.”

Last Year, Governor Scott Signed Amendments To “Nuclear Cost Recovery Act” To Protect Consumers And Create “Benchmarks Aimed At Great Transparency And Accountability From Public Utilities In The State.” “Florida Gov. Rick Scott signed into law Friday amendments to the controversial Nuclear Cost Recovery Act, adding protections for consumers and benchmarks aimed at greater transparency and accountability from public utilities in the state. The governor signed S.B. 1472, which scaled back the 2006 statute by forcing utilities that use the statute to recover costs for nuclear power plants to begin construction within 10 years of receiving a license from the National Regulatory Commission. Under the new law, utilities will also have to petition the state’s Public Service Commission, which approves any cost recovery under the statute, before beginning construction, according to a staff analysis of the bill. The PSC must at that point determine if the project is still feasible and if the projected costs are reasonable before the utility can recover construction costs, according to the analysis.” (Carolina Bolado, “Fla. Reforms Controversial Nuclear Cost Recovery Act,” Law 360, 6/17/13)

This Legislation “Toughens Guidelines For Using Nuclear Advance Fee.” “In the short term, Duke Energy can keep collecting the “advance fee” money already approved for the Levy County nuclear plant. But, in the future, it will get a little harder for the utility to charge customers more. The Florida Senate with a 40-0 vote Thursday gave final approval to a bill that adds tougher guidelines for use of the advance fee.” (Ivan Penn and Mary Ellen Klas, “Florida Lawmakers Toughen Guidelines For Using Nuclear Advance Fee,” The Miami Herald, 5/2/14)

Environmental Organization Praised The Bill As “An Important Step Toward Reigning In The Utilities’ Access To Consumers’ Wallets.” “The Southern Alliance for Clean Energy … called S.B. 1472 … an important step toward reining in the utilities’ access to consumers’ wallets.” (Carolina Bolado, “Fla. Reforms Controversial Nuclear Cost Recovery Act,” Law360, 6/17/14)

Charlie Crist Wants to “Push A Requirement That Twenty Percent Of Florida’s Electricity Come From Renewable Energy Sources.” “Former Governor Charlie Crist headlined a solar-industry rally last week in Tallahassee where he proclaimed that as Governor he would push a requirement that twenty percent of Florida’s electricity come from renewable energy resources. What he didn’t mention in his pro-solar speech was how much his scheme would cost Florida’s families. (“Charlie Crist Wants You To Have Higher Utility Bills,” Americans For Prosperity, 4/17/14)