The Facts About Rick Scott’s Record On Voting
Charlie Crist claims that Rick Scott has made it harder to vote, and it’s simply not true:

Under Rick Scott, Florida has 72 more early voting hours than existed under Charlie Crist, for a total of 168 early voting hours.

Additionally, Rick Scott signed legislation shorten the length of the ballot to increase access and eliminate long lines at the polls.

Under Rick Scott, Florida has the same number of early voting locations that existed under Charlie Crist.

In Florida, voters have the option of voting by mail, in-person absentee voting, early voting or Election Day. The fact is that major population centers like New York City, Detroit and Philadelphia all have fewer pre-election day voting options.

Previous changes to the voting laws in Florida were approved by the Obama Administration’s Department of Justice and the U.S. District Court ruled there was no intent to discriminate against any minority voters.

Crist’s attacks are particularly ironic because while he was Attorney General, he allowed the restoration of “voting rights to murderers, rapists, batterers, drug traffickers and corrupt public officials.”

See the background below.

BACKGROUND

Gov. Scott Signed Legislation to Extend Early Voting Days and Expand Polling Locations. “In Florida, Republican Gov. Rick Scott has backed a reform package that would extend early voting days and expand the number of polling places. The measure passed a committee of the state legislature on a unanimous vote.” (Steve & Cokie Roberts, “Making Voting Easier Would End National Disgrace,” Joplin Globe, 2/27/13)

Same Legislation Also Shortened the Ballot. “Florida Gov. Rick Scott has signed an elections bill that reverses some of the voting changes he and the GOP-controlled Legislature imposed two years ago, including allowing more early voting days and hours. … The Republican governor, who is running for re-election in 2014, signed the measure (HB 7013) late Monday night before leaving the country for a trade mission in Chile. “There were inefficiencies in the 2012 General Election — and our system needed to be corrected. I asked the Legislature to enhance our system of elections and they met the challenge. This law will add more early voting locations, add more early voting days and shorten the length of our ballot,” Scott said in a statement released Tuesday.” (“Early Voting Officially Extended,” The Palm Beach Post, 5/22/13)

President Obama’s Department of Justice Approved Florida’s Previous Early Voting Statute Without Condition. “The U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) approved Florida’s new early voting statute without condition late yesterday, allowing the state’s five preclearance counties to offer early voting hours under the new law. Additionally, DOJ approved the five preclearance counties’ early voting schedule for the 2012 General Election. The federal approval of the early voting changes completes the federal approval process for all 80 sections of the 2011 elections bill. Every section can now be implemented statewide in future elections.” (Florida Department of State, Press Release, 9/13/12)

S. District Court for the Middle District of Florida Ruled That There Was No Intent to Discriminate Against Minority Voters. “…the Court finds that, at this stage in the proceedings, Plaintiffs (Congresswoman Corrine Brown, et al) have failed to demonstrate that they are substantially likely to prove that the 2011 changes to the Early Voting Statute were made with the intent to discriminate against minority voters, or that Florida’s current Early Voting Statute operates to deny or abridge African Americans’ right to vote on account of their race.” (Excerpt from US District Court Ruling, 9/24/2012)

Florida Has More Voting Options Than Major Population Centers Like New York, Detroit and Philadelphia. “Florida’s 2012 presidential election was either a statewide success or an unmitigated disaster, depending on the party of the person doing the analysis. The partisan divide could shape the solutions to what Republicans believe were isolated problems but Democrats insist were the result of the GOP-controlled Legislature’s intent to restrain turnout for President Barack Obama. Floridians can cast absentee ballots by mail or in person, can vote early and can vote on Election Day, options unavailable to half the other states, Republican Party of Florida Chairman Lenny Curry said Wednesday at a panel discussion sponsored by The Associated Press. Yet locations like New York City, Detroit and Philadelphia, which don’t have those options, “manage to do a better job getting their voters in and their voters out and their votes counted than our own Palm Beach County that has managed to make it an election year tradition to be the butt of jokes on ‘The Daily Show,'” he said.” (“Legislators Battle Over Blame In ’12 Election,” The Palm Beach Post, 1/31/13)

While Crist Was Attorney General, Florida’s Clemency Board Restored the Voting Rights to Murderers, Rapists, Batterers, Drug Traffickers and Corrupt Public Officials. “Florida’s Clemency Board has restored voting rights to murderers, rapists, batterers, drug traffickers and corrupt public officials — at the same time it barred thousands of lower-level criminals from the polls. ”There’s got to be a better way to manage it,” said Crist, a Clemency Board member. Gov. Jeb Bush, who leads the Clemency Board, would not comment. Most states automatically restore the civil rights of felons after they have served their time. Florida, however, demands that they apply to the Clemency Board, composed of the governor and the three members of the state Cabinet.” (Miami Herald, 11/21/04)