Time for Answers from Paul Ryan: FAIR Launches Next Phase of its Seven-Figure TV and Radio Ad Campaign against Massive Immigration Increases and Amnesty
New Wisconsin TV/Radio Ads Questions Ryan's Claim of a "Labor Shortage"

(Washington, D.C. August 6, 2013) Beginning the week of August 5, television ads will begin running in Wisconsin taking issue with Rep. Paul Ryan's support for massive increases in immigration to the United States. The ads are being paid for by the Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR), a national nonpartisan organization that supports enforcement of U.S. immigration laws and overall reductions in immigration to restore a fair labor market for all. The Wisconsin ad buy is over $200,000 and is the next phase of a growing seven figure ad campaign to appear around the country. FAIR has already invested nearly $1 million in radio and TV spots in the first half of 2013 alone. Similar ads will soon appear elsewhere.

The 2012 Republican vice presidential nominee has become a prominent voice in support of granting amnesty to illegal aliens and dramatically increasing future immigration to avert a looming labor shortage in the United States. The ads challenge Ryan to justify his support for massive immigration increases in light of chronically high unemployment across Wisconsin and even in his own congressional district.

Ryan's advocacy for amnesty and immigration increases has intensified as unemployment has been on the rise throughout Wisconsin. In June, unemployment increased in 30 of the state's 32 largest cities and in 56 of the state's 72 counties.

"Congressman Ryan needs to explain to thousands of Wisconsin workers, who are struggling to find jobs to support their families, why he wants to increase immigration in order to avert a labor shortage that clearly does not exist," stated Dan Stein, president of FAIR. "Wisconsin has 210,000 unemployed workers. Does Congressman Ryan think they're not good enough to get the job done?"

Click here to view the ad.