Farouk System Group
July 30, 2009, Houston, TX – Farouk Systems is celebrating its Grand Opening and Ribbon Cutting Ceremony for CHI USA. The event will provide the public with a Job Fair, while enjoying a TX BBQ, entertainment and guest speakers including dignitaries and celebrities. Our guest invitees include President Barak Obama, Governor Rick Perry, U.S. Department of Labor Secretary Hilda Solis, Mayor Bill White, Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson, Sylvester Stallone, Willie Nelson, Beyoncé Knowles and more. Farouk Systems, Inc. is a Houston based company that manufactures the high quality professional hair care products - CHI and BioSilk. Farouk Shami, Founder and Chairman, is being awarded the Entrepreneur of the Year award by Former Speaker Newt Gingrich. This well deserved honor and award is due to Farouk making the decision to build CHI USA, a manufacturing facility that’s over 500,000 sq ft. that will employ over 1,000 people this year. The CHI Ceramic Iron will be the First ceramic flat iron ever to be “Made in the USA.” Furthermore, Farouk Systems raised the bar on its reputable high quality, Innovation and Advanced American Technology naming former NASA Senior Scientist, Dr. Dennis Morrison Senior VP of Technology. With the economy taking a plunge, moving production from South Korea and China to the USA has been a major priority for Farouk Shami. According to the Labor Department, manufacturing accounted for more than a quarter of layoffs. Farouk is aware that manufacturing overseas has a significant cost advantage, but he’s certain he’ll be able to offset higher labor costs using tax breaks, eliminating import duties and marketing his products “Made in the USA.” "People want Made in the U.S.A. on the products they buy,” Shami said. “I want Made in the U.S.A.” Additionally, the Labor Department recently announced an unemployment rate of 9.4%. We know that the 1,000 new jobs we are creating this year will only put a small dent on the unemployment rate, but Farouk Systems is already estimating it will be hiring an additional 4,000 people within the next 3 to 4 years. Not to mention the “trickle down” effect this will have on American businesses i.e. the vendors we purchase millions of dollars worth of equipment and components from; the carriers that ship our products to more than 100 countries; the service men that maintain our equipment; the airlines that fly 2,000 plus executives, artists and educators around the world to do business, etc. Farouk Shami adds, “Twenty-two years ago I opened the doors to Farouk Systems during a recession, and I still managed to build my empire. Today, this recession does not hold me back either, instead I’m honored to be opening a new set of doors that will bring back hope to thousands of American people. My mission is to inspire and challenge other manufacturers to follow our lead so that together we can stimulate the U.S. economy!” The inception of Farouk Systems began in 1986 when Farouk Shami invented the first Ammonia-Free hair lightener and color system called SunGlitz®. The company started during the 80’s recession and later transformed into a powerhouse in the beauty industry. Farouk Systems introduced the use of natural “Silk” in hair care products called BioSilk Silk Therapy®. It pioneered Thermal Tool Technology when it created the CHI® iron becoming the first company to incorporate Ceramic, Ionic and Far Infrared into hair tools. Utilizing Advanced American Technology, the company created hair dryers with low EMF (Electromagnetic Fields) and hair tools with Nano Silver, which kills up to 650 forms of bacteria. Farouk Systems also introduced the first nail lacquer that eliminates harmful ingredients. CHI Nails is formulated with ceramic for durability, silk for a high-gloss finish and Nano Silver for the ultimate protection against bacteria.