Footwear Designer George Esquivel Talks New Collection And Collaborating With Florsheim
Iconic American heritage footwear brand Florsheim and shoe craftsman George Esquivel recently partnered to design a capsule collection of women's and men's shoes, just in time for the holidays.



The collection, which launched in November, features a beautiful selection of U.S.-made hand-crafted leather wingtip and captoe shoes -- signature styles for both brands.



For George Esquivel, who has collaborated with brands including Chloe and Tommy Hilfiger, this particular collaboration struck a personal chord. A long-time fan of Florsheim, Esquivel's first coveted pair of shoes he purchased were vintage Florsheim long-wings.



On the heels of the collection's recent launch, we caught up with the 2009 CFDA/Vogue Fashion Fund finalist to talk about the new capsule collection and his experience working with Florsheim president John Florsheim. Read on for the full interview with George Esquivel.







FT: Tell us a little bit about the the collection. What was the inspiration?



GE: The inspiration for the collection was my very first pair of Florsheim shoes. They were called the long-wings, which is a wingtip where one of the panels goes all the way back.



I wanted to focus on the beautiful hide, so I worked with an American tannery to develop a special grain.



It was an expensive process, because you have to develop a certain leather for men and a certain leather for women. Men wear their shoes very differently from women. The leather has to be heavier and more durable. Women typically don't wear the same shoe every day, whereas men will wear the same shoe three days in a row. The leather looks similar, but we did a different pebble grain to make it look softer. I wanted the women's shoes to have a sense of masculinity but to also be very feminine.



We wanted to make it a celebration of the craft. That's really what it is. The craft of making shoes, the tanning of the leather ... even the holes on the toes, those are all hand-punched.







FT: How did the collaboration come to be, and how did you meet John Florsheim?



GE: I have someone who works with me, Jason, and he works with my VIPS -- the basketball players and the celebrities. Jason lives in Wisconsin in the same town where John has a weekend home. They've known each other for years, but they had never talked shoes.



Finally, my name came up and Jason said, "That's weird, I work for a shoe company also." John asked who he worked with, and when Jason told him, John said, "Could you find out if George would be interested in doing a collaboration? We'd love to do something with him; we're fans of what he does."



So that's how it came about. John flew out and came to my workshop in Southern California in Orange County, and we hit it off right away. Then it evolved into more. He liked what I was doing with women's shoes and asked if I would be interested in doing women's shoes with him as well. I said, "Yeah let's see where this goes."



It's been this natural progression and the easiest thing in the world.







FT: What was it like to work with such an iconic American brand like Florsheim?



GE: It was a true honor to collaborate with a brand that had such a large impact on me. I truly feel it was that first vintage pair of Florsheim's that started me on the path to designing.







FT: How long did it take you to fully conceptualize the pieces for the collection?



GE: It was about four or five months. We had been talking about it, and it moved rather quickly. The thing that was most difficult was developing the last. In terms of the ideas and the sketches, we all agreed. The last always has the issues, because we've got to get it right -- get the toe shape right and make sure the heel height is right.



From concept to design, it was really quick. And because I make everything in house in my own workshop, it moves a lot more quickly.







FT: What are you hoping will be the biggest takeaway for customers with this new collection?



GE: I hope that customers will take the time to see all of the care and attention to detail that was put into crafting each pair.







A: You've collaborated with prestigious brands in the past like Chloe and Tommy Hilfiger. How has this collaboration differed from the others?



GE: Everything started happening when I was in the fashion fund in 2009. That's when I started collaborating more.



Fratelli Rossetti, where I was the creative consultant, was amazing. They're shoe makers and have a factory, so I got to see manufacturing from a larger scale. It's not hand-made, it's all by machines, but they're still very high-quality, beautiful shoes.



The common link that I have with all of these people is that everybody loves shoes.



From there, I worked with Chloe. That was crazy. A French house, are you kidding? That was super cool, and it was a very different process, because it's a big machine. Going to Florence to their factories, and meeting with them ... we worked on it for a while. It took a while to get the collection, and it was a small capsule collection.



Tommy Hilfiger, again, he loves shoes, and we both hit it off. One day he asked if I would be interested in doing something with him. He was a sponsor of Americans in Paris which was a part of the Fashion Fund.



So many times people want to do something solely for the numbers, and Tommy really wanted to do something cool for the sake of cool. He saw that something like that was also going to give me -- a young brand -- the exposure to help my brand build. He's such a mentor; he loves to give back to people in that way. It was a 1,000-pair run, and we made them all in the shop. That was amazing.



Then I was at Tumi as a creative director, which was another amazing experience. And now I have this!



I haven't stopped smiling in six years. I literally pinch myself every day.



For me, it's always helped that I've done things from the heart. I've done it from my heart and from gut, it's never been about doing some project and making "x" amount of dollars.



Someone asked me the other day what drives me, and I said, "I just want to make beautiful things." To make beautiful things you may not make millions of beautiful things, but you're still going to feel good, and there are people who will always find and want those beautiful things. And that's the goal for me. To do really, really well-crafted, unique and special things.







The Florsheim and Esquivel capsule collection is currently available online for purchase. Exclusive styles of the women's shoes are also available at Barneys stores.