Encuesta: Los hispanos en Nevada y a nivel nacional apoyan la opción escolar
In conjunction with Hispanic Heritage Month, the American Federation for Children, the nation’s voice for educational choice, highlighted recent Nevada polling results, which found 71 percent of Hispanic respondents support the state’s new education savings account (ESA) program.

“Hispanic parents in Nevada and across the country are supportive of school choice and options for their children,” said Kevin P. Chavous, executive counsel to the American Federation for Children. “As we celebrate Hispanic Heritage Month, we also need to look at the education options that are available to the community and what we can do to ensure every child has access to an education that suits their individual needs.”

The statewide poll conducted by The Tarrance Group this past August showed public support for school choice programs is strong. The majority of Nevada voters support choice – 73 percent supporting the concept of school choice and 61 percent supporting the state’s innovative ESA program. Support was particularly strong among Hispanic respondents.

Nevada’s ESA program allows children who have attended public school for at least 100 days to use state funds to pay for tuition at a school of their parents’ choice. The innovative program also gives students with special needs the opportunity to use funds for specialized services or therapies. Scholarships will range from 90% – 100% of their state education funding depending on a family’s income level or a student’s disability.

In another national poll conducted by Democratic polling firm, Beck Research, LLC.in January 2015, 68 percent of Hispanic voters supported the concept of school choice.

National poll question: “Generally speaking, would you say you favor or oppose the concept of school choice? School choice gives parents the right to use tax dollars associated with their child’s education to send their child to the public or private school which better serves their needs.”



-30-

American Federation for Children is the nation’s leading school choice advocacy organization and works in states across the country to help secure additional, high-quality educational options for families.

Kevin P. Chavous is executive counsel and a founding board member for the American Federation for Children, an affiliate of the Alliance for School Choice. A noted attorney, author, and national school reform leader. A former member of the Council of the District of Columbia and a former chairman of D.C.’s Education Committee, Chavous was responsible for enacting numerous education reforms in D.C. Chavous is chair emeritus of the Democrats for Education Reform and a former chair of the Black Alliance for Educational Options.