McGinty Announces An Agenda for Women and Working Families
Philadelphia, PA (March 8, 2016) – Today Katie McGinty released her “Agenda for Women and Working Families,” because there is no doubt that Pennsylvania women and working families are struggling to get ahead. The cost of living has increased while real wages have not. Women continue to earn less than their male colleagues for doing the same work, and families are too often forced to choose between paying for childcare and paying the rent or mortgage.

“We need policies that actually help women and their families move forward, not hold them back,” said Katie McGinty. “But for too long, the voices of women in Pennsylvania have been drowned out by Republican obstructionism and inaction. Instead of helping families, Senator Pat Toomey has been rigidly ideological, opposing wage increases, college affordability and health care initiatives at every turn. I’m fighting to bring all of us to the decision making table – to move real solutions forward that make a difference for all Pennsylvanians.”

Economic Agenda for Women and Working Families

End Gender Discrimination in Pay. It is 2016, and women are still paid less than men for doing the same job. It is illegal to pay women less but it still happens. In Pennsylvania, women earn 79 cents for every dollar paid to men—and it is even worse for women of color—African American women make 68 cents and Latinas earn 56 cents for every dollar paid to white, non-Hispanic men doing the same job.

In the Senate, Katie will fight to pass the Paycheck Fairness Act. Step one to ensuring equal pay for women is transparency. The bill will bar employers from retaliating against employees who talk about their pay.

Paid Family and Medical Leave. The United States is the only industrialized nation that does not offer paid maternity leave. Our current system leaves millions of men and women without support when they have a new baby or need to care for an aging parent. We need a national solution to this national problem.

In the Senate, Katie will join progressive leaders and fight to pass the FAMILY Act, a national family and medical leave insurance program to provide up to 12 weeks of paid leave for employees to use to care for a new baby, to care for themselves, or an ill or aging parent.

Raise Wages for All Workers. We know that costs are rising but paychecks have not. In Pennsylvania, an astonishing 75% of minimum wage earners are women – which is higher than the national average. We must raise the minimum wage and eliminate the tipped wage so that hard working women and men have a shot at a living wage that can actually support women and families.

In the Senate, Katie supports raising the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour over the next four years. The current minimum wage for Pennsylvania workers is $7.25, and Katie’s plan would double wages for working Pennsylvanians.

Allow Workers to Earn Paid Sick and Safe Days. Everyone gets sick, but not everyone gets access to paid sick days. Four of every 10 workers have no access to paid sick days, causing many to go to work when they are sick. This impacts women even more, as women are more likely to have family care responsibilities or have to stay home with sick children. We must also provide paid leave for victims of domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking so that they have financial security to access the support services they need. We need to ensure that families do not have to choose between their own health and safety, and losing pay.

Katie will fight for the Healthy Act, which would allow workers to earn up to 7 paid sick days each year to use for their own health or to provide care for a sick family member. The bill would also allow workers who are victims of domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking to use these days to recover or seek assistance.

Make Childcare Affordable for All. For 60% of children under the age of six, both parents work. Here in Pennsylvania, the annual cost for infant childcare is over $10,000 per child, which is more than most families pay in rent and almost the same cost as in-state college tuition. This makes affordable, quality childcare out of reach for many families. To keep women and men in the workforce and to help grow our economy, we need to support working families by providing middle and lower income families tax credits to make this critical need more affordable.

Katie supports the Child CARE Act, a plan that will help families afford childcare, increase resources for states to implement much needed reforms, and give parents and caregivers the tools they need to support early learning for children under four.

Protecting Women’s Health. Republicans have repeatedly tried to defund Planned Parenthood, which would restrict a woman’s access to critical health services, such as cancer screenings and contraception. They’ve even gone so far as to threaten to shut the government down, taking away healthcare from 108,000 Pennsylvanians who depend on Planned Parenthood. As Senator, I will always defend a woman’s right to choose and fight for women to have access to these health services at all times because their most personal decisions about healthcare and family planning should be just that — personal and private.

Support Women Owned Small Businesses. Women across the country are leading on small businesses creation, representing a $3 trillion economic force and supporting 23 million jobs. But even with this tremendous impact, women still lack access to some of the most critical assets and face significant barriers when it comes to launching and growing their businesses.

In the Senate, Katie will support passage of the Women’s Small Business Ownership Act, co-sponsored by Senator Jeanne Shaheen, which will improve access to lending, business training and federal contracting for women-owned businesses.

###