Katie McGinty: Democrat for Senate, Pennsylvania
Katie McGinty believes working families should come first — and that means creating new jobs, caring for our communities, and protecting the rights of our citizens.

Creating Jobs and Growing the Economy >>

Our middle-class and working families have gotten the short end of the stick for far too long.

Investing in High Quality Education >>

Education is a right, not a privilege, and we need to do more for students.

Expanding Energy Opportunities and Protecting the Environment >>

It’s time for common sense protections and an investment in clean energy.

Ensuring Affordable and Accessible Healthcare >>

All Pennsylvanians deserve affordable quality care.

Strengthening National Security >>

We need to keep our families safe during challenging times.

Preserving our Democracy >>

All Americans must have the right to make their voice heard.

Standing up for Women’s Rights >>

We need to close the wage gap and protect women’s health services.

Fighting for LGBT Equality >>

Much remains to be done in the pursuit for true equality.

Protecting Social Security and Medicare >>

Social Security is a promise to our senior citizens that we must honor.

Gun Safety >>

The need for commonsense gun safety measures has become clearer than ever.

Creating Jobs and Growing the Economy

For too long, Pennsylvania’s middle class has gotten the short end of the stick. As the daughter of a Philadelphia police officer and restaurant hostess, I know how hard my parents worked to provide for our family. I also know that today, too many families are struggling to make ends meet. As Senator, I will fight to bring home good paying jobs and advance policies that enable families to get ahead — like expanding tax credits that make child care more affordable through bills like the Helping Working Families Afford Child Care Act.

It’s no secret that American workers are long overdue for a raise. That’s why I support boosting the minimum wage to $15 an hour. For our working families, the promise of a living wage is the difference between living in poverty and the opportunity to provide for themselves. We need to celebrate and support hard work.

In Washington, I will push to level the playing field for our workers by closing the unfair tax loopholes that incentivize sending jobs overseas and put small businesses at a disadvantage.

In an age of innovation and new technology, the potential of American workers cannot be overstated. We need to harness the creative energy of our research institutions and reinvest in a skilled manufacturing workforce. By investing in basic R&D, skilled job training, and nurturing start-up tech businesses, we can reclaim our competitive edge in manufacturing and development.

Finally, I have spent most of my career demonstrating that a healthy environment and a strong economy go hand in hand. In the Senate, I will be a leading voice for strengthening our clean energy economy by investing in renewable energy and innovative infrastructure technology, while cutting carbon emissions and lowering energy costs.

— Katie McGinty

Investing in High Quality Education

I believe that a quality education begins with investing in early childhood programs, which is why I will champion programs like universal pre-K. I will fight to expand the promise of high-quality public education from elementary school to college to give our students the building blocks for higher achievement and create pathways for lifelong success.

The jobs of the future require education and training beyond high school. For our students to succeed, college and technical training must be affordable and available to anyone willing to work hard. Unfortunately, college is more expensive than ever, and Republicans have led the charge to cut programs like the Pell Grant. As the ninth of ten children, I was the first in my family to attend a four-year college right out of high school with the help of scholarships and loans. In the Senate, I will pay it back by working to ensure that post-high school education and training are a possibility for all students, without burdening families and students with tens of thousands in debt.

I will also work to put a lid on escalating costs, support the refinancing of student debt and give middle-class families the break they need to afford a quality education by expanding tax credits like proposed in the new American Opportunity Permanence and Consolidation Act.

— Katie McGinty

Expanding Energy Opportunities and Protecting the Environment

As the former Chair of the White House Council on Environmental Quality and Secretary of Pennsylvania’s Department of Environmental Protection, I understand the importance of protecting our environment and investing in a clean energy economy.

Climate change presents a serious global threat to our health, economic well-being and national security. In the Senate, I will lead the way to a healthier and safer environment by working to pass commonsense climate protections with investments in energy efficiency and clean energy.

It is time to start moving towards a clean energy economy. We need to harness our renewable energy resources, such as wind and solar, to create good jobs and cut electricity bills for taxpayers. In Washington, I will support innovations in clean energy technologies and tax incentives that will level the playing field to move our country towards a clean energy future.

— Katie McGinty

Ensuring Affordable and Accessible Healthcare

All Pennsylvanians should have access to affordable and quality healthcare. While serving as chief of staff to Governor Tom Wolf, I was proud to help expand Medicaid coverage to more than half a million Pennsylvanians. It was the right thing to do, and it cut costs for both hardworking families and for our state. However, Pat Toomey and Republicans have repeatedly tried to repeal the Affordable Care Act (ACA), a move that would cut off millions of Americans from the healthcare they need.

As Senator, I will defend and build on the ACA by working to promote access to affordable medical coverage and rein in skyrocketing out-of-pocket costs. I will fight to lower copays and deductibles and reduce the cost of prescription drugs for our families and seniors.

I believe that mental and behavioral healthcare is critically important to the well-being of our nation. I support full parity for these services with coverage for physical ailments. In the Senate, I will fight for families dealing with the devastating effects of addiction, including opioid addiction.

— Katie McGinty

Strengthening National Security

These are challenging times, and nothing is more important to me than keeping our families safe and secure. Fighting terrorism both at home and abroad is a growing challenge but we can defeat terrorist threats while upholding America’s values and principles.

Our men and women in our military deserve the very best and as Senator, I will work to guarantee that our military remains the best-equipped and best-trained military in the world to meet the changing threats of the 21st century.

In order to respond to the threats we face, we need the strength and support of our allies. Israel is a critical partner for our national security and as a Senator, I will do all that I can to ensure Israel’s security, as any threat to Israel poses a threat to our nation’s interests as well.

— Katie McGinty

Preserving our Democracy

Our democracy was built on the principle of equality, but the influx of money in our political process has made it so that not every voice is heard equally — or even at all. Decisions like Citizens United have allowed the wealthy and the well-connected to have an outsize impact on our political process, effectively drowning out the voices of middle class and working Americans. It is absolutely critical that we overturn Citizens United and other decisions that have allowed the influence of unaccountable dark money to grow, pass a constitutional amendment to ensure that money never again is able to undermine our democratic process, and put in place firm limits and transparency requirements to ensure that every American has an equal say in our future.

Furthermore, it is critical that Congress restore the provisions of the Voting Rights Act struck down by the Supreme Court in 2013 and ensure that neither the court, nor Congress, nor any legislative body is able to deny Americans the hard-won right to vote. As endlessly long lines and disturbing reports of voter intimidation demonstrate, there still is need for vigilance against efforts to disenfranchise, especially the elderly, minority communities and the disabled. Stories of needlessly restrictive voter ID laws and limits to early voting that make it difficult for people to vote are a reminder that we need to strengthen and restore the Voting Rights Act, and make it easier — not harder — for all Americans to make their voice heard.

— Katie McGinty

Standing up for Women’s Rights

As a working mom of three teenage girls, I know how important it is to give women the tools they need to get ahead. It is past time to close the pay gap. In Pennsylvania, women still make 79 cents for every dollar made by a man in a similar job, and struggle to climb the ladder if they take time off to raise a family. As Senator, I will work to pass the Paycheck Fairness Act and fight for paid family leave because no one should have to choose between taking care of a loved one and keeping their job.

Republicans have repeatedly tried to defund Planned Parenthood, which would restrict a woman’s access to critical health services, such as cancer screenings and contraception. They’ve even gone so far as to threaten to shut the government down, taking away healthcare from 108,000 Pennsylvanians who depend on Planned Parenthood. We need to make sure that women have access to these health services at all times because their most personal decisions about healthcare and family planning should be just that — personal and private.

— Katie McGinty

Fighting for LGBT Equality

In recent years, our lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender neighbors and loved ones have made significant gains toward equal treatment under the law. However, much remains to be done in pursuit of true equality.

In the Senate, I will fight to strengthen hate-crime reporting and expand antidiscrimination protections to LGBT Americans. No one should be denied access to housing, healthcare, or employment because of their gender identity or sexual orientation.

I will work to ensure that transgender Americans who wish to serve our nation in the military are able to do so, and that healthcare programs like Medicaid provide trans patients the critical services they need.

— Katie McGinty

Protecting Social Security and Medicare

The promise of Social Security after a lifetime of hard work is a solemn pact with our senior citizens that we must honor. As your Senator, I will oppose any effort to privatize Social Security and work to ensure that earned benefits keep pace with inflation.

I will also fight to protect Medicare from those who want to turn this program into a voucher system that would force seniors to pay thousands of dollars more out of pocket for their health care.

My parents worked hard every day so they could retire with dignity and get the care they needed. They were not alone in this regard. Medicare and Social Security are vital programs that benefit millions of Pennsylvanians, yet Republicans have tried repeatedly to privatize Social Security and to end Medicare as we know it by turning it into a voucher system. In Washington, I will work to ensure that retirement isn’t a gamble for America’s seniors, and serve as a voice for the families working so hard to take care of children and elderly parents.

— Katie McGinty

Gun Safety

As our epidemic of gun violence has claimed countless innocent lives in Pennsylvania and across the United States, the need for commonsense gun safety measures has become clearer than ever.

In the Senate, I will advocate for universal background checks and work to close the terror loophole. It makes no sense that we turn a blind eye to some gun sales but not others, and that we allow those who present enough risk to be barred from a commercial flight to buy weapons.

I will also work to reinstate the civilian ban on military-style weapons and end civilian access to high-capacity magazines. As someone who comes from a family of hunters and gun-owners, I see no clear reason for private citizens to buy and own military assault weapons and magazines that allow people to shoot multiple rounds at a time.

Finally, I will do all I can to see that the Hate Crimes Prevention Act becomes law. Whether in Charleston or Orlando, we have seen the devastating consequences of allowing those driven by hatred to purchase and own guns. It is a question of basic decency to the most vulnerable and marginalized among us to keep weapons away from those convicted of a hate crime.

— Katie McGinty