A dialogue with Iran's new president
The Final Call | National News

A dialogue with Iran's new president

By FinalCall.com News | Last updated: Oct 2, 2013 - 4:20:48 PM

What's your opinion on this article?

Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, center, speaks from head table.

(FinalCall.com) - While in town for the 68th UN General Assembly, the new Iranian president hosted the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan , Muslim leaders from different Islamic communities and members of the U.S. Congress at a private meeting.

President Hassan Rouhani was elected in June and held the gathering at the One UN Hotel in Manhattan Sept. 24, 2013 across the street from the UN headquarters.

Minister Farrakhan attends meeting with new president of Iran in New York. The meeting with President Hassan Rouhani included other Muslims and congressmen Keith Ellison of Minnesota and Andre Carson of Indiana participated in the dialogue. Both US lawmakers are Muslims.

The meeting came after Iran’s president spoke at the General Assembly and impressed analysts with words that reflected a desire to thaw U.S.-Iran relations.

After the guests were hosted at a dinner, the Iranian president entered and engaged in a warm discussion with guests, including Democratic congressmen Greg Meeks of New York and Keith Ellison of Minnesota, who is a Muslim. Abdul Akbar Muhammad, international representative of the Nation of Islam, and Supreme Capt. Mustapha Farrakhan were part of the Nation of Islam delegation. The dialogue revolved around the Iranian president’s speech and how to move forward in regard to relations with the United States. Translators were included in the meeting to facilitate communications in English and Farsi.

Last year, then-President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran included Minister Farrakhan and others in a similar meeting and discussion.

(L) Rep. Gregory Meeks of New York at meeting with president of Iran. (R) Rep. Keith Ellison participates in discussions.

Related news:

No handshake--but can Iran-U.S. relations shift? (FCN, 10-01-2013)

Iran President Rouhani's 2013 UN Address - Full Video, Text (UN, 09-25-2013)