FIFA and BWI discuss Qatar labour rights and working conditions
© FIFA.com

FIFA President Blatter has opened a meeting with a delegation of the Building and Wood Workers’ International (BWI) and affiliated national unions, headed by BWI General Secretary Ambet Yuson and BWI President Per Olof Sjöö, at the Home of FIFA in Zurich. The meeting was chaired by FIFA Executive Committee member Dr Theo Zwanziger.

Dr Zwanziger, who has been mandated by FIFA President Blatter to coordinate all necessary talks on the issue of labour rights in Qatar, reinforced FIFA’s ongoing pledge to look into the matter with all relevant parties, including trade unions such as the BWI, in order to discuss feasible and sustainable solutions.

During the meeting, FIFA and the BWI discussed the progress made on matters related to the working conditions and labour rights of migrant workers in Qatar as part of the general dialogue supported by world football’s governing body with various organisations, including human rights and labour entities as well as stakeholders from the international football community.

A report containing the main outcomes of the discussions led by Dr Zwanziger in recent months will be presented during the upcoming meeting of the FIFA Executive Committee in Zurich later this week. The meetings have included various organisations such as the International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC), FIFPro, political institutions such as the European Parliament, civil society organisations such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, as well as the UN body responsible for labour matters, the International Labour Organization (ILO).

Dr Zwanziger said: “It was a constructive meeting with the BWI. For FIFA, it is important to listen to all relevant organisations in order to look into feasible and appropriate solutions. I think we all agree that the situation of the migrant workers is a complex matter, and we cannot expect things to change overnight, but we need to work together in an intensive approach in order to support the work currently being done by the competent authorities in Qatar."



Discussions on this matter will now continue, in particular in order to attribute the responsibilities of the different parties involved.