Statutes, Rules & Model Forms
Rules Under Development

Charter School Statutes

The 2002 Florida School Code adopted by the Florida Legislature provides parents and students with numerous statutory rights for educational choice. Those related to Charter Schools are listed below:

Statute Description

Section 1002.33 Establishes charter schools. Under this law, private entities may enter into charters with school boards to provide educational services to district students. State universities may grant charters to lab schools created under s.1002.32. This law provides information on the application process and review, charter school requirements, charter funding, exemptions from statute, etc

Section 1002.345 Establishes criteria and requirements for charter schools experiencing a deteriorating financial condition or a state of financial emergency.

Section 1013.62 Establishes charter school eligibility requirements, procedures, and uses for capital outlay funding.

Section 1002.331 Establishes high-performing charter school eligibility requirements and procedures.

Section 1002.332 Establishes high-performing charter school systems eligibility requirements and procedures.

Charter School State Board of Education Rules

Rule Description



SBE 6A-1.0081 Monthly Financial Statement and Financial Condition Rule, Form IEPC-FI GASB Monthly Financial Form (Excel) Form IEPC-F2 Non-Profit Monthly Financial Form (Excel) Establishes requirements related to the monthly financial statement that a charter school must complete and submit to its sponsor and establishes procedures for developing financial recovery and corrective action plans and determining a deteriorating financial condition.

Governance Training Rule, SBE 6A-6.0784 Form IEPC-09 Training Plan Approval Application (PDF) Form IEPC-10 Training Plan Renewal Application (PDF) Form IEPC-11 Governance Training Form (PDF) Establishes procedures for the approval of charter school governance training submitted to the Florida Department of Education by potential training providers. Participation in approved governance training is a statutory requirement for the governing bodies of all charter schools in Florida.

Notice Requirements for Performance Data, SBE 6A-6.0788 Outlines the manner in which charter schools will provide student performance data to required recipients.

Appeals Rule, SBE 6A-6.0781 Establishes procedures for appealing a district school board decision to deny an application for a charter school.

Capital Outlay Rule, SBE 6A-2.0020 Clarifies eligibility requirements for capital outlay funding by defining expanded feeder chain and the method for determining satisfactory student achievement.

Charter School Corrective Action and School Improvement Plans, SBE 6A-1.099827 Establishes Charter School Corrective Action and School Improvement Plans.