Congressman John Fleming : Home
THE LATEST UPDATES:

Speaker Pelosi Introduces Health Care Plan that Includes Government Option

Read H.R. 3962 - Affordable Health Care for America Act at http://docs.house.gov/rules/health/111_ahcaa.pdf

In response to the almost 2 million Americans that have contacted my office in support of House Resolution 615, I have introduced an Amendment to the Pelosi health care bill that will automatically enroll all Members of Congress and all Senators in the public option.

House Resolution 615

Over the past few months, members of Congress and the American people have come to know the details of the Administration's proposed health care plan. Call it whatever you like, I believe this proposal is nothing more than government-run health care. As a physician, I am amazed at the number of bureaucrats in this House who are quick to claim a government-run health care plan is the reform this country needs. In response to this, I have offered a resolution that will offer members of Congress an opportunity to put their money where their mouth is, and urge their colleagues who vote for legislation creating a government-run health care plan to lead by example and enroll themselves in the same public plan.

Under the current draft of the Democrat healthcare legislation, members of Congress are curiously exempt from the government-run health care option, keeping their existing health plans and services on Capitol Hill. If Members of Congress believe so strongly that government-run health care is the best solution for hard working American families, I think it only fitting that Americans see them lead the way. Public servants should always be accountable and responsible for what they are advocating.

Together we will work to ensure that any plan that is good enough for American families is good enough for every member of Congress.

If you would like to download a letter and ask your representative to consider supporting House Resolution 615, click here.

To see a list of Representatives who currently support H. Res 615, please click here.