Governor Crist Signs Legislation to Create Children’s Zones in Underserved Florida Communities
GOVERNOR CRIST SIGNS LEGISLATION TO CREATE CHILDREN’S ZONES IN UNDERSERVED FLORIDA COMMUNITIES

MIAMI – Governor Charlie Crist today signed into law House Bill 3 creating Florida’s first ever “Children’s Zone” in the Magic City neighborhood of Miami-Dade’s Liberty City. The Children’s Zone concept was pioneered in New York City’s Harlem to target at-risk youth in need of community-based services focused on education and healthy, community-oriented activities.

“No one better understands the challenges facing Florida’s communities than the people living in those communities,” said Governor Crist. “By creating Children’s Zones, we can help community members and partners develop their own solutions, focusing on what is best for the children in their communities and neighborhoods.”

The bill signing ceremony took place at the Belafonte Tacolcy Center. Founded in 1967, the center strives to provide a safe environment where children and families are encouraged to make positive choices that strengthen self and community. Governor Crist was joined by House Speaker Marco Rubio, who strongly supported the bill, as well as the bill’s sponsors, Representative Dorothy Bendross-Mindingall and Senator Larcenia Bullard.

“The Children’s Zone is designed to draw on all the community’s best energies and efforts and to invest these resources in helping disadvantaged children grow up to lead happy, successful lives,” said Speaker Rubio. “We will look to religious, educational, social and recreational organizations to join in the Children’s Zone, and we will focus on early intervention because we believe helping young children produces the best results. We want these young people to experience the attention and nurturing of caring adults engaged in healthy, organized community-based activities.”

The legislation creates the statutory flexibility to allow Florida’s communities to identify at-risk neighborhoods, and then empowers those neighborhoods to address their shortfalls. Through the legislation, Florida communities can apply to the Ounce of Prevention Fund of Florida to designate an area as a Children’s Zone. Before applying for designation as a Children’s Zone, communities must first do the following:

Adopt a resolution.

Establish a Children’s Zone Planning Team to organize community efforts that will address early development and care of children, education of children and youth, health and wellness, youth support, parent and guardian support, adult education, training and jobs, community safety, and housing and community development in the neighborhood.

Develop and adopt a community plan to put those ideas into action.

Create a not-for-profit corporation which will be responsible for implementing the Children’s Zone community plan, using funds designated by the legislation.

“This legislation introduces a new opportunity to address the needs of families in a meaningful way that will bring about success,” said Representative Bendross-Mindingall. “These are our children; we must take care of them now.”