MEMORANDUM: Governor’s Keynote Address at 2008 Serve to Preserve Florida Summit on Global Climate Change
MEMORANDUM: GOVERNOR’S KEYNOTE ADDRESS AT 2008 SERVE TO PRESERVE FLORIDA SUMMIT ON GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE

TO: Interested Media

FROM: Erin Isaac, Governor’s Communications Director

RE: Governor’s Keynote Address at 2008 Serve to Preserve Florida Summit on Global Climate Change

Governor Charlie Crist today opened the 2008 Serve to Preserve Florida Summit on Global Climate Change by delivering a keynote address entitled, “Green Technology Drives Green Economies.” His remarks prepared for delivery are below. For more information about the Summit, please visit www.myfloridaclimate.com or www.myflorida.com.

If you have any questions or need additional information, please call the Governor’s press office at (850) 488-5394.

###

2008 Serve to Preserve Florida Summit on Global Climate Change

Opening Keynote Address by Governor Charlie Crist

Wednesday, June 25, 2008

Miami, Florida

“Green Technology Drives Green Economies”

Remarks prepared for delivery.

Thank you for being here. Our purpose during these two days is to chart the course of the ‘green’ future of the Sunshine State. This summit will allow us to identify the many opportunities Florida has to explore green energy sources. And it is also an opportunity to explore how we can consider our environment in all we do, and in so doing, enrich our economy.

As Lt. Governor Kottkamp has mentioned, last summer we laid the framework for Florida’s energy and economic future, with many of you present right here. At that time, I signed three executive orders declaring three clear and courageous goals: increase our energy efficiency, reduce our greenhouse gas emissions, and increase our use of alternative and renewable energy technologies.

When we gathered last year, not everyone believed we needed to take action to address global climate change. However, after just one year, it seems everyone is on board: Republicans, Democrats and Independents; our federal, state and local partners; businesses, both large and small; and as we have seen from our Presentation of the Colors this morning, many international partners and – most importantly – our children.

Just as last year’s summit launched Florida into a new era of action to address climate change, this year’s summit will define our next steps forward. We recognize the undeniable link between our state’s environment and our economy. And this year, we want to gain a better understanding of that link. We must consider all of the possibilities – including those within our reach, and those we can only envision at this point in time.

The purpose of this year’s summit is to explore how we can further protect Florida from the threat of global climate change by engaging the entrepreneurial spirit and by being globally competitive. We must tap into the creativity, intellect and determination that Florida is known for.

Yesterday, I had the honor of officially witnessing the first steps of what will be a historic strategy to save America’s Everglades. It was a moment as significant to our environment as the creation of our nation’s first national park, or the creation of Everglades National Park itself. The South Florida Water Management District and the U.S. Sugar Corporation signed a Statement of Principles to begin dialogue that – in my humble opinion – can lead to reviving the River of Grass. If all goes as anticipated, we will acquire nearly 300 square miles of the Everglades – and within this historic acquisition, we will once and for all be able to move, store and clean water to re-connect Lake Okeechobee to Everglades National Park. The famed River of Grass is one of the most unique landscapes in our country – and on earth – and it is within our grasp to ensure her protection for generations to come.

While there on the edge of Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge yesterday, I was again reminded of how humbling and awe inspiring Florida’s beauty is – how fragile it is – and how vulnerable it is to the effects of climate change. The terrible tornadoes and flooding that have torn apart the lives of so many in the Midwest also remind us of the threats we face. The natural beauty that surrounds us and the extreme weather patterns that swell rivers and spawn strong tornadoes urge us to take action to prevent further devastation from global climate change.

While tremendous challenges stand before us, we can rise to face them. Americans – and especially Floridians – are capable of extraordinary innovation when we marshal our resources and focus on a common goal.

And we have proven it in the past. Right here in Florida, in the 1960s, we answered the call to President Kennedy’s challenge when he said in his address to Congress in May of 1961, “I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.” President Kennedy set the bar high, and with concerted effort and amazing energy, America reached its goal in July of 1969 when Apollo 11 launched from the Kennedy Space Center, and the “Eagle” landed on the lunar surface, and returned safely back to earth.

Just as America continues to reach for the stars from our great state, Florida can once again launch America into the coming green tech business boom. Innovation is at the heart of the entrepreneurial spirit, and the entrepreneurial spirit is embedded in Florida’s DNA. In the past, it has produced in us the talent, the desire and the resolve to make space flight a part of everyday life. Now, it can also help us solve the most difficult challenges of our time: how to address global climate change and how to satisfy our fuel and energy needs. And innovation and the entrepreneurial spirit can show us how to tackle these challenges in a way that does not threaten our future – or, more importantly, our children’s future.

The entrepreneurial spirit can develop the clean technology that will liberate us from our current addiction to fossil fuel. We cannot be content with doing things as we always have. We must be innovative, we must reach higher.

Florida’s emphasis on alternative fuel and renewable energy will enable us to be less dependent on foreign oil. As we have accomplished here in Florida, Washington should also move forward on comprehensive energy legislation. Several concepts offered in various bills will enable our nation to lead.

And we must lead.

Comprehensive policy must include – in my view – a study of how to enhance our domestic oil supply. However, we must have an open discussion – without compromising Florida’s sensitive ecosystems and natural beauty.

As I stated last week, only when we are able to do so far enough from Florida’s coast, safe enough for our people and clean enough for our beaches, should we consider increasing our oil supply by drilling off Florida’s shores. Let me repeat that – far enough, safe enough and clean enough.

Listen, I love Florida, but the dialogue must begin now – because our addiction to foreign oil is causing severe pain for Florida’s families.

The time has come for Florida, and America, to once again bring purpose and focus to the most pressing challenge of our time: energy.

We can also focus our efforts on developing more energy-efficient and climate-friendly air travel. Florida is the birthplace of the commercial aviation industry. In 1914, the first commercial flight carried a single passenger from my hometown of St. Petersburg to Tampa: one passenger, 21 miles and an altitude of 15 feet. In the near century since then, Florida’s commercial aviation industry has grown to more than 140 million passengers each year, making us third in the nation among all states. We are the only state with four regional hubs. And it is because people love to come to Florida.

While it is true that the aviation industry is vital to our state’s tourism and economy, it is also true that we must envision a cleaner, more energy efficient way to fly. Florida is home to 1,400 aviation companies, with 53,000 employees and a payroll of $2.4 billion. With our innovation and the entrepreneurial spirit, we should be able to create a more energy efficient aircraft engine, and use renewable energy to power our planes. With better technology, the aviation industry of the future could reduce Florida’s carbon emissions – and, at the same time, make Florida’s economy soar.

And there are other industries where Floridians have the potential to reach new heights. This Saturday, the State of Florida will break ground on our newest veterans’ nursing home in St. Johns County. Expected to open its doors in December 2009, it will be the first nursing home in Florida to be LEED-certified (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design). It will be a “green” facility. Its design, construction and operation will meet national standards as a high-performance, sustainable building. Recycled materials will be used, and it is designed to use less water and less energy than conventionally built facilities. Congratulations, Admiral Collins, on your leadership – not only in answering the call to serve your nation and our veterans, but in answering the call of conservation and energy efficiency.

Floridians can develop even more strategies and technology for increasing energy efficiency and wise use of our resources. It is how we build on the foundation we built last year.

We must develop the talent and expertise in our people so they can fill the high-wage, high-demand jobs in the green tech field. We must equip our workforce. Just as our research universities are conducting key research and development, our community colleges and K-12 schools must train students for the jobs of tomorrow. A trained workforce is key to developing the alternate and renewable energy sources and the energy efficiencies we must have in order to reduce our carbon emissions. How else can we call on the workforce prepared in the past to enter the jobs of the green future? How else can we equip them to make even more energy-efficient the buildings of today? And how else can we develop the technology needed for tomorrow?

We have only to imagine the possibilities for our state. We are moving forward into this new era of action to address climate change. To launch us into that new era, I would like to take this opportunity to sign House Bill 7135, passed by the Florida Legislature this year. It is Florida’s most comprehensive energy and economic development policy in the history of our state. Thanks to the leadership of Senator Burt Saunders and Representative Stan Mayfield, this dream and goal of ours has become a reality. Senator Saunders and Representative Mayfield – and my other friends in the Florida Legislature – would please join me on stage?

This groundbreaking legislation moves our state forward on its path to diversify our energy sources, increase energy efficiency, reduce harmful greenhouse gas emissions and support the development of renewable energy technologies right here in Florida. Thanks to the work of these gentlemen – and the rest of the Florida Legislature, Florida is one step closer to implementing a comprehensive energy policy that will protect Florida’s natural beauty for future generations.

This legislation protects our natural resources, stimulates our economy and reduces our dependence on foreign oil. We will increase our energy efficiency, support the development of renewable energy, and allow businesses flexibility in meeting our goals to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Ethanol will make up 10 percent of Florida’s total fuel supply by 2010. The Public Service Commission will develop a renewable portfolio standard to increase the use of wind, solar and other renewable energy. Based on the unanimous vote in both chambers of the Florida Legislature, our state is now a leader within the Southeast in advancing the development of a cap-and-trade program. New buildings will be up to 50 percent more efficient by 2019 – like the veteran’s nursing home that breaks ground on Saturday. A Florida Energy Systems Consortium among our state universities will leverage the expertise of Florida’s research community to grow Florida’s green tech industry.

With the stroke of a pen, we have forever changed Florida’s energy future. It is yours – and ours – to make of it what we will. I am confident that Florida’s innovation and the entrepreneurial spirit will once again chart the course of the ‘green’ future of the Sunshine State.

Thank you and God bless.