Independent Colorado Businesses Committed To Fighting Out-Of-State Corporations’ Campaign To Sell Alcohol In Chain Stores
CONTACT:

Curtis Hubbard, (303) 908-2378

curtis@onsightpa.com

DENVER — Members of Keep Colorado Local on Wednesday said they are committed to fighting changes to Colorado’s liquor laws, as out-of-state corporations announced plans to pad their profits at the expense of Colorado small businesses.

Kroger, Safeway and Walmart are teaming up to spend millions of dollars to change Colorado liquor laws, a move that would have dramatic, negative impacts on the state’s 1,600+ mom-and-pop liquor stores and more than 400 independent craft brewers, distillers and vintners.

The Keep Colorado Local coalition includes trade groups, businesses and individuals representing independent liquor stores, craft breweries, wineries, distilleries and other local businesses from throughout the state. They have teamed up to oppose the sale of alcohol in chain stores in order to defend small businesses, preserve public safety, and protect Colorado’s craft culture.

“The chain stores aren’t satisfied by our state’s leaders turning them down at every turn for the past two decades,” said Carolyn Joy, owner of Joy’s Wine and Spirits. Her father opened their family-owned businesses in Denver over 50 years ago. “Our state’s liquor laws have helped to grow local economies and changing them would have a devastating impact on small businesses like mine, our employees and their families.”

Out-of-state corporations have tried unsuccessfully to alter Colorado’s liquor laws through legislation at the State Capitol six times since 2008.

A front group for out-of-state chain stores on Tuesday announced plans to pursue legislation or a ballot initiative that would change Colorado’s current law to allow the sale of beer, wine and liquor at an estimated 1,500 grocery and convenience stores.

“Expanding sales for chain stores would nearly double the number of outlets selling alcohol and is a direct threat to small businesses like mine that are located in existing shopping centers,” said Kim Schottleutner, owner of DTC Wine & Spirits in Greenwood Village, and president of the Colorado Licensed Beverage Association.

An economic study prepared the last time out-of-state chains pursued this idea determined such a change would force more than 700 local liquor stores to close within the first three years and result in the loss of 10,000 jobs and $240 million in revenue to local businesses in the first five years.

“Liquor law in Colorado encourages breweries to grow like nowhere else and have made us the envy of the rest of the country,” said John Carlson, Executive Director of the Colorado Brewers Guild. “Craft brewers are able to get their beer on the shelves of local liquor stores quickly and easily because they have the cooler space and the staff of local stores are their friends and neighbors who are invested in the community’s success. Colorado brewers enhance and grow the local economy.”

Members of KCL said they are prepared to defend Colorado’s culture and remain committed to protecting what’s been built in our state.

For additional information, visit: www.KeepCOLocal.com

BY THE NUMBERS

The current system is working for Colorado:

$1.9 billion: Annual economic impact of Colorado liquor stores

$1.15 billion: Annual economic impact of Colorado’s craft brewing industry

15,000: No. of Coloradans employed by locally owned liquor businesses

1600+: No. of local, independent liquor stores in Colorado.

310+: Number of craft breweries in Colorado, #3 per-capita in the U.S.

1st: Colorado’s national ranking for concentration of brewery jobs in total workforce and its rank among states for distilling industry growth

6: The number of times grocery and convenience stores have tried and failed to change Colorado’s liquor laws in the last eight years

How changing our liquor laws would hurt Colorado businesses:

$240 million: Lost revenue to the state of Colorado w/in five years

10,000: Job losses for Colorado’s existing liquor businesses w/in five years

700+: Number of independent liquor stores that would close if liquor sales were expanded to grocery and convenience stores

86: Cents out of of every dollar spent in chain stores that leave the community vs. less than 50 cents for every dollar spent in an independent business

Sources: Colorado Department of Revenue, Brewers Association, Colorado Brewers Guild, Colorado Licensed Beverage Association, Summit Economics, Colorado Distillers Guild and National Bureau of Labor Statistics.

###