In First Ad, Florida Democrats Hold Rick Scott Accountable for Record of Fraud
Orlando Sentinel Editorial: The Largest Medicare Fraud In History, Happened On Rick Scott’s Watch At Columbia/HCA. Orlando Sentinel Editorial: Rick Scott’s “insistence that he knew nothing about the largest Medicare fraud in history, which happened on his watch at Columbia/HCA, should make anyone think twice about his capacity to make government more accountable.” (Orlando Sentinel, Editorial, 08/08/10)

PolitiFact Florida: Rick Scott “Oversaw The Largest Medicare Fraud At The Time.” PolitiFact Florida rated the claim that Rick Scott “oversaw the largest Medicare fraud in the nation’s history,” as “Mostly True,” saying, “Scott oversaw the largest Medicare fraud at the time.” (Miami Herald/Tampa Bay Times, 03/03/14)

St. Petersburg Times Editorial: Rick Scott “Ran A Company That Was Fined A Record $1.7 Billion For Medicare And Medicaid Fraud.” St. Petersburg Times Editorial: “Rick Scott is a hospital executive who ran a company that was fined a record $1.7 billion for Medicare and Medicaid fraud.” (St. Petersburg Times, Editorial, 08/08/10)

U.S. Department of Justice: HCA Inc., Formerly Known As Columbia/HCA And HCA, Paid $1.7 Billion In Fines, Civil Penalties And Damages, “The Largest Recovery Ever Reached By The Government In A Health Care Fraud Investigation.” A 2003 Depart of Justice press release announced that “HCA Inc. (formerly known as Columbia/HCA and HCA - The Healthcare Company) has agreed to pay the United States $631 million in civil penalties and damages arising from false claims the government alleged it submitted to Medicare and other federal health programs,” marking “the conclusion of the most comprehensive health care fraud investigation ever undertaken by the Justice Department,” and resolving.” (U.S. Department of Justice, Press Release, 06/26/03)

In "A Series Of Sworn Depositions He Gave In Lawsuits Against His Former Hospital Company," Rick Scott Gave "Murky Testimony.” Rick Scott the candidate promises voters ‘the unvarnished truth.’ But Rick Scott the witness offers little but murky testimony. In a series of sworn depositions he gave in lawsuits against his former hospital company, Scott appears to be the polar opposite of the straight-talking Republican candidate for governor in his television ads.” (Miami Herald/St. Petersburg Times, 10/18/10)

In A Case “Filed By A Nevada Company, Scott Confirmed Only His Name Before Invoking 75 Times His Fifth Amendment…” In a case “filed by a Nevada company, Scott confirmed only his name before invoking 75 times his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.” (Miami Herald/St. Petersburg Times, 10/18/10)

Asked About A Question Related To His Company’s “Improper Billing Practices,” Rick Scott Invoked The Fifth. “In the 2000 deposition obtained by the Orlando Sentinel, when Scott is asked whether he is employed, his lawyer, Steven Steinbach, interjects to state that ‘unfortunately because of the pendency of a number of criminal investigations relating to Columbia around the country, he's going to follow my advice, out of prudence, assert his constitutional privilege against giving testimony against himself. ... that privilege is not an indication of any guilt.’ Scott is then asked a series of questions regarding the contract dispute between Columbia and Nevada Communications, and he invoked the Fifth Amendment's protection against self-incrimination on each. On Page 17 of the deposition, Scott is asked: ‘Do you have any knowledge tending to indicate that Columbia's claim against Florida Software is or was designed to cover up or obfuscate Columbia's improper billing practices?’ Again, Scott pleads the Fifth.” (Orlando Sentinel, 08/21/10)