The Florida Legislative Committee on Intergovernmental Relations (LCIR)
Attention The Florida Legislative Committee on Intergovernmental Relations (LCIR) was not funded in the FY 2010-11 General Appropriations Act, and the Committee ceased operations on June 30, 2010.

Several of the LCIR's annual reports (i.e., Local Government Financial Information Handbook, Salaries of Elected County Constitutional Officers and School District Officials, Review of Federal Funding to Florida, and Utilization of Local Option Taxes by Florida Counties) will be continued in the future by the Legislature's Office of Economic and Demographic Research (EDR).

The Legislative Committee on Intergovernmental Relations (LCIR) is a public entity that facilitates the development of intergovernmental policies and practices. Housed in the legislative branch of state government, LCIR is statutorily authorized to do the following: Serve as a forum for the discussion and study of intergovernmental problems. Evaluate the interrelationships among local, regional, state, interstate, and federal agencies in the provision of public services and prepare studies and recommendations to improve organizational structure, operational efficiency, allocation of functional responsibility, and the delivery of service. Analyze the structure, functions, revenue requirements and fiscal policies of the state and its political subdivisions. Examine proposed and existing federal and state programs. Review the research and recommendations of national commissions studying local government relationships and problems. Analyze the fiscal impact of new state programs or amendments to existing programs on municipalities and counties. When a study is completed, LCIR reports its findings and recommendations to the presiding officers of the Legislature and the Governor. Because the intergovernmental element is central to its purpose and functioning, the ultimate challenge facing the Committee is improving coordination and cooperation between state agencies, local governments, and the federal government.