PantherNet : How to Help
A fund was established by The Wildlife Foundation of Florida (WFF) to aid in the recovery of injured or orphaned Florida panthers as well as other panther conservation needs. The Florida Panther Fund is an important resource that will give the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC) flexibility to deal with rare, unplanned and non-budgeted events. The mission of the Wildlife Foundation of Florida, Inc., is to provide assistance, funding, and promotional support for the FWC, and in so doing, contribute to the health and well-being of Florida's fish and wildlife resources and their habitats. To make a donation you can visit their website at http://www.wildlifefoundationofflorida.com/panthers. Anyone can donate to this fund. Checks should be made payable to Wildlife Foundation of Florida and mailed to Post Office Box 11010, Tallahassee, FL 32302. Checks should be earmarked "Florida Panther Fund." All gifts are tax-deductible as allowed by law. The WFF is a not-for-profit organization [IRS 501(c)(3)], and is a State of Florida Tax Exempt organization.

Florida panther research is funded through the Florida Panther Research and Management Trust Fund. This fund receives its monies from your purchase of Florida panther specialty license plates. Eighty-five percent of the proceeds from the extra $25.00 collected annually go into this Trust Fund. However, to obtain the money, the FWC must submit a budget request each year to the Florida Legislature for approval. Caring for injured or orphaned panthers is not something that can be planned or budgeted for on an annual basis and that's why this fund created, by WFF, is so beneficial. The money goes directly to help panthers and can be used when needed. The costs associated with panther care varies from as little as $400 per month to care for 3 young kittens recently orphaned after the death of their mother, to as much as $3000 per month to repair the broken leg of Florida Panther 65. You can rest assured knowing that your donation to this fund will help save the Florida panther.