Your views: Letters to the editor (Feb. 1)
Readers express a variety of opinions in their letters to FLORIDA TODAY. Repeal, replace costly, intrusive health law A Jan. 21 letter stated I owe my constituents answers on which aspects of the health care law I’m against. Here are some: Before this law was passed, Americans were told they could keep their current health plans. After it became law, the administration issued regulations stating nearly half of Americans would lose their current plan. Americans were promised health care savings of $2,500 per family. Yet, the latest information shows this law is contributing to increased premium costs. Americans were promised this law would reduce spending. I said at the time that the bill’s budget gimmicks were underestimating the real cost by $500 billion. My estimate is a little low as costs continue to climb. Certainly, there’s something in the law for everyone to like, including me. But with a $14 trillion debt, saddling future generations with a new unsustainable expenditure is wrong. Rather than accept a costly and intrusive law that was drafted and passed using a closed process, we should repeal it and consider replacement legislation in a transparent and bipartisan manner. Hopefully, we can repeal this law and replace it with one that respects individual liberty and economic freedom. Anyone can access information on how I vote on major issues at www.posey.house.gov. U.S. Rep. Bill Posey R-Rockledge Haridopolos burger not for everyone I read the article in Sunday’s Florida section about the Tallahassee eatery that named a burger after State Sen. Mike Haridopolos, R-Merritt Island. The Haridopolos Metropolis has been plated and served. What the story didn’t tell was the makeup of this burger came with a health warning: Caution: This meal is not recommended for people on fixed incomes or government employees, teachers and others who have invested with the Florida Retirement System. This burger contains meat from a bull and is cut with some pork for a filler.

(Page 2 of 3)

After all, the Gorgonzola cheese will cover it all. Loren Rapport Cocoa Beach

Sarno site wrong for Daily Bread I attended last Tuesday’s Melbourne City Council meeting. Apparently, Mayor Harry Goode did not sign the code of civility advocated by other mayors across the nation. Hopefully, the city will elect someone who has the interest of the city as a whole at heart, not just historic Melbourne. Those of us in historic Eau Gallie deserve representation, too. This whole mess began because Goode did not want the Daily Bread soup kitchen near downtown Melbourne.

Detractors from the real problem should stop implying that people opposed to the Sarno site do not care about feeding homeless people. Why, if Daily Bread contributes to the welfare of people, do the mayor and his minions want them out downtown? Putting a soup kitchen in a residential area is not necessary when there are other options. Not all those who visit the facility are good people down on their luck. I have lived in my home since 1970, one year after the merger of Eau Gallie and Melbourne. Yet again, I watch as the Melbourne folk run roughshod over the people of Eau Gallie to get their way. Sandi Geronimo Melbourne Obama’s speech lacked needed leadership President Obama’s State of the Union message was uplifting with words such as “investment” and “competitiveness,” but it lacked what America needs, leadership. Most agree that if something is not done soon, the U.S. will not even be able to borrow to pay for its expenses. That is called financial insolvency. Many in both political parties have proposed general solutions aimed at getting our country’s financial house in order. However, nearly all such proposals are void of specific action to reduce expenses or raise revenue. Only the president represents all Americans. It naturally follows that the one elected by all the people would propose specific solutions. Such a path would be almost certain to result in significant popular and congressional resistance from those negatively impacted.