Former Internet café owner to take state's deal to drop gambling charges
PALM BAY — Doreen Marceau is due to appear in court today to accept the state's offer to drop felony gambling charges filed more than a year ago in connection with a sweepstakes promotion she ran at her Internet café, her lawyer said. The 67-year-old retiree will plead no contest to a misdemeanor count of not properly advertising her sweepstakes promotion according to state regulations and pay $1,000 toward investigation costs, attorney Adam Regar said. If the judge accepts her plea, it will end an 18-month case that began with a phone message from Mayor John Mazziotti to Palm Bay police, according to public records and audiotapes obtained by FLORIDA TODAY from the Brevard County State Attorney's Office. Records show Mazziotti made the call after a visit in September 2009 to the Internet café with John Cofhlin, who owned the city's only two adult video arcades at the time. Mazziotti denied any wrongdoing, but Det. Greg Guillette told Marceau and her husband he was investigating whether the mayor used his position to threaten or intimidate her or her husband for personal gain. "He can't use his position to strong-arm business owners," Guillette told her during a recorded December 2009 phone call. Guillette also told the couple to expect a call from the FBI to talk about "this situation we're talking about." What came of Guillette's inquiries about Mazziotti or what motivated them is unknown. Police Chief Doug Muldoon refused to talk to FLORIDA TODAY, referring all questions about Guillette's investigation of Marceau and his questions about Mazziotti to City Attorney Jim Stokes. He said no one could comment because of Marceau's pending court case. The FBI also would not comment, according to longstanding policy. "As you can appreciate, we cannot confirm or deny the existence of any possible ongoing investigation, particularly when it comes to public officials," special agent Michael Leverock of the Miami division said. Mazziotti said he knew of no FBI investigation, but the FBI said it doesn't usually tell the subject of an investigation.

(Page 2 of 4)

The mayor denied he received any compensation from Cofhlin, whose arcade pays out winnings in gift cards. "I've won gift cards," he said. "Nobody has given me a gift of any kind playing there." Mayor's message According to a hand-written phone message from Sept. 21, 2009, Mazziotti called then-Police Chief Bill Berger, then-Deputy Chief Muldoon and Maj. John Blackledge to ask them to look into Marceau's business, the Tropical Dolphin. "His complaint is that this business is offering cash prizes in the form of a sweepstakes benefiting Brevard County Veteran's Transition Center," the message said. The message said Mazziotti considered the cash prizes "as gambling and sees that it is unfair to force the local arcades to follow the no-cash prize and not this business." On Sept. 21, a city secretary sent Mazziotti an e-mail telling him she'd gotten a call from Marceau asking why Mazziotti was at her business earlier that day and inviting him back "so she can explain how it operates." City records show Mazziotti forwarded the e-mail to City Manager Lee Feldman and Stokes on Sept. 22. That was the same day Guillette said in his investigative report that he'd been "assigned to investigate a possible illegal gambling operation located at the Tropical Dolphin Internet Café. The complainant alleged that Tropical Dolphin Internet Café was illegally paying customers in cash prizes." Undercover Guillette and another officer began an undercover operation immediately. Records show their three-month investigation cost the city $8,900. They visited Tropical Dolphin as paying customers, using the computers to go on the Internet and play the sweepstakes games. Typically, a customer pays for Internet time and gets a number of chances to win the sweepstakes. They play video games that reveal whether they won a cash prize. The probable cause affidavit describes one visit where an undercover agent noted about 21 desktop computer stations on tables along the walls, with several slot machine-style video games installed on each computer.

(Page 3 of 4)

Guillette said in his report he gave his agent $20 to play. The agent walked in and was greeted by a woman he identified as Marceau.She showed him how the games worked, and signed up for an hour of Internet time, played the sweepstakes games and won $15 after an hour. Marceau paid out the money and the officer entered it as evidence, the report said. Gambling expert Deputy State Attorney Holmes recommended hiring a court-approved gaming expert, who visited the Internet café undercover and determined they were "games of chance." The expert said each computer could be classified as a gambling device, which is illegal under Florida law. The machines at Pirate's Gold and other arcades differ in that they have a button that allows the player to stop the spinners, qualifying the machines as "games of skill." Also, arcades hand out credit card and retail store gift cards -- not cash. A Brevard County judge signed a search warrant Dec. 16, 2009, and Guillette froze about $1,500 in two of Marceau's accounts, seized her computers and other equipment as evidence and shuttered the business. When Guillette served the warrant on Marceau, she said she was operating a legal business and had a city license, met local zoning requirements and complied with state regulations to offer the sweepstakes-style games on computers. Guillette said it was illegal because she was handing out cash prizes and the games were downloaded from another state. "I truly believe that you think it's legal," Guillette told her in a taped conversation. "I know you're a law-abiding citizen and a good person, that's why I'm not taking you to jail." Reason for visit Four days later, on Dec. 21, Guillette called to talk to Marceau's husband, Septimus Silas, about the "situation you encountered involving John Cofhlin and the mayor . . . I wouldn't say threaten is the right word, but he kind of confronted you?" In the recorded conversation, Silas told Guillette that Mazziotti, Cofhlin and a third man were waiting when he showed up at the café and followed him inside when he opened the door to the business.