Scientists: Common antimicrobial chemicals can harm people, environment
CLOSE Scientists are warning that certain toiletries contain chemicals that could prevent antibiotics from helping you when your sick. Video by Jessica Saggio Wochit

Buy Photo Triclosan is a chemical that is found in many cosmetic products, deodorants, body washes and toothpastes that scientists are voicing their concerns over. (Photo: MALCOLM DENEMARK/FLORIDA TODAY)Buy Photo

A nonprofit group, along with more than 200 scientists and medical professionals, on Tuesday warned that the health risks of antibacterial toothpaste, mud masks and thousands of other consumer products outweigh the hygiene benefits.

They called for tougher limits on triclosan, triclocarban and other antimicrobial chemicals added to consumer products, citing health and environmental risks and ineffectiveness.

"We're essentially allowing this to be flushed down the drain and into the waterways," said David Andrews, a senior scientist with the nonprofit Environmental Working Group. "It does have detrimental impacts on reproductive development."

In a statement published in the peer-reviewed journal Environmental Health Perspectives, the 200 scientists, doctors, nurses, government officials and others from 30 nations urged consumers to avoid antimicrobial chemicals and for government to tighten rules on the substances.

Triclosan and triclocarban are a source of toxic and carcinogenic compounds including dioxins and chloroform. Their transformation products and byproducts build up in aquatic plants and animals, the scientists say in their statement, adding that triclosan partitions into human blood and breast milk.

People get exposed to triclosan and triclocarban via direct contact with personal care products and from food, drinking water and dust.

Triclosan is still added to some acne products, shampoos, mud masks, lotions and, specifically, Colgate Total toothpaste.

Antimicrobial chemicals also are commonplace in paints, flooring, countertops, kitchenware, school supplies, electronics, exercise mats, apparel, food storage containers and home textiles.

The chemicals build up in the body and are long-lasting in the environment. Research links the compounds to hormone disruption and shows that plain soap and water are just as effective at killing bacteria.

Indiscriminate, widespread use of antimicrobial chemicals contributes to the rise of "superbugs," strains of bacteria that have developed resistance to the substances.

Buy Photo Triclosan is a chemical that is found in many cosmetic products, deodorants, body washes and toothpastes that scientists are voicing their concerns over. (Photo: MALCOLM DENEMARK/FLORIDA TODAY)

More: Brevard receives $1.3 million in lagoon grants

More: Take a virtual airboat tour on the St. Johns River

Last year, the Food and Drug Administration banned triclosan, triclocarban and 16 other antimicrobials in consumer soaps. But many brands switched to different additives. Now scientists point to studies that show some of those are no safer.

The FDA is reviewing the safety of antibacterial chemicals known as quats, including benzalkonium chloride, also used in some hand sanitizers.

“I was happy the FDA finally acted to remove these chemicals from soaps. But I was dismayed to discover at my local drugstore that most products now contain substitutes that may be worse,” Arlene Blum, Ph.D., executive director of the Green Science Policy Institute in Berkeley, California, said in a prepared statement. Blum was a co-author of the statement the 200 scientists signed.

In 1997, an FDA review of Colgate Total found that triclosan in that product was effective in preventing gingivitis. But for other products, such as over-the-counter antibacterial soaps and body washes, the agency has found that the chemical provides no benefit over washing with regular soap and water.

Tuesday's statement also calls for labeling of all products that contain triclosan, triclocarban and other antimicrobials, even on products that make no health claims.

In 2005, researchers at FAU-Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute found traces of triclosan in the blood plasma of 1 in 4 bottlenose dolphins they sampled in the Indian River Lagoon and 1 in 3 dolphins they sampled in Charleston, South Carolina.

At the time, the scientists speculated the triclosan was coming from sewage leaks, spills, sludge and septic tanks.

Buy Photo Triclosan is a chemical that is found in many cosmetic products, deodorants, body washes and toothpastes that scientists are voicing their concerns over. (Photo: MALCOLM DENEMARK/FLORIDA TODAY)

More: Sewage leak's potential impact on lagoon: 1.3M gallons

More: 5-year review outlines Indian River Lagoon projects

In 2008, the Environmental Working Group found triclosan and 15 other toxic chemicals in the blood and urine of 20 teen girls from eight states and the District of Columbia. In another report that year, EWG scoured industry documents and government databases to assemble a list of all the products for which triclosan was approved for use.

Research has found high levels of triclosan in sewage sludge applied to land.

A 2008 study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found three-quarters of people tested in the United States have triclosan in their urine. The concentrations of triclosan were highest during the third decade of life and among those with the highest household incomes.

Andrews, of EWG, said use of triclosan and other antimicrobial chemicals should be limited to those medically prescribed.

"We think there's significant evidence of concern, that this should be avoided," Andrews said. "We don't think replacements need to be used at all."

Contact Waymer at 321-242-3663 or jwaymer@floridatoday.com Follow him on Twitter@JWayEnviro and at facebook.com/jim.waymer

Buy Photo Triclosan is a chemical that is found in many cosmetic products, deodorants, body washes and toothpastes that scientists are voicing their concerns over. (Photo: MALCOLM DENEMARK/FLORIDA TODAY)

EWG's Guide to Triclosan includes tips for avoiding the chemical. The group maintains a database on its website at http://www.ewg.org that identifies products that contain triclosan.

More than 200 scientists, medical professionals and others signed the so-called Florence Statement, which recommends the following:

Avoid the use of triclosan, triclocarban and other antimicrobial chemicals, except where they provide an evidence-based health benefit (e.g., physician-prescribed toothpaste for treating gum disease), and there is adequate evidence demonstrating they are safe.

Where antimicrobials are necessary, use safer alternatives that are not persistent and pose no risk to humans or ecosystems.

Label all products containing triclosan, triclocarban and other antimicrobials, even in cases where no health claims are made.

Evaluate the safety of antimicrobials and their transformation products throughout the entire product life cycle, including manufacture, long-term use, disposal and environmental release.

Source: Environmental Working Group

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/2sPGRb6