Senate race to pit House members Workman vs. Mayfield
CLOSE

Buy Photo Florida Rep. Ritch Workman, R-Melbourne, plans to run for a Florida Senate seat now held by Thad Altman. (Photo: FLORIDA TODAY file photo)Buy Photo Story Highlights Reps. Debbie Mayfield and Ritch Workman to run for the Senate District 16 seat held by Thad Altman

All three Florida legislators have served in their current offices eight years, and face term limits

Altman plans to run for Workman's District 52 Florida House seat in 2016

There currently are no Democrats signed up to run for those seats

Two Republican state representatives will be running against one another this year for a Florida Senate seat in a district that includes central and south Brevard County.

Reps. Debbie Mayfield of Vero Beach and Ritch Workman of Melbourne have filed to run for the Senate District 16 seat now held by Thad Altman, R-Rockledge.

That seat originally was scheduled to be contested in 2018. But, because of the redistricting of Florida Senate seats and a related court challenge, all Senate seats will be on the ballot this year.

Mayfield and Workman both are in their eighth year in the Florida House, and cannot seek re-election to their current positions because of term limits.

Altman is in his eighth year in the Senate, and cannot seek re-election there because of term limits. He plans to run for Workman's District 52 Florida House seat in 2016, where there are three other Republican candidates: Brian Hodgers, Monique Miller and Robert VanVolkenburgh.

The current Senate District 16 includes central and south Brevard County, as well as north and west Indian River County. Under the redistricting plan approved by Leon County-based Circuit Court Judge George Reynolds, District 16 will include a slightly smaller area of central and south Brevard County, and all of Indian River County.

Buy Photo Florida Rep. Debbie Mayfield, R-Vero Beach, plans to run for a Florida Senate seat now held by Thad Altman. (Photo: FLORIDA TODAY file photo)

Officially, both Mayfield and Workman are still listed by the Florida Division of Elections as 2018 candidates for the seat. But that is expected to change to 2016, when the redistricting plan officially takes effect.

Workman first filed to run for the Senate seat in July 2014, while Mayfield filed in November 2015.

"I welcome her to the race," Workman said, while adding that "it's obviously disappointing to run against a friend."

"I intend to run a positive campaign, and I hope that she will do the same," Workman said Monday.

Mayfield said, "My goal is to run a positive campaign. Hopefully, that will be what he does."

"I'm not running against anyone," Mayfield said. "I'm running for an open seat. There just happens to be two Republicans running for the seat. I have the highest regard for him. It should be the voters' choice. This is all about taking care of your constituents. I'm looking forward to the race."

Mayfield said she wanted to run for the Senate seat to continue the work she has started in the House, as well as to push for legislation to make to commissioner of education position an elected office as a member of the Florida Cabinet.

Mayfield's Florida House District 54 includes all of Indian River County and part of northern St. Lucie County. At one time, her district also includes part of southern Brevard County. Mayfield's official residence is Vero Beach, but she also has a residence in Rockledge.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 877-424-0156. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Workman's Florida House District 52 includes central Brevard County.

There currently are no Democrats signed up to run for the Senate District 16 or House District 52 seats.

The GOP primary between Mayfield and Workman would be Aug. 30.

"This is going to be a very fast and furious race," said Mayfield, noting that she and Workman are banned from campaign fundraising during the two-month session of the Florida Legislature that begins Jan. 12.

League of Women Voters of Florida President Pamela Goodman said the only thing that would hold up the new Florida Senate districts from taking effect is a potential legal challenge by the Florida Senate leadership to the boundaries approved by Reynolds. That challenge would go to the Florida Supreme Court.

The map of the 40 Senate districts that Reynolds approved on Dec. 30 was one proposed by the League of Women Voters and Common Cause Florida, rather than a redistricting plan proposed by the Senate itself. Reynolds indicated in his ruling that the Senate plan unfairly favored the Republican Party, which holds a 26-14 advantage in the Senate.

On Tuesday, a lottery-like process in scheduled to renumber the Florida Senate districts. Senate districts generally have four-year terms. But during this redistricting election cycle, half the districts will be assigned two-year terms for the 2016 election.

Contact Berman at 321-242-3649 or dberman@floridatoday.com. Follow him on Twitter @ByDaveBerman and on Facebook at facebook.com/dave.berman.54

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1R7QaIM