Floridians for Solar Choice
Florida Supreme Court Narrowly Approves Utility-Backed Solar Amendment, Fiercely Opposed by Grassroots Coalition

Floridians for Solar Choice Warn Voters of “Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing”

For Immediate Release

March 31, 2015

Contact: Floridians for Solar Choice, 754-307-7451, jennifer@flsolarchoice.org

Tallahassee, Fla. – Today, the Florida Supreme Court approved placement on the November 2016 ballot for the utility-backed “sham solar” petition sponsored by Consumers for Smart Solar, despite strong opposition from a number of organizations, newspaper editorial boards, and Floridians. The opposition argued that the utility-backed petition is misleading to voters by maintaining the status quo and falsely stating that it creates new “rights” and offering “choice” for solar power – when no such choice or new rights exist. The utility-bankrolled petition was launched in July to derail the citizen-led solar initiative sponsored by Floridians for Solar Choice. The Solar Choice initiative – a diverse, grassroots coalition of over 70 organizations – aims to open up the solar market in Florida through the development of good solar policy.

The Consumers for Smart solar petition was opposed at the Florida Supreme Court by Floridians for Solar Choice, Florida Solar Energy Industries Association, Florida Energy Freedom, Progress Florida, Environmental Confederation of Southwest Florida, and Earthjustice.

Tory Perfetti, Chairman of Floridians for Solar Choice, issued this statement: “We are disappointed that the court let through an amendment that was clearly designed to enshrine the status quo in this state. The Consumers for Smart Solar amendment is more of the same and continues the pattern of doing nothing to help Florida move into the 21st century regarding how we create, distribute, and use energy.”

The coalition of Floridians for Solar Choice will continue to oppose the utilities’ misleading sham petition.

“It is shameful that the utilities would go so far, and spend millions to manipulate and deceive their own customers,” said Dr. Stephen Smith, Executive Director of Southern Alliance for Clean Energy. “We will absolutely continue to shine a light on their dirty tricks and hope that the voters of Florida will see their ballot initiative for what is it: a wolf in sheep’s clothing, a sham designed to keep more money in the power companies pockets.”

####

Floridians for Solar Choice supports the freedom to develop solar power in the Sunshine State and is bringing people together to take solar power choice to the ballot. Learn more at www.flsolarchoice.org