Focus on the Family President Jim Daly Reacts to Exodus’ Decision to Shut Down
Colorado Springs, Colo. – Focus on the Family President Jim Daly issued the following statement today in response to the decision by Exodus International to end its three-plus-decades-long outreach.

"Over the years Focus has enjoyed working with Exodus’ leadership, including its current president, Alan Chambers. The dedicated team at Exodus has been used by the Lord to educate, inspire and encourage countless people.

"Exodus’ closing is being hailed by some as a victory and indication that Christians are abandoning long-held convictions that living with God’s design for sexuality is possible through the power of Jesus Christ - that change is possible.

"The reality is that while Exodus will no longer exist, there are numerous Christian ministries that continue to provide excellent help to those struggling with unwanted same-sex attraction, including the Restored Hope Network and Desert Stream Ministries.

"We understand God’s original intent was for marriage to be a lifelong union between a man and a woman, with children as a natural result. But we also realize that all of us sin in many ways.

"We believe there is hope for those who struggle sexually. Be it a struggle with lust, adultery, pornography addiction, pre-marital sex, same-sex attractions or issues related to identity – there is hope. The hope of a Christian is that our behavior becomes more in line with God and God’s will. He wants us to drink from His full cup of grace and truth – because it’s through Him we can overcome lifelong struggles with sin."

"God’s help usually doesn’t come as a ‘fast fix.’ It’s often a long process. Many times it takes counseling, Bible study, prayer and community support – but it can be done. Here at Focus we’ve seen marriages reconciled. We’ve seen people who struggle with unwanted same-sex attraction change. We’ve seen people experience real transformation in their thoughts, behaviors, attractions and identity. We’ve seen people find true happiness in stewarding their sexuality according to God’s plan, even when that means sacrifice.

"In the end, we know this is true: no matter what our struggle may be, God forgives us when we repent, and He is faithful to empower us to live according to His design."

To coordinate a media interview, contact Nina Coppola at 719-531-3386 or by email at Nina.Coppola@fotf.org.