Food Systems NYC – Get The Latest Food News
India has so many things to offer such as beautiful sights, delicious food, interesting cultures, etc. This is why it has become one of the most favorite destinations of tourists from different parts of the world. Before you can plan your dream vacation to India though, you need to take care of several things first. India is a big country so you need to plan your itinerary well. Of course, you also need to get a plane ticket and book a hotel. One of the most important things you need to though is get an Indian Visa. You will not be able to enter India without a Visa.

Electronic Visa

Good news for all those who are planning to go to India. You don’t need to go to the Indian embassy or meet with an Indian consul officer to get an Indian Visa. In fact, you don’t need to go anywhere. You can apply for an electronic Visa or eVisa in the comforts of your home. The scheme was implemented to streamline the Visa application process with goal of making it easy for foreigners to visit India. Currently, citizens from more than 160 countries can apply for different types of eVisas online. You can visit the official Indian eVisa website to check if your country is included.

The Application Process

It is very easy to apply for an Indian eVisa. The whole process is composed of just three simple steps.

1. First, you need to complete the online application. You need to apply for an eVisa at least four days before your scheduled trip. After filling out the form online and paying the corresponding fee, your application will be reviewed by the Ministry of Interior Affairs. Processing of the eVisa can take from 1 to 4 business days.

2. Check your email. When you get approved, you will receive your eVisa through email as a PDF file. Print the document and keep it in a safe place. It is always wise to keep an extra copy of your eVisa.

3. When you arrive in India, you will be asked by the immigration office to present your eVisa. Show it the officer and wait for him/her to approve of your entry.

Requirements

Before you apply for an Indian Visa, you need to make sure that you meet the requirements. First of all, you need to have a valid passport. Your passport needs to be valid for at least six months from the date of your arrival to India. It also needs to have at least two blank pages so it can be stamped by the Indian immigration officer. You also need to have a return ticket or a ticket to your onward destination. You also need to be able to show that you will have money to support yourself for the duration of your stay in India. You can also submit proof of booking or reservation to a hotel.

That’s it. You are ready to go to India and enjoy the spectacular sights and delicious food.