Sununu hits Trump tariffs during chamber event
ROCHESTER — Gov. Chris Sununu strongly criticized President Donald Trump’s metal tariffs and family separation policy during a State of the State address in Rochester on Tuesday. He also voiced support for border checkpoints happening in New Hampshire and Maine, which have drawn criticism from some.

Sununu used the words “terrible” and “absolutely disastrous” to describe the steel and aluminum tariffs while responding to audience questions at the breakfast forum at The Governor’s Inn. Sununu said he hopes the Trump administration has a better long-term plan and negotiating strategy to crack down on Chinese market manipulation because he said including Canada and Mexico in the penalties is already hurting Granite State businesses.

According to Sununu, communications manufacturer TE Subcom, based in Newington, will reportedly see a $12 million to $15 million increase in costs in the next few months due to the tariffs, while local craft breweries are having difficulty in obtaining cans. Sununu also made reference Tuesday to the Harley-Davidson announcement Monday it would move some motorcycle production overseas to avoid paying retaliatory tariffs imposed by the European Union.

“It’s having a real detrimental effect. It’s huge,” Sununu said of Trump’s tariffs, adding he and the rest of the country’s governors have written letters to Trump urging him to reconsider. “I don’t know of any business that’s not feeling the impact of that.”

Sununu said he still supports Trump “very much,” even though he said the tariffs and family separation policy run counter to his personal views. Last week, Trump signed an executive order that halted the policy of separating and detaining children from parents attempting to enter the country at the Mexican border without proper documentation and authorization.

Trump’s administration began enforcing the policy in April, The Associated Press has reported. Sununu had refused to send the New Hampshire National Guard to Texas to help with enforcement of the policy due to his objection to separations.

When an attendee asked Sununu Tuesday if he would also pressure the government to stop conducting checkpoints in New Hampshire and Maine, though, Sununu said he wouldn’t because he said he can’t pressure groups like U.S. Customs and Border Protection and Immigration and Customs Enforcement “to do anything.”

Various groups have claimed the checkpoints, during which agents have asked motorists about their citizenship status and birthplace, violate individuals’ civil liberties. Sununu said he believes the checkpoints have been beneficial because they have led to “numerous arrests” that have aided the region’s ongoing fight against the opioid crisis.

“Every time they’ve done those border patrols, they’ve taken out people who have trafficked drugs,” said Sununu. “That’s the federal government’s role. They’re doing their job.”

Later in the forum, the attendee who asked Sununu to pressure the government and half a dozen other individuals stood up, signs in hand, to protest Sununu and Trump’s stance on immigration. They held signs for several moments before others in the audience asked them to leave.

Sununu also touched on numerous other topics during the event, which was jointly hosted by the Rochester, Dover and Somersworth chambers of commerce. He decried the “extremism” that has crept into both the Democratic and Republican parties on the national stage, in addition to speaking at length about various Granite State successes and challenges.

Sununu said his big priorities include continuing his focus on aiding businesses, cutting regulations and investing in schools and housing to attract and support students and young families. He said the state must also overhaul and consolidate its websites to make government as user-friendly and accessible as it can be.

According to Sununu, doing all of this will promote and leverage the “New Hampshire advantage,” as well as provide equal opportunity to local residents and better position the state for what experts are expecting to be an economic slowdown or recession in 2020.

“The government is not here to guarantee you much … but opportunity,” he said. “My job is to make sure every opportunity, every door possible is open to you, your families, your businesses. What you do with that opportunity is up to you.”

On education, Sununu said it’s time to redesign the system into one that looks more at five to 20 years down the road. Sununu said he feels the system is currently focused too much on the current biennium and the institution, rather than the individual and providing an early childhood education that will help New Hampshire on a variety of fronts.

“Now is the time to push ourselves to do things differently,” he said.

On mental health, Sununu said the state is on the right path but more can be done. A 2013 class action lawsuit against the state led to a $30 million expansion in services and the creation of a new comprehensive statewide plan. While praising the suit, Sununu said New Hampshire needs to make sure helping its residents remains a priority in years to come.

“We should’ve been sued,” he said. “They were absolutely right in suing us. This state had fallen on its face in addressing mental health issues.”