Karen Handel's home target of suspicious package
- The discovery of several suspicious envelopes with a threatening letter and a "white powdery substance" shut down the neighborhood where Karen Handel lives Thursday afternoon and continued with an FBI investigation into the night.

App users: view full article here

RELATED: Suspicious package delivered to FOX 5 Atlanta

Police said a total of five homes in the Willow Springs neighborhood off Roxburgh Drive received those envelopes, with the first letter discovered around 1:30 p.m. One neighbor, firefighters said, opened the envelope and was ordered to remain "sheltered in place" at her home throughout the entire evening. Police said the woman was checked out by medical crews and determined to be okay.

The FBI was called to the scene, and federal investigators brought out numerous vehicles to properly investigate and assess the possible threat.

Karen Handel confirmed her home received one of the envelopes and released the following statement to FOX 5:

"This afternoon we had some suspicious packages delivered to our house and to our neighbors. The packages contained threatening letters and a suspicious substance. The police were quickly notified and street is now being blocked off. We will continue to coordinate with law enforcement as necessary.”

Related VideoView Larger

Neighbors who received the envelopes in their mailbox told FOX 5 off-camera, the letters were postmarked from "Greenville, SC." A suspicious package sent to FOX 5 Atlanta had the same postage as the packages sent to Handel's home and neighborhood, according to investigators. Later in the day, the FBI said another similar package was found at the WXIA-TV studios.

The white substance found at FOX 5 Atlanta was determined to be baking soda, authorities said.

RELATED: Threatening letter, powder delivered to FOX 5 Atlanta studios

Republican Handel faces Democrat Jon Offsoff in a runoff for the 6th Congressional Seat in Georgia on June 20.

Jon Ossoff released the following statement in response to recent threats of violence against his campaign:

“Our campaign has received a number of threats, some of which have intensified in recent days, and we have reported them to local police as well as taken prudent precautions. These recent events speak to the need for a redoubled commitment to civility and unity. The overwhelming majority of Americans want decent and civil political dialogue, and candidates for office and elected leaders must continue to call for calm and unity, even when there are intense differences of opinion.”

Specific incidents of threats to the Ossoff campaign have not been reported to FOX 5.