Which states drink the most (and least) beer?
Think you’re the only one who likes to crack open a cold one every day? Think again.

More than 99 million Americans regularly drink beer and last year drinking-aged Americans consumed an average of one beer per day, making beer America’s top choice drink over wine and hard liquor.

According to an annual survey conducted by the Beer Institute, a national trade association representing America’s brewers, importers and suppliers, beer consumption is about as American as apple pie.

But which state takes on the most share of our national beer intake? The Beer Institute is able to answer that question with its state-by-state beer consumption data. The annual survey calculates the amount of beer sold in each state and divides it by the number of citizens old enough to drink legally. The results reveal the country’s most beer-loving states.



According to Joe McClain, president of the Beer Institute, America’s love affair with beer means more than just the taste of a cold brew. In a way, the hoppy beverage is part of the country’s economic life blood. The U.S. brewing and beer importing business puts more than two million Americans to work, from barley farmers to shopkeepers and truck drivers.

“From hops producers to can and bottle makers in communities across the country, beer is an economic engine that contributes more than $246 billion to the U.S. economy,” said McClain in a release.



Of course, let’s not forget the country’s rising demand for craft beer. According to the Brewers Association, an industry group that represents more than 1,000 craft breweries, craft brewers sold more than 13.2 million barrels of beer last year. That’s up about 15 percent from 2011. So it’s not just the industry giants that are driving the country’s beer economy.

Although, you should keep in mind that this state-ranked data is from the Beer Institute, which represents companies that brew and import beer. It is not from the Brewers Association, which represents craft breweries. Therefore, beer consumption from smaller craft breweries may be slightly underrepresented in this data.

Nonetheless, it’s time to kick back with a brewsky and check out the Beer Institute’s list of the states with the highest and lowest beer consumption.