Reince Priebus and Sen. Claire McCaskill discuss Clinton's potential candidacy; More changes ahead for the VA?
Written by Chris Wallace / Published June 01, 2014 / Fox News Sunday

Special Guests: Rep. Jeff Miller, Dr. Sam Foote, Reince Priebus, Sen. Claire McCaskill

This is a rush transcript from "Fox News Sunday," June 1, 2014. This copy may not be in its final form and may be updated.

CHRIS WALLACE, HOST: I'm Chris Wallace.

Hillary Clinton launches her new book and a possible campaign for president.

(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)

HILLARY CLINTON, FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE: People want a good job. They want a decent living for themselves and their families. They want to live in peace and security.

WALLACE: Focusing on her years as secretary of state, Clinton talks about President Obama, the Benghazi scandal and hints at her political future.

We'll discuss all of it with Republican National Committee chair Reince Priebus and Senator Claire McCaskill who's already endorsed Clinton for 2016.

Then, embattled Veterans Affairs Secretary Eric Shinseki steps down.

PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: He does not want to be a distraction because his priority is to fix the problem and make sure our vets are getting the care that they need.

WALLACE: We'll discuss the fallout and where the V.A. goes from here with Congressman Jeff Miller, chair of the House Committee on Veterans Affairs.

As well as the whistle-blower who exposed the scandal at the Phoenix V.A., Dr. Sam Foote.

Plus, President Obama announces plans to pull all U.S. troops from Afghanistan by the end of 2016. Our Sunday panel weighs in on this latest timetable.

And our power player of the week -- FOX News' Bret Baier on his son's amazing story of survival.

All, right now, on “Fox News Sunday.“

(END VIDEOTAPE)

WALLACE: And hello again from Fox News in Washington.

We'll get to Hillary Clinton's new book and what it means for 2016 in a moment. But first, some breaking news.

The lone American POW of the Afghanistan conflict is now in Germany after almost five years in captivity. The Taliban turned over Army Sergeant Bowe Bergdahl in exchange for five high level Afghan detainees being held at Guantanamo Bay.

For the latest on the prisoners swap, let's bring in Fox News national security correspondent Jennifer Griffin -- Jennifer.

JENNIFER GRIFFIN, FOX NEWS NATIONAL SECURITY CORRESPONDENT: Chris, right now, Sergeant Bergdahl is being seen by a team of military medical specialists in Landstuhl, Germany. He has not yet spoken to his parents. Intelligence specialists are trying to glean whatever they can about his time with the Taliban.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

OBAMA: He wasn't forgotten by his country because the United States of America does not ever leave our men and women in uniform behind.

CHUCK HAGEL, DEFENSE SECRETARY: Only very, very few people knew about this operation. We did not want to jeopardize any leaks.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

GRIFFIN: Bergdahl broke down crying when he was finally onboard the U.S. helicopter being flown to safety. Several dozen U.S. Navy SEALs met 18 armed Taliban on the boarder with Pakistan to receive Bergdahl who walked off his space inexplicably on June 30th, 2009.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

SGT. BERGDAHL'S PARENTS: I just want to say thank you to everyone who has supported Bowe.

I'd like to say Bowe right now who is having trouble speaking English, (SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE), I'm your father, Bowe.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

GRIFFIN: Bowe's father spoke in Pashtu, the language of the Taliban.

The U.S. released five Taliban leaders from Guantanamo Bay including a deputy intelligence and defense chief. They were flown to Qatar.

Senior Republican leaders on the Armed Service Committee has criticized the president for not notifying them of the release as is required by the law. Quote, "America has maintained a prohibition on negotiating with terrorists for a good reason", write Congressman Buck McKeon and Senator James Inhofe, trading five senior Taliban leaders from detention in Guantanamo Bay for Bergdahl's release may have consequences for the reset of our forces and all Americans.

Defense Secretary Hagel would not answer reporters if Bergdahl would be punished by the Army for leaving his base without permission, endangering himself and so many others -- Chris.

WALLACE: Jennifer, thank you. And we'll have more on this with the panel.

Well, Hillary Clinton is months away from announcing whether she'll run for president. But with a rollout this week of parts of her new book "Hard Choices", including the leak of her chapter on Benghazi, it feels as if we've now begun the 2016 campaign.

We'll talk with a key Clinton supporter in a few minutes, but first, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, Reince Priebus.

And, Chairman, welcome back to “Fox News Sunday.“

REINCE PRIEBUS, RNC CHAIRMAN: Good morning, Chris.

WALLACE: In the Benghazi chapter of her book, Senator Clinton says that you and other Republicans are exploiting this tragedy. She writes this, "I will not be part of a political slugfest on the backs of dead Americans. It's just plane wrong and it's unworthy of our great country. Those who insist on politicizing the tragedy will have to do so without me."

Chairman Priebus, do you think that Clinton is trying to cut off discussion of Benghazi? And do you think she's trying to get out of testifying before the new House Select Committee?

PRIEBUS: Well, I wouldn't doubt that. But, you know, Hillary has been playing politics with this issue from the very beginning. Now she's launching a political defense, an organized political defense. I mean, how did this chapter get leaked to the newspaper?

It got leaked because their people are trying to preempt or stop any more criticism that she's been receiving on Benghazi. But she's from the beginning -- the secretary of state should have known that this was al Qaeda the entire time.

And now, she's claiming somehow that this is a political attack? She was -- she played a part in the White House's cover-up of what this is all about in Benghazi. It was a terrorist attack. Our heroes and diplomats have died and were murdered. And she continues to play politics.

Hillary Clinton is politics 24/7. And this is no different. This is not going to end. We're going to continue to pursue this and she needs to answer the tough questions as to what happened and why it is --

WALLACE: Let me ask you about that. You say that there are tough questions. She says there is nothing new to learn.

She writes this in the chapter, "There is a difference between unanswered questions and unlistened to answers."

Let's put it out there. What questions do you have for Clinton about Benghazi, what is it she gets wrong in this chapter?

PRIEBUS: Well, first of all, I don't understand how from the very beginning, the CIA and our intelligence said immediately that this was al Qaeda. Yet in, the book, she continues to use this line of logic that because there is no evidence that the video didn't play a role, therefore, the evidence is that it could have played a role. If you look at what it has been put on paper and what the reports have now said without question that al Qaeda was involved.

How is it that she could be the secretary of state in the greatest nation on the face of the earth, best intelligence on the face of the earth, yet, she continues to perpetrate this political answer, number one, to make sure that Barack Obama got himself reelected. But number two, to save her own hide by perpetrating this lie.

Here's another question. Why was it that Hillary Clinton was not the person on television that Sunday morning? How was that Susan Rice was chosen?

In December of 2012, Susan Rice said the reason Hillary Clinton didn't show up on television that morning was that she had a grueling week and was tired. Now, one of two things are true. Either Susan Rice is telling the truth and Hillary Clinton was tired and failed to report for duty and therefore I don't know how she can be president of the United States. Or second, Susan Rice is lying and, in fact, Hillary Clinton wasn't tired and that's not the reason she didn't report for duty.

The fact is Hillary Clinton has to answer these questions, number one. And number two, if she's even thinking about running for president, I think that she has been disqualified because of her actions here.

WALLACE: In the Benghazi chapter, Clinton says she never saw these demands, these requests from Ambassador Chris Stevens who was killed in the Benghazi attack for more security. In the book, she writes this, "That's not how it works," talking about seeing cables that would get to her level. "That's not how it works. It shouldn't and it didn't."

Do you see parallels between Clinton and Secretary Shinseki who says he wasn't getting the information from lower level people?

PRIEBUS: Well, I mean, I think that's a good point. I also think that brings us balk to Barack Obama. I mean, here is the president that in 2005 when he was senator, he said he was going to fix this issue in regard to the V.A. Getting to your question though, Barack Obama also said you recall in 2008 that no detail, no issue is too small for him to tackle.

Yet, now, he comes on television two days ago and says, hey, listen, the secretary of the V.A. couldn't possibly know the details underneath because it's unfortunate he wasn't getting the information. Hillary Clinton is saying the same thing. Well, it's too much minutia for me to understand what's going on.

You're the secretary of state. Now, you're launching a political response and saying that you don't want to play politics.

I don't think she's any different than Barack Obama. I think they're one in the same. I think her career over a long period of time is insignificant and accomplishment. I think we're going to keep talking about that. WALLACE: Let me ask you about that, because Clinton's four years as secretary of state are obviously going to be the top item on her resume if she runs for president. How do you think she did as secretary of state?

PRIEBUS: I think she gets an "F" as be secretary of state. I mean, whether it'd be Boko Haram, Russian reset, Iran sanctions that they fought the whole time and now claim credit for, and now, obviously, Benghazi.

Go to her Senate seat. What is there? I don't know.

Her days as first lady, granted some turbulent times. But, you know, what does she have there? She had HillaryCare.

WALLACE: OK. Let me ask you this. You said recently that you doubt that Clinton will run for president. But this book launch has all the markings of the beginning of a rollout of her presidential campaign. There is a new poll out this week, let me put it on the screen, new "Washington Post" poll. Fifty-five percent say they would support Clinton as a candidate for president.

Honestly, chairman, aren't you trying to rough up Hillary Clinton precisely because she is such a formidable candidate?

PRIEBUS: I don't think it's a matter of roughing up because she's a candidate. I think if her people want to play this parlor game of acting like she wants to run for president, then they're going to get the scrutiny for playing that game.

I actually doubt -- I don't know whether she's going to run. I doubt if she continues to have the trouble she's having with -- if she is going to run.

But I also know that publishers of books create this environment to make a lot of money. That's what Hillary Clinton is doing. She's making a lot of money. She's writing books. She's doing speeches.

All this talk helps her make money. And as long as she's making money, she's going to keep this up.

WALLACE: There is nothing wrong with that.

PRIEBUS: No.

(CROSSTALK)

WALLACE: -- consistent, sir.

PRIEBUS: There is nothing wrong with making money. But I would not -- but what I'm saying is don't be confused by pursuit of money with her pursuit of running for president.

WALLACE: Chairman Priebus, thank you. Thanks for coming in today.

PRIEBUS: You bet.

WALLACE: It's safe to say that Hillary Clinton has been the presumptive Democratic candidate ever since Barack Obama was reelected in 2012. But the fire she is already taken from Republicans is certainly unusual.

Our next guest was the first member of Congress to endorse Clinton for 2016 -- Missouri Senator Claire McCaskill said this in a statement last June, "It's important that we start early building a grassroots army from the ground up, and effectively using the tools of the Internet so that if Hillary decides to run, we'll be able to help her win."

Senator McCaskill, we switch you in. Three chairs, no waiting. Welcome to FOX NEWS SUNDAY.

SEN. CLAIRE MCCASKILL, D - MO: Thank you, Chris. Great to be here.

WALLACE: OK. As I discussed with Chairman Priebus, Secretary Clinton says Republicans are trying to politicize Benghazi. But it isn't just politicians, because relatives of those four Americans who were killed say that the State Department has ignored them from the start.

Listen to this.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

PATRICIA SMITH, SON KILLED IN BENGHAZI: Nobody from the government has gotten back to me to tell me anything. And I mean that by saying anything.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

WALLACE: Senator McCaskill, that's not political.

MCCASKILL: Well, certainly, it's a tragedy. And it is a tragedy, I think, that no one feels more acutely than Hillary Clinton. She knows it was on her watch that we lost Americans.

But the point is, Chris, there has been dozens of hearings. There has been thousands of pages of testimony. Hillary Clinton has appeared in some of house committees and Senate committees answering questions that any Republican wanted to put to her.

The notion that there is somehow something else that can be gained here other than politics just defies common sense. I think anybody looking at this rationally understands this tragedy, we should now focus on how we make sure it never happens again.

WALLACE: But let me pick up on that, because Secretary Clinton says, basically, all the questions have been answered.

And yet we have found out since she testified that the deputy chief of mission in Tripoli that night, the deputy head of intelligence for U.S. forces in Africa, Africom, they all knew right away this was not a protest. This was not about the video. This was a terrorist attack.

So, why did Clinton keep pushing the narrative about the video as the motive for weeks?

MCCASKILL: First of all, the narrative about the video, that was a missed narrative. And, frankly, it came from intelligence also. David Petraeus looked at those words also. It wasn't -- it wasn't just Hillary Clinton.

WALLACE: Wait, wait the CIA deputy -- Mike Morell testified before the House Intelligence Committee when Susan Rice on this show in September of 2012 said it's a video, he thought, you never said that.

MCCASKILL: Well, it is -- it's certainly everyone saw what the talking points that were out there. And the point is this, Chris. There is -- we will never know all of the motives in people who, in fact, attack Americans that night. But if you really look at this, what they're trying to say Republicans is the military, once the commander in chief said, get all the assistance you can, they're somehow trying to give the American people the impression that Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama and our military weren't doing their best at that moment.

Of course, everyone wanted to save American lives, just like they saved Americans lives yesterday. And the interesting thing to me about me the release of the POW, Sergeant Bergdahl, is the Republicans immediately criticizing that. We saved an American and foreign policy gets criticized. We lose American lives on foreign soil, the president gets criticized.

Are you seeing a theme here? It's politics.

WALLACE: I'm going to get back to Bergdahl in a second. I want to just finish up with Hillary Clinton. What was Hillary Clinton's signature accomplishment as secretary of state?

MCCASKILL: I think her signature accomplishment was re- establishing in the world that the way we have peace is through allies, being relationships, in dozens and dozens of countries, where those relationships have atrophied. Her travel schedule of -- the stamina is amazing, what she did as secretary.

And now, we have relationships. And it is a large and complicated and dangerous world. She has the kind of resume that shows leadership, strength, the ability to make decisions at moments of crisis that will make her a terrific president of the United States.

WALLACE: But let's look at some of Clinton's other initiatives, other policies during those four years as secretary of state. She pushed the reset bottom in relations with Russia, which has clearly now failed. She defended Syria's President Assad as a possible reformer at the start of that country's civil war. She failed to stop the nuclear programs in Iran and North Korea. And she decided not to designate the Nigerian group Boko Haram as a terrorist organization.

Is that a record to run for president?

MCCASKILL: She absolutely understood that by recognizing leaders of Boko Haram as terrorists, that was we had to do, because if we made the organization terrorist, that give them too much of a high profile. It was going to allow them to recruit too easily.

WALLACE: But there are a lot of law enforcement and intel people who thought that. I mean, you look at Russia, Syria, Iran, North Korea, Nigeria --

MCCASKILL: But now, we're actually looking at what Iran has. We were actually able to see what they are doing in terms of nuclear activity. She laid the groundwork for that.

We've got the chemical weapons. We're getting the chemical weapons out of Syria. She laid the groundwork for that.

I mean -- but this is, in fact, a very difficult world right now. And our enemies are everywhere. I think she established that smart power and true peace is established through allies and building though relationships.

WALLACE: I want to get back to what you brought up about the prisoner swap for Bowe Bergdahl overnight. Clearly, everybody is happy to see him come home. But didn't the president negotiate with terrorists, which is against U.S. policy -- excuse me -- and doesn't this give an incentive to groups like the Taliban to take other U.S. soldiers because they have a price now?

MCCASKILL: Well, first of all this was not a hostage. This was a prisoner of war. It is much different when you're negotiating with the enemy over prisoners of war. We have done prisoner swaps many times in our history.

WALLACE: But always with nation state. We've never done it with an insurgent group like this.

MCCASKILL: Unfortunately, this is our enemy now. This is our enemy now. We don't have nation states as enemy. We have, in fact, terrorist organizations as enemies. And this was a prisoner of war.

WALLACE: So, we negotiated with terrorists?

MCCASKILL: I guarantee you, Chris, that if in fact this man's life was lost and it came out that we had this opportunity and our commander-in-chief passed on it, the Republicans would be going crazy right now. We saved this man's life. The commander-in-chief acted within his constitutional authority, which he should have done to in fact get that man after five years of captivity. I'm very proud that we have no POWs left in Afghanistan and the president should be proud of it also.

WALLACE: Senator McCaskill, thank you. Thank you for sharing part of your Sunday with us. Always a pleasure. MCCASKILL: Thank you.

WALLACE: So, will she or won't she? What can we pick up from the leaks of Clinton's book and what it may mean for her chances in 2016? Our Sunday group joins the conversation.

Plus, what would you like to ask the panel about Hillary Clinton? Just go to Facebook or Twitter @FoxNewsSunday and we may use your question on the air.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

Up next, we'll ask our Sunday group about the prisoner swap with the Taliban for the only U.S. soldier who was being held in Afghanistan. And President Obama takes another crack at laying out the Obama doctrine in foreign policy.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

OBAMA: America has rarely been stronger relative to the rest of the world. Those who argue otherwise, who suggest that America is in decline or is seen as global leadership slip away, are either misreading history or engaged in partisan politics?

(END VIDEO CLIP)

WALLACE: President Obama at West Point this week firing back at critics of his foreign policy. By the way, National Security Adviser Susan Rice is appearing on two Sunday shows today. But the White House still has not made her available to us since we interviewed her back in September of 2012 just five days after the Benghazi attack. And we're back now with the panel. Well, before we get to the president's speech, I want to discuss the prisoner swap that took place last night. We got back Sergeant Bowe Bergdahl who has been held captive by the Taliban since he disappeared from his unit in 2009. In return, we handed over the so-called Taliban five who are being held at Guantanamo. They will reportedly be in the custody of the Gulf nation of Qatar for at least a year. Liz, the Taliban five, we're giving up the former army chief of staff of the Taliban. We're giving up an intelligence chief. We're giving up a military commander. Some of them wanted by the U.N. for war crimes. What do you make of this swap?

LIZ CHENEY, FOX NEWS CONTRIBUTOR: You know, it's wonderful that Bergdahl has been freed but this was a badly misguided policy step to take. You have a situation obviously, where we shouldn't be negotiating with terrorists. Secondly, clearly, there with a law violated here. There is a reason why the president was required to notify Congress 30 days before the release of terrorists from Guantanamo, and it was precisely to prevent this kind of thing from happening. Thirdly, you know, if what the president, you take him at his word in terms of the statements that he issued. And he says, you know, he hopes that this release and this trade will help Afghanis, you know, understand that we can all find common ground. Does he really believe it's possible to find common ground with the likes of these five terrorists who have just been released? And these are among the men who were most responsible for building a relationship between the Taliban and al Qaeda. So as we now completely withdraw from Afghanistan, as we take our last soldiers off the field in Afghanistan by the end of 2016, we're leaving in place a situation where you've now got some of the top most experienced, most hardened with blood of American men on their hands, Taliban leaders been released now by our president. Certainly that is not going to do anything to help the next Afghan government create the kind of stability and prevent a safe haven for al Qaeda from forming again. So, it's a bad mistake.

WALLACE: In sponsor or in defense, President Obama says that this shows America's commitment to leave no soldier behind on the battlefield. Senator Bayh? Your thoughts and your response to Liz?

EVAN BAYH, FOX NEWS CONTRIBUTOR: Well, it's hard for me to believe that anyone thinks we'd be better off if the soldier were back in captivity, which is the position you have to take if you think this shouldn't have been done. I think it's a good thing that he's home. Now the Israelis who no one would argue are soft on terrorists because they got to live with the members of Hamas that they release and so forth. To get back a single soldier, an Israeli that's held captive, they sometimes release hundreds of Palestinians. So this sort of thing is not unknown, even by countries who have very substantial security concerns. And the final thing I'd say, some people argue, Chris that this is going to give the Taliban more incentive because they've been rewarded to capture Americans. Anybody who thinks that the Taliban is not going to already capture as many American soldiers as they possibly can is being a little bit naive. So it's a tough situation. I think Liz makes some decent points. But I think it was the right thing to do.

WALLACE: Let's turn to the president's foreign policy and his speech this week at West Point. Mr. Obama set new limits on the use of U.S. force in the world. This in the same week that he announced that he's going to pull all U.S. troops out of Afghanistan by the end of 2016 when he will have left office. Here is the president of West Point.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

OBAMA: U.S. military action cannot be the only or even primary component of our leadership in every instance. Just because we have the best hammer does not mean that every problem is a nail.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

WALLACE: Laura, is there something there that you can glean from the speech that is -- that you can call the Obama doctrine?

LAURA INGRAHAM, FOX NEWS CONTRIBUTOR: I've been searching. I think the response from the cadets, the graduating class of West Point is very telling. I did listen to the entire speech. And there is little in the way of response. And it's very uncomfortable. And look, I think he is reflecting to this extent the viewpoint of many in the American public who are weary of all these military engagements. And I think more resisting to military engagements six years in, seeing the world as chaotic as it is now, Africa, Middle East and beyond. So it's true. I don't think that we are clambering (ph) to go to war. However, the idea that the president goes to West Point and says, look, we've never been stronger relative to the rest of the world, I'm sorry. That doesn't even pass the straight face test. Just on an economic front. Forget on our declining influence around the globe. So, I thought it was a very odd speech. And it was not well received. And that didn't surprise me at all given the tenor and the tone.

WALLACE: Bob, what did you think of the speech? And when you look at our intervention in Syria, our lack of intervention and role, or rather our intervention in Libya, a lack of intervention in Syria and how we play in Ukraine, is there a coherent, a cogent Obama foreign policy?

BOB WOODWARD, THE WASHINGTON POST: Well, there is so much talk. And I don't think talk solves lots of these problems. In foreign policy, you're trying to do two things, comfort your friends and scare the hell out of your enemies or your potential enemies. A speech like this does not have that effect. Because he said we're in effect lowering the threshold to use the military. Sometimes it is best to just be quiet and not try to theorize and not try to explain here. And I think this is the explaining is just not working. At the same time, there are two jobs the president has. And that is to protect the country and avoid unnecessary wars. And if you look at the record, you have to give Obama some credit. He's protected the country and we have not had another war or unnecessary war.

INGRAHAM: To be protective -- Benghazi diplomatic mission on 9- 11-12, I mean we kind of failed on that regard, don't you think, Bob?

WOODWARD: Well, you're underscoring my point that this will never go away, at least with you.

(LAUGHTER)

INGRAHAM: I actually don't think - I don't think it's funny when an ambassador is murdered.

WALLACE: On that somewhat cheap shot, we're going to have to leave. Thank you, panel. See you next week. Up next, our "Power Player of the Week," Fox's Bret Baier on his son's special heart and his family's inspiring journey.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

WALLACE: You know him as a polished reporter and anchor. But while he's been calmly telling us the news these last six years, he and his family have been dealing with their own personal crisis. Here is our power player of the week.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) BRET BAIER, HOST "SPECIAL REPORT": It's like a nuclear bomb without the motion. Everything was going in slow motion.

WALLACE: Bret Baier and his wife Amy had just had their first child in June of 2007.

AMY BAIER: Look at those cute eyes.

WALLACE: They were thrilled. But one day later, a doctor told them baby Paul had serious problems.

BRET BAIER: He's got at least four, probably five serious congenital heart defects. And if he doesn't have surgery within the next few days, he's not going to make it.

We're going to be optimistic that we're going to make this work.

WALLACE: That's when the Baiers began the journey Bret describes in riveting detail in his new book "Special Heart" including e-mails he sent to family and friends.

BRET BAIER: July 1ST, 20007, 6:56 a.m., thank you all for your kind words and good wishes. After the last e-mail. Now we would like to ask you for something else, your prayers.

WALLACE: Bret and Amy learned about a world famous pediatric heart surgeon in Washington, Dr. Richard Jonas who might be able to fix Paul's heart. But he was on a medical trip to Asia and wouldn't be back for almost two weeks.

AMY BAIER: Hardest thing we've ever gone through.

BRET BAIER: Yeah.

AMY BAIER: So (INAUDIBLE)

BRET BAIER: Amy was overcome one day with all of the emotions. She passed out. And she became the oldest patient in Children's National Medical Center. July 11th, our little Paul who is now 12 days old is scheduled to go into surgery early Thursday morning.

WALLACE: The surgery took eight hours. As Dr. Jonas retooled a heart that was pumping the wrong way.

BRET BAIER: So, there is a clear plastic bandage over his chest. I remember specifically looking down with Amy at this little walnut sized heart beating.

WALLACE (on camera): You could see it inside?

BRET BAIER: See it through the bandage. Thinking this -- feared that little walnut heart is going to stop. And it was heavy.

WALLACE (voice over): Baby Paul made a full recovery. But as he grew, one of the tubes in his heart had to be replaced with a bigger one. BRET BAIER: Paul has had three open heart surgeries. He's had seven angioplasties.

WALLACE (on camera): How many more procedures does he face?

BRET BAIER: He may have to have one more open heart surgery if, we're fortunate.

WALLACE (voice over): Paul had his most recent operation last September.

BRET BAIER: He woke up in the middle of the night and out of the blue he asked me, Daddy, why do I have to do all these things? All of these heart things? I said, buddy, because God has a plan for you.

WALLACE: All of us who know Paul see a happy six-year-old who is full of life.

BRET BAIER: He's the tallest kid in his class. He is full with energy. I was joking with Dr. Jonas just recently that in that last surgery if could he have just turned it down, just a hair that might have been good.

WALLACE: Bret calls their journey one of faith, hope, courage, and love. Which is why he wrote this book.

BRET BAIER: Everybody has something, some cross to bear. And this is how we got through our time. And if it can help some family get through their tough time, I think that's a good thing.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

WALLACE: Bret's book "Special Heart" goes on sale Tuesday. It is a great read and an even a better cause. Because Bret and Amy are donating all the proceeds to pediatric heart research. To learn more, please go to our website, FoxNews.com/FNS. And that's it for today. Have a great week. And we'll see you next "Fox News Sunday."

Content and Programming Copyright 2014 Fox News Network, LLC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Copyright 2014 CQ-Roll Call, Inc. All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ-Roll Call. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.