Beck: Spirit of Japan
And, Norio, please give us the translation of your first name. I love this.

NORIO NISHI, JAPANESE NATIONAL: "Nori" means man of order, harmony or order. And "Or" means man. So, that's right there.

BECK: And that's part of the thing about Japan that I don't think we really understand. It is order, right?

NISHI: Yes.

BECK: It comes from, actually, living under samurais.

NISHI: Exactly.

BECK: And I want to get to that history in a little bit because of the problem with the government, that kind of -- that kind of changes things with the government. And you actually wrote an op-ed piece, was in today's Wall Street Journal?

MICHAEL AUSLIN, AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE: Today. Yes.

BECK: Yes. Today's Wall Street Journal that talks about -- look out, because the government can do some things here, I think nefarious people can do things to change a constitutional republic if a crisis this large.

But I wanted to talk first about -- because I'm really -- we have given, I think, what is it --how many billions? Sixty-four billion dollars -- million dollars to the Red Cross in the first six days and it was over $200 million for Haiti. And I don't want to talk about why that might be happening. I want to talk about different ways that we can help so we don't lose ourselves.

You had a great suggestion about the troops.

AUSLIN: Yes, I thought it was possible for people to actually contribute to our troops who are working around the clock. You know, they're working 24/7 since this thing hit -- bringing in supplies, they're on the ground with their Japanese counterparts, trying to clear and do rescue missions.

And we can only support them. We can reach out to the USO. We can reach out by sending care packages.

There's lots of different ways I think to let them know we understand they part of this, and without them, I think this would be a much harder operation. We've delivered hundreds of tons of supplies already. And so, I think we could -- we could help our troops in that way.

BECK: Real quick, I don't want to dwell on this. But I do want to ask each of you, do you think there's a reason why? I've heard -- well, it's because we think Japan is a rich nation. Do you think -- do you think that --

NISHI: Well, I think that's possibly -- that's true, you know, when it comes to third world.

BECK: Right.

NISHI: We have to. But when it comes to Japan, it's almost like an economic competitor. But sometimes, some part of the industry, whether it would be kind of --

BECK: OK. Competitors -- I mean, we live in a business world now where you have to destroy the other. There's competitors and there's competitors that make you better. There's friends that are competitors.

Do you have any thought on why this is happening?

AUSLIN: I think people have been just overwhelmed by the scale and they're usually beginning to, you know, if you go on the Web now, you can click at different sites. I think that people will give a lot but I think that Norio is probably right. Look at Japan and we think, you know what, they have a lot of what they need and it's coming from other parts of the country.

But I think everyone feels they want to help.

BECK: OK. On the bottom of your screen, all throughout this program, we'll show you how you can help. And I'm going to make a challenge to you by the end of the program.

Back in just a second.

(APPLAUSE)

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

(NEWSBREAK)

BECK: I have to tell you that we were just watching the news break here and we were just talking about the reactor and the reaction of the press. It's out of control. You know, they said that we should -- we should make sure we buy those iodine tablets. This is the Surgeon General. It's one-billionth the level of radiation that Chernobyl had coming across Europe. One-billionth. Why, when there's so many other things to focus on in Japan?

Michael Auslin -- Michael Auslin, he is the director of Japan Studies at the American Enterprise Institute. And Norio Nishi is here. He's a Japanese national living in America. I want to spend a couple of minutes here just talking about what we can learn from Japan and why we're seeing the things that we had.

There is -- there's a Nin Tai is a concept that I had never heard about. What is Nin Tai?

NISHI: Yes. Nin Tai has been developed by the Japanese, a Samurai class. (INAUDIBLE) Japan has been ruled by the samurai class for thousand, thousand years. The key concept of Samurai lifestyle is the Nin Tai. Nin Tai means endurance, perseverance, steadfastness. You do not -- when you confront with danger, when you confront with the calamity, you don't shout, yell and move you head. You just take the pain. You just go forward and that is the kind of attitude or lifestyle that Samurai people built.

That permeate every single aspect of the Japanese society. That's what the Nin Tai is all about.

BECK: It's -- it is -- would you agree that we used to have this? Because it's honorable. We're -- I actually read people's blogs and heard people on TV say, why is there no looting? Because there's no honor in that. And doesn't it say something about us that we're asking that question?

AUSLIN: I think we used to have that idea of, you know, when we're opening up the west and you'd have the endurance of the pioneers and settlers. And I don't think it's necessarily lost, but I think it is -- it's always been a part of Japan.

There's another side of it too that I think is equally important that developed. The Samurai ruled Japan for about 700 years and this other side is this tension between what they call duty and obligation. Duty is what you had to do legally. It's -- you know, if you were Samurai, you had certain things you had to do and the law bound you. Obligation were your relations with your fellow man and they were often in tension.

And the most famous story in Japan is something probably everyone here has heard of. "The 47 Ronin," "The 47th Samurai" where they wanted to avenge what they thought was the unlawful death of their lord. But they weren't allowed to do it according to duty. It was illegal. So they had to choose what to do. They chose obligation. But they didn't run away from the duty meaning they chose it, knowing that if they were successful in repaying the honor of their lord, upholding his honor, they would go to their deaths by the legal system. And they chose to do that. They had to somehow bring the two together. But what they didn't do was attempt, for example, to say, well, it wasn't -- we weren't doing that, it wasn't our fault. And this -- this idea of duty and obligation I think has helped --

BECK: It is kind of like Allen West when he went -- Congressman Allen West -- he was questioning a terrorist knew that this terrorist had information that was going to get all of his troops killed. So he went in and he threatened the guy and he said, I know you, you Americans, you'll never do it. He fired a shot right by the guy's head, scared him to death, knew that it was wrong and got the information. Then went right directly to his commanding officer, put his gun down, and said, what I did was wrong, I did it and I'd do it again but I want you to know that's the duty and the honor.

Do you -- we've changed. I walked -- were you here yesterday for St. Patrick's Day?

NISHI: No.

BECK: Were you guys here yesterday?