Palin: 'I'm Not the Conventional, Status Quo Politician ... the Last Thing I Worry About Is the Mainstream Media'
PALIN: Well, the Ryan plan, of course, focuses less on Social Security than it does on Medicare. And from day one, I have said, Thank you, Representative Ryan, for coming out with a plan. And people who are slamming the plan and calling it social engineering or belittling his efforts, you know, for shame! I want to know where their plan is if they can't support Ryan's plan.

Ryan has been courageous. He's been fiscally sound in what he has spelled out for America. What he is trying to tell America is that we are going broke. There will be no Medicare for future generations unless we reform this now. And what I say -- he hasn't addressed, as I say, Social Security...

(CROSSTALK)

VAN SUSTEREN: You're right. It was about Medicare. You're right. Ryan talks about Medicare.

PALIN: But with Social Security, too, if you have more recipients than you have payers into the system, it's like a Ponzi scheme that's going to be upside down in no time at all! We're going to be underwater with Social Security. So all of this has to be reformed.

President Obama is dead wrong to try to -- he's deceiving the public and making it sound like we just can go along the way that we've been going and still have at the end of the day somebody's retirement years that they're going to able to receive what it is they paid into the system. We're going belly-up, so President Obama is wrong!

And if he says, and he will say, Oh, we're working on reform, we're talking about reform in our budget -- bull! The Democrat Party hasn't even produced a budget again this year. They have not produced the reform packages that they have promised. He is deceiving the public!

VAN SUSTEREN: Has the Republican Party disappointed the American people, too?

PALIN: Well, you know, I think that a lot of the disappointment in the Republican Party has to do with Democrat pundits and many in the media making it sound like the Republicans haven't even tried. Look what the Republicans tried when it came to health care reform. They offered bipartisan participation in the whole "Obamacare" scheme, and President Obama didn't want to hear from them. He did not involve in the health care reform package that he finally unveiled that we call "Obamacare" any of the reforms that had to do with tort reform, that had to do with market- based patient-centered free market principles that should an been applied to reforming health care.

So starting with "Obamacare," President Obama and the Democrats did not seek that GOP participation. And you can apply that to everything that's coming out of the White House right now. So I think if people are disappointed in the Republican Party, it's because they're not paying attention to what it is that the Republicans are trying to produce! Take again...

(CROSSTALK)

VAN SUSTEREN: Are they blameless, though? Because, you know, I mean, there's so much -- I mean, you know, I've been around Washington for a long time, and it seems like every administration after the next, you know, makes all these grandiose promises...

PALIN: No, they're not blameless.

VAN SUSTEREN: ... yet here we -- here we are.

PALIN: Right. They're not blameless. Anybody who has been a part of the system that has over-spent and over-taxed and overreached into America's private enterprise system is to blame, whether they have an R by their name or a D by their name. So yes, both parties who are -- have taxed and spent us into the quandary that we're in now, they're to blame.

VAN SUSTEREN: How does one -- and I don't mean you or anybody else, but how does one inspire the American people to stop fighting and get on the same page? Because, I mean, a lot of people are complaining about President Obama. Before that, it was President Bush. I mean, there really is a lot of resistance.

PALIN: You stop fighting by taking a step back and looking at the facts. Look at the debt that has been accumulated in the last two years. It's more debt under this president than all those other presidents combined!

VAN SUSTEREN: I think he'd say he's trying to stimulate the economy and so that we can get -- ... much of the debt is the stimulus program.

PALIN: And that did not work. A trillion dollars in stimulus package projects that still have resulted in record-setting unemployment, a heart- breaking number of home foreclosures, still these crashed markets left and right, these bailouts, these takeovers ... that didn't work.

President Obama has got to recognize that what other countries have done -- what Greece has done, what Spain, what Ireland, what -- that we are now emulating the mistakes that they have made. It's not going to work! What will work is allowing the private sector to get back to keeping more of what it earns, government backing off, allowing the job creators to do what they do best.

VAN SUSTEREN: You know, listening to you -- and I know that you say this isn't a campaign. But you got this bus that's, you know, all painted up and you're making the trip and you're intriguing all of us. This looks like a campaign.

PALIN: It's painted up with the Constitution and with the "We the People," and with part of our Pledge of Allegiance. It's not pictures of Sarah Palin out on this bus because this isn't about me. It is about our charters of liberty.

And it's reminding especially the school children across America -- that's why I have my dad on the bus, too, as a school teacher. I want the kids across America to realize what it is that built America, how important it is that we restore what's good and free and patriotic about America so that we can prepare ourselves for the heady days ahead because we have huge challenges ahead, Greta. And unless we know from whence we came, we will not know how to get to the place we need to be to get everything back on the right track.

(END VIDEOTAPE)

VAN SUSTEREN: Straight ahead: Is Governor Palin moving to Arizona? Is it to prepare for a political move? And what does she think of that new documentary about her that everyone's buzzing about? Does she love it or does she hate it? And did she have anything to do with it?

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

VAN SUSTEREN: More with Governor Sarah Palin.

(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)

VAN SUSTEREN: Could you work with someone like Senator Harry Reid or now leader and former speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi?

PALIN: When I was governor, I certainly worked on bipartisan efforts every day of our term. And then when you're the mayor and when you're a city council member, those are nonpartisan seats. So yes, I -- and in my own family, we have very independent-thinking individuals that make up a team. So certainly, willing to and used to working with both sides of the aisle. But...

VAN SUSTEREN: But with compromise, though, because then -- then when you talk about, you know, compromise, then you sort of have to drift away from whatever your principles are. Whether you're, you know, a Republican or a Democrat, when you start compromising, you know, there's a -- there's a drift.

PALIN: Right. I couldn't compromise principles. And I think people just want to know what they're working with. And what I would do and what I did as governor was lay out from the very beginning, Here's what I believe in. In this case, on a national level, I believe in the planks of the Republican platform. I will never get obsessively partisan in allowing a party machine to manipulate an agenda or tell me what to do. I've never been wired that way. So the partisanship that comes with a machine running something, I don't have time for that.

But allowing people to know what it is that they're going to be dealing with, what it is that drives me when it comes to national policy, it's the planks in the Republican platform because I do believe that they're best for America. It's all about respecting equality. It's all about the free enterprise system allowing individuals to make decisions better than an elite government far, far away making decisions for one.

VAN SUSTEREN: All right, a couple of Palin issues in the news, that you bought a -- they say that you've moved -- or not they say it, there has been the question of whether you've moved from Alaska to Arizona.

PALIN: No, I haven't moved from Alaska. But Safari Investments has invested in property in Arizona. And you know, many, many Alaskans purchase property in Arizona, Nevada and Texas. And I think we do that because not only are we good investors and it's a buyers' market, but we like fly out once in a while. So Safari Investments, which we are a part of, has some property in Arizona now.

VAN SUSTEREN: All right, a new movie out about you. Did you participate in the creation of the movie at all?

PALIN: No, but I'm very, very anxious to see the final cut of this movie because I've heard great things about it. I've seen a...

VAN SUSTEREN: Have you seen it?

PALIN: I've seen a rough cut of it, and it blew me away. It was -- I'm, like, Wow! They captured much of the record, much of the agenda that has been so perverted by the media, so twisted around that when I saw a rough cut of it and saw my team from my administration be able to finally set the record straight on the things that we worked on on energy independence, on cleaning up corruption, where people ended up going to jail, Greta, after what it is that we supported, the good things in reform in Alaska. So thankful that much of the record will be set straight.