Keystone XL is good for Montana, good for the U.S.
A recent Billings Gazette opinion article about Keystone XL has a number of factual errors which we have addressed below.

Building Keystone XL will have little impact on gas prices in either direction in Montana or elsewhere across the country. The price of gas is set by world prices for crude oil not the price of Canadian or Bakken crude oil. Refiners in the Midwest who have been purchasing crude from Canadian and American producers in Montana and North Dakota at discounted prices have been charging market prices for gas.

The U.S. Energy Information Agency’s own data shows that over the past several years, despite enjoying lower crude costs, retail gasoline prices in the Midwest averaged four per cent higher than the Gulf Coast.

The southern portion of the Keystone System (Gulf Coast Pipeline) has begun delivering crude in January to the Gulf Coast from tank farms in the Midwest eliminating much of the backlog at Cushing and netting higher prices for Midwestern and Canadian oil. According to Mr. Thompson and Mr. Findley’s logic Montana should already be seeing higher gas prices and a loss of jobs, but that is not the case.

The comments made about Montana’s refineries becoming less competitive due to higher crude prices in the Midwest simply doesn’t pass muster. Until 2008, the Midwest commanded the highest prices for crude oil in the United States which was a primary driver behind building the first phase of the Keystone System.

Mr. Thompson and Mr. Findley’s piece also erroneously suggests that Keystone XL is about exports. This is categorically false. Keystone XL is designed to serve U.S. refineries in the Gulf Coast, period. We have said repeatedly that not a drop of crude oil from Keystone XL will be exported.

The statement, “The United States already exports more refined fuels than we import, and that trend will accelerate if Keystone is built,” is also categorically false and was specifically addressed in the State Department’s market analysis in Keystone XL’s Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement that, “U.S. product exports are not sensitive to different scenarios of pipeline development.”

The comparison between coal and oil sands is wildly inaccurate. Emissions from the entire oil sands industry are 55 megatons or 0.16 per cent of global emissions. That is less than the emissions from three coal-fired power plants in the United States. Montana’s refineries are supplied almost exclusively by Canadian oil (88%) which supports hundreds of jobs and considerable economic benefit to the state.

What Keystone XL will do is contribute millions in taxes through six counties in Montana, generate $212 million in GDP, support 3,700 jobs in the state and safely bring more Canadian and Bakken crude oil to markets where producers will receive the highest value for their product while driving out riskier, higher-priced crudes from places like Venezuela, Russia and the Middle East. That’s good for Montana and good for the country.