Donald Trump accuses his rivals of 'buying delegates'
This is a rush transcript from "Hannity," April 21, 2016. This copy may not be in its final form and may be updated.

SEAN HANNITY, HOST: And welcome to "Hannity." 2016 Republican front- runner Donald Trump will join us in just a moment.

But first, the death of a music icon, legendary musician Prince -- he passed away today at the age of 57. Here's the very latest from the FOX News Channel.

(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)

MIKE TOBIN, FOX CORRESPONDENT: This is a Fox News Alert. I'm Tobin in Chanhassen, Minnesota, just southwest of Minneapolis at the Paisley Park compound where people are now streaming in to pay their respects. You see the makeshift memorial forming, people laying down flowers, purple balloons as Prince Rogers Nelson joins that sad list of brilliant musicians gone suddenly, gone too soon.

We learned this morning from the county sheriff that he was found in an elevator on this property unresponsive. Efforts to perform CPR were quickly determined to be futile.

And late this evening, we have a bombshell from the Web site TMZ that the emergency stop Prince's plane made in the Quad Cities of Illinois was not, as originally reported, a stop for a bad case of the flu, but according to TMZ, it was for a drug overdose, and that the safe shot, if you will, a drug called Narcan, was administered to bring Prince back from the dead. And that was six days ago.

I want to bring in Dr. Michael Baden, forensic pathologist, to ask questions about that. Dr. Baden, thank you for joining us this evening.

And my first question to you is, we look at this scenario of a drug overdose, it certainly seems to be more probable than someone making an emergency stop for the flu just an hour away from their destination. Your reaction.

DR. MICHAEL BADEN, FORENSIC PATHOLOGIST: Mike, I think what you're saying is true, but I think it's premature to be assigning a cause of death to Prince before the autopsy's done tomorrow. By the time the autopsy's finished by early afternoon, we will know -- the doctors will know whether he had a lung disease, whether he had heart disease, whether there was any natural cause of death.

If there isn't, they're going to have to wait for the toxicology, and that may take a few days, so early next week before we can be certain whether or not drugs are involved in the death.

TOBIN: All right, and we do know that the medical examiner has received the body, and as you mentioned, the medical examination will take place tomorrow.

BADEN: Right.

TOBIN: And as you stated there, the toxicology reports could take several days. Now, as far as what happened with Prince in the days that followed that emergency stop in Illinois, he seemed to be back on his feet, attending parties. Is that consistent with someone who had the flu so seriously it could take his life?

BADEN: Probably not. And it could be consistent with somebody who's taken a drug overdose on Friday, gets the Narcan and comes -- within 24 hours, gets over the drug overdose, goes about doing his regular work, and then takes another drug within 12 hours before or earlier before he was found dead. Now, the problem...

TOBIN: Got it. And I've got to wrap you, Dr. Baden, because we're coming up against a hard break here, but people are mourning the loss of Prince Rogers Nelson here in Minnesota.

(END VIDEOTAPE)

HANNITY: Early today, the RNC Rules Committee decided not to make any changes to the guidelines for the Republican convention. Here now with reaction, 2016 Republican presidential front-runner Mr. Trump.

Mr. Trump, good to see you.

DONALD TRUMP, R-PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Hi, Sean.

HANNITY: All right, I think the final number was what, 91, 92 delegates out of New York. That's almost a complete sweep.

TRUMP: Yes, we got most of them, almost every one of them. We really had a big win. And we were over 61 percent. It was an amazing evening. It's nice, Sean, when the people that know you best really like you. So that tells you something. So we had a great evening.

HANNITY: Let's talk a little bit about the Rules Committee. They decided to weigh in by not weighing in. We'll have some experts and people that were in that meeting coming up later in the program today.

Is that a good thing from your perspective?

TRUMP: Well, I think they had to do that. I think they were looking to make changes. There's been so much of a problem between Colorado and Louisiana and Wyoming, and you know, all the different places.

I won Louisiana, got less delegates than people that lost, and it's ridiculous, or that a specific person who lost who has absolutely no chance of winning anyway. And then you look at Colorado and Wyoming, where the people never got to vote. And in the case of Colorado and probably both, the people wanted to vote and they never got a chance to vote. It was given out by the bosses.

So that's no way to run a democracy, and it's no way to run an election, that I can tell you.

HANNITY: I had Reince Priebus on my radio show earlier today, and I've been asking questions about, for example, if there was a contested convention, second ballots, how people go about courting delegates.

I want you to listen to this question and answer and give me your reaction.

(BEGIN AUDIO CLIP)

HANNITY: Let's say that you can't get to 1,237, but you think you can win on a second or third ballot. And you and your team are courting the delegates -- Hey, all right, after the first ballot, when you're free, we want you to vote for us. What are they allowed legally to offer those people? Can they offer them hotel rooms? Can they offer plane rides? Can they offer expensive dinners?

REINCE PRIEBUS, RNC CHAIRMAN: I know that the lawyers and all of these campaigns are looking at that. And I think in the past, it's been pretty - - it's been a pretty free -- pretty big free-for-all, but I don't think you can give money. And the FEC has rules (INAUDIBLE)

HANNITY: But you can't give money, but you can pay for their plane ticket to the convention.

PRIEBUS: I'm not sure about that. The FEC has regulations on all of those things.

(END AUDIO CLIP)

HANNITY: Now, I've checked with my sources. You can offer plane tickets. You can offer hotel rooms. You can take delegates out to expensive dinners. That's troubling to me. I don't know if you knew that before now. Your reaction.

TRUMP: Well, I did know it and it's troubling -- not only troubling, it should be illegal. You shouldn't be able to do it. I mean, you know, in theory, you could take somebody who never comes in first place -- as an example, with Cruz. I'm winning by millions of votes. You know that. I'm also 300 delegates up, but I'm winning by millions and millions of votes.

And we're fighting for delegates, and what they're doing is take a look. I mean, they're traveling them around. They're taking them out to dinner. They're -- you could actually take a couple of hundred million dollars and buy an election and never win a race because all you have to do is, you know, take them out to dinner and send them to Paris, France, for the evening.

HANNITY: Yes.

TRUMP: So I would say honestly, I think it's a disgrace and that we should not be -- this it is not our system and this should not be the Republican Party.

And I'm so proud of myself -- you know, I exposed this. This was going on for a long time and it's now been exposed, and it shouldn't be allowed to be. You have people that are millions of votes down, and they're buying delegates. That should not be allowed.

HANNITY: The AP has now said in an article that Senator Cruz is mathematically incapable of reaching 1,237. The only way he could win would be on a second or third ballot. When John Kasich got to that point in the campaign, this is what he said.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

SEN. TED CRUZ, R-TEXAS, PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: John Kasich is a good man. He's an honorable man. But he has no path to nomination. It's mathematically impossible for John Kasich to become the Republican nominee. He needs more than 100 percent of the remaining delegates.

And it's worth remembering Kasich went for 0 for 27, lost 27 states in a row. Then he won his home state. You can't lose every state and expect to be the nominee. Right now, Kasich's role is really being a spoiler.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: What is your reaction? Do you have a problem with both men? They can't get to 1,237 before the convention, but they can fight for a contested convention and try to fight to prevent you from getting to 1,237. What is your reaction?

TRUMP: Well, honestly, Sean, they should both drop out. I mean, Cruz has no path. He's mathematically eliminated. He's out. And they should both drop out.

And remember this. While I'm almost hundreds of delegates -- almost 300 delegates ahead and millions of votes ahead, it's really unfair because I wasn't competing against one person, I was competing against 16 people at the beginning. So we'd have splits with 16 people, and then 14 people and 12 people and eight people and nine people. And you know, it would go on that way, and then even now, we have three people.

You know, we should be having, like, just one. And I don't really care and we're winning by a lot but it really isn't fair because when you break it up, when you have that many people, you're getting much less.

As an example, Marco Rubio has more delegates right now than Kasich, and those are delegates that are taken out of play, so it makes it hard for me to get them. And he's right now not in play.

So the point is it's a very -- the whole system is rigged. It's a phony, crooked system where people are allowed to buy delegates, they're allowed to buy hotel rooms for them and take them out to dinner and do whatever they have to do to get their vote. That's not democracy.

HANNITY: But it's interesting. But in spite of that, your campaign had an internal memo somehow made it into the press that you believe you could get as many as 1,400 delegates. Paul Manafort...

TRUMP: Yes, we think we can.

HANNITY: Paul Manafort, who works for the campaign, actually said that you will be running a more traditional campaign, that you will raise money for other candidates and the RNC. And you have also laid out a series of speeches that you will be giving, policy speeches on specific issues with a lot of detail.

Can you tell us what the changes are moving forward?

TRUMP: Well, it's all true. What he said is all true. We will be doing a lot of policy. We will be helping other members of the party, generally speaking, other members of the party.

And one thing that's very important is we have to unify the party because we're going to beat Hillary Clinton. I think I'm going to win New York, actually. And you know, if I win New York...

HANNITY: Game over.

TRUMP: No Republican will even campaign -- it's game over. No Republican other than me will even campaign in New York. They won't waste one day there because they can't win. Look at Cruz. I mean, he came in third to Kasich, and nobody understands how that's even possible. But you just take a look. He cannot get anything in a lot of these states.

HANNITY: Did you know that you only spent 13 cents per vote in New York and Bernie Sanders spent 9 bucks? That was pretty interesting.

But we got to take a break. We have a few more questions.

TRUMP: OK.

HANNITY: More with Donald Trump as we continue.

And coming up tonight, as well...

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

HILLARY CLINTON, D-PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: I am not going to be responding to all the crazy stuff he says.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: All right, Hillary Clinton refuses to respond to Donald Trump's criticism and his new nickname. Well, that's the least of her problems because Bernie Sanders supporters don't seem to like her very much. We'll explain. We'll get reaction from Donald Trump.

Later, James Comey says the FBI investigation into the Clinton serve scandal may not be done before the Democratic convention. Jay Sekulow, Monica Crowley and more tonight on "Hannity."

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

TRUMP: She makes bad decisions. You know what Bernie Sanders said about her twice. You know that. Number one, he said she wasn't qualified. That's tough. I mean, that's tough. But he said bad judgment.

GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS, ABC NEWS: OK, there's the first attack.

CLINTON: You think so?

(LAUGHTER)

CLINTON: You know, George, I am not going to be responding to all the crazy stuff he says.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: Well, I bet she will be. Anyway, that was Hillary this morning talking about Donald Trump to, of course, a Clinton sycophant, George Stephanopoulos, trying to brush off criticism.

We continue with 2016 Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump. Finally, you came up with a nickname, "crooked Hillary"?

TRUMP: Well, it's just a name I've been using because it's pretty descriptive. But it is true what Bernie said. I mean, it's bad judgment. You look at her votes. You look at what she's done. You look at some of her decisions on -- on so many -- you look at the migration that's really caused by a lot of her bad decisions. You take a look at -- you take a look at just about anything, many of the things having to do with the Middle East. You look at Iraq, where she voted yes for the war. So she does have bad judgment, and I think she has very bad judgment, frankly.

Now, Bernie also said she's not qualified. I guess she's qualified, certainly, but her judgment is very bad. Look at what happened in Benghazi. Look at the fact that she takes that phony ad about three minutes -- you know, 3:00 o'clock in the morning, and well, guess what? She wasn't there to answer the phone. So I think that she's a very flawed candidate.

HANNITY: Let me ask -- I know there's a huge issue in North Carolina and - - it's the so-called bathroom law. And a lot of people have made -- I don't know how many people this actually impacts. My guess it's a very small number, but it's become controversial. And Ted Cruz tried to attack you on this today.

And so I wanted to give you a chance to explain your position on that as it relates to transgenders picking which bathroom they want to go to. I can't even believe I'm asking the question, but I'm asking.

TRUMP: Well, it is a small number, but we have to take care of everybody, frankly. And North Carolina, which is a great place -- which I won, by the way -- I love North Carolina -- and they have a law and it's a law that, you know, unfortunately, is causing them some problems. And I fully understand that they want to go through (ph), but they are losing business and they are having a lot of people come out against.

With me, I look at it differently. A community, whether it's North Carolina or local communities, really -- they should be involved. We have so many big issues to be thinking about, Sean. We have ISIS to worry about. We have bringing trade back. We have rebuilding our military.

But I think this. I think that local communities and states should make the decision, and I feel very strongly about that. The federal government should not be involved.

HANNITY: In other words, let the state decide what local community decides, kind of like your position on education, give it back to the states.

TRUMP: Yes, let them decide. Absolutely.

HANNITY: All right. I have asked you many times about your tax plan. You were asked that question this morning about raising taxes on the wealthy.

TRUMP: Right.

HANNITY: You had said you want to lower taxes for everybody, and as a matter of fact, under your plan, you talk about a lot of people paying no federal income tax. Do you want to raise taxes on the wealthy?

TRUMP: Well, I want to do something with the Wall Street guys because some of these guys are making so much money and they have carried interest positions, and I understand very well and I've used them myself. I think they're wonderful, but I think they're unfair.

And I want to get rid of carried interest and some other things and -- but overall, my taxes are going down big league for the middle class, big league for business. And I think ultimately, everyone's going to do better because our businesses are going to generate a lot more money. We're going to really have a vital economy again, which we certainly don't have now.

We have the phony unemployment rate of 5 percent, when the number's probably into the 20s. As you know, I don't want to say it because everybody's heard me say it so many times, but you look for a job, you can't find a job, you quit looking for a job, and you're considered statistically as though you're fully employed.

So you know, we don't -- we don't have a good economy. The jobs are being taken, they're ripped away from our country. I just left -- you know, in New York, where I had the victory, upstate New York...

HANNITY: Decimating. (sic)

TRUMP: ... you go to Albany and you go to Syracuse and...

HANNITY: I go all the time.

TRUMP: It's -- they're decimated up there.

HANNITY: Decimated.

TRUMP: They're decimated. It's horrible...

HANNITY: It's horrible. Horrible.

TRUMP: ... what's happening. And we're going to bring our jobs back to this country, Sean. We're bringing our jobs back to this country. And companies that want to leave, they're going to have to pay the consequences. I mean, if they want to leave for Mexico and going to make product and sell it, they're going to have to pay the consequences, which in this case is going to be taxes. They're going to have to pay a tax if they want to come back into the country.

(CROSSTALK)

HANNITY: If they take their business and jobs away, they shouldn't be given financial benefits. But just to understand you correctly, you were talking about loopholes, especially on Wall Street, but not the rich in general. Did I understand that correctly?

TRUMP: Yes, and especially on Wall Street. Sure. And I know the Wall Street guys. They make a fortune. They pay very little tax. And frankly, you have to pay some tax and you have to pay it.

And you know, there are so many different loopholes and so many different ways of avoiding. We want to have a lower tax. We're the highest taxed country in the world. There's no country even close.

HANNITY: Yes.

TRUMP: We're the highest taxed in the world. We're going to get taxes down. But the Wall Street guys with the carried interest and stuff -- we got to get rid of some -- and nobody understands the system better -- really, I understand the system by far better than anybody, and they know it.

HANNITY: Yes.

TRUMP: And that's why I don't think I'm going to get so much backing from Wall Street...

HANNITY: Even Bernie Sanders...

(CROSSTALK)

TRUMP: The ones that are going to benefit...

HANNITY: Bernie Sanders in the top percent.

TRUMP: (INAUDIBLE) Bernie Sanders.

HANNITY: He pays 14 percent taxes! I paid 40 federal. I need a better accountant -- 40 federal. I pay city tax of 4 percent and a state tax of 10 percent. It's insane!

TRUMP: I know.

HANNITY: But you're right. There's loopholes -- some of these loopholes...

(CROSSTALK)

HANNITY: ... Wall Street Guys, they pay 10 and 12 percent. It's insane!

TRUMP: Well, the death tax, we want to get rid of it. And if you go with Bernie, forget it. But if you go with Hillary, taxes are going to go way up. No, I want to reduce taxes. And for the middle class, a huge reduction, by far...

HANNITY: All right...

TRUMP: ... the greatest of any candidate running. And for business, likewise big reduction.

HANNITY: Newt Gingrich said you are now the presumptive nominee. And he said to the establishment Republicans they better now get used to the idea.

Let me ask this question because I think it's really relevant. You know the 17 guys that began this process with you. Who can you name people, that of the 17 and others, that you would like to bring in to unite the party? A lot of people are worried, concerned. It's been a contentious campaign. Will the party unite? If the party doesn't unite, Hillary Clinton becomes president.

Name names. Who are people you would like to have with you, working with you?

TRUMP: Sure. I can tell you that Ben Carson, Dr. Ben Carson, is a terrific guy. He endorsed me. And Chris Christie endorsed me, and he is a fantastic guy. These are two tremendous people. I'd like to have them.

Frankly, Marco I'd love to have involved. I mean, honestly, many of them, almost all of them. I'm not saying all of them, but almost all of them.

The party has to unite. If we unite, this party is going to have a huge victory. Then you're going to have the House. You're going to have and Senate. The party is going to -- if I'm running, I'm going to win Michigan, I'm going to win -- I have a chance at winning New York. That's a tough one because, as I told you, people don't even -- Republicans don't campaign in New York. I have a chance to...

HANNITY: Or New Jersey.

TRUMP: You saw what I did...

HANNITY: Yes.

TRUMP: You saw what I did just a couple of days ago. New Jersey -- I'm going to win New Jersey. I love New Jersey, and they like me. I mean, you look at the polls right now. We're going to win Pennsylvania.

We're going to win places that other people have no chance of winning. And frankly, New York because of the size, New Jersey, because of the size, very big -- we're going to have victories that nobody else can have. I would love to see a united party. If this party...

HANNITY: If you get this nomination...

TRUMP: ... unites, we're going to have a total victory.

HANNITY: If you get the nomination, would you consider naming people earlier than as usual? In other words, before the election.

TRUMP: Well, I would and I would like to do that and I want to see -- there are certain people -- frankly, people that were on the stage with me that are excellent people, and they didn't make it quite. Some did a really good job. And You know, Ben Carson did a fantastic job and so did Chris Christie and so did Marco and so did numerous other of the people, and I got to know them all.

And you know, it was a little bit tough because we're warring against each other. But I'll tell you, the other ones I'm going to name very soon. I'm going to name 10 or 12 judges that I would recommend to put on the Supreme Court.

And I'm going to name them up front and I'm only going to take the judges out of that pool of judges so -- because I want people to understand that I want the values in terms of the Republican Party and the conservatives. I want -- I want judges that you will be happy with. And I'm going to actually name -- I'm going to actually name 10 or 12 judges up front, and that will be a pool in which I will take and only take from that.

HANNITY: And that would be people like...

(CROSSTALK)

HANNITY: ... Scalia and Thomas as...

TRUMP: ... and we'll see what happens.

HANNITY: You told me people like Scalia and Thomas, but...

TRUMP: Two...

HANNITY: I know you got a big crowd...

TRUMP: Two wonderful names.

HANNITY: All right, I know you got a big crowd there. Mr. Trump, thank you. Appreciate it. We'll talk soon.

TRUMP: Thank you very much. Thank you.

HANNITY: And coming up, Hillary Clinton should be terrified. Why? The FBI director, James Comey, says the Democratic national convention is not the cutoff date for the investigation into her private server scandal. Jay Sekulow, Monica Crowley are here to weigh in.

And then later, more reaction to the RNC Rules Committee. Randy Evans was in the room earlier today, will tell us exactly what happened. We'll have more on Reince Priebus's comments to me. Well, can you give delegates hotel rooms and plane fare and big, expensive dinners? Is that right? We'll talk about it straight ahead.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

HANNITY: And Welcome back to "Hannity." So Hillary Clinton and her campaign -- well, they should be very worried tonight. The FBI director, James Comey, was asked about the ongoing investigation into her private email server earlier today, and here's what he said.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

JAMES COMEY, FBI DIRECTOR: Somebody asked me in the States about whether I -- I think the question was, Is the Democratic national convention a -- I forget what the question was -- a hard stop for you? Is that a key date for you? Are you doing this investigation aimed at -- and I said, No, right? We aspire to do all our investigations in two ways, well and promptly.

I'm personally close to this investigation because I want to ensure that we have the resources, the people, the technology and the space to do those things and to do it in the way I hope we do all our work, which is competently, honestly and independently. And I'm confident that it's being done that way.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: Here with reaction, chief counsel for the American Center for Law and Justice Jay Sekulow, FOX News contributor Monica Crowley. Both have been following this story closely.

Jay, timing matters here. I mean, is there a possibility that there's a criminal referral, but it won't be made until after the Democratic convention? That would put our entire political system in a state of flux, right?

JAY SEKULOW, AMERICAN CENTER FOR LAW AND JUSTICE: And I think that was the signal, actually, from Director Comey. I think what Jim Comey was saying is they're taking the evidence where it leads them. They will put together -- if there's, in fact, a case to be made, they're going to put together the case.

You mentioned it, Sean. It's called a criminal reference letter. That is, the FBI agents in cooperation with lawyers, will put together a case. They will then take that case over to the Department of Justice and the determination will be made if, in fact, a prima facie case has been shown that there's been a violation of a criminal law.

We've talked before about those various allegations, but I think what James Comey is signaling pretty clearly there is he's going where the evidence leads. He said he was closely involved in the case, closely monitoring it. He's a man with a lot of integrity and...

HANNITY: Why is it taking so long?

SEKULOW: ... I suspect he's going to go where the evidence goes.

HANNITY: We've read reports that they already were able to recover the deleted e-mails, or at least the vast majority of them. We're told that they finished that aspect of the investigation and then moved forward into the Clinton Foundation and whether or not there was a quid pro quo during her tenure as secretary of state.

So there's -- it seems to me there's got to be some sense of urgency here, considering she is likely to be the Democratic presidential nominee.

SEKULOW: Well, I think she -- you know, she's certainly the presumptive nominee. And here's what's going on, though, Sean. These are complex matters. And you and I have talked about this one. And that is the most significant issue still, more significant than the Clinton Foundation, more significant probably than the -- what was in these e-mails -- of course, if it was disclosures, that could be very damaging -- alleged to be very damaging to the United States national security -- but it's the location of those servers. So that whole case has to be put together.

So yes, I think there's -- look, there's a lot of lawyers on this. There's a lot of FBI agents on this. They're going through this I think in a thorough manner. The question is -- what James Comey is saying, he is not going to be governed by a political clock.

Now, this is where the differential is, and Sean, this is, I think, the key part. There may well be a legal case of a violation of the criminal laws against maybe the secretary of state, former secretary of state, maybe her aides. You know, we don't know that evidence. The FBI does.

The question then becomes a political one. Will the attorney general authorize the indictment? And that means the attorney general, of course, is part of the executive branch. That reports to the president of the United States. And will the president allow an indictment maybe post- convention against the then Democratic nominee for president? That's a very tall order.

HANNITY: Monica, thoughts. You've been following this closely.

MONICA CROWLEY, FOX NEWS CONTRIBUTOR: Yes, for the rest of us, the political calendar does show a lot of pressure because once she is nominated, then it would look like a coup d'etat if she were to be stripped of that and removed somehow because of an indictment and political pressure coming from that. So the rest of us look at the political calendar and see time rushing down upon this investigation and on her.

But what the director is saying is, We're not going to be pressured. We are an independent law enforcement agency, and we're not going to -- we're not watching the clock. But the reality is that the clock is extremely important.

And Sean, when you asked why it's taking so long -- we do know that this investigation is running on multiple tracks. The classified material and the possible mishandling of it is one track. That's what everybody has been talking about. But the other track is far bigger and more important, and that is the Clinton Foundation track.

My understanding is that's why this investigation is taking so long because they have far more agents on this case -- at least this is what my understanding is -- than what we've been led to believe, and it may involve foreign countries, foreign entities, all kinds of complex transactions globally that we are not aware of yet.

And remember that if that, in fact, is the case, there are other people involved in the Clinton Foundation beyond Mrs. Clinton...

SEKULOW: Right.

CROWLEY: ... that might make her not the only target. And by that I mean the former president of the United States, Bill Clinton, their daughter, Chelsea, and others who have been deeply involved in the foundation. They might be in the crosshairs of the FBI, as well.

And if that is the case -- and we don't know, but if that is the case, it is no wonder that the FBI is taking so long.

HANNITY: Wow! The fact that we can have a criminal referral against a Democratic candidate for president, it takes your breath away. It would throw this country into a political firestorm that we haven't seen since Watergate. Guys, thank you, appreciate it.

And coming up, we're going to take you inside today's RNC rules committee meeting. Randy Evans was in the room. He'll explain what went down.

And then, the 28 secret pages of the 9/11 Congressional report, why don't they show you the American people? It's now under scrutiny. So did they show a possible Saudi Arabian connection to the 9/11 terror attacks. Should they be released to we, the people? That and more straight ahead tonight.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

TOBIN: This is a Fox News alert. I'm Mike Tobin in Minnesota where people are pouring in to the Paisley Park compound here, home and recording studio to the artist everyone knew as Prince. They're dropping off flowers and purple balloons.

I want to take you now to live aerial pictures of a spontaneous block party that has sprung up downtown Minneapolis at the First Avenue Club. You may recognize that club because Prince made it famous in his movie "Purple Rain." People are celebrating the life and the music, and of course expressing their sadness at this life that suddenly ended at 57-years-old.

We learned this morning through the county sheriff's department that Prince was found in an elevator here in the Paisley Park compound unresponsive. Efforts to perform CPR and revive him were quickly determined to be futile.

Late this evening a bombshell through the website TMZ, and that bombshell being information that an emergency stop made by Prince's private plane six days ago in the quad cities of Illinois was not for the flu as originally reported through Prince's handlers but was in fact for a drug overdose. TMZ reporting that the life-saving drug Narcan was administered at the time. The effects of Narcan are to block opiates which would otherwise depress breathing and kill the person who was using the drugs.

I want to bring in forensic pathologist Dr. Michael Baden. We talked with you a half-an-hour ago, Dr. Baden, and you seemed to believe that it's too early to jump to the conclusion of a drug overdose. Please explain.

DR. MICHAEL BADEN, FORENSIC PATHOLOGIST: Yes, because we can't say it's a drug overdose until it's found in his body in sufficient amounts to cause death. And that will take a number of days.

Tomorrow after the autopsy is back, they will know whether he had heart disease or lung disease that could have caused death, and they can rule that out or rule it in. But we have to wait for the toxicology results which really should be ready the early part of next week to determine if it's a drug overdose.

TOBIN: Explain to me a scenario in which an apparently a health 57-year- old, a guy who by rock star standards had the reputation for being clean, how he would suddenly die, and in transit. He didn't die in his bed. He died in the elevator apparently going from one location to the next.

BADEN: Well, part of it is when you get to be a super star like prince or Elvis Presley or John Belushi, often the people around them, the handlers, are not able to deal with drug abuse and force them into treatment. They're too big to go into treatment, and that's a problem. It's almost death by entourage. And they would have known that he was abusing drugs. They knew what happened when he --

TOBIN: Dr. Baden, once again, we're running out of time, Dr. Baden. And I want to thank you for your contribution here. This has been a Fox News alert. Back to "Hannity."

HANNITY: Welcome back to "Hannity." So earlier today at the highly anticipated RNC meeting, the rules committee decided not to change the convention rules. According to reports, committee members fear that changing any of the rules would make it seem like they were trying to sway the nominating process. Someone joining us right now was in that meeting. Chairman of the Republican National Lawyers Association, member of the RNC rules committee Randy Evans, and from the Hoover Institute Lanhee Chen is with us. Randy, you have been on the rules committee for how long now?

RANDY EVANS, CHAIRMAN, REPUBLICAN NATIONAL LAWYERS ASSOCIATION: For three years.

HANNITY: OK. So they didn't want to make changes because of appearances?

EVANS: Well, for three reasons really. First, we didn't want to make changes in the middle of the game. We're in the seventh inning? Why would you change the rules for the last two innings of the game?

Second, because of the cynicism, the idea that no matter what we change -- I remember one colleague, Sean, said if we change a semicolon to a coma, one of the three candidates will think that was directed towards them and that we're trying to make it more difficult for one candidate over the other.

And the final one was really unintended consequences. If we had gone to Roberts rules of order, each of the 2,472 delegates could raise an order. If somebody wanted to run out the clock, in other words, make it through the whole four days that we end up without a nominee so that we have to then come back with all the delegates unbound, that would be the technique to do it, which is to have the Roberts rules so that everybody could raise a point of order. With those kinds of consequences at stake the decision was made, let's just leave things the way they are. We've played this much of the game under these rules. Let's finish the game with these rules.

HANNITY: The idea that every delegate would have time and be able to filibuster and came away four days later without a vote or a candidate would be absurd to me, and I assume that's why you kept the house rules, which I think was the right thing do.

OK, Lanhee, let me ask you, explain the next part of this process. So we're going to have candidates that have delegates that will sit on the next rules commit, but that happens before the convention. Explain what happens there.

LANHEE CHEN, RESEARCH FELLOW, HOOVER INSTITUTE: Yes, Sean. In the week before the convention traditionally several different committees have met at the Republican National Convention, and one of those committees is going to be the convention rules committee. And they're job is going to be to determine the rules that will govern that convention as well as the Republican Party for the next four years.

So back in 2012 when I worked with Governor Romney's campaign, we put in place a whole set of rules for that convention in Tampa that have also now been the rules of the party for the last several years. So one of the things to note is that formal changes to the rules have to be adopted by that body, by that convention rules committee, which will convene in Cleveland a week before the actual convention begins.

HANNITY: Randy, back to you. A lot of prominent Republicans, John Boehner is one of them, anybody can be nominated on the convention floor, Karl Rove, new faces, John Kasich's entire strategy seems to be that rule 40B doesn't apply in this particular convention, other people, Mitt Romney, go on down the list, Mitch McConnell suggested it this week. Is there any scenario under which the, quote, "white knight" candidate can come up on a third or fourth round of balloting, maybe somebody that didn't run this time?

EVANS: Well, the consensus is no. The consensus is that rule 40B which requires that a majority of the delegation of eight states support a person in order for their name to be put in nomination will remain a part of the rules package. And then there's this other rule which you never hear about, Sean. It's called rule 40E, and it says that once we start the balloting we keep voting until one candidate gets 1,237. So if you're not in nomination by the time we start the balloting, by the time we start counting the votes, then you're not going to get added later.

It is important to note there's a provision in the rules that permit the rules to be suspended. A motion to suspend the rules is always in order at the national convention. If somebody moved to suspend the rules and that passed by majority vote, and then in fact we suspended the rules to permit more nominations, it's possible.

But the reason I don't believe that will ever happen is between Ted Cruz and Donald Trump, they will control two-thirds of the delegates on the floor. You're not going to agree to change that rule. And so they won't have the votes to change the rule.

HANNITY: I had Reince Priebus on my radio show, Randy, and I asked a lot of questions, for example in Georgia this weekend, delegates committed in the first round of balloting, in this case a state that Donald Trump won, but Ted Cruz courting the delegates, this was a question I asked him this week that seemed to make a lot of news, and I asked him what can be offered to the delegates. Here's his answer.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

EVANS: HANNITY: Let's say that you can't get to 1,237, but you think you can win on a second or third ballot, and you and your team are courting the delegates, all right, hey, all right, after the first ballot when you're free we want you to vote for us. What are they allowed legally to offer those people? Can they offer them hotel rooms? Can they offer plane tides? Can they offer expensive dinners?

EVANS: I know that the lawyers in all of these campaigns are looking at that, and I think in the past it's been pretty big free for all, but I don't think you can give money, and the FEC has ruled --

HANNITY: You can't give money, but you can pay for their plane ticket to the convention.

PRIEBUS: I'm not sure about that. The FEC has regulations on all of those things.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: Randy, can they pay for expensive dinners, hotel rooms, plane fair?

EVANS: Yes, they can. The Federal Election rule has one sentence that really deals with this issue, and what it says is basically you can't take money from corporations, from foreign nationals, all of the other limitations on the sources of funds. But as far as the amount of funds, as far as what you can give or take, there is no boundary. There's only one hard, fast boundary, however, and that is there cannot be a quid pro quo. There can't be a moment where a candidate or a campaign says to a delegate, I will give you a boat ride if you promise to vote for me. That's off limits. That's a good way --

HANNITY: But an expensive dinner with expensive wine, a hotel room upgraded to the Four Seasons, that might have some sway on me. I don't know. Guys, thank you both. Appreciate it.

And coming up, growing divide over whether or not the Obama administration, get his, should release -- why have they kept secret 28 pages that could show the Saudis literally are connected to the 9/11 terror tracks. We're going to explain and have reaction when we come back straight ahead.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

HANNITY: Welcome back to "Hannity." Remember following the catastrophic September 11th terror attacks, Congress launched an investigation to determine who is responsible for the devastation. Now a political battle is being waged over 28 classified pages which has never been released to you, the public, and it appears those documents show an alleged link between 9/11 and Saudi Arabia.

Now, recently the debate over whether or not to release the 28 pages has resurfaced because family members of the 9/11 victims have said they want to sue Saudi Arabia and the government for their potential involvement in this terror attack.

Here with reaction, from the Islamic House of Wisdom, Imam Mohammad Ali Elahi, and former NYPD detective Bo Dietl. Imam, apparently, and I've spoken to people that have seen the 28 pates, it implicates Saudi Arabia as aiding and abetting and financing the terrorists involved in the attack against our country. Don't you think those families have a right to sue Saudi Arabia for their involvement? Don't you think the American people should have a right to know if the Saudis were have aided and abetted in those attacks?

IMAM MOHAMMAD ALI ELAHI, ISLAMIC HOUSE OF WISDOM: Yes, they do. Of course it is about truth, it is about justice. It is about the suffering of 3,000 families of the victims.

And at the same time, Sean, I think this is a gift for Islam and American Muslims in this country. That is a declassification of those 28 pages is a gift for us so people who are brainwashed under the forces of Islamophobia, the realize that Islam and Muslims and even the Saudi people have nothing to do with the corrupt kingdom whose money and military and media and harsh tribal theology is harboring tools of terrorism --

HANNITY: Are you saying as somebody who is against Sunni Muslims, as a Shiite Muslim?

ELAHI: It has nothing to do with Shia or Sunni Muslim.

HANNITY: What are you? What are you?

ELAHI: As a matter of fact, I believe those pages should be --

HANNITY: I asked you a question. Are you Sunni or Shia?

ELAHI: I'm a Shia, but I don't believe there are any major differences between Shia and Sunni.

HANNITY: OK, would you say the same thing about the Iranians that are the number one state sponsors of terror?

ELAHI: If Iranians have anything to do with 9/11 I would say the same thing.

HANNITY: But they are the number one sponsor of terror. They killed Americans in Iraq.

ELAHI: That stupid decision charging Iran for the victims of 9/11, that was total insanity. And I think, and I think, Sean, to say that those pages are secret or sensitive or may harm our relationship with Saudi Arabia, that is not the answer for families of 9/11.

HANNITY: Bo Dietl, the issue here is why did our government keep this secret? We have a right to know. The Saudis apparently according to people I've spoken to and watching the "60 Minutes" piece on this, why not release it? Why not allow the American people to know the truth and families to get at least the compensation a minimum that they deserve?

BO DIETL, FORMER NYPD DETECTIVE: I watched that "60 Minutes" piece also with the United States Congressman speaking there. And the reality, 15 of the 9/11 people that flew those planes were from Saudi Arabia. There is financing done from Saudi Arabia. There's a connection to that. Also the fact that the way they worded it, that the upper echelon of the Saudi government didn't know. But the point is right now America should know what the heck is in there.

HANNITY: It is time for the American people to know the truth.

When we come back, we need your help. Our very important "Question of the Day" straight ahead.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

HANNITY: Welcome back to "Hannity." Time for tonight's "Question of the Day." So do you think, as I do, the 28 secret pages the government has been hiding from us related to 9/11 and Saudi Arabia should be made public? Yes, we have a right to know. Go to Facebook.com/SeanHannity, @SeanHannity on Twitter, let us know what you think.

Unfortunately that is all the time we have left this evening. As always, thank you for being with us. We'll see you back here tomorrow night.



Content and Programming Copyright 2016 Fox News Network, LLC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Copyright 2016 CQ-Roll Call, Inc. All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ-Roll Call. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.