GOP lawmakers call out double standards within the FBI
This is a rush transcript from "Hannity," December 6, 2017. This copy may not be in its final form and may be updated.

SEAN HANNITY, HOST: All Right. Thanks, Tucker. And this is a Fox News alert.

Wildfires are raging in the State of California burning up hundreds of homes in the Los Angeles metro area. Nearly 200,000 people tonight are under evacuation orders.

Adam Housley, he is on the ground and joins us with the live report. Also tonight, we have new big breaking information about the Special Counsel, Robert Mueller's partisan extremely biased hyper-partisan attack team. We will going to name names tonight and explain exactly who these Trump hating investigators really are and why this entire witch-hunt needs to be shut down and shut down immediately.

What is beyond clear tonight is that Robert Mueller has assembled the most partisan Special Counsel in history. Now, they are in utter disgrace in terms of equal justice under the law. The rule of law and, of course, that means our Constitution. They now posed a direct threat to you, the American people and American Republic. We will break it down for you. It is something the mainstream media I promise will never do. And that's called their job.

And also tonight, new information about the Trump-hating, Hillary-loving, FBI agent Peter Strzok. We have Department of Justice officials, they are now pouring over 10,000 text messages between Strzok and as FBI lawyer girlfriend Lisa Page so that they can turn over specific Trump bashing messages to the House Intelligence Committee. And we are learning that Strzok's fingerprints are all over that anti-Trump fake news Russian dossier bought and paid for by Hillary Clinton.

Now also, after decades of defending Bill and Hillary Clinton's abusive behavior towards women, well tonight Democrats are demanding that senator grope himself Al Franken step down after yet more accusers have come forward. We will cover all of that and much more. And important breaking news opening monologue.

All right. Tonight, before we do our deep dive into Mueller's band of Trump hating, Hillary Clinton loving lackeys, we do have major breaking news from The Hill's John Solomon.

Now, according to his new report tonight, a whistleblower told Congressman Ron DeSantis that during an FBI radio conference about former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn, well, the senior FBI official made inappropriate comment about Flynn which made it seem like there was a personal motive to investigate him. We'll have more on that story in a few minutes.

But first, a special counsel of Robert Mueller's entire investigation we now know tonight is one giant cesspool. It's full of corruption, partisanship and unbridled bias. It is the epitome of the Washington, D.C. sewer and swamp. And Mueller stooges literally are doing everything within their power and then some to try and remove President Trump from office.

And tonight, we have new information about one of Robert Mueller's top attack dogs who has very deep ties to Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton and the Democratic Party. Her name, we reveal, is Jeannie Rhee.

Now, there is a ton of information, pay very close attention. Records show she is a huge Democrat. And since 2008, Rhee has donated nearly $10,000 to Democrats. Now that includes contributions to Hillary Clinton in 2015, 2016. She also ditched out thousands of dollars to Barack Obama in '08 and 2011.

Now, it is not surprising because Rhee is a registered Democrat in Washington, D.C. Does that sound like a fair, impartial investigator? For all of you watching at home, I don't think so.

And it only gets worse from there. From 2009 to 2011, Rhee worked directly with former Obama Attorney General Eric Holder. Yes, the same Eric Holder that proudly declared that he is part of the Donald Trump resistance.

And Rhee served as a deputy assistant attorney general in the office of legal counsel at the DOJ where she advised Holder, the Obama White House and other top Justice Department officials on all sorts of legal matters. And take a look at this government document. Rhee is listed as the attorney for former Obama Deputy National Security Adviser Ben Rhodes when he was being interviewed about the Benghazi terror attack.

So clearly Rhee has deep ties to top Obama administration officials. Look at this press release from her old law firm WilmerHale. That's the same law firm Robert Mueller worked at. By the way, they mostly only donate to Democrats. It described Rhee as quote, "Having served as a legislative fellow in the office of former Senator Tom Daschle and as a counsel in the U.S. Department of Justice's office of legal policy." If you don't recall, Daschle was a Senate Majority Leader for the Democrats in the early 2000s.

Guess what? There is more. Jeannie Rhee also has done legal work for the Clinton Foundation. You can't make this up. In 2015, while at WillmerHale, Rhee defended the Clinton Foundation against a racketeering lawsuit. And Rhee's name appears at the bottom of the plea agreement. Remember George Papadopoulos? The Trump foreign policy advisor that nobody ever heard off? Well, Rhee's background and resume, what does it prove? She is a total and complete partisan hack. Mueller had no business, like in a lot of the other people he selected, selecting her to be a part of his team, but he did it anyway, which should tell you all you need to know about the top type of operation Robert Mueller is running.

Next is one of Robert Mueller's top investigators who is known as the Special Counsel's pit bull and has a history of all kinds of unethical, highly questionable, strong-arm prosecutorial tactics. And of course I'm talking about Andrew Weissmann.

Now before we get into his past, we had breaking news last night that highlights Weissmann's political bias. In an email released by Judicial Watch yesterday, Weissmann told former acting Attorney General Sally Yates how prod proud he was to her. This after Yates denied a direct order from President Trump and refused to defend what we now know as constitutional, knew then the travel ban back in January. Here's the actual email. "I am so proud. I am in awe. Thank you so much. All my deepest respects."

Well, now that you know about Weissmann. well, let's dive into his past. Our friend, colleague, Fox News legal analyst Gregg Jarrett he has been going over this guy's record with a fine tooth comb. Guess what, Weissmann is a legal nightmare. Now, we have to know Weissmann has deep and close ties to both Mueller and the disgraced former FBI Director James Comey. He has worked closely with both of them for years. And he has donated over $4,000 to Democrats like Barack Obama. So, there's no way he would have any political bias, I'm sure, right?

Well, this is the part that deeply is disturbing. When Weissmann was the top prosecutor, remember the Enron task force? Well, he secured a highly controversial obstruction of justice case against American accounting giant Arthur Anderson. It destroyed that company. It put tens of thousands of people out of work. It drove that company out of business. And in 2005, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Weissmann's conviction in an almost unprecedented nine-zero unanimous ruling. They excoriated him for his behavior.

And that's not the only example of Weissmann's hard charging, overly aggressive tactics. As part of the Enron investigation, Weissmann sent four Merrill Lynch executives to jail for as long as a year. Guess what? They were innocent. That conviction was also later overturned this time by the Fifth US Circuit of Appeals.

Here's the bottom line. Weissmann? Guess what? He is a legal tyrant. He has been accused of doing just about anything to secure a conviction. Does he not care about equal justice under the law? He has been accused of intimidating witnesses, making up crimes that do not even exist and even withholding evidence that would have been exculpatory and help the defense in one case.

And Weissmann is also directly tied to that corrupt Uranium One deal and the Obama administration's attempt to hide it from you, the American people. Weissmann? Guess what? He was in charge of the DOJ's fraud section during the Russian bribery scheme. And Gregg Jarrett pointed out that Weissmann's signature -- look there -- is at the bottom of the plea deal that was signed by the Russian businessman at the center of that case.

And also tonight, breaking information about the Trump-hating, Hillary-loving FBI agent Peter Strzok. He is the guy that was fired from Mueller's team for political bias towards President Trump. Another one of the dream team of Robert Mueller. Now the DOJ is reviewing 10,000 text messages that Strzok sent to his FBI official girlfriend Lisa Page. She also worked for Mueller. And what for? To determine which specific messages where Strzok was attacking President Trump. They need to be turned over to the House Intelligence Committee.

So, at this hour, it's unclear how many of the 10,000 messages have to do with President Trump or Mueller's investigation. It should be an interesting read. Now, the DOJ says this could take weeks or even months. Could we move a little faster? It's not that hard.

We are also learning tonight that Strzok's dirty and biased fingerprints, guess what, they are all over the fake news, anti-Trump, Russian propaganda dossier bought and paid for by Hillary and the DNC that she was running. And according to a report, Strzok and his team, they were tasked with handling the dossier when it was given to the FBI. And, according to other reports, information that that fake news dossier was used to get a FISA warrant to surveil the Trump campaign adviser Carter Page.

Stop and think about this, Hillary Clinton bought and paid for Russian propaganda to influence an election. Sound familiar? And they might have used it to get a warrant to investigate an opposition party? A campaign? A president-elect?

This is insanity. Strzok is as biased as they come. And here are more reasons why.

According to a report, it was Strzok who signed the document that officially started the Russian collusion witch-hunt. Now, the Trump-hating FBI agent also oversaw the FBI interviews -- get this -- of former National Security Adviser Lieutenant General Michael Flynn. As we told you about last night, Strzok's mistress Lisa Page served on Robert Mueller's dream team before leaving.

Now here is where it gets really disturbing. As our own Catherine Herridge is reporting while Strzok played a pivotal role also in the Clinton email server investigation. You know the one where they actually had an exoneration letter before the investigation? And he even took part in the 2016 interview of Hillary Clinton herself. By the way, she was never put under oath. And we are also learning that Strzok participated in the FBI interviews of key Clinton aides and allies, Huma Abedin, Cheryl Mills, and we showed you last night how lies were told by both of them.

And here is the most egregious example of Strzok's rampant political bias. He is responsible for changing that crucial language in James Comey's statement that exonerated Hillary before they investigated. He is the one that revised grossly negligent to extremely careless which gave them an excuse to let Hillary walk.

Now, all of this is shocking, it's incomprehensible. It's smoking-gun proof that Mueller's probe is a total political sham. It's a witch-hunt, it needs to be shut down immediately if we believe in the rule of law and our Constitution.

But, guess what? The Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein, who appointed Mueller as the Special Counsel, he is saying tonight he is satisfied with this investigation. Mr. Rosenstein, are you serious? You need to wake the hell up, get your head out of the sand and take a look at what is actually going on. This is about law and order and equal justice under the law.

Apparently Rosenstein is the only person apparently in America that doesn't seem to realize -- I guess unless you work at fake news CNN or conspiracy TV MSNBC, you seem to be the only one that doesn't realize there are very serious flaws with Mueller's investigation. This is exactly why we have been saying it's time for Rosenstein to pack his boxes, leave the Department of Justice, because this is an injustice.

Now Mueller's investigation is troubling. Democrats are using it to attack a dually elected president, the one you elected. And here is an example. Earlier today you have 58 geniuses in the House of Representatives, all Democrats, supporting a resolution to impeach President Trump. For what? The bias, the politics swirling around Mueller's investigation is beyond alarming at this point. It's been a year of this.

But, it's still of the much larger attack and it is all aimed at the President of the United States. And of course, it's being orchestrated by deep state operatives on Obama holdovers. Now, we have seen example after example of former Obama administration officials going after, attempting to discredit the president every day, day in, day out. Look at James Clapper, the former director of National Intelligence, now works at fake news CNN. He has repeatedly attacked President Trump. Here is one small example.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP, CNN, AUG. 22)

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Are you questioning his fitness?

JAMES CLAPPER, FORMER DNI: Yes. I do. I really question his ability to -- his fitness to be in this office. And I also am beginning to wonder about his motivation for it. Maybe he is looking for a way out.

How much longer does the country have to borrow a phrase, endure this nightmare?

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: Pretty disgraceful and former Obama CIA Director John Brennan, more deep state. Well, he has made this shocking admission when testifying before Congress. Watch him.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP, MAY 23)

FORMER CIA DIRECTOR JOHN BRENNAN: I want to make sure that every information and bit of intelligence that we had was shared with the bureau so that they could take it. It was well beyond my mandate as director of CIA to follow on any of those leads that involves U.S. persons, but I made sure that anything that was involving U.S. persons, including anything involving the individuals involved in the Trump campaign, was shared with the bureau.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: So, what Brennan did was do everything within his power to make sure that the FBI and the deep state were going after Trump and his campaign.

Now, after hearing statements like that, should we really be at all surprised that at the beginning of the Trump administration, remember, we had 125 deep state leaks in 126 states? Imagine this. When has it ever happened that a conversation with a sitting president and prime minister or president of another country was ever leaked? I can't think of a time.

And we can't forget that right before he left office, President Obama -- remember, we talked about this -- he signed executive order one, two, triple three, which made it easier to share intelligence so everybody across the government agencies had access. Why did he do it? Why didn't he do it during his term?

Now, there is also widespread unmasking of American citizens, including Trump associates. And at one point during the end of the Obama administration, former U.N. ambassador, remember Samantha Power? Why would she be unmasking people caught up incidentally in surveillance at the rate of one American a day? And then we have Ben Rhodes, former Obama deputy national security adviser, remember, talking about the Attorney Rhee? Remember him? He was a person of interest in the unmasking scandal.

So it appears what the Obama administration was, in fact, deliberate by unleashing this deep state power to strike against the incoming president before he even took office. And take a look at how former Ambassador John Bolton tonight is describing this mess that is going on in this country tonight.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP, "LOU DOBBS TONIGHT"/FBN)

AMB. JOHN BOLTON, FORMER U.S. AMBASSADOR TO THE U.N.: As Wall Street Journal said, this is the first attempt of coup d'etat in American history --

LOU DOBBS, HOST: It's stupid!

BOLTON: I mean, it's a mini coup d'etat but it goes right along with the idea that they should have won the election --

DOBBS: -- the transfer of power is not minor.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: You have to listen. This is not a game. What is happening in this country is dangerous and it needs to be stopped before the deep state can overthrow the president that you, the American people, voted for. A duly elected president. We will have more on that in a minute.

But first, also tonight, we have scandals continuing to engulf the Democratic Party all across the spectrum. Senator Al Franken, "Senator Groper," the one-time darling of the left, he is in deep political turmoil tonight. Two more women are now accusing that senator of misconduct, including a former Congressional aide who alleges that Franken tried to forcibly kiss her in 2006 after taping a radio show.

Now, according to her accounts she rebuff the kiss and Franken allegedly responded by telling her, quote, "Well, it's my right as an entertainer." And Franken has categorically denied that allegation." Now the second new claim of misconduct comes from a woman who says that Franken groped her at an election party in 2008. Now, she described what happened writing quote, "I don't let my husband touch me like that in public."

And today dozens of Democratic senators said it's time for Franken to resign. Franken apparently will make a statement tomorrow and there were reports earlier tonight that he would step down. But Franken's office is disputing that claim and they are now saying no final decision has been made and that Franken is consulting with his family.

And just yesterday, Democratic Congressman John Conyers, he announced, he would not seek re-election. He retired after his own sexual misconduct scandals. By the way for the record in terms of being fair and balanced, I never called for Conyers to resign as I have said many times everyone deserves due process, even somebody that I have deep political disagreements with. He denied the charges in his case.

Senator Franken, different story. He is an admitted groper and there is photographic evidence of that misconduct. We have also seen that picture. I've known Leanne Tweeden for years -- Franken groping radio talk show host Leanne Tweeden on a USO Tour. And by the way, only now we're seeing, after the 8th person has come forward a flood of Democratic senators are calling on Franken to resign.

So don't be fooled by any of this. This Democratic decision today obviously was coordinated and to turn on Franken, it's purely political. If they were really -- all these Democrats, the great champions of women's rights that they claim, why didn't they call for Franken's resignation after the picture? And why did they wait until eight women had to come forward with similar claims and he admitted a lot of it? And after decades of defending sexual predators, oh, Bill Clinton for 30 years, the Democrats were to believe now, finally, are actually credible on this issue? Or they really playing a political price and political game. Is this not about political expediency and not principle in play?

Joining us now, Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi and FOX News legal analyst Gregg Jarrett. Let me start with John Solomon who will join us in a minute. Let's start with all of these revelations.

Rhee, and Peter Strzok and all of these figures. Hillary Clinton supporters, Trump haters.

GREGG JARRETT, FOX NEWS LEGAL ANALYST: I think we now know that the Mueller investigation is illegitimate and corrupt. And Mueller has been using the FBI as a political weapon. And the FBI has become America's secret police. Secret surveillance, wiretapping, intimidation, harassment and threats. It's like the old KGB that comes for you in the dark of the night banging through your door.

HANNITY: By the way, this is not a game. This is not hyperbole you are using here.

JARRETT: No. Ask Paul Manafort, they came for him and broke through his front door.

HANNITY: And if it can happen to him, Gregg.

JARRETT: It can happen to all of us. Absolutely. The FBI is a shadow government now. It has become highly politicized. Peter Strzok is the perfect example of it. He led both the Hillary Clinton investigation and until recently the Mueller investigation. This is a guy who has corrupt political motives. We now know it. The Congress has the emails but he is the tip of the iceberg. There are others, especially Andrew Weissmann and as you pointed out, Jeannie Rhee.

Pam, you are the Attorney General of Florida. I have been laying out a case and it just keeps growing. It might leave some bounds. And the fact I am saying with the surveillance, the unmasking and the leaking of raw intelligence, we now have some members, I want to be very clear, I think the vast majority of our intelligence community, our FBI, they are good people that serve us and do a great job and keep us safe.

But we have some that are using the powerful tools of intelligence they have weaponized it as in the case of General Flynn. And we have now criminalized and politicized at the highest levels. Starting with James Comey and Mueller and his band of merry, you know, Trump haters. You know, criminalizing and politicizing the Justice Department. And justice in America. How dangerous is this?

PAM BONDI , R-FLORIDA ATTORNEY GENERAL: Well, Sean, you and Gregg have laid out an incredible case every night. And here is why it is so important as an attorney general. To me the Justice Department and as it should be for the rest of the country should exhibit the height of objectivity. They should be objective in everything they do for good reason because this is all about the rule of law.

Everything that we fight for as states attorney generals every single day of our careers. And then to see this happen and the way you are laying it out, it would be so easy to find a team, as you said, there are so many great people in the Justice Department. First of all, these people that shouldn't be donating to political campaigns. They could whack them off the list to be involved right off the bat.

Then we have Strzok. Everything you've laid out about Strzok. Lisa Page's girlfriend. Weissmann who the Sally Yates email alone praising her for defying the President of the United States who was her boss. So that's what's so troubling this team that has been assembled when, Sean, you and Gregg have laid out the perfect case why they shouldn't be on the team and there are good people out there.

HANNITY: All right. Let me go back to Gregg.

JARRETT: How else do you explain if the FBI can interview Huma Abedin and Cheryl Mills and even though they lied in the document --

HANNITY: We proved it.

JARRETT: -- they were not charged with lying to the FBI.

HANNITY: Flynn was.

JARRETT: Flynn was because he deviated fractionally from the tape-recorded conversation the FBI obtained.

HANNITY: Illegally.

JARRETT: Illegally of his discussion with the Russian ambassador. I mean, that just underscores the rampant corruption here by the government.

BONDI: And can I add to that?

HANNITY: Pam, go ahead.

BONDI: Yes. Let me add to the Mike Flynn thing. Okay. Not only they have him, they are using him obviously flipping him as a witness which we all know is common to do. But this is a man who now has lied to the Vice President. They have saying he has lied to the FBI. And they are using his son, hanging his son over his head to force him to be a witness.

HANNITY: Yes. By the way, tell us what we want to hear or, well, we may have to go after your son.

JARRETT: It's extortion, it's threats, it's bribes. When you and I do it it's illegal and thrown behind bars. When the government does it, they applaud themselves.

HANNITY: This is the biggest corruption we have ever seen in terms of our justice system I believe in our lifetime.

Thank you both. I appreciate it. Great work both of you.

When we come back, we're going to talk to two Republican lawmakers. They are rightly demanding tonight an investigation be launched into the FBI and their special treatment of Hillary Clinton. And politicizing the Justice Department and justice in America. Speaking of Hillary, does she really think Al Franken should resign? We have asked her. And more, later in the show. Stay with us.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

HANNITY: This is a Fox News alert, massive wildfires are raging tonight in Southern California, destroying homes, shutting down highways and forcing almost 200,000 people tonight to evacuate. You are seeing live pictures right now.

And also tonight, well, today a group of GOP lawmakers, they held a press conference to call out the blatant double standard within the FBI. The obvious conflicts of interest within the Mueller team. Take a look.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Each day we learn more information that reflects the double standard that unfortunately seems to be pervasive at the FBI and at the Department of Justice.

Was this dossier discredited dossier paid for by DNC and Clinton campaign money. Was this dossier in fact used? Was it part of what was taken to the FISA court to allow spying to take place on Americans who were associated with the Trump campaign?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: If Mueller was doing such a great job on investigating the Russian collusion, why could he have not found the conflict of interest within their own agency? The time for action is now. And there is a short fuse on demanding the kind of evidence and transparency that the American people deserve.

HANNITY: Here now live from Washington with much more are Freedom Caucus members. Chairman, Congressman Mark Meadows, North Carolina, Florida Congressman Matt Gaetz is with us.

Congressman Meadows, let me begin with you. And I mean, there is so much to get into. Yes, great point. It was a Hillary Clinton bought and paid for. Hillary controlled DNC bought and paid for propaganda dossier. But did they use that as a reason to get a warrant to surveil against people in either the Trump campaign or the President-elect?

REP. MARK MEADOWS (R), NORTH CAROLINA: Well, we have asked for the FISA application document to be delivered to Congress. We think the American people need to know. But, you know, here's an interesting question, Sean. You and I have been talking about this for week. But here we have Peter Strzok who actually was leading the Clinton investigation. Now, the same person who was not only interviewing Cheryl Mills and Huma Abedin but also was the same individual who changed the exoneration letter from extremely, grossly --

HANNITY: Negligent to extreme carelessness.

MEADOWS: -- negligent, which is a crime --

HANNITY: Right.

MEADOWS: To extreme carelessness. And Yet, here's the person that Bob Mueller asked to be on his investigative team. Now, there's a real problem with that when you know that he was involved in the first investigation. And now we're asking him to go after Trump? I just can't see the logic of it.

HANNITY: I talked, Congressman Gaetz about our weaponization of our powerful tools of intelligence. We are now looking at special counsel that has Comey and Strzok and Paige and Weissmann and all these Democratic donors. And a lot of Trump haters and Hillary lovers, this guy Strzok is tied to everything. Your thoughts? What do we need to do?

REP. MATT GAETZ, R-FLA.: The Attorney General needs to do his job and end this witch-hunt charade. We have a clear double standard. And you see it and the American people see it. Hillary Clinton is being investigated by her own fan club before the 2016 election. And now the only way you seem to get on Mueller's team is to demonstrate a hatred for Donald Trump. I think that the way Mueller built his team was finding people who had a bias against the President and doing everything he could to include them in this investigation. It's absolutely ludicrous. Strzok is a big problem. But you also have a Jeannie Rhee, you got Andrew McCabe telling people we have to treat Hillary Clinton special? I mean she got a small team at headquarters investigating her, meanwhile we have more people investigating Donald Trump than investigated the Oklahoma City bombing for goodness sakes.

HANNITY: Don't we have to consider the fix was in Mark Meadows. Don't we have to have a fair, if we are going to have equal justice under the law?

MEADOWS: We really do. We need not only to have a special prosecutor maybe to investigate the investigators. We are here to tell you tonight not only do we have a task force that is being set up under Chairman Gowdy and Chairman Goodlatte that includes Jim Jordan myself. John Radcliff. We are working with Matt Gaetz and Ron DeSantis to get to the bottom of it, but the American people have had enough. You know here's the interesting thing. I have got union workers back home in North Carolina, who pay dues. Many of them went to Hillary Clinton. Those dues went to Hillary Clinton who actually they ended up buying off Russian informants in an acquirer- style dossier. And they were actually voting for Donald Trump.

HANNITY: It's exactly what they say they don't like about Trump that they can't prove for a year. Last thing, what do we do? I don't even know what to do about Robert Mueller, Congressman Gaetz, last word.

GAETZ: Sean, what I would say is first thing we need to do is get rid of this Mueller investigation. The Attorney General Jeff Sessions sees the same things we see. I don't know why Jeff Sessions has not fired Bob Mueller yet as a consequence of terrible investigation. Second thing we need to do, we need to set up procedures at the FBI where there is more oversight and transparency so this never happens again. So we never get a rogue FBI Director like James Comey who determines the outcome first.

HANNITY: Is this the worst you have ever seen it?

MEADOWS: It is the worst and I will tell you what, the time now for Jeff Sessions to do his job. If he doesn't do his job you, he needs to step aside and let somebody else do it.

HANNITY: Thank you both. I totally completely wholeheartedly agree. I'm told it's being done. There is no evidence of it, where is it? Where's the beef at this point? At this point. One year no evidence on Trump. These are real crimes. This is real corruption. All right. Thank you both for being with us. By the way those wildfires our thoughts and prayers with people in the Ventura county. I lived in the adjacent Santa Barbara County when I was living in California for five years. This is way beyond the pale. Look at that fire. It is scary. Also coming up tonight, does Hillary Clinton think Al Franken should resign? We asked her earlier today, more on that and straight ahead.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

HANNITY: All right. So as we mentioned earlier in the show, an avalanche of Democrats today led by Senator Kirsten Gillibrand have called on "Senator Grope" himself Al Franken to resign after new disturbing allegations of sexual misconduct came out against him today. But one person who has been silent about Al Franken today is none other than the fake champion of women's rights Hillary Clinton. Now, of course, she initially defended Franken when the first accusations against him surfaced, because, quote, he apologized. So Hillary Clinton where are you now? Do you agree with your fellow Democrats? Do you think Al Franken should now step down? And we reached out to Clinton spokesman for a comment, shockingly we have not heard back. I guess they lost my number. Joining me now with reaction former Clinton pollster and Fox News contributor Doug Schoen, conservative columnist Monica Crowley and trial attorney Rebecca Rose Woodland. I am making the case here, 30 years defending the predator Bill Clinton, and, you know, her money that she took from all these countries that abused women, kill gays and lesbians, and persecute Christians and Jews. This is not out of principle this is political expediency. All of a sudden the flood today, it was clearly orchestrated by the Democrats. There is a political strategy behind it. Do you agree with that?

REBECCA ROSE WOODLAND, TRIAL ATTORNEY: I think the strategy is we cannot support men who are sexual abusers. Sexual assault is not acceptable.

HANNITY: Wrong answer.

ROSE WOODLAND: Sean?

HANNITY: They turned on him because they have no choice.

ROSE WOODLAND: They don't, no.

HANNITY: They want to say oh, let's go after the Republicans.

ROSE WOODLAND: No.

HANNITY: That is a 30 years of Clinton.

ROSE WOODLAND: There should not be hypocrisy I have said this over and over on your show. If Bill Clinton was a sexual abuser. Let us bring it to the court.

HANNITY: Was he? We know he was.

ROSE WOODLAND: That is what I'm saying. Let's bring it to the forefront and bring it forward. Same way as people are talking about Roy Moore. Same way people talked about Conyers. Let's keep this nonpartisan and let us make this world a better place for people who work and live.

HANNITY: Probably be the better good out of this.

ROSE WOODLAND: Yes. I hope so.

HANNITY: And that is the people treated with the respect they deserve, Monica.

MONICA CROWLEY, AMERICAN COLUMNIST AND POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: Well there is something much bigger going on here. When you talk about the left. Always keep in mind they are always playing three dimensional chess. What they are doing is essentially a purge of the old school Democrats. They want to rewrite the rules after this huge cultural moment that we're experiencing in this country. They wants to tee this up where they are getting rid of all of these predators in their own party, so that they can run more women. And younger women. They are teeing this all up so that they can redefine the culture and redefine our politics, so I think --

HANNITY: Is it believable after 30 years of defending.

CROWLEY: Listen, they are driving the stake through the heart of the Clintons, because they are yesterday's news. Barack Obama is running the Democratic Party now. He knows that the Party has to start fresh. So you have got to burn it down to the ground so that can you cultivate fresher talent. This means a lot of women. A lot more minorities. A lot more folks on the radical left. They are purging the party and this also includes very powerful Democrats like Harvey Weinstein, et cetera. This is like a controlled burn fire.

HANNITY: Apparently the Clinton team was warned about him back in 2008 by Tina Brown and Ileana Dunham this past year.

CROWLEY: This is like a controlled forest fire. You burn it all down to the ground so you can have fresh growth. That is what's really going on.

DOUG SCHOEN, FOX NEWS CONTRIBUTOR: Here is what is going on. You said it is all politics. I don't necessarily disagree with anyone here. In fact, I think smart intelligent comments. But it is politics. Because the Democrats are ahead by 10, 11 points in the generic vote for congress. The only thing that can derail them is having to defend the indefensible which is Franken. Franken has got to go. I mean, this is terrible for the Democrats. Now, if the Party goes hard left, if Keith Ellison, god forbid, replaces Al Franken we will be going in an even worse direction as a Party. I say that as a centrist. But candidly, this is about preserving the Democrats.

HANNITY: Do you know why I can't take this seriously, because the Clinton machine and the predatory behavior of Bill was defended last year during an election year?

SCHOEN: Right.

HANNITY: Now all of a sudden Hillary is no threat to becoming empowered. They don't need to kiss their --

SCHOEN: Right.

HANNITY: Now they are being a little more honest, because it's political expediency, right or wrong?

ROSE WOODLAND: Look. No matter what's happening, the point is these people are getting purged. The bad people have to go.

HANNITY: It's not out of principle.

SCHOEN: It's politics, Sean. It's politics. Look for both Clintons for different reasons, best they receive attention. Hillary's book was ridiculous, Bill Clinton at this point really is yesterday's news. Get off the stage.

CROWLEY: It is politics but it is also very strategic, because they are teeing this up for 2018 and 2020. They want to say, look, we took care of all of our perverts. We got rid all of them. The Republicans still have a bunch of perverts. We're going to run a woman. We'll run Kamala Harris for California president or Mitchell Obama for President. They are team up.

HANNITY: Repeat that again. They will run Michelle Obama for President.

SCHOEN: Strongest in the polls.

CROWLEY: And they are going to run a minority woman. Mark my words, you heard it here first, it is either California Senator Kamala Harris or Michelle Obama. They are teeing this political moment marrying it to the cultural moment so they can achieve that goal.

HANNITY: I don't even disagree with that point. I think you are right. Doug?

SCHOEN: Here's the thing. The Democrats have a huge, huge problem. Conyers resign something a step in the right direction. I'm not clear that his son as a replacement.

HANNITY: The TMZ story on his son, is that true?

SCHOEN: I don't know, Sean, but it is a very bad story. If it is true, I don't know. Let's put it this way, the Democrats to survive as a viable entity. Given that they have gone hard left have to get rid of what you call perverts or sexual predators.

HANNITY: Where is the outrage over what team Mueller and his merry band of Clinton-loving, Trump-hating, you know, corrupt. I have never seen this level of corruption in my life. And to hear nothing but crickets from most of the media, and the Democratic Party, this is chilling. Because this is the constitution. Literally being stomped on and shredded before our eyes and few people seem to want to deal with it?

ROSE WOODLAND: We are dealing with it here. Right? We are dealing with it here.

HANNITY: I would like to say we are one of very few. We are it.

ROSE WOODLAND: We are the voice for that we're the voice for the constitution. We are the voice for these women. From the beginning, Sean, you said we can't make a decision. We need to hear the stories of the females who came forward, who strongly came forward thank god they did. You are talking about the FBI. The inherent corruption we have seen shot through at the highest levels not rank and file, but the leadership, we are in a very dangerous moment in this country right now. This is the top law enforcement agency in the industry.

HANNITY: Scary.

SCHOEN: Very scary.

HANNITY: This is banana republic police state stuff that we are talking about.

SCHOEN: What I focus is on is this rouge FBI agent who changed Comey's statement.

HANNITY: Comey exonerated her didn't do the investigation that is called obstruction of justice, where I live.

SCHOEN: The statement itself would have led to a felony indictment.

HANNITY: The fix was in, Doug.

SCHOEN: I understand.

HANNITY: Sad, we got to break. Thank you all.

SCHOEN: Thank you.

ROSE WOODLAND: Thank you.

HANNITY: When we comeback President Trump decision. This is historic today. Mark my words, moving the Israeli embassy to Jerusalem after so many people, Presidents said they would do it, it is now tonight driving radical Islam as crazy. They are talking about a day of rage. We will talk to Israel's Ambassador to the U.S. Ron Dermer, coming up straight ahead.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: It is time to officially recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. While previous Presidents have made this a major campaign promise, they failed to deliver. Today, I am delivering. Consistent with the Jerusalem embassy act, I am also directing the state department to begin preparation to move the American embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: President Trump earlier today, this is a huge historical day recognizing Jerusalem as the true capital of Israel, which it is. It is so refreshing. We have an American President actually keeping a campaign promise. Not everyone is happy with the President's decision. Hamas calling for quote a day of rage on Friday. Here with reaction to this historic and right announcement Israel's ambassador to the United States Ron Dermer. So many promise, so few delivered, this is the capital of the great state of Israel, one of our closest allies.

RON DERMER, ISRAEL'S AMBASSADOR TO THE UNITED STATES: Absolutely. It's historic decision. It's not just the President since the Jerusalem embassy act was signed about 20 years ago. It's all the Presidents since the state of Israel was established, there were 12 previous Presidents and none of them actually recognized Jerusalem as Israel's capital and it's been our capital since 1949 of the state of Israel. It's been the capital of the Jewish people for 3,000 years. Probably longer than I don't know if there is another country that can boast a capital that is 3,000 years old or people that can be both. But there had been 12 previous president and none of them made the decision that the 13th President and 13 is a very lucky number for the Jewish people and it certainly was today. And the Jewish people in the Jewish state will be eternally grateful to President Trump for making this decision.

HANNITY: This will go down in history also. I, for the life of me, don't understand how others have been so hostile to this little country. Ron, I have been with you in Israel. It's the size of New Jersey. And the hostility and the tensions and surrounded by enemies going back to, you know, the U.N. partition plan to '67 to '73 to modern day. Hamas, a day of rage? That is an average day in the neighborhood, because they have committed themselves in their charter for the destruction of Israel.

DERMER: Yeah. For Hamas a day of rage is not news. They probably have 365 days of the year to rage against Israel. They rage against our existence of the state. Their charter calls for murder of Jews worldwide. I don't know if they need another reason to hate Jews. Maybe they will call for the murder of Jews around the universe. They hate Israel, they want to destroy us. But fortunately, we have the ability to defend ourselves, and we also have a great friend in President Trump and we deeply appreciate the decision that he made today.

HANNITY: We're almost running out of time. There is unique, because of the threat of hegemony in the region there is unprecedented alliance emerging and that is, Israel, United Arab Emirates, Jordan, Egypt, the Saudis, how closely now are we to a chance of an alliance nobody dreamed of before?

DERMER: Well I think that you're right, Sean, that people recognize in the Arab world that Israel is not their enemy, but a potential ally to deal with these challenges. I think President Trump recognizes that as well and that affords a historic opportunity for peace. I think what the President has done right now in this decision is actually helped us advance peace by starting to deal with reality and truth in our region.

HANNITY: All right. Ambassador, this is historic day. The right thing to do. Thank you for being with us. When we come back more on the wildfires in Southern California.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

HANNITY: As we mentioned at the top of the show devastating wildfires continue to sweep all across southern California, Ventura County. I live just, what, 30 minutes from there in Santa Barbara earlier my life and career. On the ground with the latest, Fox News senior correspondent, our friend Adam Housley. Adam it looks devastating. So many evacuated tonight. I hope they're all safe.

ADAM HOUSLEY, FOX NEWS SENIOR CORRESPONDENT: Very similar to what we saw two months ago in the Napa valley, Sonoma valley area, the wine country fire here. The fire raced into a very large city really, Ventura. Bringing a couple of hundred homes, it is called the Thomas fire and the bad news is the wind is coming back. You can now see it here. It had been gone for about 24 hours and the worry was it would come back, the forecast calling for maybe gust as much 80 miles an hour into tomorrow. That will stoke this fire, which will burn out in to the wildland, it is going towards the town of Ojai. That town is threatened by this fire and this wind has just come back maybe in the last 10 minutes. The one they were worried about. Stoke this fire potentially. Even the stuff behind is totally burned down. They're worried this stuff could potentially throw out some embers to get catch other homes and hillside to fire here in Ventura. Even though the fire moved through here a day ago. Sean, this hour really the worry is all across southern California with these winds. Especially with this fire, the Thomas fire burning again towards Ojai tonight. We will keep you updated of course and all the developments here as the Santa Ana has come back, Sean.

HANNITY: I expected tonight saying Santa Ana with huge winds spread the fire, I know it's devastating for many of you to lose your property you worked your whole life for. Please put your safety first. Adam, thank you. All right. That is all the time we have left this evening. We will always be fair and balanced. Let not your heart be troubled. The news continues, Lauren Ingraham is next. Laura.



Content and Programming Copyright 2017 Fox News Network, LLC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Copyright 2017 CQ-Roll Call, Inc. All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ-Roll Call. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.