The Freedom Project
In the News Home Monday, May 12, 2008

Boehner Responds to Obama Claim that Israel is a "Constant Sore"

RATE IT | Share Save DISCUSS DIGG PRINT del.icio.us EMAIL Technorati TAG IT reddit Related News Related News Boehner Statement on Governor Palin's Address to the 2008 GOP Convention BOEHNER ADDRESSES 2008 REPUBLICAN NATIONAL CONVENTION Boehner Expects Successful Convention, Tight Race Boehner: A Preview of the Convention and the Fall Campaign Boston Globe: GOP leader: Palin Trumps Obama and Biden Multimedia Multimedia Boehner Highlights Pelosi Premium on Fox News FNC: Colombia Free Trade Deal "Fell Prey to Election Year Politics" GOP Leaders to Fight Massive Tax Increases Boehner Addresses American Legion Conference "We're Waiting" - Dems Fail to Act on Terrorist Surveillance Issues Issues War on Terror WASHINGTON, DC – House Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) responded tonight to Democratic Presidential candidate Barack Obama’s remark that Israel is a “constant sore” that “does infect” American foreign policy. Boehner released the following statement: “Israel is a critical American ally and a beacon of democracy in the Middle East, not a ‘constant sore’ as Barack Obama claims. Obama’s latest remark, and his commitment to ‘opening a dialogue’ with sponsors of terrorism, echoes past statements by Jimmy Carter who once called Israel an ‘apartheid state.’ It’s another sign that Obama is part of the broken Washington Americans are rejecting. “During his three years in the Senate, Obama and his Democratic allies have failed to take our national security seriously, opposing critical, bipartisan terrorist surveillance legislation and supporting every effort to choke off resources for our troops in harm’s way. The policies he promotes – which neatly reflect the weak national security agenda long pushed by liberal Democrats and far Left groups like MoveOn.org – are far from ‘change.’ They undermine the national security of both Israel and the United States, and give our enemies rhetorical cover to continue their campaign against the Jewish state. “Americans expect more and deserve better from their government, and Republican candidates nationwide are ready to provide real national security solutions – the change the American people deserve – where the Democratic Majority and its presidential candidates have fallen short.” NOTE : In an interview with The Atlantic, Obama reaffirmed his commitment to “opening up dialogue” with those who wish to see Israel destroyed. He referred to the plight of the Israeli people as a “constant wound” and a “constant sore” that “does infect all of our foreign policy.” Boehner serves as honorary chairman of The Freedom Project (www.freedomproject.org), a political action committee (PAC) established in 1995 to provide assistance to Republican candidates for federal office. Its mission is to help Republicans earn back the majority in the U.S. House of Representatives. The Freedom Project is committed to a better America based on freedom and security, empowered citizens and personal responsibility. # # # # #

Join the Freedom Project Today!

Support Republican Candidates!

Build Your Own Project!

TAKE ACTION NOW JOIN CONTRIBUTE BUILD

Pending Contributions

No contributions pending.

GET STARTED Rapid Recovery Plan John Boehner has a rapid economic recovery plan that will cut taxes and create new jobs -- and can begin working quickly. WATCH VIDEO From The Blog

Posted by TFP at 11/26/2008 11:24 AM

"More Questions Are Being Raised" About Rangel's Ethics Problems >> Posted by TFP at 11/24/2008 2:23 PM

On FNS, Boehner Urges Obama to Take Tax Hikes Off the Table >> Posted by TFP at 11/20/2008 2:58 PM

Dems "Thank the Lord" for Secret Ballot >> What Happened?



Join the Team