Loans give GM, Chrysler 3 months
WASHINGTON — Tossed a $17.4-billion lifeline by the White House on Friday, General Motors and Chrysler now leap directly into about three months of feverish long-term planning and blunt dealing with creditors, shareholders, workers and dealers or face bankruptcy and possible dissolution by spring.

It's a daunting challenge.



Negotiate a new labor contract. Shed excess dealers, who have shown an inclination to sue to protect their franchises. Renegotiate debts with creditors — a process that can take more than a year in bankruptcy court — in a matter of weeks. All while trying to sell more cars and trucks in the worst auto market in at least a generation.



The loans offered by President George W. Bush — $9.4 billion for GM through January with an additional $4 billion contingent on congressional action next year and $4 billion for Chrysler — not only call for deep concessions outlined in wide-ranging plans due by mid-February but start a ticking bomb that could explode in Detroit's face unless dramatic change is on the way.



President-elect Barack Obama, whose administration will inherit the loans and be asked to decide whether to accept the carmakers' plans or essentially force them into bankruptcy by March 31, warned GM and Chrysler that it is an opportunity not to be wasted.



“The American people's patience is running out,” Obama said in Chicago.



Still, Bush's move ended a tense week of waiting for Michigan, its automakers and millions of workers tied to the industry across the nation. As recently as Thursday, the White House suggested bankruptcy was an option.



“Eighty-five percent of our business is GM,” said Jalita Shabazz, a clerk at a Godiva chocolate shop in Detroit's Renaissance Center, where GM has its world headquarters. “It was such a relief,” she said, expressing the sentiment of much of Michigan and auto-dependent areas around the country.



In his statement Friday, Bush said the risk to the economy of the automakers failing — the result of poor sales, a credit crunch and dwindling cash reserves — at a time of recession was too dire to ignore.



“If we were to allow the free market to take its course now, it would almost certainly lead to disorderly bankruptcy and liquidation,” Bush said. “Under ordinary economic circumstances, I would say this is the price that failed companies must pay — and I would not favor intervening. …



“But these are not ordinary circumstances.”



On news of the loans, GM's stock rose 83 cents to $4.49, up 23% but far below its yearly high of $29.28.



Standard & Poor's continued to recommend sale of GM shares, with an analyst saying he expects GM to run through the loans and need more. Chrysler isn't publicly traded, but its future remains uncertain, with its majority owner, Cerberus Capital Management LP, willing to trade its equity for concessions to meet the loan requirements.



Both companies had said they could run short on cash for operations by Dec. 31 without the bridge loans.



The three-year loans stake the money to the companies beginning Dec. 29, with an interest rate tied to the rate banks use to lend money to each other. As of Friday, the loans would have carried a 5% interest rate.



Far more significant to the automakers, their employees and others, however, are the terms of the loans.



As worked out in legislation that failed to pass the Senate a week ago, they call for the government to receive nonvoting stock worth 20% the cost of the loans, limit executive compensation, eliminate corporate jets and require the government's debt to be paid before others if the companies fail and liquidate their assets.

Paulson oversees aid

First under Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and then under whomever Obama designates, the government will have the authority to veto transactions of more than $100 million and receive, by Feb. 17, plans for how the companies plan to achieve viability, become profitable, make autos that meet strict fuel-efficiency standards and produce “a product mix that is competitive in the United States.”



More daunting may be targets set by the White House, which require the companies to work toward reducing debt by two-thirds, cut in half the cash owed to an employee health care plan and make UAW wages competitive with those paid by Honda, Nissan and Toyota at their U.S. operations by the end of 2009.



The president's designee, by March 31, can waive those targets but must explain why.



If the designee finds that not enough progress is made by that date, he or she can call the loans in 30 days, forcing the companies into bankruptcy.



“It's an interesting agreement in that it is fairly vague,” said Aaron Bragman, an automotive analyst for Global Insight in Troy. “It does not set any mandates. … It sets negotiable and renegotiable targets.”



“They've basically opted to punt, and the Obama administration is going to take it for the return,” Bragman said.



Said Gov. Jennifer Granholm: “This is not the end of the story. It just gets us to March.”

Not enough cuts?

GM Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Rick Wagoner said he was “highly confident” the company could meet the loan terms and the viability tests outlined by Bush.

Under those terms, GM may seek an additional $4 billion in February if Congress releases the second half of a $700-billion Troubled Asset Relief Program that was originally intended to help financial companies. Despite its reluctance to do so, the Bush administration agreed to use some of that funding from the first $350 billion authorized by Congress to prop up the automakers.

Chrysler Chairman and CEO Bob Nardelli said the company would focus on returning to profitability.

Earlier this month, before a second round of hearings on Capitol Hill, both automakers and Ford — which has said it doesn't need a bridge loan — presented plans for their restructurings.

The automakers discussed cutbacks, reducing brands, changing their product lines and entering negotiations with stakeholders to reduce pension and health care costs. Those plans will be the starting point for negotiations.

The president signaled that the time frame could give the companies the room needed to make the financial and legal preparations to prepare for bankruptcy reorganization.

Critics on Capitol Hill carped that the president wasn't demanding enough.

Alabama Sen. Richard Shelby, a Republican who has become a symbol of those who blocked the rescue plan in Congress, said “the only assurance the taxpayer has is that these companies will be back for more money soon.”

Sen. Bob Corker, R-Tenn., who helped write the terms that became the administration's targets in the loans, said he would have preferred to see them as requirements, not goals.

Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., who has fought for weeks to get funding for the automakers, breathed a sigh of relief Friday but argued that the requirements placed on the companies are stern enough.

“This isn't anything like a blank check,” he said. “It's the opposite.”

Contact TODD SPANGLER at tspangler@freepress.com. Staff writers John Gallagher, Jewel Gopwani and Brent Snavely contributed to this report.