Bush and McCain's Social Security road show
SANTAFENEWMEXICAN.COM News: Politics, Santa Fe / NM

www.SantaFeNewMexican.com has moved.

Please update your bookmarks to http://www.santafenewmexican.com.

This is an archived site and will not be updated with news and information beginning Oct. 11, 2007. Bush and McCain's Social Security road show (38 comments; last comment posted March 25, 2005 04:19 pm) print | email this story By JENNIFER LOVEN | Associated Press

March 22, 2005



The Arizona Republican accompanied Bush on Monday to the senator's home state and Colorado to try to help sell the public and Congress on the president's proposal for a major Social Security overhaul.



Bush again focused on calming seniors' fears that his plan would mean their checks would stop coming or be cut and tried to convince them that adding private accounts to Social Security would be in the best interest of their children and grandchildren. Bush said he was open to any idea Democrats, or others, want to bring forward to solve Social Security's fiscal ills, and he pledged no political retribution.



"I'm willing to listen to any solution," Bush said in Denver. "I'm confident that eventually the will will be there to get something done."



McCain, after jokes that had the audience howling and some unvarnished adoration of "the leadership of this man," had a little different message.



In remarks that got sharper as the day wore on, he accused Democrats of not working toward a bipartisan solution.



"We find this reluctance to even come to the table," he said. "We've started the debate and yet we find that the opponents will not sit down with us."



He also had what he called a "little straight talk" for AARP, the powerful lobby for older citizens that opposes Bush's plan to allow younger workers to divert a portion of their Social Security payroll taxes into personal accounts that could be invested in the stock market in trade for reduced guaranteed benefits.



The group is running television and radio ads during the two-week Easter break while members of Congress are back in their home districts.



"My dear friends at ... AARP, if you don't like our solutions, give us one," McCain said. "Sit down and join us in this debate. Don't block it."



It all went so well that McCain, perhaps enticed by a day riding around in the presidential limousine and aboard Air Force One, decided to accompany Bush to an event Tuesday in Albuquerque, White House press secretary Scott McClellan said. McCain had been scheduled to drop off Bush's itinerary after Monday's last stop in Denver.



The original reason for the Albuquerque stop was to give a boost to New Mexico Sen. Pete Domenici, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee that will have a hand in any Social Security changes.



Vice President Dick Cheney was doing his part, hosting town hall meetings Monday and Tuesday in Bakersfield, Calif., and Reno, Nev.



A majority of Americans say they disapprove of Bush's handling of Social Security overall, and a majority also opposes the creation of personal investment accounts, according to a recent AP-Ipsos poll.



By Tuesday afternoon, Bush was to be back at his Crawford, Texas, ranch, with meetings scheduled there for Wednesday with Mexican President Vicente Fox and Canadian Prime Minister Paul Martin. He was to remain in Texas for an Easter break until March 28. ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. (AP) - There's another showing Tuesday of the good-cop, bad-cop routine featuring President Bush and Sen. John McCain, Bush's one-time presidential rival who has become a big booster of the president's Social Security plan.The Arizona Republican accompanied Bush on Monday to the senator's home state and Colorado to try to help sell the public and Congress on the president's proposal for a major Social Security overhaul.Bush again focused on calming seniors' fears that his plan would mean their checks would stop coming or be cut and tried to convince them that adding private accounts to Social Security would be in the best interest of their children and grandchildren. Bush said he was open to any idea Democrats, or others, want to bring forward to solve Social Security's fiscal ills, and he pledged no political retribution."I'm willing to listen to any solution," Bush said in Denver. "I'm confident that eventually the will will be there to get something done."McCain, after jokes that had the audience howling and some unvarnished adoration of "the leadership of this man," had a little different message.In remarks that got sharper as the day wore on, he accused Democrats of not working toward a bipartisan solution."We find this reluctance to even come to the table," he said. "We've started the debate and yet we find that the opponents will not sit down with us."He also had what he called a "little straight talk" for AARP, the powerful lobby for older citizens that opposes Bush's plan to allow younger workers to divert a portion of their Social Security payroll taxes into personal accounts that could be invested in the stock market in trade for reduced guaranteed benefits.The group is running television and radio ads during the two-week Easter break while members of Congress are back in their home districts."My dear friends at ... AARP, if you don't like our solutions, give us one," McCain said. "Sit down and join us in this debate. Don't block it."It all went so well that McCain, perhaps enticed by a day riding around in the presidential limousine and aboard Air Force One, decided to accompany Bush to an event Tuesday in Albuquerque, White House press secretary Scott McClellan said. McCain had been scheduled to drop off Bush's itinerary after Monday's last stop in Denver.The original reason for the Albuquerque stop was to give a boost to New Mexico Sen. Pete Domenici, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee that will have a hand in any Social Security changes.Vice President Dick Cheney was doing his part, hosting town hall meetings Monday and Tuesday in Bakersfield, Calif., and Reno, Nev.A majority of Americans say they disapprove of Bush's handling of Social Security overall, and a majority also opposes the creation of personal investment accounts, according to a recent AP-Ipsos poll.By Tuesday afternoon, Bush was to be back at his Crawford, Texas, ranch, with meetings scheduled there for Wednesday with Mexican President Vicente Fox and Canadian Prime Minister Paul Martin. He was to remain in Texas for an Easter break until March 28.