Explaining Hillary Clinton's, Bernie Sanders' votes on the auto bailout
Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE IN FLINT 7th Democratic debate: What you missed from Flint | 2:58 Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders took to the stage in Flint, Michigan for the 7th Democratic debate. The big issues included education reform, climate change, racism and, of course, Donald Trump. VPC 1 of 9 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE IN FLINT Watch the sassiest moments of the CNN Democratic debate | 2:47 Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders not only made a few quips about each other but also about the GOP candidates at the CNN democratic debate in Flint, Michigan. VPC 2 of 9 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE IN FLINT Moment of silence held for Nancy Reagan during debate | 0:38 A moment of silence was held for former first lady, Nancy Reagan, during the CNN Democratic debate. 3 of 9 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE IN FLINT Hundreds protest in Flint before Democratic debate | 0:57 Hundreds from different organizations came together Sunday night to protest and rally before the Democratic debate. Katrease Stafford Detroit Free Press 4 of 9 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE IN FLINT Raw video: Protest outside Democratic debate in Flint | 0:51 Protesters gather outside Whiting Auditorium in Flint, the site of tonight's Democratic presidential debate. Videolicious 5 of 9 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE IN FLINT People demonstrate outside of Democratic debate in Flint | 0:32 People gather to demonstrate and support their candidates outside of Whiting Auditorium in Flint at the Democratic debate Sunday, March 6, 2016. Videolicious 6 of 9 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE IN FLINT Hundreds rally and protest before Democratic debate | 1:59 Hundreds came to rally and protest in Flint Sunday before the Democratic debate. Katrease Stafford Detroit Free Press 7 of 9 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE IN FLINT Democratic presidential candidate, Sen. Bernie Sanders | 0:44 Democratic presidential candidate, Sen. Bernie Sanders, speaks during A Future to Believe In campaign rally at Macomb Community College on Saturday, March 5, 2016, in Warren, MI. Salwan Georges, Detroit Free Press 8 of 9 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE IN FLINT Sanders, Clinton slam Republican 'insult-fest' | 1:17 Senators Ted Cruz and Bernie Sanders scored key victories in the 2016 quest for the White House, but Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton remained their parties' frontrunners as the 'Super Saturday' results came in. 9 of 9 Last VideoNext Video 7th Democratic debate: What you missed from Flint

Watch the sassiest moments of the CNN Democratic debate

Moment of silence held for Nancy Reagan during debate

Hundreds protest in Flint before Democratic debate

Raw video: Protest outside Democratic debate in Flint

People demonstrate outside of Democratic debate in Flint

Hundreds rally and protest before Democratic debate

Democratic presidential candidate, Sen. Bernie Sanders

Sanders, Clinton slam Republican 'insult-fest'

Democratic presidential candidate, Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., right, argues a point as Hillary Clinton listens during a Democratic presidential primary debate at the University of Michigan-Flint, Sunday, March 6, 2016, in Flint. (Photo: Charlie Neibergall, Associated Press)

Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders discussed their stances on the auto industry bailout during Flint's Democratic presidential debate. Here's the nub of the fight over Clinton's support and Sanders' opposition to the auto bailout.

The $82 billion that helped finance the bankruptcy of General Motors, Chrysler, their finance subsidiaries -- GMAC and Chrysler Financial -- and a handful of large suppliers were part of a much larger Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) that covered more than $700 billion that went to bailout the largest banks, and AIG, the insurance giant that has issued credit default swaps that came due when the banks could not cover their losses on mortgage-backed securities.

In short, a Senator or congressman could not vote to rescue GM and Chrysler without voting to provide the money to keep the nation's largest investment banks from failing.

Sen. Clinton voted yes. Sen. Sanders voted no.

It's worth remembering that until the TARP funds were released, banks, as well as other lenders, had stopped financing loans and leases for new cars and trucks. As distasteful as it was to help global banks that made disastrously worthless mortgage loans, without the restoration of credit it's likely that no effort to ignite an economic recovery would have gained traction.

Earlier, Secretary Clinton talked about Johnson Controls, a Milwaukee-based company that benefited from the $82 billion auto bailout because in 2009 it was one of the large auto suppliers that received some of that emergency funding.

More recently, Johnson Controls, which had a large presence in Plymouth and near Grand Rapids, has sold most of its automotive operations. In January it announced plans to acquire Tyco International, a company that had transformed itself from a diversified holding company into one focused on fire and security products.

In that process Tyco established a headquarters in Bermuda where it pays a much lower tax rate than in the U.S.

So if Johnson Controls completes the acquisition of Tyco, the combined company would be based in Ireland, which has a corporate tax rate of 12.5%, among the world’s lowest. The companies project they will save $150 million each year in lower taxes.

The practice, called a tax inversion, has motivated a number of recent acquisition.

Contact Greg Gardner: 313-222-8762 or ggardner@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter @GregGardner12

Flint presidential Democratic debate coverage roundup:

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1p0Z1jM