Can Medicaid cover my abortion?
Medicaid covers abortion in 15 states in the U.S. If you live in one of the states below, click on the state name to be taken to some instructions about how to enroll in Medicaid quickly. If you want to use Medicaid to cover your abortion, you must live in and have your abortion in the same state. Your Medicaid coverage will not follow you if you need to travel out of state.

If you do not live in one of these 15 states, your Medicaid will not cover your abortion. Many clinics offer discounts for women who are enrolled in Medicaid. Read more about those discounts.

A few notes on applying for Medicaid:

Although in many states you can apply for Medicaid by mail or over the phone, we strongly recommend applying in person and early in the day (when the office opens) at your local enrollment office. This way is usually the most efficient and will help you enroll as soon as possible.

and early in the day (when the office opens) at your local enrollment office. This way is usually the most efficient and will help you enroll as soon as possible. Be confident when you apply and know that, if you qualify for Medicaid, you have the right to receive abortion coverage and enroll in a timely manner.

When applying, be sure to tell your caseworker that you are pregnant and would like the application process to be expedited. You do not need to tell them you are planning to have an abortion.

Federal Poverty Guidelines are often used to determine Medicaid eligibility. However, in some states that cover abortion, pregnant women may have a higher income than the guidelines for other people. Check the specific income guidelines for your state below.

Proof of identity is not the same as proof of citizenship. If you need to prove that you are a U.S. citizen, you'll probably need a birth certificate or passport.

Please note: The information provided on this site is intended to provide a general overview of Medicaid specifically for abortion coverage. We aren't the government, so we've pulled this information from government websites and from the experience of abortion fund activists. The information will change (sometimes quickly) and we’ll do our best to keep up, but you should always check with the Medicaid office in your state or call a community health center for specific information.

ALASKA

Denali KidCare is Alaska’s state Medicaid program for pregnant women and it covers abortion.

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

· your income is within 175% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines (click here for more information)

· you can provide proof of pregnancy from your health care provider, AND

· you live in Alaska

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP: Denali KidCare requires proof of U.S. citizenship for citizens. Legal immigrants may apply if they provide proof of immigration status.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· proof of income

· proof of pregnancy (a letter from your doctor)

· citizenship documentation/proof of immigration status, AND

· proof of identity

HOW TO APPLY: Go in person to the Denali KidCare office, your local Public Assistance office, or fee agent to fill out an application. A list of district offices may be found here.

OR

Download the Denali KidCare application, fill it out, and bring it to one of these places with the required documentation

HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE?

State law requires the application to be processed within 30 days, though the office tries to do so within 10-14 days.

CONTACT INFORMATION for Denali KidCare

Anchorage area: 907-269-6529

Other areas: 1-888-318-8890 (toll free)

Email: [email protected]

Denali KidCare website



CLINICS ACCEPTING ALASKA MEDICAID:

Alaska Women's Health Services (Anchorage, AK)

Colleen Murphy, MD FACOG (Anchorage, AK)

Planned Parenthood of Alaska (Anchorage, AK; Fairbanks, AK)

George C. Stransky, MD FACOG (Anchorage, AK)

Michael Merrick, MD (Kenai, AK)

Susan Lemagie (Palmer, AK)

CALIFORNIA

California’s state Medicaid program is called Medi-Cal . The requirements and enrollment process will vary depending on the county where you live. Medi-Cal covers abortion.

If you are receiving Social Security Income or CalWORKS, you automatically receive Medi-Cal and do not need to apply separately.

There is a separate Medi-Cal program just for pregnant women and it is often much faster and easier to get onto this program than regular Medi-Cal. This program covers abortion. The program is sometimes called Medi-Cal for Pregnancy, the 200% program, Restricted Medi-Cal for Pregnancy, or the Pregnant Women’s Program.

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

· your income is within 200% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines, AND

· you are pregnant (you do not need to provide proof of pregnancy; you can simply say that you are pregnant)

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP: You do NOT need to provide proof of citizenship if you are applying for Medi-Cal for Pregnancy. Sometimes Medi-Cal eligibility workers get this wrong, though. If you run into a problem with someone asking you for proof of citizenship, you can call your local abortion fund, ACCESS, for help: 1-800-376-4636 (English) or 1-888-442-2237 (español).

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· Proof of identity AND

· Proof of income

HOW TO APPLY: Go in person to your nearest county office. A list of offices where you may apply for Medi-Cal is available here.

You may also go to a hospital or clinic where county eligibility workers are located.

When applying for Restricted Pregnancy Medi-Cal, you do not need to say that you plan to have an abortion.

You also may download an application online.

CONTACT INFORMATION:

Find out the phone number of your local county office here.

If you would like advice or counseling on how to apply for Medi-Cal, you may call ACCESS, a non-profit reproductive justice organization, at 1-800-376-4636 (English) or 1-888-442-2237 (Spanish)

CONNECTICUT

The state Medicaid program for pregnant women in Connecticut is called HUSKY. HUSKY covers abortion.

Connecticut’s Healthy Start program helps low-income pregnant women obtain HUSKY coverage.

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

· You are a pregnant woman making $42,156 or less.

· You are a pregnant woman with one other person (a child or other household member) relying on her income making $47,976 or less.

· You are a pregnant woman with two other people relying on her income making $57,636 or less.

· You are a pregnant woman with three other people relying on her income making $67,536 or less.

· You are a pregnant woman with four other people relying on her income making $77,436 or less.

Note: If your income is close to the cut-off point, go ahead and fill out an application for HUSKY. The state may choose not to count all of your income and you may qualify anyway.

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP: There is a brochure on the HUSKY website [English|español] that explains what documents you will need as proof of citizenship.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· Proof of identity AND

· Proof of income

HOW TO APPLY: The fastest way to apply is to go in person to your local community-based enrollment agency that offers Healthy Start services (find your closest enrollment office here).

Be sure to let your case worker know that you are pregnant and would like your application to be processed very quickly.

You also may download an application online before going to apply.

CONTACT INFORMATION for HUSKY

For information: 1-877-284-8759

To apply by phone: 1-800-656-6684

CLINICS ACCEPTING HUSKY STATE MEDICAID:

Planned Parenthood (all)

Summit Medical Center Inc. (Bridgeport, Hartford)

Hartford GYN Center(Hartford)

Medical Options (Danbury)

HAWAII

The state Medicaid program of Hawai’i is called QUEST and it covers abortion.

If you are a documented immigrant and are pregnant, you may qualify for the State Medical Assistance Program for Pregnant Immigrant Women

YOU ARE IF ELIGIBLE IF:

· you are a Hawaii resident

· you are a U.S. citizen or documented immigrant

· you can’t receive health insurance from your employer, AND

· you are making less than $27,000 if no one else relies on your income. If you have another person in the household, you are eligible if the household income is under $33,900. If there are three people in the household, the household income must be under $40,800. If there are four people living in the household, the household income must be under about $48,000; if there are five people in the household, the income must be under $54,600.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· proof of your citizenship status, alien status, and/or Social Security Number

· proof of identity

· proof of income

HOW TO APPLY:

1. Fill out Medical Assistance Application for pregnant women. You can download the application online.

2. Deliver the completed application in person or send in the mail. For information on the local Med-QUEST offices in your area, click here.

CONTACT INFORMATION for Med-Quest:

Click here to find the number of your local Med-QUEST Eligibility Office.

MARYLAND

The state medicaid program in Maryland is called Maryland Medical Assistance. If you are already enrolled in Medical Assistance, ask your clinic or hospital if they will accept this coverage. Because of the amount of time it takes to enroll in Medical Assistance, however, we do not recommend that you apply for Medical Assistance if you are trying to raise money for your abortion. Instead, run a search for abortion funds that may be able to assist you. Note that there is an abortion fund in Washington, DC, that provides help to women living in Maryland.

MASSACHUSETTS

There are three major public insurance options that cover abortion in Massachusetts: MassHealth, Commonwealth Care, and Health Safety Net. All three insurance options have the same application procedure.

All MassHealth programs cover abortion with two exceptions: MassHealth Limited and MassHealth Prenatal.

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

· you are a Massachusetts resident

· you are a citizen or an eligible noncitizen

· your income fits the program guidelines. The maximum income for any of these programs is 300% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines. That means you can make $33,510 and still qualify for Commonwealth Care. If other people rely on your income, you can make more (look at the chart below). The state will look at your income and decide when of the plans (MassHealth, Commonwealth Care, or Health Safety Net) makes sense for you.

1 person: $34,470

2 people: $46,530

3 people: $58,590

4 people: $70,650

5 people: $82,710

6 people: $94,770

7 people: $106,830

8 people: $118,890

(You can use an unofficial online eligibility check to see if you are eligible for MassHealth.)

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP: U.S. citizens are required to provide proof of citizenship. Noncitizens must provide proof of immigration status.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

Specific requirements will be explained in the instructions of your application. You may be required to submit some of the following with your application:

· Proof of identity

· Proof of citizenship for U.S. citizens and nationals

· Proof of immigration status for noncitizens

· Birthdates for family members

· Social Security number (except for MassHealth Limited)

· Proof of disability (if you have a disability)

· Proof of wages/income

· Proof of self-employment, business or rental income

· Proof of unearned income

· Bank statements

· Copy of health insurance card (if you have another type of health insurance)

· Proof of medical condition for people applying based on HIV/AIDS status

After you submit your application, MassHealth will decide which insurance coverage program you will receive and then notify you.

HOW TO APPLY:

The application process is the same for all of the state health care programs. The fastest way to apply is in person at your local community health care center. To find one near you, click here or call 617-426-2225.

Before going to a health care center, you should make sure that the center offers insurance enrollment by consulting its website or calling.

For more information, look at the MassHealth website and check out the applications in English or Spanish.

CONTACT INFORMATION for MassHealth:

MassHealth Customer Service Center:

1-800-841-2900

TTY: 1-800-497-4648

Commonwealth Care Customer Services

1-877-MA-ENROLL

TTY: 1-877-623-6765

Health Care for All’s Consumer Health HelpLine: 1-800-272-4232

Health Care for All is a non-profit, non-government group that helps people in Massachusetts get health insurance. They are an excellent resource for information or if you get confused by the process at any point.

MINNESOTA

Pregnant women who meet income guidelines are eligible for Medical Assistance, which covers abortion. If you are currently enrolled in MinnesotaCare (a different state health program that doesn't cover abortion), please contact your social worker as soon as possible and let them know you are pregnant and would like to have your insurance moved from MinnesotaCare to Medical Assistance. Please note that this process may take a couple weeks. To learn the differences between Medical Assistance and MinnesotaCare, click here. (Medical Assistance is Minnesota's Medicaid program.)

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

· You are a resident of Minnesota

· Your income falls under the following limits (effective through June 30, 2013):

Family Size Monthly Annual Just you $3,468 $41,616 You + one more person $4,376 $52,512 You + 2 more people $5,284 $63,408 You + 3 more people $6,192 $74,304

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP: U.S. citizens who are applying are required to show proof of citizenship. Pregnant non-citizens are NOT required to provide proof of immigration status. Click here for more information.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· Confirmation of pregnancy from a clinic or doctor

· Proof of income, AND

· Proof of identity

HOW TO APPLY:

1. Fill out a Minnesota Health Care Application and make sure you check the box that says you want to apply for all programs.

2. Take completed application to county human services agency or a local doctor’s office, clinic, or hospital that processes applications. Click here for more information about how to apply.

HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE?

You will be notified within 15 days of applying.

For Medical Assistance, coverage may begin in the month you became pregnant, but no earlier than three months before you applied.

CONTACT INFORMATION FOR MEDICAL ASSISTANCE:

Department of Human Services Information Desk: (651) 431-2000 (TTY/TTD: 800-627-3529)

Medical Assistance: (651) 431-2670

Toll-free line: (800) 657-3739

MinnesotaCare: (651) 297-3862

Toll-free line: (800) 657-3672

CLINICS ACCEPTING MEDICAL ASSISTANCE:

Dr. Mildred Hanson (Minneapolis)

Planned Parenthood Minnesota (St. Paul)

Robbinsdale Clinic (Robbinsdale)

Whole Woman's Health (Minneapolis)

Women’s Health Center of Duluth (Duluth)

MONTANA

The full Medicaid program in Montana covers abortion for pregnant women. (The “basic” Medicaid program does not cover abortion.)

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

· you meet certain income guidelines (generally within 150% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines, but you should contact your local Office of Public Assistance for more information),

· you are a U.S. citizen or documented immigrant, AND

· you have a note from a doctor confirming your pregnancy

(A pregnant woman may apply for Presumptive Eligibility. This means that you can enroll quickly because you are pregnant.)

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP: You must provide proof of citizenship or legal immigrant status.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· Note from doctor confirming pregnancy

· Proof of citizenship or immigration status, AND

· Proof of income

HOW TO APPLY:

To apply in person (recommended), go to your local Office of Public Assistance with required documents and fill out an application (pdf). You can also apply online.

You may be able to apply at your provider’s office because some offices process Medicaid applications. Check with your clinic/provider to see if you may apply through its office.

CONTACT INFORMATION for Montana Medicaid:

Montana Citizens’ Advocate office: 1-800-332-2272

Website for Montana Medicaid program

CLINICS THAT ACCEPT MEDICAID:

Planned Parenthood (Billings)

Mountain Country Women’s Clinic (Livingston)

NEW JERSEY

Pregnant women may be eligible for the NJ FamilyCare/Medicaid program, which covers abortion.

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

· You are a resident of New Jersey

· You are a U.S. citizen or documented immigrant, AND

· You have an income at or below 200% of the Federal Poverty Level. This is about $22,980 for a single woman with no children.

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP: You must provide documentation of U.S. citizenship or legal immigrant status.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· proof of identity

· proof of residency

· proof of household income

· proof of disability (if applicable)

· proof of resources, AND

· proof of citizenship status and Social Security number

HOW TO APPLY:

Go in person to your local County Welfare Agency to apply OR

You may be able to apply at your clinic or doctor’s office (call to check if they accept applications) and follow up with your local County Welfare Agency.

Because you are pregnant, you may fill out a shorter Medicaid application form with an “outstation” worker at some New Jersey hospitals and Federally Qualified Health Centers.

CONTACT INFORMATION:

Find contact information for local County Welfare Agency.

CLINICS ACCEPTING MEDICAID:

Cherry Hill Women's Center (Cherry Hill)

Planned Parenthood (look for clinics that list "Abortion Services")

NEW MEXICO

Medicaid Presumptive Eligibility (called Category 030) allows you to receive immediate coverage from the date your pregnancy is confirmed until the last day of the next month. This program covers abortion.

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

· You are a New Mexico resident

· Your family income is below 185% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP: You must provide proof of U.S. citizenship or legal immigrant status.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· proof of U.S. citizenship or legal immigrant status

· proof of income

· proof of residence, AND

· proof of pregnancy. Home pregnancy tests do not count. Pregnancy may be confirmed at your local county public health office or hospital, but not a Crisis Pregnancy Center or Abortion Alternatives Center.

HOW TO APPLY:

First, gather all necessary documents. Once you have the required documents, you may:

1. Go to your local county public health office and say, “I’m pregnant and need to see a doctor.”

2. Apply at the office.

OR

Go to the Planned Parenthood Surgical Clinic in Albuquerque to apply.

CONTACT INFORMATION:

Medicaid -- NM Human Services Department

Phone: (505) 827-3100 (local Santa Fe)

Toll free: 1-888-997-2583

For more information on Medicaid in New Mexico, check the state website.

Insure New Mexico! Solutions Center: (888) 997-2583.

For more information about where to apply, visit Insure New Mexico!

NEW YORK

There are a number of state programs in New York that will assist you with paying for an abortion if you qualify. These programs are Medicaid for Pregnant Women & Teens, Prenatal Care Assistance Program, Child Health Plus, and Family Health Plus.

Pregnant women may get Medicaid coverage through Presumptive Eligibility. This program allows women to get Medicaid coverage quickly. Presumptive Eligibility coverage begins the same day that you apply for it.

For those who do not qualify for Medicaid, the program Prenatal Care Assistance Program (PCAP) may provide coverage of abortion if the applicant’s income is less than the Federal Poverty Level. Women are eligible regardless of citizenship or immigration status and may apply for presumptive eligibility.

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

· You are a resident of New York.

· Your income is under 200% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines. This is about $22,980 for a single woman.

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:

Pregnant women may be eligible for Medicaid for Pregnant Women & Teens, PCAP, or Child Health Plus (CHP) regardless of citizenship/immigration status. You do not need proof of citizenship or immigrant status.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· proof of identity

· proof of income

· proof of residence, AND

· insurance benefit card or policy (if you have health insurance)

HOW TO APPLY:

The fastest way to apply is to go in person to an abortion clinic or health center that processes applications. Doing so will allow you to get coverage the same day.

Clinics and abortion providers can often help arrange to enroll you in one of these programs. In some cases, you may apply at a clinic and have a procedure that will be covered in the same day. Contact your clinic to see if they process applications.

Pregnant women can apply through many clinics, hospitals, and Prenatal Care Assistance Program offices. You may contact your local Department of Social Services to find out where you may apply.

OR

Phone or go in person to your local Department of Social Services.

CONTACT INFORMATION:

The Medicaid helpline is 1-800-541-2831.

In New York City, you can try the Human Resources Administration at (718) 557-1399

Five boroughs of NYC: 1-877-472-8411 (toll free)

CLINICS THAT ACCEPT MEDICAID:

Click here to find a clinic that accepts Medicaid.

OREGON

There are two types of Oregon Health Plan -- Standard and Plus. There is currently a waiting list for the Standard Oregon Health Plan, so you may want to apply for the “OHP Plus” program, which prioritizes pregnant women and which covers abortion. There is an even faster way to get abortion coverage: apply for a Temporary Emergency Medical Card.

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

· You are pregnant and can show proof of your pregnancy

· Your income is less than $30,000/year

· You are a U.S. Citizen

· You are uninsured

· You aren’t receiving Financial Aid or enrolled in school

· You can prove your residence with a driver’s license, state ID, or mail from the past 30 days

· You can show proof of your income (pay stubs for past three months, letter from employer, etc.) AND

· Able to show proof of citizenship (birth certificate)

You may consult the website http://www.oregonhelps.org to see if you might be eligible for OHP Plus.

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP: You must have proof of your U.S. citizenship.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· Proof of income (paystubs)

· Proof of citizenship (birth certificate) AND

· Proof of pregnancy (Planned Parenthood or your county health department can help you provide proof)

HOW TO APPLY:

· Use the online application or call 800-699-9075 to request a printed application.

· Go to Department of Human Services Office with completed application and required documents. If possible, arrive early in the morning. All counties must accept applications for Temporary Emergency Medical Cards.

· Specify that you are applying for a Temporary Emergency Medical Card due to pregnancy and have a critical medical appointment.

· If you sense the case manager is anti-choice, ask to switch case managers. Otherwise, tell her you have an abortion appointment so it is clear your application is urgent. Do not leave the office without completing and filing your application.

· Ask your case manager when you can come back to pick up your card. Insist on picking up your card rather than having it mailed or faxed. This is the quickest way.

CONTACT INFORMATION:

To find a local Department of Human Services branch, call 1-800-699-9075.

The Network for Reproductive Options (NRO) may also be a source for information about OHP and abortion coverage:

Hotline: (541) 543-6607

Toll-free: 1-866-355-9100

CLINICS ACCEPTING MEDICAID/Temporary Emergency Medical Cards:

Downtown Women’s Center (Portland)

VERMONT

The health care program for low-income people is called Green Mountain Care. There are two Green Mountain Care programs that cover abortion: Dr. Dynasaur and Medicaid. You can fill out one application to be considered for both programs.

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

To determine if you are eligible, you may call 1-800-250-8427 or consult the online screening tool. For more information, go to the Green Mountain Care website.

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP: U.S. citizens may be asked to provide proof of citizenship if they cannot be found in state records. Noncitizens must provide proof of legal immigrant status.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· proof of identity

· proof of income, AND

· proof of citizenship/immigrant status

HOW TO APPLY:

You may download an application online or call to request one in the mail. Online is faster, of course. Here is the application you need to fill out to be considered for both Medicaid and Dr. Dynasaur.

Telephone: Call 1-800-250-8427 to determine which program to apply for and to request an application. Make sure to ask for a Medicaid application.

CONTACT INFORMATION:

Green MountainCare, Health Access Member Services

Phone: 1-800-250-8427

TDD: 1-888-834-7898

WASHINGTON

A pregnant woman may qualify for Medicaid’s Pregnancy Medical program. This program covers abortion.

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

· you are a resident of Washington AND

· you meet certain income requirements.

You may want to consult an online eligibility calculator.

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP: U.S. citizens are required to show proof of citizenship (unless you receive Social Security Income or Social Security disability benefits).

Non-citizens are required to provide proof of immigration status.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· Proof of income (pay stubs)

· Proof of citizenship or immigration status

· Proof of identity

· A positive proof of pregnancy from a clinic or physician

HOW TO APPLY:

1. Go in person to your local Community Service Office (CSO). Arrive as early as possible. You may call the Family Planning Hotline to find the closest CSO: 1-800-770-4334. If you’d like to fill out the application before going to the CSO, you may download it here.

2. Ask for an expedited application process. If you have an appointment, tell your caseworker.

3. Do not leave until your application is complete! Make sure you have all the required documents.

4. Get your voucher. Your voucher will either be mailed to you (often within a business week, no later than 15 working days) or you may request to pick it up at your CSO. If you’d like to pick it up, ask your case worker if you can be notified when it is ready.

Make sure the clinic you are going to accepts Medicaid!

CONTACT INFORMATION

Health care benefits: 1-800-562-3022

WEST VIRGINIA

West Virginia’s Medicaid program for pregnant women is called the Poverty-Level Pregnant Women and Infants Under Age One.

For information on Medicaid in West Virginia, consult the state guide.

YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:

· Your income is at or below 150% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines.

To self-screen your eligibility, click here.

PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP: U.S.citizens must provide proof of citizenship when applying.

If you have declared yourself an alien and have satisfactory immigration status, you do not need to provide this proof.

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:

· Proof of identity

· Proof of citizenship or legal immigrant status AND

· Medical statement confirming pregnancy

HOW TO APPLY:

You may apply in person at local county office of the West Virginia Department of Health and Human Resources. Also, many local hospitals and primary care clinics have staff that may help you apply.

CONTACT INFORMATION:

For information, contact your local county office.

Department of Health and Human Resources website