Scott vetoes UF-FSU tuition bill
Gov. Rick Scott on Friday vetoed legislation that would have allowed the University of Florida to seek higher tuition increases, citing the lack of a detailed plan on how the money would be used.

The measure would have allowed state universities meeting certain academic and research benchmarks — currently just UF and Florida State University — to raise tuition to market rates beyond the state's 15 percent annual cap. Both houses of the Legislature passed the bill by wide margins, but Scott repeatedly has questioned the need for higher tuition.

Scott cited concern for student debt in his veto letter but also called on the Board of Governors, the governing body of the state university system, to develop a statewide plan with a mission for each university tied to degree production and geographic location. The board also must implement a plan for cost savings and efficiencies at universities, he wrote.

"I look forward to the Board of Governors and the universities coming back with a very targeted plan so that we can better understand the return on an increased investment in our higher education system," he wrote.

UF officials have argued that more money is needed to remain competitive with other major research universities. UF President Bernie Machen said in a statement that he was very disappointed by the veto because the bill would have provided "a pathway toward excellence" and enabled the state to have two world-class universities.

"Our state, expected to become the third-largest in the country, deserves to lead the nation in innovative thinking, cutting-edge research, economic development, job creation and exceptional quality of life — all things that come from great universities," he said. "While we are saddened with this development, we will continue to pursue excellence in education, research and service and renew our commitment to serving our students and the people of Florida."

UF officials have long sought the ability to make higher tuition increases. This time around, UF had support from key lawmakers and the Board of Governors. Board Chairman Dean Colson released a statement expressing disappointment in the veto. Chancellor Frank Brogan said in a statement that the board would continue working for accountability in the system.

The board last year tried to establish eight regions for the 11 state universities and an approval process for any university starting a program with a major physical presence in another region. After UF objected to the proposal as a threat to its statewide mission, the board dropped the idea of regions in a revamped plan.

In his veto letter, Scott said he next week would initiate a review of higher education options to "begin creating a more exceptional higher education system that is well organized and focused on creating opportunities that benefit all Floridians."

In preparation for his decision on the tuition bill, Scott held an unusual public meeting with the UF and Florida State presidents to allow them to press their cases. UF officials had cited figures showing its students graduate with little debt compared with those at other major universities.

UF now charges nearly $5,700 in tuition and fees for undergraduates, compared with a national average of about $8,200 for public four-year universities. Yet, student activists had protested the tuition bill and urged Scott to veto it.

UF had planned a 15 percent increase next year and would have waited until fall 2013 to make the higher increases allowed by the bill. Its board of trustees and the Board of Governors would have needed to approve those increases. The measure also would have allowed UF to require incoming freshmen to take 9 to 12 credits that can't be fulfilled from advanced classes in high school.

Scott's decision followed his veto last week of legislation that would have allowed UF to create its own health plan for its employees. Scott also signed a state budget that cut state university system funding by $300 million — leading UF to plan $38.2 million in cuts — along with a measure establishing Florida Polytechnic in Lakeland as the state's 12th public university.

Before Scott's decision was known Friday, UF Provost Joe Glover said it would be a "very unfortunate day for the university" if the bill was vetoed. The bill would have provided a critical source of revenue to build a first-class university, boost state economic development and leverage more than a century of investment in the university, he said.

"And now it seems to be eroding away," he said.

Contact Nathan Crabbe at 338-3176 or nathan.crabbe@gvillesun.com. For more stories on the University of Florida, visit www.thecampussun.com.