Scott: I do not support proposed abortion bill
Republican gubernatorial candidate Rick Scott's campaign says Scott would not support a proposed law to make abortion illegal in nearly all instances in Florida.

TALLAHASSEE — Republican gubernatorial candidate Rick Scott's campaign says Scott would not support a proposed law to make abortion illegal in nearly all instances in Florida.

A state legislator earlier this week sent out a message telling supporters that Scott pledged, if elected, to throw his support behind the bill that would make abortion illegal in Florida in nearly all instances, including rape and incest.

Chad Colby, a spokesman for Scott's campaign, said that Scott's position on abortion has been "consistent" and that Scott opposes abortion except when the woman's life is in danger, or if a woman has been a victim of rape or incest.

"Rick's position hasn't changed," Colby said. "You would be hard pressed to find where he's differed."

But Colby could not explain why Rep. Charles Van Zant of Keystone Heights told campaign supporters in an e-mail that they should vote for Scott because he personally promised to push through the GOP-controlled Legislature and sign into law the "Florida Right to Life Act."

"You will have to ask Mr. Van Zant," Colby said.

Van Zant did not respond to repeated attempts for comment, including messages left on his home phone.

In his e-mail to supporters, Van Zant, a minister and an architect, said he had talked to Scott twice about whether the Naples businessman would make abortion illegal in Florida: "He immediately said ‘Yes, that's what I believe and that's what I will do.' He telephoned me last week to assure me that he would keep this issue before our state government," Van Zant added.

Colby did not deny that Scott had talked to Van Zant.

"He's talked to every potential Republican legislator," Colby said.

Legal experts say that if such a ban on abortion is approved in Florida, it will trigger a legal war that could reach the U.S. Supreme Court and have national implications.

The proposed bill would limit abortions only to cases in which the mother's life is in danger, either from the pregnancy or a disease.

And even in those cases, it would require the approval of two doctors before an abortion would be allowed.

All other abortions, including those involving rape and incest, would be outlawed.

The measure also would make any attempt to induce an abortion a first-degree felony. The legislation would outlaw any facility or business that performs abortions.

The bill states that the Florida Legislature has the power to ignore U.S. Supreme Court rulings on abortion — including Roe v. Wade — because the constitution does not give the court the "power to determine moral questions on behalf of the citizens of any state without their consent."