Rubio weighs options with 2016 in mind
U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio’s fallback plan is hardly a walk in the park.

WASHINGTON — U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio’s fallback plan is hardly a walk in the park.



Even if the Miami Republican does not run for the White House in 2016, Rubio knows that what awaits him is an anything-but-certain re-election campaign for the Senate in 2016.



“If I ran for re-election to the Senate, by no means is that a safe congressional seat,” Rubio said in an exclusive interview last week. “It’s a competitive state in a presidential cycle, and I anticipate it will be hotly contested.”



In 2010, even with a strong Tea Party wave at his back and spending almost $22 million, Rubio failed to capture 50 percent of the vote. Instead, he won 48.9 percent to take his Senate seat, benefiting from his opponents — Democrat Kendrick Meek and then-independent Charlie Crist — splitting the other 49.9 percent. Rubio’s 48.9 percent represents the smallest percentage for any U.S. Senate candidate to win Florida during the last three decades.



This time, Rubio is an incumbent, but he also faces a more Democratic-leaning electorate. In presidential cycles, Democrats traditionally see a bigger boost in turnout than Republicans. With Hillary Clinton considered the likely Democratic candidate, Rubio could have a tougher electorate to win over than what he faced in 2010.



“Every statewide election in Florida, particularly high-profile ones, have the potential to be very difficult, just like my original one was,” Rubio said, acknowledging that he is taking nothing for granted no matter what he runs for.



National political observers agree.



Stuart Rothenberg, one of the most respected political analysts in Washington, has Rubio’s re-election listed as a toss-up with a slight lean toward Rubio, even though there is no clear opponent. Rothenberg said without even knowing who his opponents could be, the fundamentals of Florida suggest it will be one of the most competitive seats.



“It’s a very competitive seat in a presidential election,” Rothenberg said.



To be sure, Rubio said he thinks he has a strong case to make for re-election. He said that even with all the potential distractions of running for president lingering around him, he’s been able to do his job as a senator.



“The issues that are important to Florida, we are fully engaged in,” Rubio said, listing Everglades protection, the defense budget and Cuba policy as examples.



There are Democrats already appearing on the radar as possible opponents for Rubio.



Alan Grayson of Orlando and U.S. Rep. Patrick Murphy, from Jupiter, have expressed interest.



Neither are household names, but Grayson has proven to be a fundraising power within the Democratic Party, raising $3 million to $6 million in each of his four runs for Congress.



Murphy, who beat Tea Party star Allen West in a strongly Republican district on Florida’s east coast, has a track record of winning in Republican areas — a potential key to winning Florida.



Given that Democrats will be looking to pick up five seats to regain the majority in the Senate, the party will almost certainly have a big incentive to help anyone who enters the race against Rubio.



With Senate seats in Illinois, Wisconsin, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Florida and New Hampshire up for grabs in 2016, Democrats are looking at six states on the ballot that President Barack Obama carried in 2012 that are currently held by Republicans.



Florida’s political nature alone assures Rubio of a tough re-election, no matter which Democrat steps forward, said Steve Schale, a veteran Democratic political strategist.







Growing Senate prestige



A recent fundraising trip to California and an upcoming publicity tour for Rubio’s new book have added to speculation that he is preparing for a presidential run.



But walking though the marble halls of the Russell Senate Office Building last week, Rubio sounded very much like a man who has not decided what he will do — run for the presidency or seek re-election to the Senate.



He has not said when he will announce a decision, though some published reports have said it will this spring.



“For me the decision comes down to where is the best place for me to serve our country at this moment in my career and in my life,” Rubio said. “If it’s the presidency, then I’m going to run for president.”



Rubio already has said he won’t seek both simultaneously.



His growing importance in the U.S. Senate — particularly on international affairs — is sure to be part of his decision-making.



In his four years in the Senate, Rubio has made a mark that typically takes newcomers far longer to achieve, said U.S. Sen. John McCain, R-Arizona. Rubio is not only a powerful speaker but has impressed the Senate with his depth of knowledge on foreign affairs.



“One thing I would like you to print is that Marco Rubio is one of the most articulate people to have come to the U.S. Senate,” McCain said.



But with Rubio in earshot, McCain wryly added, “but I don’t believe he should ever run for president of the United States.”



“Leave that part out,” Rubio quickly interjected with a laugh.



While McCain was joking, the banter shows the camaraderie the two have built and how Rubio’s growing voice on international issues puts him in a position to have influence for years to come if he seeks re-election.



Last week, Rubio for the first time led a subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee with jurisdiction over Cuba policy. The hearing on the Western Hemisphere Subcommittee included men and women from the democratic movement in Cuba, assuring their voices were put on equal footing with the U.S. administration or the Cuban leaders.



“I think the bigger symbolism is that they were even heard from,” Rubio said.



U.S. Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart, a Miami Republican, highlighted Rubio’s Senate role. “It’s crucial,” Diaz-Balart said. “What Marco is doing at this moment in history is crucial.”



He said for years, Florida has had very strong voices on Cuba policy in the House. And now, with Republicans in the majority in the Senate, Rubio has a platform to influence how the U.S. policy toward Cuba progresses. That includes his making sure dissidents in Cuba get their chance to be heard in Congress and abroad.



At the close of his first hearing, Rubio said the four hours spent discussing the issue was the most he has seen Cuba on the congressional agenda since he came to office. His status as a potential presidential contender is helping in that regard, too. Dozens of media from around the nation covered Rubio’s hearing, giving him a wide audience.







Family matters



While the title of senator and the potential one as president are on the table, Rubio doesn’t hesitate in citing the title that ultimately will be pivotal in his decision of which post to seek.



“My No. 1 goal is to be a good father,” said Rubio, who has four children, all under age 18.



He said as he weighs his political options, which one offers the best route to being there for his kids becomes is a key component.



Rubio, 43, is one of the few members of the U.S. Senate with young children. Being in the Senate means a lot of time away from home and there are often votes that can prevent him from getting back to Florida for important events.



Rubio said he hates the idea of being the only father to miss a father-daughter breakfast at school or an event for his son because of a vote. In that regard, he said if there is something that is too important to miss at home and his vote is not critical to the passage of something, he’s been known to head for home.



“I’m never going to put anything in front of it,” Rubio said of being a dad.



Whether that means running for the Senate again or president, Rubio did not say. Either way, he said, his children will be part of the equation.



“I’m always going to do that job first and be the best dad I can,” he said.