State changes course on immigration policy
The heated immigration rhetoric from the presidential campaign is echoing across Florida’s Capitol as state officials debate legislation designed to crack down on immigrants who do not have legal status.

TALLAHASSEE — Just three years after Florida’s Republican leadership approved cheaper college tuition for non-citizens, President Donald Trump has realigned the state’s immigration debate and GOP lawmakers are moving in the opposition direction.

The heated immigration rhetoric from the presidential campaign is echoing across Florida’s Capitol as state officials debate legislation designed to crack down on immigrants who do not have legal status.

“At the end of the day Donald Trump won and he won on a strong immigration platform,” said state Rep. Joe Gruters, a Sarasota Republican who is sponsoring one of the immigration bills and co-sponsoring two others. “We’re a nation of laws and here in Florida we’re no different; people have to respect the rule of law.”

GOP lawmakers are proposing harsher penalties for immigrants in the country illegally who commit violent crimes, punishing local governments that do not cooperate with federal immigration authorities, rolling back the college tuition benefit approved in 2014, forcing businesses to verify the legal status of their employees and a range of other immigration proposals.

Many of the bills have failed in the past and face significant hurdles again this year, but Trump’s campaign has injected more energy into the issue in Florida.

Immigrant rights groups are tracking nine bills in the Legislature that they view as anti-immigrant. That’s the same number as last year, when Trump's hard-line views began changing the conversation on immigration within the GOP.

None of the nine bills passed last year. In fact, Francesca Menes with the Florida Immigrant Coalition boasts that “we haven’t had any anti-immigrant bills pass” since she began lobbying state lawmakers in 2010. But coming off the presidential election, Menes said the political climate seems especially ripe for immigration proposals.

“They’re kind of taking it and running with it because we have a Republican president,” Menes said.

Changing politics

The politics surrounding immigration today are similar to when Menes first got involved in the issue.

In 2010, Arizona made news for enacting one of the toughest immigration laws in the country. The legislation requires law enforcement to check the immigration status of someone officers stop if there is suspicion the person is in the country illegally.

Gov. Rick Scott ran for office that year pledging to bring an Arizona-style immigration law to Florida, but dropped the issue after lawmakers failed to pass such a measure.

The governor stopped pushing any state-level efforts to crack down on illegal immigration. By 2014 he was standing in the same room with Menes celebrating the bill allowing students who are not U.S. citizens to receive cheaper in-state college tuition.

The tuition bill was supported by former GOP House Speaker Will Weatherford, backed by many Republicans in the House and Senate and signed by Scott.

At the time, there was a concerted effort within the GOP to be more immigrant friendly after GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney’s poor performance among Hispanics.

Trump changed everything.

“I think that certain legislators have been emboldened by Trump’s anti-immigrant agenda and they’re bringing that home to Florida,” said Kara Gross, the legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Florida.

Bills moving

Trump’s tough talk on immigration has had a profound effect on the debate.

The president made outlawing so-called “sanctuary” policies adopted by cities and counties a national rallying cry within the GOP.

A sanctuary city billed filed by Rep. Larry Metz, R-Yalaha, has 22 House co-sponsors this year, including all four Republicans who represent Sarasota or Manatee counties. The bill, which creates a variety of penalties for municipalities that adopt policies aimed at defying federal immigration enforcement efforts, cleared the House last year but never had a vote in the Senate because the former chair of the Judiciary Committee, a Hispanic Republican from South Florida, refused to hear it.

The new chairman of the committee is Sen. Greg Steube, a Sarasota Republican who emphasized his staunch opposition to illegal immigration on the campaign trail and is co-sponsoring the sanctuary city bill.

Steube also has filed legislation to repeal in-state college tuition for students who are not citizens. And Steube and Gruters are co-sponsoring a bill that would enhance penalties for illegal immigrants who commit certain violent crimes, including armed burglary, assault with a deadly weapon and sexual assault.

Democrats and groups such as the ACLU and the Southern Poverty Law Center blasted the penalty enhancement bill during a House committee hearing last week, saying punishing immigrants who do not have legal status more harshly than U.S. citizens for the same crime raises significant constitutional questions.

“This bill has a whole host of problems but I am smart enough to understand that we’re not doing this on the law, we’re doing it on emotion,” said Rep. Jared Moskowitz, D-Coral Springs.

House bill sponsor Dane Eagle, R-Cape Coral, said the harsher penalties are warranted because the federal government is not doing enough to deport violent criminals before they are released, so they should be detained longer to protect the public. He and other lawmakers brushed aside the constitutional concerns and passed the bill through the Criminal Justice Subcommittee.

“These are heinous acts,” said state Rep. James Grant, R-Tampa, adding that: “I would encourage all of us to put the Florida Supreme Court in the position of telling us that we are wrong.”

Long odds

Many of the proposals targeting immigrants without legal status face long odds in the Legislature.

Steube’s bill repealing in-state college tuition for non-citizens is opposed by top Republicans in the House and Senate who were instrumental in passing the law. It does not have companion legislation in the House.

Gruters’ bill requiring employers to use an “E-verify” system to check the legal status of employees has been proposed many times before. Business groups always have been successful in shooting it down. It does not have companion legislation in the Senate.

The two bills that are getting the most attention are the penalty enhancement measure, which is advancing in the House and Senate, and the sanctuary city bill.

Trump has made ending sanctuary policies a priority. He issued an executive order aimed at withholding federal funds from municipalities that do not cooperate with federal immigration officials.

Metz’s bill would outlaw sanctuary policies in Florida. State and local government entities that enacted sanctuary provisions would face fines of up to $5,000 a day and the loss of state grant funds. Local officials could be removed from office for not reporting violations.

The legislation cleared its first House committee last week but has yet to get a hearing in the Senate Judiciary panel chaired by Steube, the bill’s co-sponsor. The committee has two Hispanic Republicans from South Florida, a region where Trump and his immigration views are not popular. One of them is Sen. Rene Garcia, R-Hialeah.

Garcia said the sanctuary bill’s Senate sponsor came to see him last week to get his thoughts on the measure.

While Garcia said “I’m not a fan of sanctuary cities,” he noted that the definition of what constitutes a sanctuary policy is nebulous, and he worries that the larger conversation surrounding immigration is too polarizing.

“Look they’re here, they’re undocumented individuals but we can’t think that they’re all criminals,” Garcia said, adding: “I understand their plight. I understand those on the other side but they need to cool down their whole rhetoric.”