Editorial: Veto state budget, education bill
State lawmakers flushed promises of transparency down the toilet as they rushed to pass a budget and education bill that are disastrous for public schools.

In the waning hours of the 2017 legislative session, which had to be extended to Monday, the Legislature approved wide-ranging education changes that were crafted behind closed doors without proper public vetting. A key senator suggested lawmakers would need to make revisions to the education measure when committees met in September.

Gov. Rick Scott should make them get back to work even sooner. The governor should veto the education legislation as well as the entire $82.4 billion budget, the latter of which fell far short of the funding he sought for Visit Florida’s tourism marketing programs and provided none of the money he sought for Enterprise Florida’s business incentives.

Scott had also proposed increases in education funding that were ignored by lawmakers. Supporters touted the budget as making a small increase in education funding, but Alachua County Public Schools officials say it would actually result in a $20 per-student cut here.

The education bill, HB 7069, would do even more damage to traditional public schools here and across the state. The 278-page legislation is a mish-mash of dozens of different bills filed this session and includes language and that was never discussed or considered before the vote.

It would spend $234 million to expand the flawed “Best and Brightest” bonus largely based on teachers’ standardized test scores and $140 million on the “Schools of Hope” program to funnel more money into privately managed charter schools.

Lawmakers weren’t able to amend the legislation because it was tied to the state budget that House Speaker Richard Corcoran, R-Land O’Lakes, and Senate President Joe Negron, R-Stuart, crafted behind closed doors. This flies in the face of Corcoran’s promise of a “transformational leap” in government accountability and transparency.

Sen. David Simmons, an Altamonte Springs Republican who chaired the pre-K-12 education budget committee, told reporters that he saw a first draft of the education bill only at 7 p.m. Thursday. He said parts of the “Schools of Hope” plan would be “exceedingly difficult to implement” and “the thought is to try to correct it after we pass the legislation.”

That is a completely backward way of making public policy, but at least Simmons voted against the bill. Sen. Keith Perry, R-Gainesville, helped it squeak to a 20-18 margin of victory in the Senate and also backed the budget. In the House, Rep. Chuck Clemons, R-Newberry, voted for the education bill and budget and Rep. Clovis Watson, D-Alachua, voted against them.

While K-12 schools were walloped in the budget, higher education fared far better. The budget significantly increases funding for state universities, Bright Futures scholarships and need-based aid, although state colleges had their budgets slashed for remedial education and other programs.

Lawmakers again ignored the will of the voters in failing to fund the Florida Forever land conservation program and left funding for other needs such as mental-health services at inadequate levels. Instead they passed yet more tax cuts, adding to a budget crisis of their own creation as they’ve cut taxes by $6 billion over six years in an already revenue-constrained state.

The public deserves better than the Legislature delivered in rushing through ill-considered changes and cuts to public education. The governor should veto the budget and education bill, giving lawmakers another shot at doing the work they should have done the first time around.

— This editorial was written by Gainesville Sun opinion editor Nathan Crabbe and represents the opinion of The Sun's editorial board.