Frank Baumgartner: Racial bias plagues Florida’s death penalty
The fact that no white person has ever been executed for killing a black person needs to be recognized for what it is: evidence of a severely broken system based on race.

This month, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down Florida’s death penalty statute because judges rather than jurors were making the ultimate decision about who should be sentenced to die. This narrow ruling highlights a serious problem with Florida’s capital punishment scheme, but new research suggests that this is just one of many flaws in how the state determines who should be executed.



I recently conducted a study that looked at the race of victims in all homicides in Florida since 1976, including those that resulted in execution. I found that executions are very rare: just 0.30 percent of homicides lead to an execution. But there are tremendous disparities depending on the characteristics of the victim: homicides involving white female victims are 6.5 times more likely to result in an execution than those involving black male victims.



In fact, 72 percent of all executions carried out in Florida between 1976 and 2014 were for crimes involving white victims despite the fact that 56 percent of all homicide victims are white. Similarly, only 26 percent of all homicide victims are female, but 43 percent of all executions carried out in Florida were for homicides involving female victims.



What’s even more shocking, though, is that no white person has been executed in Florida for a homicide involving a black victim to date. In contrast, 71 percent of the executions carried out against black inmates were for homicides involving white victims. The vast majority of homicides occur with offenders and victims of the same race.



With 40 years of experience with the modern death penalty, and over 30,000 homicides in Florida, the fact that no white person has ever been executed for killing a black person needs to be recognized for what it is: evidence of a severely broken system based on race.



We can quibble about racial disparities that are measured by a few percentage points. But the results of my study are not like that. These are stark results with effects measured by orders of magnitude. They clearly show that Florida's death penalty system is plagued by vast racial and gender disparities, and that black lives are not valued the same as white lives.



When a black male is murdered, chances that that offender will be executed are 0.23 percent. When the victim is a white female, odds are 1.5 percent. Those are all very low numbers, suggesting that the death penalty is not as central to the fight against crime as some might imagine. But one is 6.5 times greater than the other, and when we add in the race of the offender, we can’t even calculate the statistics because the white offender-black victim category shows no executions in modern Florida history.



Bias enters the process at many different points, from the prosecutor's initial decision about whether the charge the crime as first or second degree murder, to their decision to seek either life in prison or the death penalty. This exacerbated by the fact that Florida’s death penalty statute is so broad that the vast majority of homicides could be charged as first degree murders eligible for the death penalty and that decision is completely up to the discretion of the local prosecutor. It is also worth noting that Florida is the only state that doesn't require any unanimity in a capital jury verdict.



Prosecutorial and judicial discretion may also explain dramatic geographic variation in the use of the death penalty. Just six out of Florida’s 67 counties are responsible for more than half of the state’s 89 executions. Only four counties (Miami-Dade, Orange, Duval and Pinellas) have produced more than five executions, while 36 counties have never produced an execution.



The homicide rate in counties that have produced no executions is significantly lower than the homicide rate in counties with executions. It’s difficult to argue that executions are deterring future murderers with numbers like these.



With the Supreme Court ruling that Florida’s procedures must be revised, and with this comprehensive review of the distribution of executions across different counties and categories of victims revealing shocking disparities in patterns of actual usage, maybe time has come to question whether the system is worth it.



Florida had almost 30,000 homicides from 1984 through 2012, and 89 executions through 2014: Just 0.30 percent of homicides result in an execution. Given the flaws and inequities my study revealed, maybe it’s just not worth it.



— Frank R. Baumgartner is a professor of political science at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the author of “The Impact of Race, Gender, and Geography on Florida Executions.” The full study can be found here: http://bit.ly/1RN4BAV