For Whom Would Americans Vote Next November?
PRINCETON, NJ -- Hypothetical 2008 general election trial-heat matchups between Democratic and Republican presidential candidates suggest that the Democrats would continue to have an edge if the election were held today. Specifically, Barack Obama does better than Hillary Clinton against two out of three Republican candidates, while Rudy Giuliani does better than either Mike Huckabee or Mitt Romney against the Democrats. Additionally, the new poll shows that the Democrats are comfortably ahead of the Republicans when voters are asked for which party's candidate for the House of Representatives they would vote next November.

Presidential Matchups

The Dec. 14-16 USA Today/Gallup poll pitted Clinton and Obama against Giuliani, Romney, and Huckabee -- yielding six separate matchups (all data reported here are among registered voters).

These results show that the two Democratic candidates are tied with or lead the three Republican candidates in all six pairings -- albeit across a range from just 1 point (Clinton versus Giuliani) to a robust margin of 18 points (Obama versus Romney).

More specifically, the Democratic candidates get between 49% and 57% of the national vote across these six matchups; the Republican candidates get between 39% and 48%.

Obama does as well as or better than Clinton against the three Republican candidates. These results are of interest against a backdrop that shows that an increasing number of Democrats are interested in nominating a candidate who has the best chance of beating the Republican in the November 2008 election. (In November of this year, 36% of Democrats chose that alternative, versus nominating a candidate with whom they agree on the issues; now, 45% of Democrats prefer to nominate a candidate who has the best chance of beating the Republican.)

It is also of interest that Clinton's name ID -- based on the percentage of Americans who know enough to have either a favorable or an unfavorable opinion of her -- is at 98% in our latest poll. Obama's national name ID is lower, at 87%. Yet he does as well or better than she does when pitted against the Republican candidates.

Giuliani does better than his two Republican counterparts when voters are asked to choose between the Republicans and the two Democratic candidates. That could be because he is much better known than the other Republican candidates included in the poll. Perhaps the most interesting point to be made from a comparison of the Republican performances is that Huckabee -- whose name ID at 58% is lower than Romney's at 67% -- still manages to match the latter's performance in these general election trial heats.

All in all, it can be said that at this point, the Democrats maintain at least a slight edge across these hypothetical matchups. Also, Obama tends to fare better versus the Republicans than does Clinton, and Giuliani tests better against the Democrats than does Huckabee or Romney. There have been some changes in these results across time.