Obama's Birth Certificate Convinces Some, but Not All, Skeptics
Less than half of Republicans still say he was definitely or probably born in the U.S.

WASHINGTON, D.C. -- Barack Obama's release of his long-form birth certificate in late April appears to have removed some -- but not all -- doubt among Americans about where the president was born. More Americans now say he was definitely born in the United States (47%) than did so before its release (38%) and they are joined by 18% who say this is probably the case. Significantly fewer -- but still 13% -- say he was probably or definitely born in another country.





The most recent results are from a Gallup poll conducted May 5-8, while the prior results are from an April 20-23 Gallup poll. Obama released his long-form birth certificate on April 27.

The release came after years of skeptical chatter on the topic and vocal criticism of Obama from some Republicans, including Donald Trump, for withholding the document. While it may not yet be clear whether the most vocal so-called "birthers" were convinced by the certificate's release, the Gallup surveys show that many Americans across the political spectrum were.

Nearly half of Republicans (49%) now say Obama was definitely or probably born in the U.S., up from 35%. The same is true for 65% of independents, up from 56%, and 81% of Democrats, up from 78%. Republicans are 20 percentage points less likely to say Obama was definitely or probably born in another country, though 23% remain steadfast in this view. They are joined by 14% of independents and 5% of Democrats.





Bottom Line

President Obama's release of his long-form birth certificate appears to have significantly reduced skepticism about his place of birth, but by no means completely. All political groups are more likely after the release than they were before it to say Obama was definitely or probably born in the U.S. Still, 13% of all Americans and nearly one in four Republicans continue to say he was definitely or probably born in another country. And one in five Americans still say they don't know enough to say one way or the other.