American Action Network Launches $3 Million Television Ad Campaign Promoting The Tax Cuts And Jobs Act
WASHINGTON – Today, as the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate continue work on pro-growth tax reform legislation, American Action Network’s Middle-Class Growth Initiative (MCGI) announced the launch of a $3 million television advertising campaign promoting the benefits of the Tax Cuts And Jobs Act for middle-class families. The member-specific ads, featuring a Michigan working mother, Kendra Sroka, and her family, will air in 35 congressional districts across the country. View the list of targeted districts here.

“Providing the average family of four a tax cut of $1,200, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will help working families keep more of what they earn and allow them to save for the future,” said AAN Executive Director Corry Bliss. “America’s middle class deserves the peace of mind that comes with higher wages, higher take-home pay, more jobs, and stronger economic growth. It’s time for Congress to support working families and keep working to pass the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.”

Kendra Sroka is a working mother living in Michigan with her husband and two children. She feels pro-growth tax reform will benefit her family, allowing them to keep more of the paychecks they work so hard to earn.

The television ad campaign is part of the Middle-Class Growth Initiative (MCGI), a special project of American Action Network launched in August to advocate for the passage of meaningful tax reform legislation. The multi-pronged effort, now totaling $18 million in expenditures, includes advertising on television, radio, direct mail, and mobile billboards in over 50 congressional districts nationwide.

View example of ad here

SCRIPT

KENDRA: Shortly after my husband got cancer – I lost my job.

We were lucky to make it through, but we spent our life savings just to get by.

So, we’re glad Congress has released a plan that helps families like ours…

…by cutting Middle-Class taxes.

An independent analysis shows a typical family saves $1,200…

And the plan closes loopholes while keeping tax rates the same for the rich.

That’s fair.

So thank [Member of Congress], [she/he] has a plan to cut taxes for middle-class families like mine.