Budget and Federal Debt

How does the budget deficit or surplus relate to federal debt? View details

When the Congress makes budgetary decisions, it is also indirectly making decisions about the level of debt held by the public. The yearly change in debt held by the public is approximately equal to the budget surplusThe amount by which the governmentís revenues exceed outlays in a given period. or deficitThe amount by which the governmentís spending exceeds its revenues for a given period, usually a fiscal year.. The budget surplus or deficit is the difference between total federal revenue and spending in a given year. When the budget is in deficit, the government borrows from the public. Alternatively, when the budget is in surplus, the government can reduce debt held by the public. Thus, debt held by the public generally represents the total of all cash deficits minus all cash surpluses accumulated over time.

How do trust fund surpluses or deficits affect debt? View details

Trust fund total surpluses add to debt held by government accounts, but only cash surpluses reduce the need for the federal government to borrow from the public. The Social Security program has historically run large cash surpluses that helped reduce the governmentís need to borrow from the public to finance other federal government activities. But in fiscal years 2010-2011, the program paid more in benefits than it received in taxes, thereby contributing to the governmentís borrowing needs. While the programís recent cash deficits were largely due to the economic slowdown, the Social Security Trustees project that the program will run persistent cash deficits over the next 75 years.

What have been trends in deficits and debt held by the public? View details

How does federal debt affect the federal budget? View details

The federal governmentólike other borrowersópays interest on its debt. The federal debt affects the federal budget through the level of interest spending. Interest spendingóa function of both the amount of debt and the interest rate on that debtócannot be changed directly. At any given interest rate, additional borrowing will drive up interest payments. Similarly, at any given level of debt, higher interest rates increase the amount of interest paid. Interest spending can absorb resources that could otherwise be used for other national priorities. Spending on net interestPrimarily interest on debt held by the public. In addition to interest on debt held by the public, the government also earns some interest from various sources and pays interest for purposes other than borrowing from the public. These amounts are only a small portion of net interest and, taken together, slightly reduce its total. as a percentage of federal spending has fluctuated over time, peaking in the late 1940s and in the mid 1990s. In the past, interest payments contributed to deficits and helped fuel a rising debt burden. Rising debt, in turn, raised interest costs in the budget, and the federal government increased debt held by the public to finance these interest payments. This has been called the "vicious cycle." Todayís relatively lower interest rates have lessened the pressure debt service places on the budget, despite the recent increase in the debt held by the public. However, interest rates are expected to increase as the economy recovers, resulting in increasing pressure on the budget. FusionCharts will load here! Source: Office of Management and Budget.

Notes: Data from Budget of the United States Government for Fiscal Year 2013–Historical Tables. Net Interest as a Percentage of Total Federal Outlays data: txt pdf

Treasury regularly refinances portions of the government's outstanding debt and issues more debt at market interest rates to finance new deficit spending. Consequently, the amount that the federal government spends for interest on its debt is directly tied to those interest rates. Under CBO's January 2012 baseline budget projections, debt held by the public would be 62 percent of GDP in 2022 and spending on net interest would rise from $227 billion in 2011 to $624 billion (or 2.5 percent of GDP) in 2022. CBO has assessed how changes in interest rates can affect federal spending. CBO notes that if interest rates are 1 percent higher than the rates assumed in CBO’s baseline budget projections, the government’s higher interest costs would add nearly $1 trillion to the cumulative budget deficit over the 10-year period.