Dedicated to land and water protection in Wisconsin
Help protect funding for land and water conservation

The Knowles-Nelson Stewardship Program provides crucial funding to protect land and water in Wisconsin.

The state legislature is debating the future of Knowles-Nelson funding right now. Please, make your voice heard and tell your elected officials to renew Knowles-Nelson for 10 years.

Take Action

Our campaign to save Stewardship

The future of the Knowles-Nelson Stewardship Program will be decided soon. Funding for Stewardship is allocated as part of the state budget, which is being debated right now. In May, the Joint Finance Committee will decide whether or not to include funding for Knowles-Nelson in the state budget and how much money to allocate. It's vital that our elected officials hear our message over and over again: renew the Knowles-Nelson Stewardship Program for 10 years.

Our efforts are paying off! A coalition of more than fifty statewide groups representing silent sports enthusiasts, hunters, business groups, and land trusts endorsed a 10 year reauthorization. Key elected officials have also endorsed a 10 year reauthorization including Governor Evers, Representative Rob Kitchens who chairs the Assembly Committee on the Environment, and Senator Rob Cowles who chairs the Senate Committee on Natural Resources. The Cap Times opinion editor has also called for renewing Stewardship. Vocal opponents, however, are also making their voices heard.

With your support, we're talking with legislators, giving land trusts the tools they need to speak up for Knowles-Nelson, and connecting people across Wisconsin with their elected officials through our easy-to-use action center.

Please consider making a donation to support our advocacy work on behalf of Wisconsin's land and water.

Special thanks to our strong partners in the fight to save the Stewardship Program:

If your business or organization would like to be a partner in this effort, please reach out to Gathering Waters' Development Director, Mindy Petersen.

GATHERING WATERS IS HERE TO HELP YOU protect Wisconsin’s land, water, wildlife, and way of life, by strengthening over 40, member land trusts, throughout the state.

LAND TRUSTS are nonprofit organizations that permanently protect land for the benefit of the public. Each Wisconsin land trust has a unique service area, mission, and vision, based on its size and scope. For instance, while the focus of the Ice Age Trail Alliance is to create, support and protect a thousand-mile footpath tracing Ice Age formations across Wisconsin, other land trusts may be focused on preserving the natural areas around a single lake or restoring prairies in one or two counties. No matter the size or scope of the land trust, as a member of Gathering Waters, each land trust has the strong support of their peers and the power of a statewide voice.

GATHERING WATERS STRENGTHENS WISCONSIN LAND TRUSTS by:

Advocating for government funding that provides millions of dollars to land trusts each year (see above)

Providing tools, resources, education opportunities, and a network of peers for land trust staff and board members

Increasing statewide awareness of the opportunities and benefits land trusts bring to the communities they serve

Watch a video about Gathering Waters.