Georgia Department of Economic Development
Brazilian IT service provider to create 400 jobs in Atlanta

06/17/2015

ATLANTA, June 17, 2015—Gov. Nathan Deal announced today during an economic development mission to Brazil that Stefanini, a leading global information technology (IT) service provider based in São Paulo, Brazil, will create 400 jobs by the end of 2016 through an expansion of its Atlanta office.

“For more than two decades, Georgia has sustained a partnership with Brazil that is vital to our economic development efforts,” said Deal. “Throughout this mission and as evidenced by today’s announcement, I’ve seen firsthand the results of our continued ties to this important South American nation. I’m confident that Georgia’s highly skilled workforce and thriving technology cluster will create the ideal environment for Stefanini’s future growth in Atlanta.”

Stefanini has maintained a presence in Georgia for 10 years and has grown its employee base to be one of the largest employers in the area of IT services. With the expansion of its office in Atlantic Station, Stefanini will grow its revenue and employment by 50 percent with the potential to expand business in the future.

“It was a pleasure to meet with Governor Deal in São Paulo this week,” said Stefanini President and CEO Marco Stefanini. “We are thrilled to expand operations in Georgia. We have experienced companywide success, benefiting from a strong network of talent and customers. We look forward to growing our business globally with this newest expansion.”

With more than 600 active clients, including more than 300 multinational clients, Stefanini maintains a strong presence in industries such as financial services, manufacturing, telecommunications, chemical services, technology, public sector and utilities. The company’s clients benefit from offerings that include IT infrastructure outsourcing (helpdesk/desktop services and data center), application development/systems integration, ERP/SAP consulting, asset management and strategic IT staffing solutions.

Close to 4,400 technology jobs have been announced in Georgia over the last year. According to the Technology Association of Georgia, the current IT job market is 15.1 percent larger than in 2014.

The Georgia Department of Economic Development (GDEcD) and the Metro Atlanta Chamber will partner to support the company with talent recruitment for the newly created jobs.

“Stefanini continues to find success in Georgia,” said GDEcD Commissioner Chris Carr. “The skilled talent and vast network of companies and R&D resources found in Georgia are what keep us on the radar for global technology companies who are looking to relocate or expand. These same resources are what have helped grow Stefanini over the last decade. I am confident this innovative company will be successful in the future.”

“We are pleased that Brazilian company Stefanini has selected metro Atlanta for its office expansion,” said Metro Atlanta Chamber Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer Brian P. McGowan. “Brazil has always been an important market with a growing presence in Atlanta, and Stefanini’s investment in our region adds strength to our international technology ecosystem.”

Georgia has had representation in Brazil for more than two decades. More than 12,000 Georgians are employed by Brazilian-owned businesses. Deal, along with state and local business leaders, are currently on an economic development mission in Brazil to establish new business relationships, strengthen existing ties and promote Georgia as an excellent tourism destination and quality source for products and services. The Georgia delegation represents some of Georgia’s greatest economic development assets in business, education, tourism, trade and workforce.

About Stefanini

Stefanini is a global IT outsourcing services company with locations in 34 countries across the Americas, Europe, Australia and Asia. Since 1987, Stefanini has been providing offshore, onshore and nearshore IT services, including application development services, IT infrastructure outsourcing (help desk support and desktop services), systems integration, consulting and strategic staffing to Fortune 1000 enterprises around the world. Clients benefit from Stefanini’s financial stability, sustained year-over-year growth and zero net debt. The corporate global headquarters is located in São Paulo, Brazil, with European headquarters in Brussels and North American headquarters in metropolitan Detroit.

Related