the GaSSO School Portal
About The Tuition Tax Credit Program – and GaSSO

In 2008, the Georgia General Assembly passed the original legislation creating the Georgia Qualified Education Expense (QEE) Tax Credit Program. Under this program, individuals and corporations can make tax-credit donations to authorized non-profit organizations which can then fund scholarships at private schools in Georgia, including schools recommended by the donors.

GaSSO – the Georgia Student Scholarship Organization, Inc. – sought and won approval from the Georgia Department of Education to operate under the new law as an authorized Student Scholarship Organization, or SSO.

The Georgia QEE Tax Credit Program allows individuals, married couples and businesses to claim dollar-for-dollar tax credits on their Georgia income tax for scholarship donations made through a qualified SSO, up to the following limits:

For individuals who are single, up to $1,000;

For individuals who are married, up to $1,250;

For married couples filing jointly, up to $2,500;

For C Corporations, up to 75 percent of their Georgia income tax liability;

For members of limited liability corporations (LLCs), shareholders in Subchapter ‘S’ corporations, and partners in partnerships, up to $10,000.

The amount of tax credits that can be taken is limited to the donor’s tax liability or actual donation amount, whichever is less.

As an SSO authorized by the Georgia Department of Education, GaSSO receives and processes donations from individuals, families and corporations, and disburses the funds to designated private schools, usually within three business days of receiving approval from the school.

GaSSO is pleased to announce that Cindy Neyer has joined GaSSO as Business Manager. Cindy has over 20+ years as an Administrative Assistant working for Pitney Bowes, Imagistics and Canon. She also has worked in the Legal Department at IBM.

Her role with GaSSO will be processing scholarship applications, writing checks, preparing and reconciling reports, processing donations, filing donation updates and managing general inquiries.

Please send all of your scholarship requests and general inquiries to her at Cindy@GeorgiaSSO.us

GaSSO is based in Cumming, Ga., and works with donors and private schools throughout Georgia. It is operated by a staff of three and governed by an independent Board of Directors.

Management Team