Replenishing General Fund Balance
GFOA recommends that governments adopt a formal fund balance policy that defines the appropriate level of fund balance target levels. Also, management should consider specifying the purposes for which various portions of the fund balances are intended. For example, one portion of the fund balance may be for working capital, one for budgetary stabilization, and one for responding to extreme events. This additional transparency helps decision makers understand the reason for maintaining the target levels described in the fund balance policy.



Governments should also consider providing broad guidance in their financial policies for how resources will be directed to fund balance replenishment. For example, a policy may define the revenue sources that would typically be looked to for replenishment of fund balance. This might include non-recurring revenues, budget surpluses, and excess resources in other funds (if legally permissible and if there is defensible rationale). Year-end surpluses are an especially appropriate source for replenishing fund balance.



Finally, a government should consider including in its financial policy a statement that establishes the broad strategic intent of replenishing fund balances as soon as economic conditions allow. This emphasizes fund balance replenishment as a financial management priority.



Governments are subject to a number of factors that could require the use of fund balances. It is therefore incumbent on jurisdictions to minimize the use of fund balance, except in very specific circumstances. Replenishment should take place in a prompt fashion with amounts that have been used to ensure that the jurisdiction is properly prepared for contingencies. With the foundation of a financial policy in place, governments should use their long-term financial planning and budget processes to develop a more detailed strategy for using and replenishing fund balance. With these criteria in mind, the government should develop a replenishment strategy and timeline for replenishing fund balances as soon as possible, and that is still appropriate to prevailing budgetary and economic conditions and that considers the following:

The policy should define the time period within which and contingencies for which fund balances will be used. This gives the public a sense for how fund balance is being used as a “bridge” to ensure stable cash flow and provide service continuity. The policy should describe how the government’s expenditure levels will be adjusted to match any new economic realities that are behind the use of fund balance as a financing bridge. The policy should describe the time period over which the components of fund balance will be replenished and the means by which they will be replenished. Frequently, a key part of the replenishment plan will be to control operating expenditures and use budget surpluses to replenish fund balance. The replenishment plan might also specify any particular revenue source that will aid in the replenishment of fund balances. For example, if the government has a volatile sales tax yield, it might specify that yields that are significantly above average would be used to replenish fund balances.

Generally, governments should seek to replenish their fund balances within one to three years of use. However, when developing the specifics of the replenishment plan, governments should consider a number of factors that influence the rate and time period over which fund balances will be replenished. Factors influencing the replenishment time horizon include: