Why It's Time for Democrats to Talk About Abortion at a Debate
Thursday night, in Brooklyn, presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders tell voters why each should be the Democratic Party’s nominee. CNN moderators will undoubtedly ask questions about economics, health care, and gender equality, but the real question is whether they ask about the one issue at the center of all three: abortion.

To date, there have been eight debates, and moderators have asked exactly zero questions about abortion. There have been useless questions about what Bill Clinton would do as First Gentleman, Bernie and Jane Sanders’ honeymoon in the Soviet Union, and so, so many questions about the email “scandal” that isn’t. (If Clinton’s emails had been about abortion, would moderators have asked about it?)

Univision debate moderators came close by mentioning abortion in a question about judicial nominations, especially in light of the case currently before the Supreme Court—which could effectively end abortion access for millions of women. During the Fox News town hall, candidates were asked about later abortions in a way that stigmatized women who might need them, but candidates didn’t actually debate the procedure or lay out plans for the future.

In previous debates, both Clinton and Sanders have noted their support for Planned Parenthood and desire to ensure that abortion remains safe and legal, but they haven’t explained what they would do to protect or increase access to care. On the campaign trail, each has said they would overturn the Hyde Amendment, a federal policy that disproportionately bars low-income people and women of color from using their Medicaid insurance for abortion care. Research has shown when a person isn’t able to the access abortion care they want, they’re three times as likely to be living below the federal poverty level two years later. Abortion is as much an economic issue as it is a health care issue.

As a black woman who has had an abortion, I want to know how they will do it. At a time when abortion clinics are being shuttered, shot at, threatened, and burned, and patients are having to travel hundreds of miles or induce their own abortions because there’s no clinic nearby, we need pro-choice candidates to outline their agendas on what reproductive freedom should look like. Let’s be honest: It would make the debate more relevant to people’s lived experiences.