American Red Cross
The Red Cross provides biomedical services as well as services in five other areas (1) Domestic Disaster Services, (2) Health and Safety Services, (3) International Relief (4) Community Services and (5) Service to the Armed Forces. The Red Cross reports that it responds to nearly 66,000 disasters in the U.S. every year, ranging from home fires that affect a single family to hurricanes that affect tens of thousands, to earthquakes that impact millions. The organization reports that it helps an average of 160,000 military families and veterans annually prepare for, cope with, and respond to the challenges of military service through a range of support services. The Red Cross reports that it is the largest single supplier of blood and blood products in the U.S. Nearly 3 million people donate approximately 5.1 million units of blood through the Red Cross each year. The Red Cross also provides health and safety courses, including CPR and First Aid training. The organization reports that more than 6.25 million Americans participate in its training programs each year. The Red Cross reports it is part of one of the worlds largest humanitarian networks with 17 million volunteers in 190 countries. The organization reports that it reaches an average of more than 140 million people across the globe each year by responding to disasters, building safer communities, and educating future humanitarians. During the past six years, the Red Cross was reorganized. The Red Cross reports that budgets, back office systems, purchasing functions and other tasks have been consolidated to become more efficient and to enable local affiliates to provide more focus on program service delivery including the management of volunteers. In addition, the Red Cross noted that this reorganization helped streamline its decision-making process and financial management. In addition to the program information included in this report, American Red Cross provided BBB WGA with detailed data on the level of major Red Cross services in the past year on a state by state basis. A PDF version of this can be viewed by going to give.org/redcross

For the year ended June 30, 2016, American Red Cross's program expenses were: