Glenn attacked for 8/28
Glenn Beck is seen here on GlennBeck.TV, a feature available exclusively to Glenn Beck Insider Extreme members. Learn more…

GLENN: It’s going to be one for the history books. And because of that, the enemies have come out from the woodwork, because they know if you learn history, everything changes. Here’s what Bill Press said about 8-28. Listen carefully.

VOICE: I just think sometimes you have to stand up and say, this is wrong. The wrong place. I’m not taking away his, you know — this fuzzy idea, you know, that he can do it anywhere, anytime.

GLENN: No.

VOICE: There’s some places, where, you know, cheap political tricks should not be allowed. You know, to me — this may be going over the top. I don’t think so. I think this is the same as allowing Al Qaeda to hold a rally on September 11th at Ground Zero.

PAT: The exact same thing because you killed home people? How many innocent people have you killed?

STU: It was 2929.

PAT: It was in the 3,000 person range and enemy of the state.

GLENN: They have gone on to say that this is a slap in the face of Abraham Lincoln. Okay. So, I don’t have a right — I don’t have a right to speak my mind and this — I told you, the reason why 8-28 is — one reason why it’s historic is because it may be the last time anyone is allowed to hold a rally at 8-28 and they will — they will couch that in, it’s too sacred of a spot. Believe me. I know. I used to watch the sunrise — when I was 18 years old, I used to watch the sunrise by sitting on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. I watched it rise all the time. I know how sacred that space is. I know what that space means. I don’t ask you out of arrogance to come. We all have to stand. We all have to stand. We have to stand where we have been asked to stand. Today I’m standing here. I’m saying what I feel I’m supposed to say and none of us are any different. We all are supposed to do what we feel we are supposed to do with humility. I’m standing at the Lincoln Memorial on 8-28. The government is trying to now close the Lincoln Memorial for any kind of large gatherings. This may be the last large gathering ever to assemble at the Lincoln Memorial. Historic, historic.



Learn more about the Restoring Honor Rally, 8/28 in Washington DC…

I believe in divine providence. It was not my intention to select 8-28 because of the Martin Luther King tie. It is the day he made that speech. I had no idea until I announced it and I walked off stage and my researchers said, New York Times has already just published that this is Martin Luther — and I said, oh, geez. We were going to use 9-12 but 9-12 is a Sunday. I’m not going to ask anyone to work on the Sabbath. I’m not going to ask anybody to honor God on a Sunday. I’m not going to ask anybody to work on the day of rest. So, we had to find the next Saturday. The one that we could arrange with all our our schedules was 8-28. I have to tell you something. I believe in divine providence. I believe this is a reason, because whites don’t own the founding fathers. Whites don’t own Abraham Lincoln. Blacks don’t own Martin Luther King. Humans, humans embrace their ideas or reject their ideas. Too many are rejecting the founders’ ideas. Too many have forgotten Abraham Lincoln’s ideas and far too many have either gotten just lazy or they have purposely distorted Martin Luther King’s ideas of judge a man by the content of his character. Lately, in the last 20 years, we’ve been told that character doesn’t matter. Well, if character doesn’t matter, then what was Martin Luther King asking people to judge people by?

I don’t know how many people will be there been 8-28. I know there’s going to be grand opposition against it now. That’s unfortunate because I ask you to come with your children and I ask you to leave your signs at home. They will reveal themselves and you will be revealed as people of peace and of character. 8-28, steps of the Lincoln Memorial and Abraham Lincoln. Put yourself between Abe Lincoln and George Washington, in that hallowed space and restore America.