Glenn Beck: Have Our Leaders Abandoned Common Sense?
Watch the latest news video at <a href="http://video.foxnews.com/">video.foxnews.com</a> Watch Glenn Beck weekdays at 5p & 2a ET on Fox News Channel

I know progressives have tried to tell you otherwise, but you don’t need to be a rocket scientist to lead America. A degree from Harvard or Yale is not a pre-requisite for president. There are only two essential traits all leaders need: Integrity and some good-old fashioned common sense. You need to be able to look at a problem, see what works and go with it.

We seem to have completely abandoned anything remotely close to common sense.

Today we’re going to try and simplify things. What would your grandparents say? The news today must have them spinning in their graves.

Stock markets around the world took a dive last week and again on Monday. The Asian stock market tumbled by the most it has in 14 months. Why? I mean, we all heard the great news from the president about how unemployment went from 9.9 percent to 9.7 percent and that the economy is getting "stronger every day":

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: This report is a sign that our economy is getting stronger by the day.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

OK sure, 95 percent of the jobs "created" in that report were temporary government census jobs. And we now have more census workers — 564,000 — than in the following industries:

• Oil and gas extraction (about 165,000 workers)

• Electronic and appliance stores (about 480,000)

• Air transportation (about 456,000)

• Rail transportation (about 216,000)

• Utilities (about 557,000)

And sure, because we have hired so many workers, the cost of counting Americans is skyrocketing. The 2000 Census cost $4.5 billion. The 2010 Census is set to cost up to $14.5 billion.

What are we spending the extra $10 billion on?

And sure, of the jobs added last month, roughly 96 percent were census workers — temporary positions — but other than that, what’s the big deal? Does anyone think spending $14.5 billion on temp census workers is good for the country in the long run?

What would your grandparents say? Probably something that made a lot more sense than these clowns are saying today.

We’ve told you Europe is falling apart. Over the weekend, we find out that Hungary looks like it’s next to go the way of Greece. The euro is at a new four-year low. Iran is selling off their euros. And Eurozone nations announced they are setting up a $1 trillion bailout fund to "soothe"’ market jitters. How is this soothing? They don’t have the money.

America’s wealthiest state, Connecticut, just had their credit rating reduced from AA-plus to AA, as they prepare to borrow $956 million to close a budget gap — after borrowing money last year to cover a deficit of $947.6 million. President Obama is about to push our national debt higher than U.S. gross domestic product: Meaning we could take everything we make and sell in this country for an entire year and not pay for the small debt we owe.

Something else was happening in Europe: There was another Bilderberg meeting. I don’t know much about these people — I know about the Build-a-Bear people and they’re brainwashing our kids with teddy bears. If they’re half as evil as he teddy bear people, look out.

My critics right now are saying, Oh boy, here goes that conspiracy nut Glenn Beck again, he thinks the Bilderbergs are taking over. Please, I don’t believe in any of that nonsense — my critics just want to paint me into a kook. Besides, you don’t need a conspiracy site to know what these supposedly elite and powerful people were "secretly" meeting about. They weren’t talking about their golf handicaps; they’re talking about the economic shape of the world. They’re asking if the euro will survive. They’re wondering if America will survive. What will the world look like a year from now?

Here’s the not-so-secret that most people don’t know: America’s economy is based on spending. No matter who the president is — pick your favorite one — they most likely will never say the economy is in trouble, because they know that 70 percent of our economy is based on spending. The world economy stops if you stop spending. That’s why Obama can look you in the eye and with a straight face say it was a good thing that we spend $14.5 billion on the Census.

Again I ask: What would your grandparents say to that logic? They’d say we spent too much; it’s broken and we can’t fix it with more spending. Time to take your lumps and move on. And then they’d smack you with a shovel for being so stupid.

Why is Greece in trouble? After joining the supposed economic safe haven of the Eurozone, did they build useful infrastructure? Did they free up people to create a brighter tomorrow? No, they thought it would be great to have people retiring at fifty; give everyone free health care, free this and free that; increase government handouts and create nothing except debt.

The sad part is two Australian comedians made more sense out of the dire situation than anyone in the press so far.

Where do they get the money? They don’t.

The politicians and the uber-elites are playing a game. They’re in bed with the world labor unions. They’ve spent us into oblivion while all the time telling us it’s OK. It’s not. Here’s the fun part. Government will raise taxes on you. When you say no, the labor unions — who are in bed with government — will start civil unrest, which government will blame on you. This is the endgame and the only loser is you.

This is from the World Socialist website:

"In recent days, a number of media commentaries have predicted a similar eruption of social unrest of revolutionary dimensions as a direct result of the worsening economic crisis. These warnings are accompanied by dire predictions that Europe will suffer the return of nationalist tensions, the emergence of fascist movements and even war.

"Writing in the Financial Times May 24, for example, historian Simon Schama stated, ‘Far be it for me to make a dicey situation dicier but you can’t smell the sulfur in the air right now and not think we might be on the threshold of an age of rage… in Europe and America there is a distinct possibility of a long hot summer of social umbrage."

"In The Observer of May 30, Will Hutton, its former editor… declares, ‘The future of Europe is in the balance. the potential disintegration of the euro will be a first-order economic and political disaster…. What will emerge will be a Europe closer to the 1930s. Fearful, stagnant and prey to vicious racist and nationalist ideologies.’

"Deutsche Welle writes that these warnings are ‘Closer today than at any other time since this current financial crisis-the worst since 1929-began… The deep anger brewing in these countries is fermenting worldwide against the same institutions, the same people, and the failure of global capitalism’

"Deutsche Welle concludes with comments by Marie-Hélène Caillol… ‘This crisis is directly connected to the end of the world order as we know it since 1945 — and even earlier since the European colonization process. Therefore, the whole global fabric centered on the U.S. for 60 years is slowly collapsing, generating turmoil of all sorts.’

"When she was asked where all the social unrest ends, she answered: ‘War. It’s as simple and as horrifying as that.’"

There are forces trying to make you believe everything is OK and that more government and more spending is the way to go. There are forces who want to gain more international power and control. And then there’s you.

Our Founders had faith in you. I have faith in you. Have faith in yourself and the principles our parents and grandparents had that made this country great. And have faith in God. It’s pretty simple, really.

— Watch Glenn Beck weekdays at 5p & 2a ET on Fox News Channel