Main Intelligence Administration (GRU) Glavnoye Razvedyvatelnoye Upravlenie
Main Intelligence Administration (GRU)

Glavnoye Razvedyvatelnoye Upravlenie (GRU)

Russian President Vladimir Putin congratulated the military intelligence officers 02 November 2018, proposing to think about restoring the name of the Main Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces. "I congratulate you on the upcoming professional holiday - the Day of the Military Intelligence Officer and the 100th anniversary of the legendary GRU, now the Main Directorate of the General Staff of the Armed Forces," the head of state addressed veterans and service workers at a solemn event at the Theater of the Russian Army. “It is not clear where the word reconnaissance has disappeared - the Main Intelligence Directorate should be restored,” Putin added to applause in the hall.

The President stressed that intelligence is an integral part of military affairs and military science, it has always been and is everywhere for centuries. Putin noted that the current anniversary of the Russian military intelligence "is turning us to history - in order to recall brave, talented people who faithfully served Russia and their people." Among these he named the heroes of the Patriotic War of 1812, the Crimean War and the First World War, officers of the General Staff and military agents at the diplomatic missions of the Russian Empire, "who, often risking their lives, extracted the most valuable information necessary for the defense of the country to protect its national interests". He concluded that Russia is proud of all these milestones in the development of military intelligence.

Putin noted that many officers of the Russian Imperial Army, being true patriots and statesmen, played a significant role in the establishment of a new military intelligence structure of the country, since they understood that "there is no greater shame than to betray the Fatherland, to betray comrades." Thus, the president continued, these people during the period of revolutionary upheavals ensured the continuity of the traditions of service. “The military intelligence officers showed the same loyalty to duty at the turn of the 1990s after the collapse of the USSR. Then the GRU potential and the personnel training school were preserved,” the head of state emphasized.

The president added that Russia's military intelligence is distinguished by high professionalism and unique capabilities. “As the Supreme Commander, I certainly know, without any exaggeration, your unique capabilities, including special operations, I highly appreciate the information and analytical materials and reports that are being prepared for the country's leadership in the General Directorate of the General Staff. courage and determination that each of you will do everything for Russia and our people ", - Putin addressed the military intelligence officers.

The Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) of the Russian army has the overall responsibility for intelligence collection by the military. This includes GRU agents stationed in embassies and military intelligence and reconnaissance units during wartime. The GRU is Russia's premier military intelligence organization that serves the General Staff. By some estimates the GRU is larger than the intelligence organizations of all the United States military services combined. The KGB and the GRU were the two principal Soviet intelligence organizations. The KGB (or Committee for State Security) maintained internal security in the USSR and, as a secret intelligence service, collected intelligence and conducts covert political influence operations (termed "active measures") abroad. The GRU (or Chief Directorate for Intelligence) was the Soviet military intelligence organization and engaged only in foreign intelligence activities.

The structure, numerical composition and even the biographies of GRU superiors are a state secret. In terms of the degree of closure, this structure is at least as good as the FSB and the Foreign Intelligence Service, whose rivalry with military intelligence officers has been going on since Soviet times. And this is not just hardware competition. It is believed that the GRU and the SVR-FSB represent two alternative geopolitical visions of the current situation in the world. Say, the GRU are "Eurasians" who offer Russia an alliance with the East and do not care too much about the "democratic image" of the country. And the SVR and the FSB are supposedly "Atlantists" who want to be friends with the Western elite. The Soviets used a single generic term - razvedka - to describe all actions necessary to achieve a better understanding of the enemy. The term razvedka means both intelligence and reconnaissance and, with an appropriate adjectival qualifier, it pertains to every possible means of intelligence collection and analysis. After 1918 the High Command centrally controlled razvedka, and intelligence departments within fronts and armies directed the activities of intelligence chiefs within subordinate divisions.

Front RU's (Intelligence Directorate) and army RO's (Intelligence Department) fielded long-range reconnaissance groups or detachments from front commando brigades at shallower depths, and formations below army level employed short-range razvedka detachments and patrols. All of these activities were coordinated by the GRU and the RU's and RO's in the intelligence chain of command.

Six GRU directorates were responsible for various geographical areas. Each directorate kept notes on different aspects of intelligence- gathering operations, such as reconnaissance, electronic intelligence, information gathering, personnel records, correspondence, reporters, special operations, and money transfers.

Infected with the desire for conquest and controlling the modern world's most massive and multi-faceted foreign intelligence institutions, the KGB and the GRU, the Soviet leadership watched constantly for opportunities, indeed worked to create opportunities to strengthen the Soviet Union's world position politically, economically, and militarily relative to the other super power, the United States.

With the dissolution of the USSR at the start of 1992, the GRU became for a time the principal intelligence body of the Main Command of the Commonwealth of Independent States Armed Forces. Following the April 1992 creation of a Russian Ministry of Defense, however, the GRU became Russia's military-intelligence arm.

The GRU today is a cohesive, highly efficient, and professional military intelligence agency despite widespread budgetary and organizational difficulties facing the rest of the Russian military.

On 24 April 2009 Persident Medvedev dismissed the 63-year old Chief of the GRU, General Valentin Korabelnikov. No official reason was given for the dismissal, but Korabelnikov's impending dismissal had been rumored for months. Korabelnikov was known to be a Soviet-style general who focused the GRU's efforts at countering the perceived threat from NATO, rather than terrorists, separatists, and other, more germane threats to Russia. As a result, the GRU performed poorly during the August 2008 conflict in Georgia.

Korabelnikov also publicly opposed Serdyukov's proposed military reforms, although experts said this was at best a secondary reason for his dismissal. Not much was known about Korabelnikov's replacement, Aleksandr Shlyakhturov, other than he is a career intelligence officer. Experts downplayed the possible effects of Korabelnikov's dismissal on military reform, which took another step forward with the dismissal of 50 generals and colonels who failed a basic skills test.

While Korabelnikov opposed many of Serdyukov's proposed military reforms, and even published his criticisms in a report, experts maintained this was not the main reason for his dismissal. His dissenting views, however, did not endear him to GOR leadership. In a classic turf battle, Korabelnikov and other top GRU officials openly criticized proposals that would have placed GRU special forces brigades under district commands. There was also talk of placing GRU signals intelligence systems under the command of the Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR). Some even talked of liquidating the GRU and folding all of its assets into the SVR.





NEWS LETTER Join the GlobalSecurity.org mailing list Enter Your Email Address