Get to Know Goodwill Industries International President and CEO Jim Gibbons

How much do you know about the leader of Goodwill Industries International? Read on to learn a few facts about our president and CEO.

Name: Jim Gibbons

U.S. State That Claims Him: Indiana

Goodwill Tenure: 2008- Present

Favorite Movie:

For Once In My Life , which is an inspiring, expectation-defying look at the Spirit of Goodwill® Band, a unique assembly of 28 singers and musicians, all with disabilities — ranging from autism and behavioral disorders to cerebral palsy, Down syndrome and visual impairments — who share an uncanny gift for music, joy and friendship.

Favorite Color:

Blue, of course. More specifically, Goodwill’s PANTONE® Reflex Blue

Where He Got His Smarts:

Gibbons earned his bachelor’s of science degree in industrial engineering from Purdue University (Indiana, United States), and then attended the Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration (Cambridge, Massachusetts), where he was the first person who is blind to graduate with a master’s in business administration.



His Pre-Goodwill Years:

Before coming to Goodwill in April 2008, Gibbons served as president and CEO for National Industries for the Blind (NIB), a United States-based nonprofit organization that works in partnership with more than 88 associated agencies throughout the country to enhance economic opportunities and professional development for people who are blind. Through comprehensive marketing and branding strategies and an emphasis on aggressive mission measures, Gibbons transformed the nearly 70-year-old NIB into a results-oriented social enterprise for the 21st century.

Prior to NIB, Gibbons was president and CEO of Campus Wide Access Solutions, a wholly owned subsidiary of AT&T. An employee of AT&T for more than a decade, Gibbons held leadership positions in operations, product management, and mergers and acquisition.

Presidential Duties:

On December 14, 2010, U.S. President Barack Obama named Gibbons to the newly established White House Council for Community Solutions, which is committed to social innovation and civic engagement throughout the nation. As leader of an international movement, Gibbons — one of 25 nonprofit, corporation and foundation leaders on the council — has brought his global perspective to this respected panel.

Want To Learn More?

Check out the newsroom to get the latest news on Gibbons and all things Goodwill.