Republican • National • Committee
OBAMA SPEND-O-METER OBAMA'S LIBERAL FISCAL AGENDA: OVER $1 TRILLION IN NEW SPENDING Add this to your website or blog

Click Here If Sen. Barack Obama (D-IL) Could Enact All Of His Campaign Proposals, Taxpayers Would Be Faced With Financing $1.297 Trillion In New Spending Over One White House Term: Obama's Second Stimulus Plan Includes $50 Billion For States And Infrastructure Projects. "Obama advisers put the cost of Mr. Obama's full economic stimulus plan at $175 billion, including $60 billion for the steps announced Monday. Of the earlier $115 billion, $50 billion would be used to help states and to speed construction of roads and other infrastructure projects that create jobs." (Jackie Calmes and Jeff Zeleny, "Obama Details Plan To Aid Victims Of Fiscal Crisis, The New York Times, 10/14/08) Obama Will Provide Loans For Struggling Small Businesses At A Cost Of Approximately $5 Billion. "Mr. Obama's proposal from last week to allow struggling small businesses to apply for loans from the Small Business Administration's disaster funds would cost more than $5 billion." (Jackie Calmes and Jeff Zeleny, "Obama Details Plan To Aid Victims Of Fiscal Crisis," The New York Times, 10/14/08) Obama Will Cover Loan Guarantees For The Auto Industry At A Cost Of Approximately $4 Billion. "Senator Barack Obama proposed new steps on Monday to address the economic crisis, calling for temporary but costly new programs to help employers, automakers, homeowners, the unemployed, and state and local governments. ... The expense of covering additional loan guarantees for the auto industry would mean more than $4 billion more." (Jackie Calmes and Jeff Zeleny, "Obama Details Plan To Aid Victims Of Fiscal Crisis," The New York Times, 10/14/08) Obama's Energy Plan Will Cost $150 Billion Over 10 Years, Equal To $15 Billion Annually And $60 Billion Over Four Years. "Obama will invest $150 billion over 10 years to advance the next generation of biofuels and fuel infrastructure, accelerate the commercialization of plug-in hybrids, promote development of commercial-scale renewable energy, invest in low-emissions coal plants, and begin the transition to a new digital electricity grid." (Obama For America, "The Blueprint For Change," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 1/14/08, p. 25) Obama's National Infrastructure Reinvestment Bank Will Cost $60 Billion Over Ten Years; Equal To $6 Billion A Year And $24 Billion Over Four Years. Obama: "I'm proposing a National Infrastructure Reinvestment Bank that will invest $60 billion over ten years." (Sen. Barack Obama, Remarks On Economic Policy, Janesville, WI, 2/13/08) Obama's Early Education And K-12 Package Will Cost $18 Billion A Year; Equal To $72 Billion Over Four Years. "Barack Obama's early education and K-12 plan package costs about $18 billion per year." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama's Plan For Lifetime Success Through Education," www.barackobama.com, 11/20/07) Obama's Home Foreclosure Prevention Fund Will Cost $10 Billion. Obama: "I've put forward a $10 billion home foreclosure prevention fund. We're going to help families who have been hoodwinked by deceptive practices and predatory loans so that they can work out the terms, stay in their home, keep paying their mortgage." (CNN's "CNN Newsroom," 3/2/08) Obama's National Service Plan Will Cost $3.5 Billion A Year; Equal To $14 Billion Over Four Years. "Barack Obama's national service plan will cost about $3.5 billion per year when it is fully implemented." (Obama For America, "Helping All Americans Serve Their Country: Barack Obama's Plan For Universal Voluntary Citizen Service," www.barackobama.com, 12/5/07) Obama's Health Care Plan Will Cost $150 Billion; Equal To $600 Billion Over Four Years. CBS' Steve Kroft: "The most expensive part of the Obama program is the health insurance plan, which would make coverage for children mandatory, and promises affordable government subsidized insurance to all Americans, with premiums based on a percentage of their income. How much is it going to cost? $150 billion it's going to cost, right?" Obama: "It is." (CBS' "60 Minutes," 9/21/08) Obama Will Increase Foreign Assistance Funding By $25 Billion. "Obama will embrace the Millennium Development Goal of cutting extreme poverty around the world in half by 2015, and he will double our foreign assistance to $50 billion to achieve that goal." (Obama For America, "The Blueprint For Change," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 1/14/08, p. 53) Obama Will Provide $2 Billion To Aid Iraqi Refugees. "He will provide at least $2 billion to expand services to Iraqi refugees in neighboring countries, and ensure that Iraqis inside their own country can find a safe-haven." (Obama For America, "The Blueprint For Change," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 1/14/08, p. 51) Obama Will Provide $1.5 Billion To Help States Adopt Paid-Leave Systems. "As president, Obama will initiate a strategy to encourage all 50 states to adopt paid-leave systems. Obama will provide a $1.5 billion fund to assist states with start-up costs and to help states offset the costs for employees and employers." (Obama For America, "The Blueprint For Change," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 1/14/08, p. 15) Obama Will Provide $1 Billion Over 5 Years For Transitional Jobs And Career Pathway Programs, Equal To $200 Million A Year And $800 Million Over Four Years. "Obama will invest $1 billion over five years in transitional jobs and career pathway programs that implement proven methods of helping low-income Americans succeed in the workforce." (Obama For America, "The Blueprint For Change," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 1/14/08, p. 42) Obama Would Close The "Doughnut Hole" In The Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Program. "Barack Obama wants to close the 'doughnut hole' in the Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Program ..." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama: Helping America's Seniors," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 3/3/08) Based On Estimates From The Congressional Budget Office, Closing The "Doughnut Hole" Would Cost Approximately $39.18 Billion In The First Fiscal Year Of Obama's Administration; Equal To $156.72 Billion Over Four Years. The Congressional Budget Office estimated the cost of eliminating the 'doughnut hole' in Medicare's Drug Benefit design at $39.18 billion for FY 2010. (Congressional Budget Office, "Budget Options," www.cbo.gov, 2/05, p. 204) "Closing It Would Roughly Double The Cost Of The Medicare Prescription Drug Program, However, And Obama Offers No Way To Pay For It." (Andrew Taylor, "Expensive Campaign Promises Would Face Deficit Reality Check," The Associated Press, 2/24/08) Obama Would Repeal The Social Security Windfall Elimination Provision (WEP) And Government Pension Offset (GPO). "Protect the Social Security Benefits of Public Employees and their Families: Barack Obama cosponsored the Social Security Fairness Act, which would repeal the Windfall Elimination Provision and the Government Pension Offset. ... Barack Obama believes that we have a responsibility to take care of workers who have devoted their lives to public service and that we shouldn't be discouraging our young people from working in these essential jobs." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama: Helping America's Seniors," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 3/3/08) Eliminating The WEP Would Cost $32.7 Billion Over 10 Years; Equal To $3.27 Billion A Year And $13.08 Billion Over Four Years. "The Congressional Budget Office has estimated that full repeal of the WEP would cost approximately $32.7 billion between 2006 and 2015. According to the Office of the Actuary of the SSA, elimination of the WEP would cost 0.06% of taxable payroll (causing an increase in Social Security's long-range deficit of about 3%)." (Laura Haltzel, "Social Security: The Windfall Elimination Provision (WEP)," Congressional Research Service, 3/8/07, p. 4) Eliminating The GPO Would Cost $38.1 Billion Over 10 Years; Equal To $3.81 Billion A Year And $15.24 Billion Over Four Years. "According to estimates provided by CBO and the Social Security actuaries, elimination of the GPO would cost $38.1 billion over 10 years, and in the long run would cost 0.06% of taxable payroll, which would increase Social Security's long-range deficit by about 3%." (Laura Haltzel, "Social Security: The Government Pension Offset (GPO)," Congressional Research Service, 3/9/07, p. 14) Obama Would Implement The Lugar-Obama Legislation To Crack Down On The Smuggling Of Weapons Of Mass Destruction. "[Obama] also will fully implement the Lugar-Obama legislation to help our allies detect and stop the smuggling of weapons of mass destruction throughout the world." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama: The War We Need To Win," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 3/3/08) According To The Congressional Budget Office, Implementing The Lugar-Obama Legislation (S. 2566) Would Cost $2.2 Billion Over Five Years, Which Averages Out To $440 Million Per Year And $1.76 Billion Over Four Years. "CBO estimates that implementing S. 2566 would cost ... more than $2.2 billion over the 2007-2011 period, assuming appropriation of the necessary amounts." (Congressional Budget Office, "S. 2566: Cooperative Proliferation Detection, Interdiction Assistance, And Conventional Threat Reduction Act Of 2006," www.cbo.gov, 5/31/06) Obama Has Proposed Creating "A National Network Of Public-Private Business Incubators" At A Cost Of $250 Million Per Year; Equal To $1 Billion Over Four Years. "Barack Obama will support entrepreneurship and spur job growth by creating a national network of public-private business incubators. Business incubators facilitate the critical work of entrepreneurs in creating start-up companies. ... Obama will invest $250 million per year to increase the number and size of incubators in disadvantaged communities throughout the country." (Obama For America, "Changing The Odds For Urban America," Fact Sheet, www.barackobama.com, Accessed 3/3/08) Obama Says He Will Restore Funding To The Community Development Block Grant Program. "The important Community Development Block Grant program ... has been cut by an astonishing 31 percent since Bush took office. ... The Community Development Block Grant is an important program that helps strengthen cities and towns throughout the nation by providing housing and creating jobs primarily for low- and moderate-income people. The Bush Administration has consistently attempted to cut funding for the Community Development Block Grant, by $1.2 billion next year and $6.9 billion over the next five years. Barack Obama has fought against these cuts, and as president will restore funding for the CDBG program." (Obama For America, "Changing The Odds For Urban America," Fact Sheet, www.barackobama.com, Accessed 2/26/08)



Returning CDBG Program Funding To FY 2000 Levels Would Require $2.447 Billion In Additional Spending Per Year, Equal To $9.788 Billion: The Fiscal Year 2008 Omnibus Appropriations Bill Provided $3.593 Billion For The Community Development Block Grant. "For assistance to units of State and local government, and to other entities, for economic and community development activities, and for other purposes, $3,865,800,000, to remain available until September 30, 2010, unless otherwise specified: Provided, That of the amount provided, $3,593,430,000 is for carrying out the community development block grant program under title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 ..." (H.R. 2764, Enacted On 12/26/07) In Fiscal Year 2000, The Community Development Block Grant Was Funded At $4.8 Billion, Which Is Equal To $6.04 Billion In 2008 When Adjusted For Inflation. "For grants to States and units of general local government and for related expenses, not otherwise provided for, to carry out a community development grants program as authorized by title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended (the `Act' herein) (42 U.S.C. 5301), $4,800,000,000, to remain available until September 30, 2002 ..." (H.R. 2684, Enacted On 10/20/99; Bureau Of Labor Statistics, "Inflation Calculator," www.bls.gov, Accessed 3/10/08) Obama Has Proposed A Credit Card Rating System, To Be Implemented By The FTC. "Barack Obama will create a credit card rating system, modeled on five-star systems used for other consumer products, to provide consumers an easily identifiable ranking of credit cards. Under the Obama plan, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) will assess the degree to which credit cards meet consumer-friendly standards. The FTC will test for a set of credit card features that are deemed the most dangerous for consumers, including the underwriting standards used to issue the card, the card's interest rate spread between the introductory rate and the maximum rate allowed, and transaction fees. The FTC will assign ratings so that consumers can easily understand if a credit card agreement meets or exceeds standards of safety. Credit card companies will be required to display the rating on all application and contract materials, enabling consumers to quickly understand all of the major provisions of a credit card without having to rely exclusively on fine print in lengthy documents. Credit card companies will also be required to disclose in simplified, clear language all of the major features of the card in addition to their FTC rating to provide consumers with additional information to compare credit card products." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama's Economic Agenda," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 2/26/08) Obama Co-Sponsored Legislation That Proposed This Rating System, At A Cost Of $10 Million Per Year, Equal To $40 Million Over Four Years. Obama is a co-sponsor of S. 2411, "[a] bill to require the establishment of a credit card safety star rating system for the benefit of consumers, and for other purposes." The text of the legislation authorizes $10 million a year to carry out this program. (S. 2411, Introduced 12/5/07) Obama Would Expand Loan Programs For Small Businesses, As Specified In The Small Business Lending Reauthorization And Improvements Act He Co-Sponsored. "Expand Loan Programs for Small Businesses: Access to capital is a top concern among small business owners. Barack Obama cosponsored the bipartisan Small Business Lending Reauthorization and Improvements Act. This bill expands the Small Business Administration's loan and micro-loan programs which provide startup and long-term financing that small firms cannot receive through normal channels. Obama will work to help more entrepreneurs get loans, expand the network of lenders, and simplify the loan approval process." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama's Plan For Small Business," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 3/7/08) The Congressional Budget Office Estimated The Cost Of The Small Business Lending Reauthorization And Improvements Act Of 2007, A Bill Co-Sponsored By Obama, At $3.4 Billion Over Five Years; Equal To $680 Million Per Year And $2.72 Billion Over Four Years. "Assuming appropriation of the necessary amounts, CBO estimates that implementing S. 1256 would cost ... $3.4 billion over the 2008-2012 period." (Congressional Budget Office, "S. 1256: Small Business Lending Reauthorization And Improvements Act Of 2007," www.cbo.gov, 9/10/07) Obama Would Assist High School Students With Obtaining Access To College-Level Courses. "Give More High School Students Access to Rigorous College-Level Courses: Students who participate in Advanced Placement (AP) programs, which give students the opportunity to take college-level courses in high school, are much more likely to enroll and succeed in college. While enrollment in AP courses has nearly tripled over the past decade, many students attend schools that do not offer AP classes. Barack Obama, with Senator Jim DeMint (R-SC), introduced a bipartisan plan to allow students who do not have access to college-level courses at their high schools to apply for need-based grants and seek credit at local colleges or community colleges." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama: 21st-Century Schools For A 21st-Century Democracy," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 3/10/08) Obama Co-Sponsored Legislation To Achieve This, Which Authorizes $50 Million Per Year, $200 Million Over Four Years. "Amends the Higher Education Act of 1965 to authorize the Secretary of Education to award grants to low-income secondary school juniors and seniors for the cost of taking nonremedial courses offered by institutions of higher education which award such students transferable postsecondary credits for such courses." The text of the legislation authorizes $50 million per year for the five fiscal years following the bill's enactment, equal to $200 million for fiscal years 2010 - 2013. (S. 3995, Introduced 9/26/06) Obama Would Double Federal Funding For Basic Research. "Invest in the Sciences: Barack Obama supports doubling federal funding for basic research, changing the posture of our federal government ... to one that embraces science and technology." (Obama For America Website, www.barackobama.com, Accessed 3/7/08) According To The Congressional Research Service, Federal Basic Research Funding For FY 2007 Was $28.2 Billion; To Double This Funding Level Over Four Years Would Equal $112.8 Billion. "[T]otal federal basic research funding for FY2007 would be flat at $28.2 billion (in real dollars)." (Michael E. Davey, et al., "Federal Research And Development Funding: FY2007," Congressional Research Service, 10/26/06) Obama Would Enact The Responsible Fatherhood And Healthy Families Act Which He Co-Sponsored. "Barack Obama has re-introduced the Responsible Fatherhood and Healthy Families Act to remove some of the government penalties on married families, crack down on men avoiding child support payments, and ensure that payments go to families instead of state bureaucracies. The legislation would also fund support services for fathers and their families, including domestic violence prevention efforts. As President, he will sign this bill into law and continue to implement innovative measures to strengthen families." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama: Fighting Poverty And Creating A Bridge To The Middle Class," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 3/9/08) Obama's Responsible Fatherhood And Healthy Families Act Would Cost $528 Million Over Three Years. (S. 1626, Introduced 6/14/07) Obama Would Ensure Full Health Care Enrollment Of "Priority 8" Veterans. "Barack Obama is committed to ending the unfair ban on healthcare enrollment of certain groups of veterans, including 'Priority 8' veterans who often earn modest incomes. He has voted to end this unfair policy, which has resulted in the VA turning away nearly one million veterans since 2003. As president, one of Barack Obama's first acts will be signing an executive order reversing this ban." (Obama For America, "Fulfilling A Sacred Trust With Our Veterans," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 3/10/08) The Cost Of Enrollment For "Priority 8" Veterans Was Scored By The Congressional Budget Office At Approximately $8.8 Billion Over 5 Years, Equal To $1.76 Billion A Year And $7.04 Billion Over Four Years. "After adjusting for expected inflation, CBO estimates that implementing this provision would increase VA health care costs by ... almost $8.8 billion over the 2008-2012 period, assuming appropriation of the necessary amounts." (Congressional Budget Office, "S. 1233: Veterans Traumatic Brain Injury And Health Programs Improvement Act Of 2007," www.cbo.gov, 8/23/07) Obama Supports Creating A National Catastrophe Fund, Similar To The One Passed By The House - Which Authorized $20 Million Per Year For The Fund; Equal To $80 Million Over Four Years. Q: "The U.S. House approved a national catastrophe fund in November. Do you support that bill?" Obama: "I think it's a good start. I think that we need a national catastrophe fund. The key is to make sure that it's run efficiently, that its adequately funded and that we build in smart incentives to assure that developers are mitigating risk when they're making decisions on where to locate homes or businesses." (Michael C. Bender, "Obama's Talk With The Palm Beach Post," Palm Beach[FL] Post, www.palmbeachpost.com, 5/23/08) The House Legislation Authorized $20 Million Per Year To Establish The National Catastrophe Risk Consortium. "H.R. 3355 would authorize the appropriation of $20 million for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2013 to establish the National Catastrophe Risk Consortium." (Congressional Budget Office, "H.R. 3355: Homeowners' Defense Act Of 2007," www.cbo.gov, 10/30/07) Obama Would Spend $500 Million A Year For Religious Organizations To Help The Disadvantaged; Equal To $2 Billion Over Four Years. "Democrat Barack Obama said yesterday that if elected president he would set aside more than $500 million a year in federal funds for religious organizations to help the disadvantaged, sharply expanding a Bush administration program that has strong support from evangelical Christians." (Joseph Williams, "Obama Vows $500M In Faith-Based Aid," The Boston Globe, 7/2/08) Obama Proposed Spending $90 Million A Year To Double The Manufacturing Extension Partnership; Equal To $360 Million Over Four Years. "In a new initiative, Obama proposed spending $90 million a year to double the Manufacturing Extension Partnership. The 20-year-old program has helped manufacturers improve efficiency and growth, he said, but has been underfunded. Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, his Democratic rival, made a similar proposal months ago." (Charles Babington, "Obama Woos Working-Class Voters In Michigan," The Associated Press, 5/14/08) Obama Proposed Creating $10 Billion In Additional Mortgage Revenue Bonds, At A Cost Of $50 Million To The Federal Government. "Barack Obama will provide $10 billion in additional Mortgage Revenue Bonds, at a cost of $50 million to the federal government, to help families facing foreclosure refinance and to enable low- and moderate-income first time homebuyers purchase a home." (Obama For America, "Protecting Homeownership & Cracking Down On Mortgage Fraud In Texas," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 7/14/08) Obama Would Extend Trade Adjustment Assistance To Service Industries. "To help all workers adapt to a rapidly changing economy, Obama would update the existing system of Trade Adjustment Assistance by extending it to service industries, creating flexible education accounts to help workers retrain, and providing retraining assistance for workers in sectors of the economy vulnerable to dislocation before they lose their jobs." (Obama For America Website, www.barackobama.com, Accessed 7/14/08) The Cost Of Extending Trade Adjustment Assistance To Service Industry Workers Was Scored By The Congressional Budget Office At $2.5 Billion Over 10 Years; Equal To $250 Million Per Year And $1 Billion Over Four Years. "CBO estimates that provisions in S. 1309 to include workers involved in the provision of services in the class of workers eligible for TAA benefits would increase outlays by $2.5 billion from 2006 through 2015." (Congressional Budget Office, "S. 1309: Trade Adjustment Assistance Equity For Service Workers Act Of 2005," www.cbo.gov, 9/19/05) Obama Would Double Funding For The Jobs Access And Reverse Commute (JARC) Program. "Obama will double the federal Jobs Access and Reverse Commute (JARC) program to ensure that additionally federal public transportation dollars flow to the highest-need communities and that urban planning initiatives take this aspect of transportation policy into account." (Obama For America, "Changing The Odds For Urban America," Fact Sheet, www.barackobama.com, Accessed 7/14/08) According To The U.S. Federal Transit Administration, The JARC Program Was Authorized $156 Million In FY 2008; To Double JARC For Four Years Would Cost $624 Million. (U.S. Department Of Transportation, Federal Transit Administration Website, www.fta.dot.gov, Accessed 7/14/08) Obama Supports Funding The National Science Foundation's Advanced Technological Education Program At $100 Million. "As president, Barack Obama will support authorization of the National Science Foundation's Advanced Technological Education program at $100 million, a critical program that has helped support STEM programs in community colleges." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama: Preparing America For 21st Century Jobs," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 7/14/08) In FY 2008 This Program Was Authorized At $52 Million, According To The National Science Foundation's Budget. That Means An Additional $48 Million Is Needed Per Year To Reach $100 Million, Equal To $192 Million Over Four Years. (National Science Foundation, "National Science Foundation Current Authorizations," www.nsf.gov, Accessed 7/14/08) Obama Would Provide $25 Million A Year For States To Develop Early Assessment Programs To Increase College Readiness; Equal To $100 Million Over Four Years. "Some states have developed an Early Assessment Program that enables 11th graders and their families to ascertain if they are on track to be college ready by the time they graduate. ... This program will increase college readiness and is voluntary. Barack Obama will provide $25 million annually in matching funds for states to develop Early Assessment Programs." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama: Making College Affordable For Everyone," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 7/14/08) Obama Would Provide $250 Million To "Bring Quality Teachers Back To The Gulf Region." Obama: "Many heroic, high-quality teachers have returned to New Orleans - but we need more. That is why I have called for $250 million to bring quality teachers back to the Gulf region. Any teacher or principal who commits to come here for three years should receive an annual bonus; and those who teach in subject areas where we face shortages - such as math and science - should receive an additional bonus." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama To Lay Out Program To Rebuild New Orleans And The Gulf Coast Region," Press Release, www.barackobama.com, 2/7/08) Obama Would Spend $1 Billion A Year In Autism-Related Funding By The End Of His First Term. Obama: "My administration will not only work to fully fund the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and the Combating Autism Act, but will add to that a commitment of $1 billion dollars a year in autism-related funding by the end of my first term." (Obama For America, "Obama Statement In Support Of World Autism Awareness Day And Awareness Month," Press Release, www.barackobama.com, 4/2/08) Obama Would Add "65,000 Soldiers To The Army And 27,000 Marines," Which Would Cost Approximately $11.04 Billion Per Year, Equal To $44.16 Billion Over Four Years. Obama: "That's why I strongly support the expansion of our ground forces by adding 65,000 soldiers to the Army and 27,000 Marines." (Sen. Barack Obama, Remarks To The Chicago Council On Global Affairs, Chicago, IL, 4/24/07) It Costs Approximately $1.2 Billion A Year For 10,000 Soldiers. "Every additional 10,000 soldiers would cost about $1.2 billion a year, according to the Army." (Peter Baker, "U.S. Not Winning War In Iraq, Bush Says For 1st Time," The Washington Post, 12/20/06) Obama Would Provide An Additional $1 Billion Per Year In Non-Military Assistance To Afghanistan, Equal To $4 Billion Over Four Years. Obama: "Moreover, lasting security will only come if we heed Marshall's lesson, and help Afghans grow their economy from the bottom up. That's why I've proposed an additional $1 billion in non-military assistance each year, with meaningful safeguards to prevent corruption and to make sure investments are made - not just in Kabul - but out in Afghanistan's provinces. As a part of this program, we'll invest in alternative livelihoods to poppy-growing for Afghan farmers, just as we crack down on heroin trafficking." (Sen. Barack Obama, Remarks On Iraq And National Security, Washington, DC, 7/15/08) Obama Plans To Implement Legislation That Would "Triple Non-Military Aid To The Pakistani People." Obama: "It's time to strengthen stability by standing up for the aspirations of the Pakistani people. That's why I'm cosponsoring a bill with Joe Biden and Richard Lugar to triple non-military aid to the Pakistani people and to sustain it for a decade, while ensuring that the military assistance we do provide is used to take the fight to the Taliban and al Qaeda." (Sen. Barack Obama, Remarks On Iraq And National Security, Washington, DC, 7/15/08) It Would Authorize $7.5 Billion Over Five Years, An Increase Of Approximately $5 Billion In Spending, Equal To A $1 Billion Increase Per Year. "The bill triples non-military aid to Pakistan and sustains it over five years. Specifically, the legislation authorizes $7.5 billion over 5 years in aid that can be used for development purposes, such as building schools, roads and clinics. ... Authorizes $7.5 billion over the next 5 fiscal years ($1.5 billion annually) in non-military aid. Advocates an additional $7.5 billion over the subsequent 5 years." (Sen. Joe Biden, "Biden, Lugar Introduce Landmark Legislation On Pakistan," Press Release, biden.senate.gov, 7/15/08) Obama Would Spend $5 Billion Over Three Years To Create A Shared Security Partnership. Obama: "To strengthen our efforts with friends and partners, I've proposed a Shared Security Partnership that invests $5 billion over 3 years to forge an international intelligence and law enforcement infrastructure to take down terrorist networks." (Sen. Barack Obama, Remarks At Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 7/16/08) Obama Would "Lead A Global Effort To Secure All Nuclear Weapons And Material At Vulnerable Sites Within Four Years." "Barack Obama will lead a global effort to secure all nuclear weapons and material at vulnerable sites within four years." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama: The War We Need To Win," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 7/15/08) Obama Said This Could Be Funded By Ending The War In Iraq, At A Cost Of $10 Billion Over Four Years. Obama: "We are spending $10 billion a month in Iraq. ... For the amount of money that we are spending in Iraq in one month, if that same amount of money is spent over the course of the next four years, we could lock up all the loose nuclear material that exists out there. That strikes me as a good investment to make. (Sen. Barack Obama, Remarks At Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 7/16/08) Obama Proposes Doubling Funding For The Consumer Product Safety Commission. "As President, Obama will enact a plan to protect Americans from unsafe products. In addition to banning lead-tainted toys and increasing fines for companies that fail to disclose known safety hazards with their products, Obama will: ... Double the funding for the Consumer Product Safety Commission, and make sure it has the inspectors it needs to ensure that the goods we're buying are safe." (Obama For America, "Obama Vows To Protect Kids And Ban Toys With Lead," Press Release, 12/23/07) In FY 2008, The CPSC Was Funded At $80 Million. Doubling Funding Would Cost An Additional $80 Million Per Year, Equal To $320 Million Over Four Years. (Thomas H. Moore, U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commissioner, Statement Submitted To The Subcommittee On Financial Services And General Government, House Committee On Appropriations, www.cpsc.gov, 3/11/08) Obama Has Proposed $2 Billion In Additional NASA Funding. "Sen. Barack Obama has detailed a comprehensive space plan that includes $2 billion in new funding to reinvigorate NASA and a promise to make space exploration and science a significantly higher priority if he is elected president." (Marc Kaufman, "Obama Suggests $2 Billion In New Funding For NASA," The Washington Post, 8/19/08) Obama Will Increase The Maximum Pell Grant To $5,400 And Ensure The Grant Keeps Pace With The Rising Cost Of College Inflation. "Two decades ago, the maximum Pell Grant covered 55 percent of costs at a public four-year college, compared with only 32 percent today. The first bill Barack Obama introduced in the U.S. Senate would have helped make college more affordable for many Americans by increasing the maximum Pell Grant from the limit of $4,050 to a new maximum of $5,100. Obama has worked in a bipartisan way on the Senate Health Education Labor and Pensions Committee to achieve an increase in the Pell Grant to $5,400 over the next few years. As president, Obama will continue to work to ensure that the maximum Pell Grant award is increased for low-income students. Specifically, he will ensure that the award keeps pace with the rising cost of college inflation." (Obama For America, "Barack Obama: Making College Affordable For Everyone," www.barackobama.com, Accessed 7/14/08) The National Taxpayers Union Estimated This Would Cost $7.08 Billion Per Year, Equal To $28.32 Billion Over Four Years. "Cost: $7.08 billion ($35.401 billion over five years). Source: Obama is a cosponsor of S. 359 (110th Congress): A bill to amend the Higher Education Act of 1965 to provide additional support to students. Section 2 of the bill increases the maximum Pell Grant award and authorizes additional funds." (National Taxpayers Union Foundation, "Democratic Presidential Primary Spending Analysis - Barack Obama," www.ntu.org, 6/3/08) Obama Would Spend $200 Million A Year To Develop "Regional Clusters" To Spur "Smart-Growth Strategies," Equal To $800 Million Over Four Years. "Sen. Obama says his administration would shift urban-policy making to so-called smart-growth strategies that synchronize transportation, commercial and housing needs for entire regions, rather than following the tradition of focusing first on fighting poverty and crime. He would fund $200 million in annual grants to develop 'regional clusters,' such as the high-technology-focused area known as the Research Triangle in North Carolina." (Corey Dade, "Obama Promotes Plan For Urban Development," The Wall Street Journal, 8/25/08) Obama Would Spend $5 Billion Over 10 Years To Protect And Restore The Great Lakes, Equal To $500 Million A Year And $2 Billion Over Four Years. "Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama is promising to push for $5 billion in new funds to protect and restore the Great Lakes if he gets elected in November. The money would come over a 10-year period from rolling back tax breaks for oil and gas companies, and it would flow toward things such as sewage system treatment repairs, toxic cleanups and wetlands restoration, according to a Great Lakes restoration plan the Obama campaign is expected to release today." (Dan Egan, "Obama Plan Calls For $5 Billion To Protect, Restore Great Lakes," Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, 9/15/08) Obama Would Increase PEPFAR Funding By $2 Billion. "President Bush created the $15 billion President's Emergency Program for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), which helps treat and prevent HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa and the Caribbean. The program was reauthorized this year, bumping U.S. contributions up to $48 billion over the next five years. Obama has pledged to increase funding for PEPFAR to $50 billion and plans to revise the bill to include Southeast Asia, India and Eastern Europe." ("Platform Review: Candidate Positions On Science And Tech Issues," elections.foxnews.com, 9/18/08)