GOP Solutions for America
MOVING FORWARD



Herger, House Republican Leadership Introduce Legislation to Repeal Government Takeover of Health Care and Replace with Solutions that Lower Costs

House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence (R-IN) on Health Care and Republicans moving forward.





THE REPUBLICAN PLAN:

COMMON-SENSE HEALTH CARE REFORMS OUR NATION CAN AFFORD

Summary of House GOP Health Care Reform Bill (PDF)



Text of House GOP Health Care Reform Bill (PDF)



Ten Reasons to Support the GOP Health Care Reform Bill (PDF)



OTHER MATERIALS

Memo from House GOP Leader John Boehner (R-OH): Where Are the Jobs? Not in President Obama’s Health Care Law (PDF)





LEADER BOEHNER'S ADDRESS ON THE REPUBLICAN PLAN

The American people have spoken. They oppose government-run health care. Republicans are on the side of the American people.



What Americans want are common-sense, responsible solutions that address the rising cost of health care and other major problems. In the national Republican address on Saturday, October 31, 2009, House Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) discussed Republicans’ plan for common-sense health care reform our nation can afford. Boehner’s address emphasized four common-sense reforms that will lower health care costs and expand access to quality care without a government takeover of our nation’s health care system that kills jobs, raises taxes on small businesses, or cuts Medicare for seniors:

Number one: let families and businesses buy health insurance across state lines.

let families and businesses buy health insurance across state lines. Number two: allow individuals, small businesses, and trade associations to pool together and acquire health insurance at lower prices, the same way large corporations and labor unions do.

allow individuals, small businesses, and trade associations to pool together and acquire health insurance at lower prices, the same way large corporations and labor unions do. Number three: give states the tools to create their own innovative reforms that lower health care costs.

give states the tools to create their own innovative reforms that lower health care costs. Number four: end junk lawsuits that contribute to higher health care costs by increasing the number of tests and procedures that physicians sometimes order not because they think it's good medicine, but because they are afraid of being sued.

For the full text of Leader Boehner’s address, click HERE.



ADDITIONAL COMMON-SENSE REPUBLICAN REFORM PROPOSALS

For more information about some of the other common-sense health care reforms proposed by Republicans, please visit the links below: