20 Cringeworthy 80s Kids Hairstyles That Have To Be Seen To Be Believed
We’re definitely not here to make fun of the way children used to present themselves in the 1980s, as no doubt in 30 years time people will look at our kids and wonder what on earth we were thinking! Instead, we’re here to celebrate the wonderful hairdos of the 1980s, marvel at their extravagance, and express how much we miss them. So please ready your hairdryer and have your hairspray standing by, because here are ‘20 Cringeworthy 80s Kids Hairstyles That Have To Be Seen To Be Believed’…

1. We have no doubt that at the time this young lady thought her haircut was absolutely beautiful, but looking back we do have to wonder what on earth her parents were thinking!

2. The old ‘bowl over the head’ trick may have been utilised to obtain this rather distinctive 80s classic…

3. Curly on top and straight at the sides was extremely popular back in the 1980s, and this is a fine example…

4. Another 80s favourite was trying to make your hair as tall as possible, no doubt contributing to the hole in the ozone layer with the amount of hairspray that was used…

5. Again, a perfectly normal haircut if it wasn’t for the extra few inches on top!

6. This is definitely a work of art and we won’t hear otherwise…

7. This fella is looking good and he absolutely knows it, just look at his face…

8. There’s so much going on here that we’ll just leave it for you to decipher…

9. An absolute beauty this, and about as 80s as you can get…

10. I get the feeling that this girl knew that her haircut was rather outrageous, even for the 1980s…

11. Just yes. Absolutely yes. No wonder the smile is so big…

12. Goodness me what an absolute work of art. Like two hairstyles in one…

13. And talking of two hairstyles in one, here’s another fine example…

14. We think this is a boy but we couldn’t be sure? What a lovely big smile, what a wonderful outfit, and what an amazing haircut…

15. This haircut is perfectly normal, but we had to include this photo. You’ll have to forgive us…

16. Absolute perfection here, with not a hair out of place…

17. Like a Lion’s mane, this work of 80s genius must have taken a whole can of hairspray to prepare…

18. As 80s as Wham! and Back to the Future, this hairstyle just couldn’t have existed in any other decade…

19. What is not to like here? Those ringlets are beautiful…

20. And this concludes our look at some wonderful 80s Kids Hairstyles…

If you know of any friends or family members that had questionable haircuts back in the 1980s, be sure to share this post with them as a friendly reminder!