The Virginia Health Care Landscape
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) went into full effect on January 1, 2014, ushering in health insurance reforms and new health coverage options in Virginia and across the country. Although the Medicaid expansion debate is still underway in the state, Virginia is experiencing changes to its health care delivery system. This fact sheet provides an overview of the population health, health coverage, and health care delivery system in Virginia in the era of health reform.

Demographics

Virginia has a growing and increasingly diverse population. Virginia is one of eight states and DC located in the South Atlantic region of the U.S. (Figure 1). At almost 40,000 square miles, it is the 37th largest state. Virginia is home to nearly 8 million residents, making it the 12th most populous state in the U.S. In 2012, 65% of Virginians identified as White, which is similar to the U.S. average. However, Virginia has a higher percentage of Blacks (19%) than the U.S. overall (12%) and a smaller percentage of Hispanics (7% compared to 17% nationally)(Figure 2). The age distribution of Virginia’s population aligns with the age distribution of the overall U.S. population. Between 2000 and 2010, Virginia’s population increased 13.0%, compared to 9.7% nationally, making Virginia the 17th fastest-growing state in the U.S. Population growth in Virginia was concentrated in the state’s major metropolitan areas, including northern Virginia (which is considered a suburb of Washington, D.C.), Richmond, and the Hampton Roads area in the southeastern part of the state. Meanwhile, many of the state’s rural counties in the south and west have experienced a decrease in their populations. (See Figure 11 in the Appendix for nonelderly population by county.)

Hispanics are the fastest-growing racial/ethnic group in Virginia, with the population increasing 92% between 2000 and 2010, followed by the Asian population, which increased 70% during the same time period. Changes in the political dynamics of the state, including the outcomes of recent statewide and national elections, are attributed, in part, to the changing demographics of the population within Virginia.

Virginia has lower unemployment and higher family incomes than the U.S. population overall. In March 2014, Virginia’s unemployment rate was 5%, which is lower than the national average (6.7%) and the 12th lowest unemployment rate among the states. The 2012 median household income in Virginia was nearly $62,000, which was the 9th highest among the states. Nearly one in six (16%) individuals in Virginia were living in poverty in 2012, which was the 12th lowest poverty rate among the states and well below the national average of 20% (Figure 3). Among states in the South Atlantic region, Virginia has the third highest median household income (behind MD and DC) and the second lowest poverty rate (behind MD). However, poverty rates vary across areas of the state. For example, poverty rates are lower in the state’s northern counties and the western counties outside of Richmond, than in the cities of Richmond and Norfolk and the rural counties of the south and southwest.

State Economy

Virginia is experiencing moderate economic growth. In 2012, Virginia’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) was $445.9 billion, which makes it the 10th largest state economy in the U.S. Like other states across the country, Virginia has experienced consecutive years of economic growth. However, from 2011 to 2012, Virginia’s real GDP increased by 1.1%, less than the national GDP (2.5%). Agriculture, manufacturing, and mining are major industries in the state, in addition to federal government and military activities and tourism. Like other states across the country, Virginia experienced budgetary challenges during the recent economic downturn, although, the state’s economy continues to improve. Virginia ended State Fiscal Year (SFY) 2013 with a $585 million budget surplus, the state’s fourth annual budgetary surplus and its largest since 2005.

Population Health

The overall population health in Virginia is comparable to the national average. In 2013, Virginia ranked 26 among the 50 states in overall health, according to the United Health Care Foundation’s Annual Report, America’s Health Rankings. The shares of adults in Virginia who are overweight or obese, have been diagnosed with diabetes, or have asthma are similar to shares nationally, as are the death rates due to heart disease and cancer.,,,, Adults in Virginia were less likely than adults nationally to report being in fair or poor health or to have poor mental health., In addition, the proportion of adults in Virginia who are smokers is equal to the national average of 19%.

Population health varies across Virginia’s counties, with the state’s northern counties, those to the west of Richmond, and those in the west along the Blue Ridge Mountains, faring better than the cities of Richmond and Norfolk and the rural counties along the northern peninsula, south, and southwest.

Disparities in health and health care access exist in Virginia. Like other states across the country, measures of health status and access to and utilization of health care services in Virginia vary by race/ethnicity and patterns across these measures in Virginia closely align with national averages. Blacks (75 years) and Whites (79 years) in Virginia have a shorter life expectancy than Asians (87 years) and Hispanics (88 years). The mortality rates due to heart disease, cancer, and diabetes are higher for Blacks in Virginia than Whites. Further, nonelderly Black adults in Virginia are more likely to be overweight or obese (74% vs 61%), have diabetes (11% vs 7%), and report being in fair or poor health (19% vs 13%) than nonelderly White adults. Both nonelderly White (35%) and Black (33%) adults in the state are more likely to report experiencing frequent mental distress than nonelderly Hispanics (26%). While nonelderly Hispanic (58%) and Black (72%) adults are less likely than nonelderly White adults (77%) to have a usual source of care, nonelderly White adults (83%) are less likely than nonelderly Black (89%) and Hispanic (85%) adults to report having a primary care visit in the past two years.

To address the state’s health disparities and promote health equity, the Virginia Department of Health’s Office of Minority Health & Health Equity published a Health Equity report in 2012. This report is a call to action for Virginia communities across the state to work together to improve the health of all races and ethnicities. Local programs and initiatives are also operating in the state. For example, Virginia Commonwealth University operates the Virginia Coordinated Care (VCC) Program, which aims to increase access to primary care, and the Mosby Partnership, which works to reduce health disparities among public housing residents in the Richmond area. In addition, to address geographic health disparities, Virginia’s Department of Health released the Virginia’s State Rural Health Plan in 2013, which is a three-five year action plan to enhance health systems throughout rural areas of the state.

Coverage

Over one million nonelderly individuals, or 13% of Virginia’s population, were uninsured in 2012 (Figure 4). This rate is lower than the U.S. average of 15%, which reflects the range of uninsured rates across the country from 4% in Massachusetts to 24% in Texas. People of color are disproportionately represented among the nonelderly uninsured in Virginia. Although only 19% of nonelderly Virginians identify as Black, they represent one-quarter (26%) of the state’s uninsured. Similarly, while only 8% of nonelderly Virginians identify as Hispanic, they represent one-fifth (19%) of the state’s uninsured. In addition, as shown in Figure 12 (Appendix), the nonelderly uninsured in Virginia are not equally distributed across the state’s counties, with the southern and northwestern regions having higher uninsured rates than other areas of the state. As in other states across the U.S., the majority of the uninsured have at least one full-time worker in their households, have income below 400% of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL), and are under age 55 (Figure 5).

Among the 87% of Virginians with health insurance, the largest share (54% of the state population) have employer-sponsored coverage, followed by Medicare (13%), Medicaid (10%), and individual private insurance (5%)(Figure 4).

Medicaid

Similar to the national picture, the large majority of Medicaid enrollees in Virginia are children, but the elderly and individuals with disabilities account for most Medicaid spending. Based on data for SFY 2013, 54% of Medicaid enrollees were children, who accounted for 23% of expenditures (Figure 6). While, one-quarter (26%) of enrollees were elderly or people with disabilities who accounted for 65% of total program costs. Based on data from 2010 (the latest year for comparative data), average federal and state spending per beneficiary in Virginia was $5,985, slightly higher than the national average of $5,563 and slightly above other states in the South Atlantic Region (Figure 7).

Medicaid costs are shared by the states and the federal government, with the federal government paying 50% of the cost of Virginia Medicaid; therefore, for every $1.00 that Virginia spends on Medicaid, the federal government sends an additional $1.00 to the state in matching funds. The combined federal and state spending on Medicaid in Virginia for SFY 2013 was $6.7 billion. This accounted for 17% of total state spending, 22% of state general funds, and 40% state spending of federal funds (Figure 8). Medicaid is the second largest source of state general fund spending behind elementary and secondary education, but the largest source of federal revenue flowing into the state.

Most Medicaid beneficiaries in Virginia are enrolled in managed care. Nearly 7 in 10 (69%) Medicaid beneficiaries in Virginia are enrolled in risk-based managed care. Seven managed care organizations serve Medicaid beneficiaries and the three largest plans, Anthem HealthKeepers Plus, Virginia Premier Health Plan, and Optima Family Care, account for nearly 85% of total Medicaid managed care enrollment. Although foster children were previously excluded from managed care, the state is currently transitioning them to Medicaid managed care, with an anticipated completion date of July 2014.

Virginia currently has limited Medicaid eligibility for adults. Pregnant women in Virginia with income up to 148% FPL ($28,904 for a family of 3 in 2014) are eligible for Medicaid in Virginia, which is the sixth lowest eligibility limit in the country. Meanwhile, parents of dependent children are only eligible for Medicaid if their income does not exceed 51% FPL ($10,120 for a family of 3 in 2014), the sixteenth lowest eligibility limit in the country, and adults without dependent children in the state are ineligible for coverage, regardless of income. Virginia provides coverage for children up to 205% FPL through the CHIP-funded Family Access to Medical Insurance Security (FAMIS) plan.