[Press Release] Gov. Perry: 10th Amendment a Vital Issue for All Texans and Americans
Gov. Perry: 10th Amendment a Vital Issue for All Texans and Americans

Supports resolutions asserting states’ rights under U.S. Constitution

Gov. Rick Perry today was joined by Texas Rep. Brandon Creighton and State Sen. Dan Patrick, sponsors of House Concurrent Resolution 50 and Senate Concurrent Resolution 14, which assert states' rights under the 10th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

"Our founding fathers very clearly spelled out exactly which powers were enumerated to the federal government and explicitly left the rest to the states. However, Washington has extended its reach over the years until the sound concepts behind the 10th Amendment were blurred and lost," Gov. Perry said. "These resolutions boldly affirm the rights reserved to the states by the 10th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, a vital issue that affects the livelihood of all Texans and Americans."

The resolutions claim sovereignty for Texas under the 10th Amendment, and assert that the 10th Amendment limits the scope of federal power to the powers specifically granted by the U.S. Constitution. The resolutions also call for an end to federal mandates on the states that are beyond the scope of the powers delegated to the federal government by the Constitution.

Additionally, the resolutions call on the U.S. Congress to prohibit or repeal any legislation that directs states to comply with federal edicts under threat of criminal penalties, or that requires states to pass legislation to avoid losing federal funding.

"HCR 50 represents the growing sentiment that the federal government has continued to overreach its power and spending, and sends a message that our nation is a union of individual and sovereign states," Rep. Brandon Creighton said. "The leadership of Gov. Perry, Lt. Gov. Dewhurst, and Speaker Straus on the Tenth Amendment and HCR 50 will enable the Legislature to address the downward economic pressures and avoid collateral damage that costly federal mandates cause for Texans."

"If the Tenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution is to have any meaning, and it must, the federal government must stop wielding excessive power and influence over the states," Sen. Dan Patrick said. "If liberty is to prevail, it is incumbent upon the State of Texas to restore the rightful meaning of and respect for Tenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The business of Texas is best left to Texans."

The U.S. Constitution was specifically designed to limit the powers of the federal government, and leave all other powers to the states and to the people. A number of recent federal proposals are outside of the scope of the federal government's constitutionally designated powers and impede the states' right to govern themselves, such as Obamacare, the EPA's takeover of Texas' successful air permitting program, and a misguided amendment to the education jobs bill filed by Rep. Lloyd Doggett in his attempt to require the governor to make assurances in violation of the Texas Constitution.