Governor McDonnell Congratulates MWAA on Receipt of Bids for Phase II of the Dulles Metrorail Extension Project
For Immediate Release

Governor McDonnell Congratulates MWAA on Receipt of Bids for Phase II of the Dulles Metrorail Extension Project

– Bids Received Last Week Came in Well Below Expectations –

Low Bids and New Revenue in Transportation Bill Will Mean Significantly Lower Dulles Toll Increases Than Projected; Drivers on Toll Road Will Save Money in Years Ahead

**Cost Estimates for Phase II Have Declined by $1 Billion During McDonnell Administration**

RICHMOND - Governor Bob McDonnell today congratulated the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority ("MWAA") on receiving five proposals for construction of Phase II of the Dulles Corridor Metrorail Extension Project last week that were far below expectations, meaning major savings for Virginia taxpayers. MWAA received and opened the proposals on Friday, April 19.

Speaking about the proposals, Governor McDonnell said "The Dulles Corridor Metrorail Extension Project is one of the largest and most important infrastructure projects currently underway in the United States. Once complete, the project will provide a seamless connection for commuters and travelers from downtown Washington, D.C., to Washington Dulles International Airport and beyond. Over the past two years, my administration, working with U.S. Secretary of Transportation Ray LaHood, local leaders from Fairfax and Loudoun Counties, and MWAA, has taken steps to reduce the original cost estimates for Phase II by over $1 billion and eliminate mandatory union preferences from the bid documents. Last Friday, we saw the results of our efforts come to fruition, with the lowest of the proposals coming in over $300 million below estimates."

"These additional cost savings are crucial to our continued efforts to ensure that the tolls necessary to finance this project remain as low as possible," the Governor continued. "When combined with the additional $150 million my administration pledged last year and the $300 million in funding identified in my 2013 transportation funding and reform package, there will be a significant reduction in the projected toll increases in the years to come."

The five proposals - submitted by Bechtel Transit Partners, Capital Rail Constructors, Dulles APC Railbuilders, Dulles Metrorail Connectors, and Silver Line Constructors - range in value from $1.17 billion to $1.37 billion. MWAA is expected to conduct a detailed review of the proposals and award a contract later this spring. Construction of Phase I of the project is 90 percent complete, with a target goal of opening to the public in late 2013.

# # #