The Nuclear Option, Explained: How the Senate GOP Rule Change Works
The bad news is that right now, as we speak, this country is closer to the much-discussed, long-dreaded deployment of the "nuclear option" than ever before. The good news, such as it is these days, is that that phrase does not mean what you might assume it means given that one Donald J. Trump lives in the White House and has the keys to the football. As the Senate prepares to decide on the nomination of Neil Gorsuch to the Supreme Court, it appears increasingly likely that Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell will have to invoke the "nuclear option" in order to secure Gorsuch's confirmation. You might have a few questions as to what this means, both for Gorsuch and also for the future our democracy. We have (some) answers:

How does a Supreme Court justice get confirmed?

After the President announces his pick, the nominee goes through a series of interminably boring hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee, where he or she answers senators' probing questions by saying as little as possible in a hypercautious effort to not screw up a cushy gig that would allow them to wear bathrobes for the rest of their careers. Gorsuch's hearings ended last week, and sure enough, he managed to get through them without dropping a racial slur, expressing enthusiasm for Sharia law, or otherwise doing something dumb that would torpedo his nomination. On Monday, the committee will decide whether to recommend him to the full Senate for an up-or-down confirmation vote.

What happens in the full Senate, then?

Technically, the nominee needs only a bare majority of votes—that's 51 senators—in order to get confirmed. Marshaling these numbers should not be a problem for Republicans, since the party holds 52 Senate seats. However, practically speaking, the bar is higher, and this is where all that mushroom cloud and radiation rhetoric comes into play. Before a confirmation vote can take place, three-fifths of the Senate—that's 60 senators—must vote for cloture, which is a motion to end debate. In other words, the Senate has to vote on whether to vote before it actually votes. If McConnell can't scourge up eight Democrats who are willing to join his team and proceed to that elusive up-or-down stage, the filibuster is on, baby.

Hell yeah.

Don't get too excited. You might hear "filibuster" and imagine a grandiose, Jimmy Stewart-style exhibition in which a hardy coalition of rock-ribbed legislators delays a vote by heroically talking for hours on end without ceding the floor or taking a break, but unfortunately, filibusters aren't nearly as cool as they used to be. Cloture mostly dispenses with the need for these types of marathon sessions—if enough senators make it clear that they won't vote to end debate, there's no need for them to actually stand and read from the phone book while desperately trying not to think about how badly they have to use the Senate bathroom. Today's filibuster is a lot more humane.

Wait, what's the nuclear option again?

Right, where were we? The three-fifths hurdle is a creation of Senate precedent, not law. And since Republicans control the Senate, they could change the rules to require that only a bare majority of lawmakers can vote to end debate, instead of three-fifths. Bafflingly, spiking the three-fifths requirement can be accomplished by a series of simple majority votes. Massaging Senate precedent to lower the magical threshold from 60 to 51 is the "nuclear option." I know, not as exciting as you hoped (or feared).

So I don't need to dig a fallout shelter?