Medicaid expansion would have benefitted local hospital
Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Medicaid expansion would have benefitted local hospital

Rural hospitals throughout the country have been struggling to stay financially solvent, and amid an uncertain national healthcare climate, one of the biggest hits came for those in states that rejected a Medicaid expansion offered through terms of the Affordable Care Act.



For many hospitals, the resulting loss of income that would have otherwise been provided by the ACA has had a trickle-down effect, leading many rural health facilities to reduce their workforce and even close entirely.



A February 2015 article from Kansas City Public Media breaks down the situation for many rural hospitals:



“Such hospitals are often the biggest employers in rural counties, but unless Medicaid eligibility is expanded to include more low-income people, as the Affordable Care Act envisions, officials at those hospitals say they may be forced to cut jobs – or even, like Sac-Osage, to close down.”



Graham Regional Medical Center recently let go 15 of its employees in what hospital officials called a reduction in force. Following that, hospital CEO Scott Landrum said there could be another reduction in force later this year.



Officials did not say how much the reduction in Medicaid payments that would have been paid in full by the federal government has to do with GRMC’s decision, but GRMC Board Chairman Larry Kovar did say that the hospital has lost a significant amount of revenue because the state of Texas opted out of the expansion.



“A lot more people would have been eligible for Medicaid (had Texas accepted the expansion), and the government was paying 100 percent of that Medicaid, certainly for the next several years,” Kovar said. “And that would have brought in more money to the hospital, obviously. If we had more Medicaid payments to us, we would have had significantly more dollars available to us through the expanded Medicaid program.”



Even though the government was picking up all of the costs, Kovar said the rationale for rejecting the expansion likely had to do with state officials’ fears that Texas would wind up with considerably more state Medicaid costs in the future.



“Unfortunately, to the extent that we didn’t accept that Medicaid, the hospital is funding those patients now through indigent care and such programs in lieu of the expanded Medicaid,” he said. “We still treat those people, but they’re not eligible for Medicaid, so it hurts the hospital to some extent.”



Rising numbers of local Medicaid applicants

Across Highway 16 from GRMC on Packing House Road is the Graham branch of the Texas Health and Human Services. Workers there say that in the last several months, they’ve seen a sharp rise in Medicaid applications.



Walk-in applications at that office in March for the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP), Temporay Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) and Medicaid combined more than quadrupled from this time last year, topping off at 98 walk-in applicants, up from 14 walk-in applications in March 2014.



Because Texas opted out of the federal Medicaid expansion, Alicia Goree, clerk for the Texas Medicaid and SNAP program serving Young and Jack counties, said that the qualification requirements are different from states that took the expansion.



“If you’re an adult caring for a child under the age of 18, then we’ll go straight into you’re income limit to see if you qualify,” Goree said. “But if you ... walk into this building and you say you don’t have any children, you don’t have Medicare, you don’t have SSI (Social Security income), you’re not pregnant and you’re not under 18, there’s not a program for that in the state of Texas because of the non expansion of the Medicaid program.”



Medicaid eligibility requirements differ depending on income and life circumstance, but data show that in Texas, the criteria for approval are substantially more stringent.



In Delaware, a state that opted in to the expansion, a single adult over 18 in a household of one can’t exceed an income of $1,273 per month in order to qualify for Medicaid.



In Texas, adults in a household of one have to make less than $100 per month to qualify.



Read the entire story in this weekend's Graham Leader. Rural hospitals throughout the country have been struggling to stay financially solvent, and amid an uncertain national healthcare climate, one of the biggest hits came for those in states that rejected a Medicaid expansion offered through terms of the Affordable Care Act.For many hospitals, the resulting loss of income that would have otherwise been provided by the ACA has had a trickle-down effect, leading many rural health facilities to reduce their workforce and even close entirely.A February 2015 article from Kansas City Public Media breaks down the situation for many rural hospitals:“Such hospitals are often the biggest employers in rural counties, but unless Medicaid eligibility is expanded to include more low-income people, as the Affordable Care Act envisions, officials at those hospitals say they may be forced to cut jobs – or even, like Sac-Osage, to close down.”Graham Regional Medical Center recently let go 15 of its employees in what hospital officials called a reduction in force. Following that, hospital CEO Scott Landrum said there could be another reduction in force later this year.Officials did not say how much the reduction in Medicaid payments that would have been paid in full by the federal government has to do with GRMC’s decision, but GRMC Board Chairman Larry Kovar did say that the hospital has lost a significant amount of revenue because the state of Texas opted out of the expansion.“A lot more people would have been eligible for Medicaid (had Texas accepted the expansion), and the government was paying 100 percent of that Medicaid, certainly for the next several years,” Kovar said. “And that would have brought in more money to the hospital, obviously. If we had more Medicaid payments to us, we would have had significantly more dollars available to us through the expanded Medicaid program.”Even though the government was picking up all of the costs, Kovar said the rationale for rejecting the expansion likely had to do with state officials’ fears that Texas would wind up with considerably more state Medicaid costs in the future.“Unfortunately, to the extent that we didn’t accept that Medicaid, the hospital is funding those patients now through indigent care and such programs in lieu of the expanded Medicaid,” he said. “We still treat those people, but they’re not eligible for Medicaid, so it hurts the hospital to some extent.”Across Highway 16 from GRMC on Packing House Road is the Graham branch of the Texas Health and Human Services. Workers there say that in the last several months, they’ve seen a sharp rise in Medicaid applications.Walk-in applications at that office in March for the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP), Temporay Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) and Medicaid combined more than quadrupled from this time last year, topping off at 98 walk-in applicants, up from 14 walk-in applications in March 2014.Because Texas opted out of the federal Medicaid expansion, Alicia Goree, clerk for the Texas Medicaid and SNAP program serving Young and Jack counties, said that the qualification requirements are different from states that took the expansion.“If you’re an adult caring for a child under the age of 18, then we’ll go straight into you’re income limit to see if you qualify,” Goree said. “But if you ... walk into this building and you say you don’t have any children, you don’t have Medicare, you don’t have SSI (Social Security income), you’re not pregnant and you’re not under 18, there’s not a program for that in the state of Texas because of the non expansion of the Medicaid program.”Medicaid eligibility requirements differ depending on income and life circumstance, but data show that in Texas, the criteria for approval are substantially more stringent.In Delaware, a state that opted in to the expansion, a single adult over 18 in a household of one can’t exceed an income of $1,273 per month in order to qualify for Medicaid.In Texas, adults in a household of one have to make less than $100 per month to qualify.Read the entire story in this weekend's Graham Leader.