Feingold: Laws needed to improve rural broadband
CLOSE

Buy Photo Former U.S. Senator Russ Feingold talks with April Konitzer, the regional manager for NWTC’s center in Oconto Falls, and Karen Smits, the college’s vice president of administration, on a visit April 18. Konitzer and Smits provided a tour of the center for Feingold, who is running to regain his seat in the Senate. (Photo: Kent Tempus/USA Today NETWORK-Wisconsin)Buy Photo

OCONTO FALLS - Broadband service should be considered a utility, says U.S. Senate candidate Russ Feingold, who used an Oconto County stop to call for legislation to make sure municipalities and cooperatives can offer high-speed internet service.

Too many rural residents are disadvantaged by lack of fast and reliable service, he said.

“We’ve got to pass federal law that preempts these state laws that let the big companies control everything,” Feingold said. “They get everything, and if they don’t want to extend it two miles outside Oconto Falls, it’s not going to happen. If they don’t want to provide fast enough service, it’s not going to happen.”

Feingold spoke during a visit Tuesday morning to NWTC’s Northwest Regional Learning Center in Oconto Falls, where he toured the classrooms and computer labs, then met with a few students and instructors to ask them about broadband.

An adult student, Kristy Shefelove, told Feingold her service at her home two miles from the city was inconsistent.

“Sometimes I have to use my phone as a hot spot, and then I have perfect connection, but then I breeze through the gigabytes on my (data plan),” she said.

“Late at night, when I’ve needed to finish a test and kept getting kicked off, I actually drove to the parking lot of the public library and opened up my computer to access the internet at the library, because I know it’s always a good connection there and I finish my test,” she added.

That once prompted a police officer to check on Shefelove’s car and wonder what she was up to. She explained she was taking an online test she only had a limited amount of time to finish.

“That’s not just here, but people in rural areas all over American people are hanging out outside these places,” Feingold replied.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-5042. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Business instructor Gail Schroeder said internet speed at her home five miles outside of Oconto Falls is very slow, so she’s thankful she – like students and community members – have access to the computers at the RLC.

“It’s nice for myself to have the facility to use – much faster,’ she said.

Farm business instructor Mark Alden he’s helping farmers learn to use software like Excel, but when they try to do free downloads of Microsoft Office products at the home office, it often doesn’t work.

“On a rural location, through the internet service that’s there, that’s very time consuming, and they find themselves getting interrupted or lose service, and they have to started over again,’ Alden said. “It’s very problematic.”

Schroeder says as classes are increasingly taught to students in other locations, reliable and fast internet connections is vital.

“That’s the next thing we’re looking at is for students to be able to attend class from home through Webex or Cisco,” said leadership and human resources instructor Todd Perrault.

Feingold – running against the Sen. Ron Johnson – said legislation making hardline broadband access available to everyone is no different that the rural electrification expansion decades ago.

“Up to a million people in this state don’t have it,” he said. “So whether its Prairie du Chien, or Antigo, or here in Oconto falls, we hearing the same story … businesspeople and farmers and students are at a huge competitive disadvantage…”

“That’s one of the reasons this place (NWTC) is important,” he added. “But we all know a lot of this work goes on at night, after hours, 2 a.m., whenever people have time, and just outside of town they don’t have that access. And that is hurting people up here who are clearly determined to try to improve their lives and have a good living.”

Feingold said Johnson was one of the signers of a letter backing a slower internet.

“The FCC wants to make sure there’s a high enough standard,” he said. “(Johnson) signed a letter with 10 other senators to slow it down. He does not support what I do, which is creating these alternatives, making sure municipalities and co-ops can provide this (service).”

In the January letter, the senators expressed concern that the FCC was trying to justify more regulation by setting a benchmark of broadband at 25 Mbps, noting that was it much more than considered optimum by streaming services such as Netflix. Advocates contend that level is necessary because home often have more than one device, meaning each user receives less speed.

Johnson campaign spokesman Brian Reisinger said the senator has been involved in the issue, including a letter urging then-FCC chairman Julius Genachowski to quickly finalize rules so that funds to deploy broadband in rural areas can be distributed. The 2013 letter, also signed by Democratic Sen. Tammy Baldwin, said 23 percent of rural Wisconsin residents lack access to reliable broadband, which is needed “to be competitive in the digital age.”

“Ron has worked on a bipartisan basis to create an environment where more broadband companies can invest and innovate to provide rural broadband across Wisconsin,” Reisinger said. “Senator Feingold’s answer to every problem is to get Washington bureaucrats more involved and make them more powerful — and after 18 years in D.C., he never learned it doesn’t work.”

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/26uBgSS