Walker pushes UW tuition freeze, downplays deficit
CLOSE Gov. Scott Walker and Lt. Gov. Rebecca Kleefisch make a campaign stop to talk to students at UW-Green Bay, reminding them of their plan to continue tuition freezes if reelected. (Sept. 9, 2014) Kyle Bursaw

Buy Photo Gov. Scott Walker has his photo taken with members of a group of UW-Green Bay students in Mary Ann Cofrin Hall. (Photo: Jim Matthews/Press-Gazette Media)Buy Photo

Gov. Scott Walker on Tuesday promised to continue a tuition freeze at University of Wisconsin campuses and asked students to vote for him in the upcoming November election.

During at campaign stop at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay, the Republican governor said keeping college tuition low is a key part of his economic strategy because it would help more people earn advanced degrees and find higher paying jobs. He first froze tuition two years ago after learning the UW System had more than $1 billion in cash reserves.

Walker was joined on the Green Bay campus by Lt. Gov. Rebecca Kleefisch as part of a multi-day tour of the state's universities. He also stopped at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee on Tuesday and planned to be at the campuses in La Crosse, Eau Claire and Parkside today.

"We understand you're working two-three jobs sometimes in order to figure out how you're going to pay for your education," Kleefisch said to the modest gathering of students Tuesday at UWGB. "We want to have the best educated workforce right here in Wisconsin, but it needs to be affordable."

Not everyone approved of Walker's campaign stop.

RELATED: State budget shortfall projected at $1.8B

Recent graduate Teri Crabb, 50, stood outside the building where Walker spoke with signs decrying high student loan debts and a low minimum wage.

Crabb graduated in May with more than $50,000 in debt and has not been able to find a job. She said she returned to college as an adult because she was tired of working minimum wage jobs.

"Does that not speak to our state's economy?" she said.

Walker did not speak specifically about student loan debt during his campaign stop, but he did say he prefers controlling tuition over government-subsidized financial aid.

Buy Photo Lt. Gov. Rebecca Kleefisch, right, and Gov. Scott Walker talk about college tuition with a group of UW-Green Bay students in Mary Ann Cofrin Hall at UWGB. (Photo: Jim Matthews/Press-Gazette Media)

"We know it's not just about providing more financial assistance, it's about providing a great price for a UW education that's low to begin with," he said.

UWGB Junior Amanda Metcalf, 25, said she wouldn't have been able to afford going to college if Walker hadn't frozen tuition. She said she couldn't enroll in college directly out of high school because it cost too much.

"Its definitely made a huge change in my life," she said.

Walker is facing Democrat Mary Burke in the general election on Nov. 4.

RELATED: Burke, Walker spar over $1.8B budget shortfall estimate

Burke, of Madison, has said she would increase University of Wisconsin System schools' capacity and establish an authority to oversee new protocols for refinancing student loans at lower interest rates, according to a report by The Daily Cardinal, a student newspaper for the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Walker did not directly answer questions about the future of state aid for public education. Instead, he said he offset past budget cuts by giving local governments and school boards more control over their spending through Act 10. The controversial law bars most public employee unions from collective bargaining for anything but base wages tied to inflation. Walker said the law allowed schools, cities and counties to save money by cutting or changing employee benefits and making other changes.

Buy Photo Gov. Scott Walker talks to a group of UW-Green Bay students in the Mary Ann Cofrin Hall at UWGB. At right is Lt. Gov. Rebecca Kleefisch. (Photo: Jim Matthews/Press-Gazette Media)

In the past, Walker cut state funding for the UW System by nearly $300 million over a two-year period. He also implemented significant reductions in state aid to public schools while also lowering the cap on how much they could raise in local property taxes. He has since restored some of that funding.

The state could be facing another structural deficit in its next biennium estimated by the Legislative Fiscal Bureau at $1.8 billion. That amount doesn't account for changes in spending or revenue growth.

Walker said Tuesday he's not concerned about the projections.

"We know we're not only going to control spending going forward as we have — rooting out waste, fraud and abuse — but we'll squeeze out more efficiencies as we have done routinely over the past few years. We also know the policies we invoked will help the economy grow over the next few years," he said.

—arodewal@pressgazettemedia.com and find him on Twitter @AdamGRodewald

CORRECTION: In an earlier version of this story, Terry Crabb is quoted as describing herself as a nontraditional student. She did not identify herself that way.

CORRECTION: In an earlier version of this story, the estimated size of the projected structural deficit was incorrect. It is $1.8 billion.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1rVrFTq