Tuition freeze ignores student loan debt crisis
CLOSE

Hansen (Photo: File )

At a recent stop in Green Bay, Gov. Scott Walker was touting his proposal to freeze tuition at UW campuses for another two years.

Unfortunately the governor’s proposal does nothing to help the 753,000 Wisconsin citizens currently coping with student loan debt or the businesses that are losing sales of new cars, homes and other products and services because these people are forced to use earnings that could go to start their lives and families to pay off their student loans.

And it does nothing to help current students who will be facing crushing student debt and high interest rates when they graduate. While they may save a bit now, there is nothing about the tuition freeze that will save them from the crushing debt many of them will face upon graduation.

Nor does it do anything to address a skyrocketing debt crisis which was made even worse after the governor increased tuition at Wisconsin campuses by 11 percent in his first budget. Freezing tuition now is more an offer to make up for the pain he inflicted just three years ago. However, even that doesn’t go far enough.

This past session Rep. Cory Mason and I authored legislation known as “Higher Ed, Lower Debt,” which would provide much-needed reforms including the ability to refinance loans at lower interest rates, provide a tax break for borrowers and greater transparency in the student loan process.

It is a decidedly moderate, common-sense approach to addressing the student loan crisis that would have helped hundreds of thousands of taxpaying citizens across the state. This legislation had the support of every Democrat in the Legislature. Yet Walker and the Republicans have not only failed to embrace our plan, but they have offered nothing to help the 753,000 people in this state burdened by debt they took on solely to better themselves.

This bill shouldn’t be a partisan issue. It’s a common-sense proposal to help those 753,000 citizens cope with a problem that is only getting worse and which a tuition freeze does nothing to help.

Earlier this month a study was released by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York that revealed the number of aging Americans with outstanding loan debt has tripled in less than ten years.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-5042. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Over 2 million people over the age of 65 still have student loan debt; many of them are seeing reduced Social Security checks as a result.

Student loan debt is a problem that needs to be addressed and it affects adults of ages. A tuition freeze is a temporary solution that is unsustainable in the long run and ignores the real problem.

Meanwhile, the student loan debt crisis continues to mount and our economy continues to falter.

— Sen. Dave Hansen, D-Green Bay, represents the 30th Senate District in the Wisconsin Legislature.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1sfBPP7