'My father is dead ... and I blame the VA'
CLOSE

Thomas Patrick Baer and his daughter Candace Baer-Delis. (Photo: Contributed) Story Highlights Thomas Baer of Marshfield went to the Tomah VA clinic last month.

While there, he suffered an apparent stroke, but was not treated immediately.

He was taken to a La Crosse hospital by ambulance instead of helicopter.

WASHINGTON – The death of another veteran treated at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Tomah added to mounting questions Wednesday about potentially negligent treatment at the facility.

Family members took 74-year-old Thomas Patrick Baer to the urgent care clinic at the center last month because he was having trouble breathing and walking and was confused and dizzy.

He waited more than two hours to be seen, and then he slumped over in his chair, unresponsive from an apparent stroke, but wasn't given a CT scan or drugs to prevent another one, family members said. As he waited to be transported to a hospital in La Crosse, he had another stroke and later died.

"My father is dead ... and I blame the VA," his daughter, Candace Baer-Delis, said. "I am ashamed to live in a country where its veterans are ignored, neglected, and left to die."

RELATED: Late vet's daughter rips Baldwin for 'lip service'

OBITUARY: Thomas P. Baer

Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wis., is taking up Baer's cause and pushing for an expanded investigation of medical care at the Tomah medical center. He and other lawmakers pushed for a probe of alleged over-prescription of opiates at the center's mental health clinic after learning last month that 35-year-old Marine Corps veteran Jason Simcakoski died of an overdose as an inpatient last August.

"It is heart-breaking," Johnson said Wednesday. "You listen to the widow, you listen to their children, you listen to their parents, and you hear the story and there's no defense for it."

"I'm not a doctor. I know some of these cases can be very difficult – pain management, depression – these are not easy things to treat," Johnson said. "But when you actually hear the stories, you know, where there's smoke, there's fire."

The VA and the VA inspector general have both launched investigations of prescription practices. It's unclear if they will look at treatment facility-wide, including in Baer's death.

The VA issued a statement Wednesday saying the agency could not comment on specific veterans' cases without privacy waivers signed by relatives but in general, the agency is "committed to providing the highest quality health care.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-5042. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"Our deepest sympathies go out to the families who lost a loved one," the statement said. "All of the incidents are unfortunate and our goal is to provide the best care possible to our Veterans. The patient care issues raised are serious and the Department takes these cases to heart."

Baer-Delis described a nightmare scenario January 12 when she took her father to urgent care. After her father slumped over, she said she told medical staff that she thought he had had a stroke because his left side was limp and he was leaning in that direction. They told her his vital signs were normal and that they were busy and would put him in a room to wait for treatment.

She said she asked repeatedly that he be tested for stroke but was told the center's CT scan machine was not working. After he appeared to suffer another stroke, she asked if they would administer anti-clotting drugs.

"They said they were not familiar enough with it to administer the drug," Baer-Delis said.

RELATED: Baldwin fires aide over Tomah VA report

A doctor then confirmed her fear, saying he had indeed suffered a massive stroke and would be transported by helicopter to the hospital in La Crosse. But she was later told he would have to be transported by ambulance instead as there were no helicopters flying that day.

In LaCrosse, doctors told her he should have been given the anti-clotting drugs and been flown in to save time, she said. They performed surgery to remove a blood clot, restoring blood supply to the brain but he never regained consciousness and died two days later.

"The fact that my father, a man who proudly served his country, sat for almost three hours in the waiting room of the Tomah VA's 'Urgent Care' department was completely unacceptable," she said. "Had they done something as simple as a CT scan at Tomah, the outcome may have been different."

Johnson penned a letter last week to VA administrators peppering them with questions about Baer's death and asking about equipment failures, urgent care wait times, and guidelines for timely treatment nationwide. The VA has yet to respond.

RELATED: Baldwin's handling of VA report 'frustrating' for widow

At a hearing on Capitol Hill Wednesday, Johnson cited Baer's death as an example of the horrifying consequences of shortfalls within the VA health care system that need to be addressed.

"It's a tragedy that I don't think should have happened," he said, noting that he believes Baer "basically died of neglect."

Johnson was chairing a hearing about federal programs deemed by the Government Accountability Office to be at high-risk for fraud, waste, abuse and mismanagement. The VA's Veterans Health Administration was officially added to the list Wednesday.

The GAO cited the agency's "ambiguous policies" and "inconsistent processes," as well as "inadequate oversight and accountability."

A VA spokesman said Wednesday the agency shares the GAO's goal of "ensuring Veterans are provided with the high-quality health care they have earned and deserve."

"(W)e will continue to identify and rectify issues within our department," spokesman James Hutton said. "We respect GAO's work and we take their recommendations regarding VA programs or policy very seriously."

-- Contact dslack@usatoday.com. Follow @donovanslack

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1Di7bHO