Raymond M. Dall'Osto
Ray Dall'Osto is fondly known as the firm’s “true believer.” He is a tough litigator who has dedicated his career defending and protecting the constitutional and legal rights of his clients. “It is my goal to help people cope with and overcome adversity, while preserving their rights. If you don’t stand up for your rights, you have none.” Ray notes that if he was in the client’s shoes, he “would want a lawyer representing me who cares and treats me the same way as if I was a close family member of the lawyer. That is how I try to represent my clients.”

Before he joined GRGB in 1990, Ray served as First Assistant Public Defender in charge of the Milwaukee Public Defender office for two years. He also was a trial attorney with the Milwaukee Felony Division for ten years and taught as an adjunct law professor at the Marquette Law School from 1985-1990. Prior to his public defender service, Ray was Legal Director of the Wisconsin affiliate of the American Civil Liberties Union for several years.

Ray's criminal defense and civil litigation practice is complemented by his substantial expertise in constitutional law, evidence, and procedure. The majority of the cases Ray handles involve a government entity accusing an individual or business of a law or regulation violation, the government’s refusal to recognize the rights of the client, to treat the client fairly, or the government entity trying to take away or limit the client’s legal and constitutional rights. He makes it his job to step into the ring for the client and fight for these rights.

Ray makes it a point to get to know and understand his clients and how their legal problems impact on them, their families and businesses, so that he is able to represent them properly. He is passionate about his responsibilities to his clients and refuses to give up until their rights are honored and vindicated.

Outside of GRGB, Ray’s greatest joy is spending time with his wife and three children. He loves to travel in the United States and Europe, and to backcountry canoe, hike and fish. One of his life goals is to visit most of America’s National Parks.