Gregg Cantrell Homepage
This book is a stand-alone biography of John B. Rayner, the African American Populist leader and is adapted from the the book above. It is widely used in college classrooms in Texas and around the country. Click here to purchase a copy

My first book, a dual biography of North Carolina Whig congressman Kenneth Rayner and his son by a slave woman, John B. Rayner, explores the fate that awaited talented southern political figures whose racial views were at odds with the region's orthodoxy. Click here to purchase a copy

The first scholarly biography of the founder of Anglo-American Texas, Stephen F. Austin, Empresario of Texas (Yale University Press) won ten awards, including the TSHA's Bates Award, the Philosophical Society of Texas Book Award, and the Miss Ima Hogg Historical Achievement Award. Click here to purchase a copy

Co-edited with Elizabeth Hays Turner, Lone Star Pasts: Memory and History in Texas (TAMU Press) pioneered the application of memory studies to Texas History. Winner of the T. R. Fehrenbach Award. Click here to purchase a copy

Now in its fifth edition, The History of Texas, coauthored with Arnoldo De León and the late Robert A. Calvert, remains the leading college-level Texas History textbook. Click here to purchase a copy

Originally delivered as the presidential address at the 2014 Texas State Historical Association Annual Meeting at the Menger Hotel in San Antonio, this article, "Lyndon's Granddaddy: Sam Ealy Johnson, Sr., Texas Populism, and the Improbable Roots of American Liberalism," appeared in the October 2014 issue of the Southwestern Historical Quarterly.

Click here for full article

This article, “Our Very Pronounced Theory of Equal Rights to All”: Race, Citizenship, and Populism in the South Texas Borderlands,” published in the Journal of American History (Dec. 2013) explores Populism in San Antonio and South Texas against the backdrop of the landmark immigration-law case, In re Rodriguez.

Click here for the full article