GSA Seeks to Redevelop D.C.'s Old Post Office
This is archived information. It may contain outdated contact names, telephone numbers, Web links, or other information. For up-to-date information visit GSA.gov pages by topic or contact our Office of Public Affairs at media@gsa.gov. For a list of public affairs officers by beat, visit the GSA Newsroom.

GSA Seeks to Redevelop D.C.'s Old Post Office

Effort will preserve historic landmark and add vitality to Pennsylvania Avenue.

GSA # 10783

March 24, 2011

Contact: Maryanne Beatty, 202-501-0768

maryanne.beatty@gsa.gov

Adam Elkington, 202-357-9582

Adam.Elkington@gsa.gov

WASHINGTON – Today the U.S. General Services Administration’s National Capital Region issued a Request for Proposals (RFP) for the redevelopment of the Old Post Office building and annex located at 1100 Pennsylvania Avenue NW in Washington, DC. With this project, GSA will turn this underused federal office space into a private sector initiative that best serves the community and the government. The request will leverage the expertise of the private sector in determining what future use will be most lucrative for the federal government while maintaining the historic nature of the building.

“The Old Post Office is one of our Capital’s most iconic buildings. The RFP presents us with a unique opportunity to work with the private sector to find ways we can put a building on our nation’s Main Street to better use,” said Bob Peck, GSA Commissioner of Public Buildings. “Several decades ago, the landmark building faced imminent demolition, inspiring a campaign that laid the groundwork for the historic preservation movement in Washington. The building’s redevelopment will continue advancing the Federal Triangle and establish a link between tourists on the mall and downtown.”

The main building of the Old Post Office contains 315,000 square feet of space, divided between federal tenants on the upper floors and restaurant facilities on the first three floors. The 315-foot clock tower that makes the building visible for miles around is under the control of the National Park Service and is not part of the redevelopment project. There also is a 64,000 square foot annex built in the early 1990s, currently unoccupied, included in the project.

The Old Post Office was opened in 1899 and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and is being leased under Section 111 of the National Historic Preservation Act. Once a developer is selected, they will be responsible for the restoration, rehabilitation, and preservation of the OPO, as well as management and operations. GSA is issuing the RFP with a proposal deadline of July 20, 2011.

Currently, the OPO serves as headquarters for the National Endowment for the Arts, the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation. GSA and the National Park Service also have a presence in the building. In total, the federal government currently occupies 225,000 rentable square feet in the building. As the proposed redevelopment will encompass the entire OPO and Annex, these tenants will need to be relocated from the building. The RFP is being issued under the authority of the Old Post Office Redevelopment Act, a bill introduced by Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton in 2008.

Interested members of the public can track the project’s progress on GSA’s website

View full Request for Proposal >>





###

As the federal government's workplace solutions provider, the U.S. General Services Administration works to foster an effective, sustainable and transparent government for the American people. GSA’s expertise in government workplace solutions include:

• Effective management of government assets including more than 9,600 government-owned or leased buildings and 215,000 vehicles in the federal fleet, and preservation of historic federal properties;

• Leveraging the government’s buying power through responsible acquisition of products and services making up approximately 14 percent of the government’s total procurement dollars;

• Providing innovative technology solutions to enhance government efficiency and increase citizen engagement; and,

• Promoting responsible use of federal resources through development of governmentwide policies ranging from federal travel to property and management practices.