Immigration reform: deal inches closer as Republicans propose 'human fence'
Conservative efforts to frustrate immigration reform were rebuffed on Thursday, bringing Congress one step closer to legalising the estimated 11 million undocumented migrants in the US.

As the battle to pass legislation proved far tougher than many expected, a new group of moderate Republican senators proposed doubling the number of border guards to 40,000 in a "human fence" to secure the southern border with Mexico.

Their border security amendment goes far further than the original "gang of eight" Republican and Democrat senators who introduced immigration reform in April but is thought crucial in persuading more conservative Republicans to accept the proposed amnesty for existing immigrants.

Although passage of the bill through the Senate is not in doubt due to a Democratic majority, the debate is on a knife edge in the Republican-controlled House of Representatives after speaker John Boehner insisted he would only allow a vote if a majority of his party caucus were in favour.

The legislation is seen as a centrepiece of President Obama's second term and a test of whether Congress can function at all in an era of mounting partisan mistrust.

But in a crucial day for the bill and a extraordinary day for the future of the Republican party, a succession of party heavyweights stood up to defy the conservative wing and push legislation forward.

Senators Bob Corker and John Hoeven joined original Rebublican supporters of the bill such as Marco Rubio, Lindsay Graham and John McCain to make emotive appeals on the floor of the Senate.

Rubio called the current immigration system "a disaster of epic proportions". "Shouldn't a nation founded on judeo-christian principles bring these people out of the shadows?" added McCain.

Hoeven and Corker said their plan, including 350 extra miles of physical fencing, would cost $30bn but would be more than paid for out of the $197bn worth of extra economic growth that the congressional budget office estimates would stem from the amnesty over 10 years.

"We are on the verge of a huge breakthrough," said Democrat Charles Schumer, who called the 20,000 extra border security guards a "virtual human fence". "There was a group of colleagues who were inclined to vote for the bill but first wanted to see stronger border controls – that make sense."

The battle is far from over however. At the same time Republican leaders were calling for immigration reform, a press conference was called by the Tea Party wing in Congress threatening to block even the amended bill when it reaches the House.

Senator Jeff Sessions said the bill had been written by "special interests", referring to deals struck big business and union groups. "We need to listen to the people of America, not special interests," he said.

The Corker/Hoeven amendment has also taken longer to draft than expected and had not yet been published, let alone voted on, by mid-afternoon on Thursday.

There are currently 278 other amendments waiting to be debated before a proposed Senate vote on the full bill by July 4. "Our ability to legislate has gone out of the window," said Louisiana Democrat Mary Landrieu .

Senator John Cornyn attempted to get another border security amendment debated that would postpone all amnesty until 90% border security could be guaranteed, but this was shelved with the help of the moderate Republican alliance.