Kansas City Chiefs fans reclaim record for loudest crowd roar at sports stadium
They’ve done it again.

Continuing a back-and-forth battle that’s spanned more than a year, the NFL’s Kansas City Chiefs have reclaimed the official title for loudest crowd roar at a sports stadium, doing so in front of a national TV audience on Monday Night Football this week.

En route to a 41-14 thumping of the favored New England Patriots, Chiefs fans made enough noise to register a 142.2 dbA reading at Arrowhead Stadium, bringing the unofficial crown of sports’ loudest fans back to KC.

The record-breaking sound burst occurred with 8 seconds left in the first quarter, after the Chiefs defense stuffed Patriots running back Shane Vereen for no gain on a second down rush. Kansas City would end the quarter with a 7-0 lead.

Check out our take on the budding crowd roar battle from when it began last year.

This marks the second time in the last year the Chiefs have broken this record. It continues a tug-o-war with the defending Super Bowl champion and two-time crowd roar record-holding Seattle Seahawks.

video [&amp;amp;lt;a href="//storify.com/GWR/kansas-city-chiefs-loudest-crowd-roar" target="_blank"&amp;amp;gt;View the story "Kansas City Chiefs loudest crowd roar" on Storify&amp;amp;lt;/a&amp;amp;gt;]

After fans of Turkish soccer club Galatasaray held the record at 131.76 dbA from March 2011, the Seahawks took the title on Sept. 15 of last year with a reading of 136.6 dbA. That came on a third-quarter goalline stand in an eventual win over the division rival San Francisco 49ers.

The Chiefs would break that number in a win over the Oakland Raiders 28 days later, registering 137.5 dbA.

Seattle would then barely reclaim the mark on Dec. 2 with a 137.6 dbA in a 34-7 rout of the New Orleans Saints.

Kansas City has more breathing room now thanks to Monday’s boisterous fans, taking this record above 140 dbA for the first time ever.

The gauntlet has now been thrown for “the 12 th Man” in Seattle or any other fan base – from the NFL or not – to try and take down the Chiefs.

Some have even started wondering which fan bases from other sports might be best suited to enter the fray of this unique budding rivalry.

An NFL team set the Guinness record for loudest crowd tonight. If a proper football (soccer) club were to top it, who would it be? — ESPN FC (@ESPNFC) September 30, 2014

One thing we can say with some certainty if anyone else can break this record is that the fans will likely be cheering for a winner. The history of the record started off seeing the first three teams to successfully measure the roar – Ireland rugby union in 1998, the NFL’s Denver Broncos in 2000, and Galatasaray in 2011 – all lose their games.

But in the Seahawks-Chiefs quadrilogy, the home team is a perfect 4-0, with an average margin of victory of 23.25 points. These fans have proven that bringing the noise means bringing the wins.

The 60th Anniversary Diamond Edition of the Guinness World Records book is out now! Find out all about it and see record holders like the longest tongue at www.guinnessworldrecords.com/2015

And for the latest on all things world record, visit Guinness World Records on Facebook, Twitter, Google+ and our brand-new Instagram. Plus check out Guinness World Records on YouTube to subscribe for the latest record-breaking videos!