Attempt By Liberal Hack To Smear Sean Hannity Backfires Spectacularly
Politifact, a website that is allegedly dedicated to fact-checking, is accusing Sean Hannity of using false information drawn from a “hoax website” in several recent interviews he conducted on Fox News' Hannity.

Politifact writer Jon Greenberg claims “Sean Hannity falls for hoax website on claim that U.S. is taking in 250,000 Syrian refugees”.

The claim is demonstrably false on several levels.

First, Hannity never said the U.S. is taking in 250,000 refugees from Syria. As evidence, we offer the very clips Politifact posted.

In an October 9th interview with Jeb Bush on Fox News’ Hannity, Sean says:

You see the backlash emerging now in Europe over the refugee problem from Syria and Iraq. And the president said he’s going to bring 250,000 refugees into this country. My fear is, and our national intelligence director James Clapper said, that ISIS in Iraq will infiltrate the refugee population.

The second clip comes from an October 20th interview with Donald Trump where Sean says:

You see what’s happening in Europe, there’s a huge backlash because of Syrian refugees and Iraqi refugees and the cost. We’re being told by our national security Intelligence Director that ISIS and Al Qaeda—not if—they will infiltrate the refugee community. This president is committed to nearly 250,000 coming to America.

You’ll note that nowhere in either clip does Hannity say that 250,000 refugees are coming exclusively from Syria as Politifact claims. In fact, he actually mentions Iraq by name IN BOTH CLIPS. The fact that the very videos that Politifact used as evidence do not support its own claims speaks volumes about the level of care with which they handled this story.

Mistakes happen frequently in the world of 24-hour news and genuine errors can be forgiven. However, the next claim Politifact makes is completely fabricated out of thin air.

We repeat: COMPLETELY FABRICATED OUT OF THIN AIR.

Again, Greenberg:

The figure he used seems to have emerged in early September on a website called realnewsrightnow.com. The website reported that State Department spokeswoman Cathy Pieper announced that 250,000 Syrian refugees would be resettled on tribal reservation lands in Arizona and North Dakota.

Although Greenberg uses the weasel words “seems to have” when referring to the alleged source of Sean’s numbers, the title of his hit piece offers no such qualifications.

The truth is, Hannity has never cited, quoted, or even seen the “hoax article” in question. “I don’t read the websites that Politifact does,” he told Hannity.com. “I never heard of them.”

In fact, Hannity’s source for the 250,000-refugee figure comes from an Associated Press article dated September 20th, 2015. The article reads in part:

The U.S. is offering new details about its plan to ease the Syrian refugee crisis by significantly increasing the number of worldwide refugees it will take in over the next two years.

U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry says the U.S. will accept 85,000 refugees from around the world next year, up from 70,000, and the number will rise to 100,000 in 2017.

Aides to Kerry say that many, though not all, of the additional refugees would be Syrian. (emphasis added)

The same numbers were reported by Bloomberg and The New York Times.

The rest is simple mathematics:

2015: 70,000 Refugees

2016: 85,000 Refugees

2017: 100,000 Refugees

Total: 255,000 Refugees

Hannity did offer one apology though, “I underestimated Kerry’s figure by 5,000 and for that I apologize.”

Our Ruling

To believe Politifact's claims, one would have to accept that something Sean Hannity never said is evidence of his being tricked by a "hoax article" he never saw. The claims they make are not only disconnected from anything Hannity actually said, they fly in the face of the very evidence they themselves provide.

We rate these claims fabrications, lies, and a poor attempt to smear Sean Hannity.

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com