Radio Show Recap: Sep 1
*** Lake County, IL police officer murdered and suspects are at large

***Stock market opened to a volatile day- Dow down apx 400 points

***Donald Trump leads with 37% in the new Morning Consult poll



3:30 P.M. EST- Mike Scott - News director and morning news anchor for our Chicago affiliate A.M. 560 The Answer to give us an update on the shooting of a police officer in Lake County, IL. Police are searching for suspects



4:00 P.M. EST- Jamie Dupree: The Washington Insider joins Sean with the latest from Capitol Hill and the 2016 campaign trail, including:



“Jeb Bush continued to take jabs at GOP front runner Donald Trump today, dealing Trump some of his own social media medicine, by trotting out a video that features past statements where the real estate mogul voices his support for abortion, higher taxes, the Obama stimulus law, Hillary Clinton and more. ‘Hillary Clinton, I think is a terrific women,’Trump says in an interview clip that the Bush team assembled to argue that Trump holds a number of views that are not in sync with Republican voters. ‘My views are a little bit different than if I lived in Iowa,’Trump says frankly at one point on an old edition of NBC’s Meet the Press.”



4:30 p.m. EST- Dick Cheney and Liz Cheney - The former vice president and his daughter explain the unique and indispensable nature of American power in their new book released today, EXCEPTIONAL: Why The World Needs A Powerful America. Provocative and up-to-the-minute, this new book explores how after seventy years of bipartisan foreign policy consensus that propelled America to victory in WWII, the Cold War, and the first decade of the War on Terror, President Obama has drastically broken with the vision of America shared by presidents Democratic and Republican alike, from Franklin Roosevelt and Dwight Eisenhower to Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton.



5:00 P.M. EST - Donald Trump - The 2016 GOP hopeful is continuing to defy political gravity, with his poll numbers continuing to rise:



The Morning Consult survey shows Trump leading among Republicans and Republican-leaning independents with 37 percent of the vote, compared with just nine percent for the second-place finishers, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush (R) and retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson.



5:30 P.M. EST - James O’Keefe - President of Project Veritas has released a new video which is sure to add to Hillary Clinton’s growing list of problems:



The video shows “Molly Barker, the Director of Marketing for Hillary Clinton’s national campaign, knowingly breaking campaign finance law by accepting a straw donation from a foreign national. Contributions from foreign nationals are illegal under FEC election law. Straw donations (contributions made in the name of another person) are illegal under FEC election law….



“We know Barker knew of their illegality because the hidden camera footage shows her consulting with the Clinton campaign’s Compliance Manager, Erin Tibe, who reiterated to Barker that she could not accept the contribution. Minutes later, Barker accepted the illegal contribution anyway.



These are not volunteers or low-level staffers in remote outposts. These are top campaign aides. The illegal transaction took place at Clinton’s campaign kickoff event in New York.”