Why Lana Del Rey Won't Use American Flag Imagery Anymore
Lana Del Rey is ditching her signature Americana aesthetic now that Donald Trump is in office. Though she initially built her brand on nostalgic, patriotic motifs—like the star-spangled backdrops, motorcycle rides through the American West, and even a Kennedys tribute we've seen in her earlier music videos—she's taking a break, considering the nation's current political climate.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Now that Trump is president, she says "it's certainly uncomfortable" to look at the country with that same romantic lens, Del Rey told Pitchfork in a new interview. Thus, she plans to skip the stars-and-stripes imagery when she goes on tour for her upcoming album, Lust for Life.

"I definitely changed my visuals on my tour videos," Del Rey explained. "I’m not going to have the American flag waving while I’m singing 'Born to Die.' It’s not going to happen. I’d rather have static. It’s a transitional period, and I’m super aware of that. I think it would be inappropriate to be in France with an American flag. It would feel weird to me now—it didn’t feel weird in 2013."

We knew Del Rey's new record was going to be politically influenced from the moment she first announced it. (Even before she revealed new music, she was already joining witches around the world in casting spells on Trump.)

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

In a trailer for her upcoming album, she compared the political climate to "dark times" and a "tumultuous period." The track list offered more clues, with songs titles like "God Bless America - And all the Beautiful Women in It" and "When the World Was at War We Kept Dancing." The former is a tribute to women who "don't feel safe" in Trump's America, she told Pitchfork, and the latter calls out the "boisterous rhetoric" perpetuated by the administration.

Those songs haven't been released yet, but you can hear them when Lana Del Rey finally releases her fourth studio album, Lust for Life, tomorrow, July 21. Read up on everything you need to know before it comes out below.