A Conversation With Kenya Ministry of Health's Dr. Isabella Maina
Kenya is taking bold steps towards taking a more efficient approach to strengthening its health data system. With a mosaic of international partners supporting different pieces of a fragmented information system, the Ministry of Health has called on all stakeholders to work together towards one strong national system that meets all country and international data needs.

Dr. Isabella Maina, head of the Health Sector Monitoring & Evaluation Unit of the Ministry of Health, is playing a central role in furthering this agenda. With over 15 years of experience in the Kenya health sector, Dr. Maina has coordinated the development of the health sector M&E framework and guidelines for the 2014-18 period and recently organized the groundbreaking launch of the Kenya Health Data Collaborative on May 18.

Kenya is the first country in Africa to officially launch the Health Data Collaborative at the national level. The Collaborative brings together global health partners adopting a new aligned approach to working with countries to strengthen national health information systems, improve the quality of their health data and track progress toward the health-related Sustainable Development Goals. The launch event in Nairobi was attended by partners including CDC, Gavi, GIZ, Global Fund, PEPFAR, UNAIDS, UNICEF, USAID, World Bank Group, and WHO, the Collaborative's Secretariat.

Q: How did Kenya become involved in the Health Data Collaborative?

A: Kenya’s Ministry of Health participated in the Summit on Measurement and Accountability for Health in June 2015 in Washington, D.C., which resulted in the Five Point Call to Action and thereafter the formation of the global Health Data Collaborative. Kenya’s Ministry of Health was invited to participate as a member of the steering committee of the Collaborative at the global level and has since participated in its various technical working groups.



Q: What expectations do you have for the Health Data Collaborative?

A: There has been a sustained effort around improving our health information, monitoring and evaluation systems, leading to many results that can serve as best practices. Despite such good progress, there is often lack of alignment among global health organizations, with existence of uncoordinated, parallel activities, and hence I feel that they need to work differently in countries. More often than not, countries have identified priorities for health, and for global health organizations, the issue is to align with those country priorities and allow countries to take stewardship in implementation. There needs to be better harmonization, supporting a single national health plan and single national M&E plan instead of having parallel demands for data. It’s about improving how we work together.

With a renewed effort through the global Health Data Collaborative and now the Kenya Health Data Collaborative launched last month, we now expect better alignment of the sector stakeholders getting behind a common agreed vision and goals. -Dr. Isabella Maina