3rd Alternative, Prominent Doctor From Florida Found Dead in 2 weeks. Authorities say MD was murdered.
First and foremost, it brings me no joy to break yet another story about another doctor. My heart goes out to the friends, families and patients of all three of them who were from here in Florida. I hope they find at least one of the killers who is currently on the loose.

Controversial Autism Researcher Murdered

Less than 2 weeks ago the first doctor, Dr. Jeff Bradstreet, MD a controversial autism researcher loved by his patients, was found in a river with a gunshot wound to his chest. He leaves behind a beautiful wife and children. On June 20th, his friends and family started a memorial page on Facebook in his honor and I waited 3 days after that to report the story, out of respect. Some don’t believe that I should cover these stories, but I am a journalist, and now that 3 doctors have died so quickly from my home state (at least one murdered) I feel I need to write about it.

Dr. Bruce Hedendal Found Dead In His Car

The second doctor is Dr. Bruce Hedendal, DC, PhD of Boca Raton, FL who died suddenly on Father’s Day, leaving behind a beautiful family. Sources tell me that he was found dead in his car; there had been no accident and it wasn’t running. He had exercised earlier at an event, but we don’t want to speculate, as the authorities have yet to rule on his cause of death. In addition to being a DC, he held a PhD in nutrition from Harvard. A friend who worked with him said he was in great shape, describing him as “very healthy”. They too didn’t know the cause of death and were still in shock, not sure if anyone knows at this point.

Both Dr Hedendal and Dr. Bradstreet had run ins with the feds in the past. In fact, Dr. Bradstreet’s office was just raided by the FDA days before he died. We know they will both be missed by countless patients, family and friends.

Dr Sievers’ Death

The most recent death was that of the inspiring and intelligent Teresa Ann Sievers MD, also here in Florida (Bonita Springs). The bio on her website describes her many accomplishments and degrees as a medical doctor who believed in a holistic, alternative approach. She lived in a safe area where neighbors said they rarely, if ever, had problems. I had actually just been in that neighborhood last month for a health event and it’s beautiful and serene. UPDATE: This new video about Dr. Sievers’ death on CBS News talks about a donation site set up through CBS’s official website for those who wish to do so.

From the breaking news article about Dr. Sievers’ death:

The killing of a popular Estero doctor has left family and friends puzzled and saddened. The body of Dr. Teresa Ann Sievers, 46, was found Monday morning at her Jarvis Road home after she didn’t arrive at work. “We don’t know anything but that she was murdered,” said Sievers’ sister, Annie Lisa, 52. She said Sievers, her husband and children had come to Connecticut for a gathering and her sister flew home alone Sunday.

The Lee County Sheriff’s Office declined to discuss the case, saying it was an ongoing homicide investigation, but assured neighbors that there was no threat in the area, but they reminded residents to lock their doors.

Sadly, Dr. Sievers leaves behind a husband Mark, and two daughters aged 8 and 10. We will update the article as we know more.

Another article talks about the reward being offered and provides a phone number where you can call in anonymous tips. If you have information pertaining to the death of Dr. Sievers or any information or tips, please call.

Again we’ll report as more info becomes available and ask that everyone stay safe and alert. We send our condolences and thoughts to all family, friends and patients of these three wonderful doctors.

XO Erin Elizabeth, Health Nut News, Florida July 1, 2015