2 More Doctors Go Missing, after 3 Found Dead in 2 Weeks
UPDATE: Chief Deputy McCarty of the Sheriff’s Dept in charge of the case of missing Dr. Jeffrey Whiteside MD, is directly asked if there is a tie to the doctor’s disappearance and my breaking stories about other doctors who are missing or were found dead. The Chief says the following about my articles and any correlation:

McCarty said that information has been given to investigators to determine if there’s any correlation to the Whiteside case. “We haven’t been contacted by any other law-enforcement agency or by the FBI or anything like that,” he said.

Second update:

Just hours or days after authorities said this referencing the stories I broke to the world, they found Dr. Whiteside’s body right in the *very* area he was last seen (so that’s another mystery), and there was a .22 caliber found discharged by his body, but no other details are being given.

2 More Doctors Go Missing

In the past 2 weeks I’ve reported on 3 alternative doctors (2 MD’s and 1 DC, PhD) who were found dead in less than two weeks. (Click through for stories and funds for families as well as numbers to report tips to authorities.) It was with heavy heart, as I knew a few of the doctors and have many mutual friends with all three.

NBC and Fox have since picked up my stories and given me credit and links which I appreciate and only wish it were a happier subject, but I do believe this is important to find the doctors who are missing (alive, I hope), and get justice for those who were killed or mysteriously died. The only update on the third one, Dr. Teresa Sievers, is that they have absolutely no suspects in mind, and her husband and kids were out of state in Connecticut at a family reunion that she left early tto see patients.

Update: Initially I said I would not post a link for Dr. Sievers in this article and I didn’t. People started questioning me. So, as much as it pains me, here is the most recent article from NBC. Click through at your own risk. I’m not posting the details here out of respect.

The local sheriff investigating the case of Dr. Sievers said it was not random, not a home invasion and definitely “targeted”. He’s gone so far as to say that when all the facts do emerge, it will likely be the subject of a best selling book (or movie). I don’t even know what to make of that. Mind boggling.

Now, in just a few days, we have 2 more doctors missing. The first is Dr. Fitzpatrick of North Dakota who went missing in or around July 3rd. NBC is reporting on his disappearance. Little else is known at this time. Note: Initially it was reported he was a DO, but now we see that’s another Patrick Fitzpatrick in the area. This doctor specializes in Ophthalmology and is an MD. From all accounts it appears he practiced in North Dakota, but was found missing in neighboring Montana.

Searching for a 74-year-old North Dakota Doctor

from the NBC article about a doctor gone missing: