Fall River fires back after taking hits following Kennedy speech
The far right wing online portal Breitbart News took issue with U.S. Rep. Joe Kennedy III description of Fall River as a "proud American city, built by immigrants" in his response to President Donald Trump's State of the Union address on Tuesday night.

FALL RIVER - From the Fabergé egg-shaped bell towers of St. Anne's Church to the Portuguese bakeries that line Columbia Street, Fall River would not be Fall River without its immigrants.

"And it would be pretty bland, I have to say," said Maria Ferreira-Bedard, the executive director of SER-Jobs for Progress Inc.

Fall River's notable churches and many of its landmarks were built by the people who began arriving on its streets in the mid-19th century from Ireland, Canada, Italy, Lebanon, Poland and Portugal, and in recent years from Brazil, Syria, Haiti, Cambodia and elsewhere.

"We have always been a melting pot," said state Rep. Carole Fiola, a lifelong Fall River resident who describes herself as one of the city's biggest cheerleaders.

The far-right-wing online portal Breitbart News — Steve Bannon, its former executive chairman, once called Breitbart a "platform" for the so-called "alt-right" movement — took issue with U.S. Rep. Joe Kennedy III's description of Fall River as a "proud American city, built by immigrants" in his response to President Donald Trump's State of the Union address on Tuesday night.

Minutes after Kennedy, 37, uttered those words from a podium at Diman Regional Vocational Technical High School's autobody shop, Breitbart published a "Fact Check" article that graded the young congressman's statement as "mostly false."

To support its claim, Breitbart said Fall River was established in the 1600s by English settlers "who were not 'immigrants, but colonists." The website also made a point to note that "native-born" residents, such as the Borden family and Col. Joseph Durfee, built the city's factories and mills. Breitbart suggested that it was not until the late 19th century that immigrants "swelled" the city's population.

Breitbart also threw in a random observation — that immigrants have never comprised a majority of Bristol County's residents — that local residents did not very find convincing.

"Kennedy didn't say immigrants founded the city, but they did build it. If you look at who built many of the structures and buildings that still stand today, they were built on the back of immigrant labor," said Rebecca Cusick, president of the Fall River Educators Association.

On Twitter this week, Cusick got into spats with people or automated bots — it's often hard to tell the difference — who, after Kennedy's speech, began attacking Fall River as a drug-infested rat hole ruined by immigrants.

"That's just factually wrong, but I don't know if facts really matter to those people," Cusick said, adding that the Twitter vitriol aimed at Fall River appeared to be intended to discredit Kennedy, who is seen as a rising star in the Democratic Party.

"That's not to say we don't have our problems. Every urban community has its problems," Cusick said. "But I just find it so disrespectful to trash an entire community just because you want to score political points."

Fall River City Council President Cliff Ponte agreed that Breitbart and its ilk were "clearly trying" to discredit Kennedy's speech. Ponte accused Breitbart of "splitting hairs" by trying to argue the city's founding colonists were not immigrants.

"A stretch, at best," Ponte said.

But even granting the critics that point, Ponte said the large waves of immigrants in the 19th century, beginning with the Irish in the 1840s, worked in the city's textile mills and as craftsmen and professionals. Ponte said their contributions can be seen in the the variety of ethnic churches that are still scattered throughout Fall River.

"I would recommend that the writers at Breitbart do a more thorough research into Fall River's history before making broad, erroneous observations about our city and the people of our community," Ponte said. "A five-minute Google search is not sufficient."

Ferreira-Bedard of SER-Jobs, who attended Kennedy's speech at Diman, said many of the city's recent immigrants go to her nonprofit agency's offices in the evenings to learn English, even after working in menial low-paying jobs during the day.

"You can walk through those classes every night and they are filled with people from all over the world," she said.

Ferreira-Bedard said the new immigrants, like many before them, are trying to assimilate into American society and give their children an economic foothold. It's a familiar story in Fall River that Ferreira-Bedard's parents would know. She said her father worked in the city's textile industry and her mother was a sewing machine operator. Fereira-Bedard today is an accomplished professional with a master's degree in English language and literature.

Said Ferreira-Bedard, "Obviously, they did something right."

Email Brian Fraga at bfraga@heraldnews.com.