Miami-Dade County voters to decide on slot machines
MIAMI -- Voters in Florida's largest county will reconsider Tuesday whether they want slot machines installed at three pari-mutuel facilities, with tax dollars from the new gambling attraction bolstering a state education fund.



Miami-Dade County voters rejected slot machines in a 2005 referendum, though voters in neighboring Broward County approved them for its jai-alai fronton and horse and dog racetracks during the same election. Miami-Dade voters will determine whether to add Las Vegas-style slot machines at Miami Jai-Alai, the Flagler Sports and Entertainment Center dog track and Calder Race Course, which features horses. It is a contentious issue that again brings the pros and cons of gambling to the forefront.



Slot machine critics say gambling is a vice that targets the poor, erodes family values and is not the answer for Florida's education needs. Proponents say slots in Florida generate needed money for education and can help bolster a sluggish economy. They point out that slots are already available in Broward and on gambling boats that leave Miami for international waters. Video lottery machines, which are similar to slots, are available at an Indian casino.



And since 2006, slot machines have been operating at three Broward County "racinos" -- Gulfstream Park, Pompano Park Race Track, and Mardi Gras Racetrack and Gaming Center -- generating more than $100 million for the state's Educational Enhancement Trust Fund, said Sam Farkas, spokesman for the Division of Pari-Mutuel Wagering.



The state levies a 50 percent tax on Broward slot machine revenues, and Miami-Dade's rate would be the same if slots are approved.



Supporters have raised millions in their pro-slot machines campaigns. One political committee, called Yes for a Greater Miami-Dade, had received more than $5.2 million in contributions and spent more than $3.3 million as of Dec. 31, according to Florida Department of State election reports.



A study done by Coral Gables-based Washington Economics Group said more than 6,400 jobs could be created by the slot machines in their first year of operation, according to Yes for a Greater Miami-Dade. The study projects $26 million in tax revenues will go to the county and the cities of Miami and Miami Gardens in the first year.



Among those who support the slots measure are Flagler Sports and Entertainment Center owner Barbara Havenick, former U.S. Rep. Carrie Meek and state Sen. Alex Villalobos, R-Miami. Havenick has said she plans to make improvements to the aging facility if slots are approved.



One constant from the 2005 vote is the involvement of Jeb Bush, who campaigned against the slots measure when he was governor. His efforts back then are widely believed to have helped sway voters against the proposal.



This time around, both Bush and former governor and U.S. Sen. Bob Graham oppose Miami-Dade slots. A group called Truth for Our Community sent out statements from Bush and Graham urging a "no" vote, and both former politicians have or will record radio commercials to publicize their stance.



"As a lifetime citizen of this community, I am saddened at the continued attempts to define our beautiful community's future as tied to a slot machine," Graham wrote. "We are better than that."



Hialeah Mayor Julio Robaina, a catalyst behind Truth for Our Community, said slot proponents overestimate how much money will go to education and how many jobs will be created. And, Robaina said, Miami-Dade will absorb the negatives of gambling while creating revenues from which the other 66 Florida counties will benefit.



"Why are we producing this money that's going to Orlando, that's going to Gainesville, that's going to Orlando and Tallahassee?" Robaina asked, calling Miami-Dade a "donor county." "They're laughing at us."



Even the Humane Society of the United States has chimed in, donating $500,000 for the anti-slots campaign because of the potential economic benefits the machines present for dog racing, which it strongly opposes.



With an estimated 2.4 million people, Miami-Dade ranks eighth among the nation's counties in population, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.



State figures show there are about 3,285 slot machines running in Florida. The addition of slots in Miami-Dade could potentially add 2,000 to that total.



Some industry observers said the Broward slots have not met expectations, partly because of the high tax rate and competition from the Seminole Tribe of Florida. The Seminoles have seven casinos in the state, including two juggernauts: the Hard Rock hotels and entertainment centers in Tampa and Hollywood.



Joseph Weinert, senior vice president of Spectrum Gaming Group in Northfield, N.J., said Wall Street investors and slot machine manufacturers have been nonplussed with the amount of money generated by Broward's slots.



"Given the relatively poor performance of slot machines in Broward, I don't think that too many people see slot machines in Miami-Dade as being an instant bonanza," Weinert said.



David Schwartz, director of the Center for Gaming Research at the University of Nevada Las Vegas, said the 50 percent tax rate "discourages investment, discourages amenities and ultimately discourages people from going there." However, Schwartz did note that the slots could have some economic benefit.



In November, the Seminole Tribe and the state agreed to allow Las Vegas-style slots, blackjack and other card games at the Indian casinos, in return for tax dollars generated by those games. Legislative leaders have challenged the agreement in court.