Analysis: Crist's attacks stretch the truth
Gov. Charlie Crist is one of the nicest guys in Florida politics. He is polite, soft-spoken and never forgets to say thank you, and he has an ability to remain calm at times others would lose their cool.



But threaten to beat him in the Senate Republican primary, and he will attack, as former state House Speaker Marco Rubio is learning. Crist, who calls himself a "happy warrior," still smiles, but he is proving he will throw anything and everything at Rubio to try to win what is becoming one of the closest watched races in the country. Many of Crist's attacks are exaggerated, take words out of context, are not true or are over the top. Rubio has also exaggerated or taken out of context some of Crist's statement or actions, but not to the same extent.



"When the going gets tough, the tough get going," Crist recently told supporters. "And we're going. And we're coming at 'em, and they haven't seen anything like this before." Moments earlier, he quoted a line from President Ronald Reagan about not confusing kindness with weakness. "Shame on the other side if they do, because we are anything but weak."



For months Crist acted as if he did not have a primary opponent. But as Rubio began steadily gaining and later passing Crist in the polls, the attacks have grown more frequent, mocking and personal, calling Rubio a fraud and untrustworthy. The attacks have covered Rubio's home equity loan, his registering as a lobbyist and his putting personal expenses on a state GOP credit card.



On Monday, Crist even suggested on a Fox News interview that Rubio might have paid $130 for a back wax at a men's salon.



"I don't know what you do at a salon when you're a guy," Crist said. "I get my haircut for 11 bucks from a guy named Carl the Barber in St. Petersburg, Fla., where I grew up. And you know, to me, that's real fiscal conservatism."



Rubio's campaign called those comments "disastrously bizarre."



A spokesman said Rubio paid $20 for a haircut with a straight razor on the neck, and he bought gift certificates for a silent auction.



Crist is trying to paint Rubio as a big spender, but sometimes exaggerates the truth. For example, Crist accused Rubio of hiring 20 aides at $100,000 salaries and spending $500,000 to renovate his office and the House cafeteria when he became speaker.



"My word, he talks about the fact that government spends too much, but yet when he had power, all he wanted to do was spend," Crist said last month between central Florida campaign events.



But Rubio actually hired five aides who were paid $100,000 or more. Another eight transferred in from other government offices. The renovation to create the House members' cafeteria cost less than $7,000 and Rubio did not spend any money to renovate his own office.



The House did move some member offices and renovated a space so budget staff members could work in the same set of offices.



"I don't know if Gov. Crist has ever been in the dining room," said current House Speaker Larry Cretul, a Republican, while standing in the modestly furnished room that has become a campaign issue. "There's a lot more important issues to talk about than this kind of stuff: Our economy, our country. If this is all there is, we're in a lot better shape than I think we are."



Rubio trailed Crist by 46 percentage points in a Quinnipiac University poll taken in May, the month before they both entered the race.



Rubio moved ahead in that poll in January, with support from 47 percent of Republican voters to Crist's 44 percent. Rubio and Crist both polled well in a head-to-head matchup with likely Democratic nominee U.S. Rep. Kendrick Meek.



"You have someone who a few months ago wouldn't even acknowledge he had an opponent, and now can't stop talking about me," Rubio said. "I think that's a sign of progress. We both have an opportunity to engage in a high-minded, issues-oriented campaign that will make the Republican Party stronger. If indeed there is a real commitment to a unified Republican Party, then let's have a debate about our principles, on ideals, about who we should be as a party."



Some other examples of Crist campaign attacks:



His campaign frequently calls Rubio a "lobbyist and politician." Rubio is a zoning and land use attorney and Miami-Dade County requires lawyers in his field to register as lobbyists while also prohibiting them from lobbying. Rubio is clearly a politician, having served as a West Miami commissioner and eight years in the House, but Crist fits the definition even more. After serving six years in the state Senate, Crist ran unsuccessfully for U.S. Senate in 1998. He then hit a winning streak: education commissioner in 2000, attorney general in 2002, governor in 2006. He now is seeking his fourth different office in as many elections.



Crist said Rubio attacked him for taking federal stimulus money and then flip-flopped by saying he would have taken it too. Rubio's criticism is not that Crist accepted the money once it passed: every Republican governor did. Rubio's complaint is that Crist endorsed President Barack Obama's plan before passage, including a joint Fort Myers appearance.



The Crist campaign asked, "How can Florida voters trust Speaker Rubio at all?" after someone close to Crist leaked confidential GOP American Express statements to reporters. Rubio says he paid for his personal expenses, though there is evidence the party may have paid for some. Rubio's use of the party card, however, pales in comparison to the use of party cards for lavish travel, meals and entertaining under Crist's hand-picked state chairman, Jim Greer. Greer's predecessor, Carole Jean Jordan, called the party's spending spree "disgusting," "obscene" and "criminal." Donors and party activists called for Greer's resignation for months because of fiscal irresponsibility, but Crist defended Greer until he resigned.



The Crist campaign points to $900,000 in debt Rubio owes as a sign he is not good with money. Rubio says the debt is mortgages on two houses and student loans. Crist has never owned a house.



But Rubio has not been entirely innocent in his attacks on Crist. In a September Web video, Rubio took a Crist quote from a television interview out of context to make it appear he said Florida's unemployment and foreclosure rate were "not that big a deal." The question Crist responded to was only about Florida losing population.



While Rubio generally focuses his criticism on policy issues, his campaign is also becoming more aggressive. The campaign repeatedly says Crist is reinventing himself and calls him a "desperate politician."