Lyons: Buchanan exonerated? Not so much
Rep. Vern Buchanan's spokeswoman contends that elections officials found Buchanan to be totally innocent of concealing the source of campaign funding. But her evidence is scant.

Congressman Vern Buchanan's spokeswoman wanted a recent Herald-Tribune news story to say Buchanan has been exonerated by the Federal Elections Commission.



Actually it is just her saying so, not the FEC, even though she did get some newspapers to go along with her overstatement about the FEC's words.



And if the word that means "proven blameless" to me also means the same thing to Sally Tibbetts, she should issue a correction. The FEC did not say that, or anything of the kind.



The news story this week was about the investigation into allegations that employees at two car dealerships owned in large part by Buchanan were encouraged in 2005 to donate to his first congressional campaign, and later were reimbursed by the dealership.



That's an unlawful trick, sometimes used to disguise the real source of campaign funding. At issue, in part, was whether Buchanan knew about or encouraged this.



He has denied it. And now, Buchanan's spokeswoman now contends that the FEC has found Buchanan to be totally innocent.



"The Congressman has been completely exonerated," Tibbetts said. "These phony accusations have been exposed as dishonest and partisan attacks," she said.



They were?



Her evidence is scant, and comes in the form of two FEC letters sent to Buchanan's lawyer, in February and March, but kept secret until now. Neither says a word about baseless partisan attacks, and the FEC has already levied fines against a Jacksonville car dealership manager and then-business partner and with Buchanan — Sam Kazran — who said Buchanan put him up to making the reimbursements.



True or not, that was hard to prove, and it appears the FEC could not do so. But nothing in the FEC's letters says the agency decided Buchanan knew nothing about the reimbursement scheme and did nothing to make it happen. In fact, the February letter says the agency "found reason to believe that Vernon G. Buchanan violated" campaign laws.



It does say the FEC eventually decided "to take no further action," a decision it does not explain.



A shortage of proof could be the likely reason. But the $70,000 in fines levied against Kazran, and a still ongoing investigation, show that the accusations of a reimbursement scheme were not considered baseless, even if it was impossible to prove or disprove Kazran's claim that Buchanan was in on it with him.



Tibbetts probably doesn't know any more than I do what FEC commissioners or investigators really believe. But surely she noticed the glaring lack of even a single sentence to the effect that Buchanan was found to be falsely accused by Kazran or anyone else.



Tom Lyons can be contacted at tom.lyons@heraldtribune.com or (941) 361-4964.