Recovery no help to Florida poverty rate, census finds
Figures also show that household incomes have not rebounded.

Florida's economic rebound has yet to reverse a stubbornly high poverty rate or grow household incomes pinched by the Great Recession, according to the latest Census Bureau data.



Figures released today show median household income and poverty levels were flat statewide and in Southwest Florida during 2012 compared with the previous year.



Florida's poverty rate of 17.1 percent in 2012 remained among the highest in the nation. Poverty in Sarasota and Manatee counties was still roughly 50 percent greater last year than during the height of the real estate boom.



Meanwhile, household income declined 10 percent locally during the recession and has yet to bounce back.



Economists point to the relatively slow pace of the economic recovery through 2012 in explaining the data. One of Florida's main economic drivers — the housing market — only began to pick up in the second half of 2012 and early 2013.



With the recovery expected to build through the end of this year and into 2014, the benefits should start to be more broadly felt, said Mekael Teshome, an economist who tracks the Florida market for PNC Financial Services Group.



But poverty and median household income are not expected to return to pre-recession levels soon. It could take years of solid job growth to compensate for the severe downturn.



“It's going to be a slow climb but it will get better,” Teshome said. “We are moving in the right direction.”



While wealthy new retirees could help boost median income levels locally, most Florida communities have struggled to attract the type of industries that could lift average salaries. Teshome does not expect that to change, noting: “It's difficult to create a different mix of jobs.”



But as the economic recovery builds and the job market improves, average wages should rise.



“Step one is to absorb all that excess labor,” Teshome said. “As the labor market tightens we'll see wage pressure going up.”



Falling income



Southwest Florida's red-hot housing market provided a major boost to income levels during the real estate boom years, with everyone from real estate agents to builders and mortgage brokers cashing in.



Median household income hit $52,996 in Manatee County and $53,796 in Sarasota County in 2007 before falling with the onset of the global recession.



Sarasota County's median household income was $48,035 last year; Manatee County's was $47,474.



As income fell, poverty worsened.



The Census Bureau reported that 12.4 percent of Sarasota County residents lived below the poverty line in 2012, compared with 7.9 percent in 2007. In Manatee County, 15.4 percent of residents lived in poverty, compared with 10.7 percent five years earlier.



One bright spot in the census data: The number of people without health insurance in Manatee County dropped from 20.2 percent to 17.6 percent between 2011 and 2012, a significant one-year decline.



Social service providers say demand for services such as rental and utility assistance has at least stabilized.



“I don't think it has gotten worse but it also hasn't gotten any better,” said Rose Chapman, director of Jewish Family & Children's Service of Sarasota-Manatee.



Chapman was approached recently by a volunteer who had spent the day fielding phone calls from struggling families. The volunteer was frustrated by the number of calls for help: 55 in one day. Many of the families were added to a waiting list. It currently takes four to six weeks to get help from JFCS.



“It hasn't let up, Chapman said. “The economy may be better for some people but that doesn't mean everyone is benefiting.”



David Sutton, director of social services at the Sarasota Salvation Army, said he has noticed more working people seeking meals.



People may be finding jobs, but it's often low-paying work in the service industry.



“There's a stretch between the wages and the cost to live,” Sutton said. “Particularly in Sarasota.”