Key donors backing Crist
SENATE CAMPAIGN: Support, even in the event of an independent run for office

Even as high-ranking state Republicans distance themselves from Gov. Charlie Crist, some of his biggest GOP donors are vowing to stick with him even if he leaves the party and runs as an independent for the U.S. Senate.

A contingent of major donors in Southwest Florida have quietly begun planning a fundraiser for Crist to send a message about how deep Crist's support is regardless of whether he runs as the Republican nominee or not, said Paul Sharff, a former Manatee County Republican Party chairman.

"We're all going to be supporting him," Sharff said a day after talking with some of those top donors.

The speculation that Crist will drop from the Republican race and run with no political affiliation continued to grow Wednesday, with some analysts saying such a move now appeared inevitable.

The lifeblood of an independent campaign would be money -- and lots of it -- because he will have to compete with Republican and Democratic party candidates for votes.

A successful U.S. Senate campaign in Florida can require a candidate to raise more than $15 million. U.S. Sen. Bill Nelson, a Democrat, spent more than $18 million in his 2006 re-election campaign.

Crist has raised more than $10 million, according to his latest campaign finance report filings, released earlier this month.

But interviews with prominent donors and other Crist supporters suggest the governor's fundraising pipeline would not dry up if he quit the Republican race.

Those standing behind Crist include Gary Kompothecras, the chiropractor behind the 1-800-ASK-GARY referral network; former Sarasota Republican Party chairmen Bob Waechter and Eric Robinson; and Bradenton developer Carlos Beruff.

Kompothecras alone has been one of the biggest financial players in the state for Republicans over the years. Through hosting fundraisers and direct giving, Kompothecras has delivered more than $1 million to Crist's campaigns.

The support comes at a time Crist is facing mass defections of top political allies. Already his longtime mentor, former U.S. Sen. Connie Mack, has publicly declared he can no longer support Crist.

U.S. Sen. George LeMieux, whom Crist appointed to the position in August, said he told Crist to stay in the GOP primary, and Crist's Lt. Gov. Jeff Kottkamp, a Republican, told a Fort Myers television station that he cannot support Crist if he runs as an independent.

"I will be supporting whoever the Republican nominee is," Kottkamp told WESH.

Crist on Wednesday said he was not concerned about the growing list of Republican leaders who are abandoning his campaign.

"No, I'm really not," he said. "All I'm ever really concerned about are the people, the people of Florida.

As for the latest defection of state Rep. Tom Grady, R-Naples, from his campaign, Crist said: "So be it."

Crist said his decision on his political future will be based on "listening to the people." He said he has been getting some encouragement.

"That they're willing to support me -- regardless -- is pretty compelling," Crist said. "So I'll just have to listen for another week and see what's best for the people of Florida."

While some of his past backers are wavering in their support of Crist as independent, two key political players in Manatee are not among them. Former state Senate President John McKay, R-Bradenton, and former Manatee Sheriff Charlie Wells said they'd prefer Crist remain in the Republican Party, but also said they would continue their support if Crist runs as an independent.

McKay, who organized a fundraiser for Crist in Lakewood Ranch last summer that brought in more than $300,000 in one night, said he will stick by Crist, whom he considers to be a personal friend. McKay and Crist served in the Florida Senate together in the 1990s.

Wells, who worked with Crist in the 1990s on legislation to force prisoners to serve more of the sentences before being released, said he owes Crist too much to abandon him now, regardless of his party. At Wells' recommendation, Crist appointed Brad Steube to be Manatee County's Sheriff after Wells retired in 2007.

"I'm going to stick with Charlie," Wells, a Republican, said. "I ain't going to forget any of that."

Crist has to decide by noon April 30 whether to run as a Republican or an independent. That is the filing deadline to get on the Senate campaign ballot.

If Crist runs as an independent, he will be able to keep his personal Republican Party registration, but will go on the November ballot with no party affiliation.

Instead of facing a tough primary campaign against front-runner Marco Rubio, Crist would go immediately to the general election where he, Rubio and Democrat Kendrick Meek would compete for votes.

Crist once had a sizable lead in public polling, but the most recent numbers show he would have a better chance of winning by running as an independent in November rather than trying to overcome a more than 20 percentage point gap with Rubio in the GOP primary.

There are signs that Crist is not relying on some of the key supporters from past campaigns to make his decision. One major fundraiser in Tallahassee said he had not spoken to the governor since last Thursday.

He said he advised the governor to consider putting off a Senate campaign until 2012. But he said the governor did not appear to be interested in that option.

Crist, who is close to his family, did say he is getting advice from his father, his wife and his sisters on his political future. But he didn't tip his hand as to the family's recommendations.

"There's a range of advice that I'm receiving in the family."

Jeremy Wallace can be reached at 361-4966 or jeremy.wallace@ heraldtribune.com.