Corey Lewandowski rallies GOP base in closing stretch of Sarasota state House race
Former Trump campaign manager makes pitch for candidate James Buchanan.

There were Make America Great Again hats sprinkled throughout the crowd, people sported Trump stickers and a chant of “lock her up” even broke out at one point.

Seeking to energize GOP voters in the closing stretch of a tight contest that has drawn national interest, Sarasota state House candidate James Buchanan appeared at a rally Sunday with two high-profile supporters of President Donald Trump.

Former Trump campaign manager Corey Lewandowski and former deputy campaign manager David Bossie urged Republicans to get out and vote for Buchanan in the special election Tuesday to send a message that Trump is still popular.

“Let me just say this, you guys have an election on Tuesday,” Lewandowski told a crowd of about 200 gathered at Dolphin Aviation in Sarasota. “The fake news is going to watch you. The failing New York Times wants to write that James Buchanan lost the seat and that Donald Trump cannot carry a candidate anymore. That’s what they want. You cannot allow it.”

Lewandowski’s pitch was yet the latest sign of how the race for a low-profile state House seat covering much of northern Saraosta County has taken on outsized significance as a bellwether for the November midterm election.

“This race has turned national,” said Sarasota state Rep. Joe Gruters, who arranged the Lewandowski rally through his role as the Sarasota GOP chair.

Prominent Democrats such as former Vice President Joe Biden and 2016 presidential candidate Martin O’Malley have weighed in to support Siesta Key attorney Margaret Good’s campaign.

Democrats are hoping to make a statement in House District 72 and build on their momentum from other special election victories around the country in districts that Trump carried. They've been pouring resources into the District 72 race. Good has outpaced Buchanan in fundraising.

“The Democrats are highly motivated,” Lewandowski told the crowd at a rally that sometimes seemed like a smaller version of Trump’s 2016 events. “They are winning elections in places where they shouldn’t … 50 seats have already changed hands from the Republicans to the Democrats since Donald Trump was elected. That should be concerning for us. Dave and I are here to make sure that one thing happens: That Buchanan goes to the state House and we don’t have another Democrat in office.”

Buchanan took the stage before Lewandowski and led off by asking the crowd: “Who here thinks President Trump’s doing a good job?”

In tying himself so closely to Trump, Buchanan risks alienating detractors of the polarizing president and further energizing Democrats.

Good’s campaign sent out a press release saying she “condemns James Buchanan for his perplexing choice of Corey Lewandowski, former disgraced Trump campaign manager and known abuser of women, to advocate for his beliefs.”

Trump fired Lewandowski shortly after securing the GOP nomination. A pugnacious political operative who proudly called himself "a fighter" Sunday and punctuated his remarks with periodic curse words, Lewandowski was charged with misdemeanor battery during the campaign after he was accused of grabbing a reporter as she approached Trump. The charge was later dropped.

Lewandowski and Bossie recently published a book about Trump's campaign. They signed copies for fans after the rally, which also featured a handful of GOP state House members and candidates for statewide office touting Buchanan. The candidate's father, U.S. Rep. Vern Buchanan, made an appearance but did not address the crowd.

State Rep. Jay Fant, a candidate for attorney general, drew applause when he asked the crowed "Are we Trumpers?" Fant also prompted the "lock her up" chant — a staple of Trump rallies — when he mentioned former Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton.

Buchanan has said little about Trump throughout the race. When asked about the president during a Herald-Tribune interview last month, he offered praise but also was quick to point out that he disagreed with Trump on certain issues and has concerns about his temperament.

Some Republicans who support Buchanan have quietly questioned whether appearing with someone like Lewandowski will benefit Buchanan in District 72. The district went for Trump by 4.4 percentage points and has 12,060 more Republican than Democrats, but it also has more than 30,000 independent voters who could swing the election.

Trump’s approval among Republicans is at 90 percent, according to the most recent weekly average of Gallup’s daily tracking poll, but only 33 percent of independents approve of the president.

Republicans are betting that they can win the race by motivating Trump supporters and boosting GOP turnout.

Gruters acknowledged that "some people are second-guessing my decision to bring in Corey Lewandowski."

“Yes, we’re embracing (Trump) because we think people will respond well to him,” Gruters said, adding: “It’s all about turning out the base.”

Asked about tying himself to Trump so dramatically in the closing stretch of the campaign, Buchanan said “the economy’s roaring, we got tax reform done and they’re talking about putting together an immigration package, so I think he’s done a great job so far.”

Republicans likely need a strong Election Day turnout Tuesday to win the contest, which also includes Libertarian candidate Alison Foxall.

Gruters said he believes Buchanan is losing right now based on the number of Republicans, Democrats and independents who have casts absentee ballots and participated in in-person early voting.

But Democrats often outperform Republicans in early voting, and Republicans often do better on Election Day.

“My guess is we’re down,” Gruters said. “The question is can Republicans get to the polls and can a rally like this make a difference?”

Buchanan said the District 72 state House race “sets the tone for 2018, so that’s why it’s so important that we win.”

“It’s all going to come down to Election Day,” he added.