Can it be that Florida's now No. 3?
Florida last month likely edged New York to become the third most populous state in the nation, based on U.S. Census Bureau estimates.

Southwest Florida's population growth maintained a steady trajectory from 2010 to 2013, despite the collapse of the region's housing market eight years ago and the toll of a recession that cut deeper here than in much of the country.



In all, more than 43,000 new residents moved to Sarasota, Manatee and Charlotte counties during that three-year period — about 14,000 annually.



Manatee led the region, growing by some 17 new residents a day, on average.



The region's growth, according to U.S. Census Bureau estimates released Wednesday, dovetailed with that of Florida's during the period from July 2010 to July 2013.



As a result, Florida last month likely edged New York to become the third most populous state in the nation, based on bureau estimates and a Herald-Tribune analysis of the data.



During that three-year period, Florida's population grew by an average of 645 people daily, while New York's grew by some of 231 a day.



Florida, with an estimated population of 19.55 million as of July 1, had been inching toward New York for several years. Last summer, New York had a total estimated population of 19.65 million.



“If you look at the recent trends, it certainly appeared that Florida would pass New York somewhere between July 2013 and June of 2014,” said Stan Smith, population program director at the University of Florida's Bureau of Economic and Business Research.



California remains the most populous state, with 38.3 million residents, followed by Texas, with 26.4 million. Illinois, now fifth, has 12.9 million.



Population counts are significant.



They directly tie into $400 billion that the federal government disburses to states every year — much of it in the form of program-based funding — based on the fluctuating growth or losses.



The bitter winter experienced throughout Northeast and Mid-Atlantic states this year may have amplified Florida's population growth.



“You factor in this kind of winter, and you get a bunch of New Yorkers riding in on the polar vortex,” said University of Central Florida economist Sean Snaith.



“It is like a two-person swing. New York loses somebody and we gain somebody.”



Evolving populations also have an impact on state tax collections, said Jack McCabe, an independent real estate analyst based in Deerfield Beach.



“Aside from bragging rights, increased population does mean increased revenue into the state budget,” McCabe said.



Florida growth could boost private business for years to come.



“It will have real economic implications,” said Moody's Analytics economist Chris Lafakis, who covers Florida for the company.



“If your population is growing three times as fast as the other guy's, then guess what? Your service sector is going to be growing at a faster rate as well.”



The influx of population likely spreads job growth across numerous economic sectors.



“You have more services that need to be provided: health care, retail trade, construction, hospitality, wholesale trade, the size of government,” Lafakis said.



Florida's largest population growth has occurred in already heavily populated corridors — along Interstate 4 from Tampa to Orlando, and in South Florida, from Miami-Dade County north to Palm Beach County.



Miami-Dade added roughly 103 residents each day in the three-year period beginning July 1, 2010, a figure that was the highest for any county in the state, based on the census estimates.



Broward County, home to Fort Lauderdale, added an average of 79 residents per day, while Palm Beach County notched an additional 45.



Orlando's Orange County, by comparison, grew by about 70 residents a day. Hillsborough County, home to Tampa, added 53.



Manatee County added 17 people each day over that three-year span, with Sarasota County growing by nine people daily.



Charlotte County, with fewer population centers and housing options, added four residents a day, on average.



That population influx kept census figures on the rise, despite the fact that deaths outpaced births in Southwest Florida because of the area's older-skewing demographic.



Deaths outpaced births by 3,300 annually in the three-county area from July 2010 to July 2013, though Manatee neared the break-even point each year.



That natural decline, however, was more than offset by the number of people who moved to the area compared with those who moved away.