Brooks Brothers Home Collection debuts online
The Brooks Brothers Home Collection, featuring the clothier's classic twills, stripes, silks and pinstripes applied to bed, bath and decorative pillows, are now being offered exclusively online at the company's retail website.

The Tie Stripe Silk Twill pillow collection, crafted of English silk and filled with a blend of white duck feathers and down, is offered in three tie patterns, each in three color combinations. The Tie pillows retail from $248 for a 16" square Vertical Jockey Stripe, to $288 for a 20" square Horizontal Guard Stripe.

Two bedding collections of 330-thread count Supima cotton include the Blue Yarn-dye Bedding Collection, featuring a selection of Brooks' classic shirt fabrics (houndstooth, windowpane, glen plaid, pinstripe), and the Herringbone Bedding Collection, in white with three-row embroidered border of navy and red, retailing from $68 for two standard pillow cases to $298 for the King Duvet Cover.

The herringbone-bordered terry bath collection, from American-grown Supima cotton and hydro-cotton spun yarn, is offered in 12 colors, at prices ranging from $9 for a washcloth to $48 for a 40x70 bath sheet.

View the complete collection here.

Earlier this year, Brooks Brothers Communications Director Arthur Wayne told Home Accents Today the company would start out testing a limited number of home accessories on its website this fall. "This will include pillows, lampshades, sheets and towels and is in addition to some home items which are already available," Wayne said.

Brooks Brothers was founded in 1818 when Henry Sands Brooks opened H. & D.H. Brooks & Company on the corner of Catherine and Cherry Streets in New York City. The Brooks family is credited for introducing the ready-to-wear suit to America and for inventing the button-down dress shirt collar. Brooks Brothers granted Ralph Lauren, once a salesman at the Madison Avenue store, the right to use the Polo trademark from its original polo shirts. Most of Brooks Brothers' clothing is imported. The clothier's necktie silks are woven in England or Italy and the ties are still "cut and piled" at the Brooks Brothers tie factory in Long Island City, New York. Winthrop Holly Brooks was the last member of the Brooks family to head the company, which she did until 1946. Today the New York City-based company is owned by Retail Brand Alliance, a spinoff of Luxottica. (from Wikipedia)