WELCOME TO FORT HOOD
Like the State of Texas, Fort Hood is big and boasts of being the largest active duty armored post in the United States Armed Services. Fort Hood is nicknamed The Great Place because of the quality of life the post and area offer Soldiers and their families. These qualities are important, especially with home-basing initiatives, frequent deployments and family stability and support.

Soldiers assigned to Fort Hood can expect to have one of the highest quality of life standards in the Army. New housing, quality medical care, thriving communities, recreation and schools combine to ensure that Fort Hood is The Great Place.

Fort Hood covers a total of 340-square miles and supports multiple units, a corps headquarters and a robust mobilization mission. Fort Hood also meets the training and support requirements for many smaller units and organizations, thus maintaining a vital defense force for the United States of America.

Fort Hood rests in the beautiful 'hill and lake' country of Central Texas between Killeen and Copperas Cove and is approximately 60 miles north of the capital city of Austin, 50 miles south of Waco, 160 miles south of Dallas, and 150 miles north of San Antonio.

For everyone who enjoys the outdoors, The Great Place is the ideal location, because of warm winters and hot summers. The nearby lakes, Belton and Stillhouse, offer year round outdoor recreation activities.

Fort Hood also captures the attention of the entertainment industry and is the frequent host of celebrities, entertainers and theatrical shows from national dance teams. There are also many opportunities to enjoy the Central Texas atmosphere at Fort Hood, as local talent is frequently performing at Fort Hood clubs.

With all the current deployments, be sure to make the most of available down time at Fort Hood. The Fort Hood experience is only limited by the individual. So, make the most of the time here!

Click here to view a copy of the current Off-Limits Establishments/Areas OPORD