Sara Lee Corporation

History

Businessman Nathan Cummings bought the C. D. Kenny Co., a Baltimore coffee, tea, and sugar wholesaler, in 1939. Cummings soon purchased several grocery firms and later changed the company's name to Consolidated Grocers (1945). The operation went public in 1946 and was renamed Consolidated Foods Corp. (CFC) in 1954.

Two years later CFC bought the Kitchens of Sara Lee, a Chicago bakery founded by Charles Lubin in 1951. Introduced in 1949 and named after Lubin's daughter, Sara Lee cheesecake had become the bakery's most popular product.

In 1968 CFC sold its Eagle Complex, which included Piggly Wiggly Midwest supermarkets and Eagle Food Centers, and it bought Bryan Foods. The firm continued to buy and sell businesses in the US, including beverage, appliance, and chemical companies. Some major US purchases were Hanes Corp. (1979), Jimmy Dean Meat Co. (1984), Coach Leatherware International (1985), and Champion Products (athletic knitwear, 1989). Cummings served as president until 1970.

CFC began building its international markets with its first European acquisition in 1962. Following that purchase, it expanded its global presence with the purchases of Douwe Egberts (coffee, tea, and tobacco; the Netherlands; 1978), Nicholas Kiwi (shoe care and pharmaceuticals, Australia, 1984), and Dim (hosiery and underwear, France, 1989).

Using one of its most respected brand names to enhance the public's awareness of the company, CFC changed its name to Sara Lee in 1985. It continued making acquisitions in the 1990s, including Playtex Apparel.

In 1997 Sara Lee began a restructuring that included selling noncore businesses and increasing its use of outsourcing, closed more than 90 manufacturing and distribution facilities, and laid off 9,400 employees (about 7% of its workforce). It also closed its Mark Cross leather goods business.

Sara Lee sold its loose tobacco business (Amphora, Drum, Van Nelle) in 1998 to the UK's Imperial Tobacco for $1.1 billion; bought undergarments maker Strouse, Adler; and purchased Quaker Oats ' coffee marketer, Continental Coffee Products. Also that year Sara Lee recalled hot dogs and packaged meats produced by its Bil Mar Foods unit after the items were linked to nearly two dozen fatal food-poisoning cases. (The company settled class-action suits over the incident in 2000.)

While closing more than 100 facilities, during 1999 Sara Lee continued acquiring, including coffee company Chock Full o'Nuts, and the Hills Bros., MJB, and Chase & Sanborn coffee operations from Nestlé . It also bought Royal Ahold 's Dutch meat processing units, Meester and Nistria; J.E. Morgan Knitting Mills (maker of Duofold thermal underwear); and the UK's leading intimate apparel and underwear producer, Courtaulds Textiles. (It sold Courtaulds International Fabrics unit in April 2001 to Spanish fabric maker Dogi.)

During 2000 Sara Lee spun off its Coach (leather goods) business and sold off its foodservice operation, PYA/Monarch, to a Royal Ahold subsidiary as the first move to refocus on its core brands. In 2000 president Steven McMillan added the CEO title to his duties; he was named chairman that October.

In 2001 Sara Lee continued to dispose of noncore operations. However, in that August it acquired The Earthgrains Company, the second-largest fresh-bread company in the US; the combined bakery operations of the companies were renamed the Sara Lee Bakery Group.

The Sara Lee Bakery Group was slapped with a $5.25 million fine in 2003 when the EPA determined that ozone-depleting chemicals were leaking from refrigeration systems in many of its plants. The company agreed to pay the fine and spend an additional $5 million on repairs. Due to falling sales caused by more casual dressing habits, the company that year also sold off its Italian hosiery business, which had sold its products in France, Italy, and Spain.

In 2005 McMillan retired and handed over the titles of president, CEO, and chairman to Brenda Barnes, who instituted a total reorganization of the company. Sara Lee is still in the process of this reorganization.

In 2006 Sara Lee sold off its European packaged meats business. Turning to its apparel operations, the company sold its $1.2 billion European apparel business to Florida's Sun Capital Partners . The 2006 deal included the Dim, Playtex, Wonderbra, Abanderado, Nur Die, and Unno brands. (Sara Lee had already sold its 23% stake in Delta Galil Industries , an Israeli clothing manufacturer, to GMM Capital for more than $27 million in 2005.)

In 2009 Sara Lee sold its commercial coffee operation, Superior Coffee, to Farmer Bros. for $45 million. In addition to Superior, other coffee brands included in the sale were Cain's, Ireland, Justin Lloyd, McGarvey, Metropolitan, Prebica, Suntipt (in the US only), Wechsler, Cafe Royal, and Royal Kona. Sara Lee kept its Douwe Egberts and Java Coast brands, which are sold through large wholesalers and food suppliers rather than a distributor network.

In mid-2010 Sara Lee sold its European air-freshener business, including Ambi Pur, to Procter & Gamble for €320 million ($470 million). Sara Lee said it would use the proceeds to invest in its core food businesses and buy back stock. Abandoning a decision to retain its International Household and Body Care business, Sara Lee sold its global personal care and European laundry brands to Unilever for €1.2 billion (equal to $1.5 billion) in cash in late 2010. The deal included the Sanex, Duschdas, Radox, and Switzal brands. Additionally, in 2010 the company completed the sale of its 51% stake in the Godrej joint venture in India to its partner there for €185 million ($230 million).

Brenda Barnes stepped down as chairman and CEO of the company in August for medical reasons.