Texas House of Representatives
State Representative Brooks Landgraf proudly represents District 81 in the Texas House of Representatives, where he serves on the Energy Resources Committee, the Environmental Regulation Committee, and the Local & Consent Calendars Committee.



Brooks is a native son of Odessa. His family has been ranching in West Texas for five generations, and Brooks helps manage the family's cow-calf operation and mineral interests. Brooks is also an experienced business lawyer who has worked in the oil and gas and healthcare industries. Currently, Brooks practices law at Todd, Barron, Thomason, Hudman & Bebout, P.C.



A Permian High School alum, Brooks attended Texas A&M; University, where he received U.S. Army training in the Corps of Cadets. After graduating cum laude from Texas A&M;, Landgraf earned his law degree from the St. Mary's School of Law in San Antonio, where he also served as the editor-in-chief of the law review.



Following law school, Brooks immediately returned home to West Texas and represented energy producers and other local businesses while working in private practice. Brooks was named volunteer of the year by Legal Aid for his pro bono efforts.



Brooks has served the people of Andrews, Ector, Ward and Winkler counties in the Texas House of Representatives since 2015. He quickly became known for his strong work ethic, commitment to his district and advocacy for conservative, practical solutions. Brooks has fought to improve highways and schools in West Texas while working to repeal burdensome regulations that harm the Permian Basin's oil and gas industry. Earning many accolades for his work in the Legislature, including the coveted "Champion of Free Enterprise" award two legislative sessions in a row, Brooks demonstrated the approach and principles that earned him the respect of his colleagues.



Governor Greg Abbott has praised Brooks for his "tireless efforts" and leadership in the Legislature where he played a key role in what Abbott called "the most conservative legislative session we've ever seen" in Texas.



Brooks is a proud Eagle Scout and is dedicated to serving the community that has given him so much. He has been active on several local non-profit boards in West Texas. In 2017, Brooks was named to the inaugural class of "Odessa Under 40" by the Young Professionals of Odessa.



Brooks and his wife, Shelby, whose family is from Andrews, have one daughter, Hollis Rose, and are proud to call West Texas their home. They enjoy volunteering together for local charities, and the family loves spending time together working on the family cattle ranch. They attend St. Elizabeth Ann Seton Catholic Church in Odessa.