Audit finds myriad problems with cancer agency grant
Photo: Harry Cabluck, STF State Auditor John Keel found problems with the approval of a $25.2...

The state auditor has identified a third troubling grant awarded by the state cancer agency, delivering another blow to the beleaguered program.

Auditor John Keel's withering report also found that the taxpayer-funded Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas repeatedly failed to follow its own rules as it handed out hundreds of millions of dollars.

In response to the report, the cancer agency's interim executive director insisted its problems were not widespread.

"The report paints an accurate picture of an agency in the early stages of its development," wrote Wayne Roberts in a Jan. 24 letter to Keel. "Although serious, the missteps appear to have only affected a few of CPRIT's awards."

Roberts promised the agency would abide by the auditor's sweeping recommendations to increase transparency and accountability.

More Information List of problems at cancer agency Among the findings from the state audit of the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas: 1 While the cancer agency developed monitoring tools for tracking the dates on which grantees' annual progress reports were due and received, it could not show that it used those monitoring tools consistently. It did not receive 12 of 20 annual progress reports that were due between September 2011 and June 2012. 1The cancer agency established a review process to assess the adequacy of grantees' financial management. However, as of June 2012, the cancer agency had not performed such reviews for any of the 487 grants totaling approximately $683 million that CPRIT had awarded. 1 The cancer agency had no clear policies for extending grants. Three of the four extended grants that included provisions for extending grants received extensions that were longer than the six-month maximum for extensions specified in those grants. 1 Texas law requires a grantee to have funds equal to one-half the amount of the grant dedicated to the research that is the subject of the grant. However, the cancer agency did not verify the availability of matching funds. During site visits to five grantees, auditors identified two methodologies permitted by the cancer agency that allow a grantee to report funds that were not used on a CPRIT-funded research project as matching funds. 1 Jacqueline Northcut, president of Texas BioAlliance, which provides "virtual management company services" to the cancer agency, was a senior manager on a $20 million combined grant application to CPRIT from M.D. Anderson and Rice University to create an incubator. In her Texas BioAlliance role consulting for the cancer agency, Northcut paid herself at a rate of $270 per hour. 1 This virtual management was to include an entrepreneur in residence program and the contract with Texas BioAlliance was increased to $1.1 million to create four such positions. However, as of July 2012 only one such position was created. Source: State audit of CPRIT

The audit's most significant revelation concerns the cancer agency's biggest grant, $25.2 million awarded in June 2010 to the Statewide Clinical Trials Network of Texas, which was created to speed up the process by which clinical trials are done for cancer drugs.

Like other grants submitted to the agency, the clinical trials network received a score on a scale of 1 (very good) to 5 from out-of-state scientists hired to review the merits of proposals.

The clinical trials network grant got a 4.64, the auditor found. It was nevertheless fully recommended by the cancer agency's executive director at the time, Bill Gimson, to the oversight committee, which unanimously approved it.

Scores compared

The auditor also reviewed the scores of 44 other applications for similar grants during the same period. Many that did not get funded scored substantially higher than the clinical trials network. The six other applications that did receive awards at the same time received scores ranging from 1.50 to 2.93.

The clinical trials network did not actually exist when the grant was approved, so it was awarded to the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in June 2010. An M.D. Anderson researcher originally submitted the proposal.

"It is unclear what allowed CPRIT to transfer the award from the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center to The Clinical Trials Network of Texas," the audit states.

M.D. Anderson officials say they never received money from the cancer agency. The clinical trials network began receiving funds after its creation in August 2010. It then failed to submit timely reports on how it used the cancer agency's funding.

But, the auditor found, the checks kept coming, even in the form of advance payments when only reimbursements were allowed.

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below. Texas

The audit also found that the grant's "receiving agent" was Carolyn Bacon Dickson, the executive director of the O'Donnell Foundation. The same foundation, tied to Dallas philanthropist Peter O'Donnell, has given $1.6 million to the CPRIT Foundation that supplements salaries for decision makers at the agency.

Finally, the audit uncovered significant so-called "unallowable costs," which means the network used its grant funding for inappropriate purposes. Among the $300,000 in these costs were bonuses, travel, decorations and furniture.

The cancer agency never sought to recoup those expenses.

"The report from the state auditor's office serves as another reminder that CPRIT is in need of significant change," said Texas House Speaker Joe Straus, who has indicated the audit will serve as a blueprint for re-crafting the agency.

Honorarium payments

Lucy Nashed, a spokeswoman for Gov. Rick Perry, noted that the report "further details concerns with the agency's management of taxpayer dollars," but said the governor is "committed to working with lawmakers to ensure CPRIT continues its core mission."

And Rep. Jim Keffer, R-Eastland, co-author of the legislation that created the agency, said, "I am disturbed by the auditor's findings, but appreciate the clear path put forward by his office to get this agency back on track."

The audit also noted the widely reported problems with two commercial grants awarded by the cancer agency that were improperly reviewed: $20 million for an incubator to the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center and Rice University, and $11 million to Dallas-based Peloton Therapeutics.

$200 vs. $2,000 a day

The cancer agency says it goes to great lengths to ensure its grant review process is free from conflicts of interest, and accordingly requires out-of-state reviewers to rate applications.

The auditor found that while reviewers of scientific and prevention grants were, indeed, from out of state, that wasn't always true of those who reviewed commercial grants - including the grants to M.D. Anderson and Peloton.

Nearly 40 percent of the agency's commercialization review council had their honorarium payments sent to Texas addresses, the audit found.

"By not holding its commercialization review council to the same standards as its prevention and scientific review councils, CPRIT increases the risk that commercialization grant decisions may be impaired or influenced by financial or personal interests that commercialization peer reviewers may have in Texas," the audit states.

The agency also paid significantly higher honorariums to its reviewers.

The National Cancer Institute reimburses its out-of-area reviewers, at most, $200 a day. The cancer agency paid review committee members $2,000 per day, not including travel costs.

As part of the audit more than three dozen recommendations were made to legislators and the cancer agency.

"I'm pleased to see that the recommendations made by the State Auditor's Office echo the reforms in my draft legislation," said Sen. Wendy Davis, D-Fort Worth. "Particularly distressing are the findings regarding CPRIT's relationship with (the clinical trials network), and the accountability lapses related to the CPRIT Foundation."