Houston recognized for program that helps homeless veterans
The same day federal officials acknowledged they would might not meet President Barack Obama's ambitious goal to end veteran homelessness nationwide by the end of 2015, they also praised efforts by a handful of communities that have, including the city of Houston.

Three Cabinet secretaries joined Mayor Annise Parker on Monday to tout the city's program, which leaders said essentially ended the problem here.

"The Houston region has come together as a team to transform our homeless response system to effectively end veteran homelessness," Mayor Annise Parker told a cheering, flag-waving audience at Union Station.

In 2010, when Obama issued the goal, there had been approximately 75,000 homeless veterans across the country. Since then, that number has dropped by about 33 percent.

Houston has the second highest population of veterans in the country and homeless veterans made up a sizeable chunk of the approximately 10,000 or so people living on the streets and in shelters every year. The city's homeless population overall has dropped steadily since 2011 when more than 8,500 people were counted during that year's annual Point-in-Time count of the region's homeless.

Approximately 4,500 people were counted in this year's survey, said Mandy Chapman Semple, special assistant to the mayor for homeless initiatives. While veterans may fall into homelessness, Chapman Semple said city workers had whittled the list of veterans who were homeless and unwilling to seek housing and other support down to just eight people.

"If we were going to succeed ... we had to do more than end just end homelessness for veterans we were seeing today, we had to put a system in place that would work going into the future," Parker said. "Today, that system is in place, and there is not going to be another veteran that stays on the streets of Houston for lack of resources."

City officials acknowledge that there will always be homeless people in Houston, but now, adequate resources are available to house any veteran who becomes homeless and seeks help.

Three-city tour

Three Cabinet secretaries - Julian Castro of the Department of Housing and Urban Development; Bob McDonald from the Department of Veterans Affairs; and Thomas Perez of the Department of Labor - along with Interagency Council on Homelessness Executive Director Matthew Doherty, joined Parker at the first stop of a three-city tour over the next two days to tout efforts across the country to address a problem that has stymied communities nationwide for decades.

"Our nations veterans made a solemn vow to defend our nation, and they held up their end up their end of the bargain," Castro said. "We must always, as a nation, return what they have given to us."

One of the most challenging issues in Houston has been to find the resources for veterans who were not eligible for VA programs because of their discharge status, but city officials say they have dealt with that problem.

With the goal of ending veteran homelessness nationally fast approaching, federal officials backpedaled Monday from that hard and fast deadline.

"We're fixated on getting to the goal eventually and not on getting there by Jan. 1," McDonald told The Military Times on Monday. "What's important is to build a system that can last … and not to pick a specific day."

But here in Houston, almost three dozen organizations working together have helped more than 3,650 veterans find housing over the last three years in Harris and Fort Bend counties.

At Monday's event, veterans spoke of living out of their cars and struggling with post traumatic stress disorder and the fresh start housing had given them.

Among them was Lyn Smith-Ricks.

When she joined the military in 2008, she dreamed of a career as a civil affairs specialist in the U.S. Army. Six months later, an injury in basic training dashed all that, forcing her to have surgery, and ultimately, a medical discharge.

A fresh start

After her relationship soured, she soon found herself jobless and homeless, joining the ranks of hundreds of veterans in Houston - and thousands across the country - struggling or living on the streets. She lived with relatives, and in an empty apartment.

The situation caused her to despair, to contemplate running away from her family, even suicide, she said.

Instead, her sister helped her get in touch with caseworkers at the Michael E. DeBakey center, where she got help finding housing and job training.

Had she not, "I probably would be lost in the world, somewhere," said the quiet 35-year-old, who now lives with her husband and children.

Housing "stabilized us," said Smith-Ricks, who recently celebrated her second wedding anniversary, is once again employed, and has long since stopped needing housing assistance from the VA.

The 'ultimate goal'

Dozens of federal and local agencies and nonprofit groups partnered in Houston's system, "The Way Home," which city officials said helped create faster entry for homeless individuals into housing, and a more coordinated approach dealing with the challenges for homeless people.

City officials said a major challenge was creating a sustainable method to help people who become homeless.

Marilyn Brown, president of the Coalition for the Homeless of Houston - Harris County said the next step would be taking lessons learned from dealing with the challenge of veteran homelessness and continuing to apply it to the rest of the city's homeless population.

"Once we enter this steady state, with no one having to be without permanent housing for longer than 30 days, that's the ultimate goal of 'The Way Home,' " Brown said.