Republican discontent continues despite the party's dominance in Texas
AUSTIN - Republicans dominate Texas politics, but that hardly means there is peace in the valley within their ranks.

What started as a loose band of tea party Republicans tossing jabs at one of the longest-serving GOP leaders in Texas is on the cusp of becoming an all-out civil war.

More than 50 county Republican Party organizations - including the Harris County Republican Party just last month - have passed rebukes and "no confidence" resolutions to House Speaker Joe Straus, the San Antonio Republican who has been among the state's top three GOP leaders since 2009.

And even in Straus' home county, Bexar County Republicans are leading an effort for an all-out public censure of Straus to hold him accountable for the failure of the so-called bathroom bill and other items on some GOP agendas.

The possible censure will be before the Bexar County Republican Party's executive committee on Oct. 9 and would go to the state party if approved.

But while Straus is the immediate target, those in trenches say it's about more than him.

"There is a kind of civil war in the Republican Party," said Dale Huls, a tea party Republican from Clear Lake who sponsored the no-confidence resolution in Harris County. "The same thing in Washington is happening in Austin. They both have a swamp that needs to be drained."

Republicans everywhere are on notice, he said.

"We're changing the culture of what it means to be a Republican in this state," Huls said.

'Eating their own'

On one side, tea party-brand Republicans have celebrated a socially provocative agenda that focuses on bathroom privacy policies, making it harder to get abortions and celebrating immigration reforms that have antagonized the state's growing Hispanic population.

On the other side are business-first Republicans who say the driving force in Texas politics should be about jobs and how to grow them.

It's an internal war that not all Republicans are comfortable with.

In San Antonio, Bexar County Republican Party Chairman Robert Stovall said he is stunned that members of his own party seem determined to attack other Republicans, including Straus, a member of the Bexar County Republican Party's Hall of Fame.

"He's been leading the fight for a long time," Stovall said of Straus. "It's a little puzzling to have some of our own party eating their own."

Even in Bexar County, though, some members of the party succeeded in passing a resolution calling for Straus to be replaced as speaker. By a 36-28 vote in August, the Bexar County executive committee backed a resolution calling for a "change in leadership in the Texas House speakership" even though it would mean less political clout for San Antonio. The last Bexar County resident to hold the speaker's post was Democrat Chester Terrell in 1915.

Stovall said the August vote against Straus was a surprise addition late during the meeting and that most members had left when it came up. Stovall said he plans to have a new resolution up on Oct. 9 that will declare public support for the speaker - a counter to the censure.

And last month, state Rep. Phil King, a Fort Worth-area Republican, announced plans to run for speaker against Straus.

To be sure, Straus has faced opposition before and had little trouble prevailing. In 2015, he defeated then-Rep. Scott Turner by a 128-19 margin among House members to earn his fourth term as leader of the House.

He was elected to a record-tying fifth term at the start of 2017 on a 150-0 vote.

Internal divides

Perhaps no issue has accelerated the divide in the party as much as the bathroom bill.

In both the regular session and the special summer session, the Senate passed legislation that would have barred school districts from allowing transgender children from using the bathroom they identify with.

Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick and other Senate leaders called the legislation a matter of protecting the privacy of women and girls and stopping exploitation of transgender bathroom policies. But the bill was vocally opposed by some of the biggest businesses in Texas, who also happen to be the biggest campaign donors to Texas Republicans.

Those businesses said the legislation could trigger boycotts of the state and make it harder for Texas to attract top talent.

In the special session, the House never brought the bathroom bill to a vote and Straus made it clear in an interview with the New Yorker that he opposed the bill.

"I'm disgusted by all this. Tell the lieutenant governor I don't want the suicide of a single Texan on my hands," Straus was quoted saying.

When the special session ended in August, Patrick personally called out Straus for the failure of that bill.

"It was the speaker's personal politics," said Patrick, a former radio talk show host.

Straus has helped add to the political tension by appearing to encourage a room full of school board members to run for the state Senate earlier this year. Just last week, Kristin Tassin, the president of the Fort Bend ISD school board, announced she would run against state Sen. Joan Huffman, R-Houston, in a GOP primary in 2018. Straus had specifically praised Tassin during the speech before the Texas Association of School Boards.

Gov. Greg Abbott has joined the fight against Straus as well, telling a talk show audience after the special session ended in August that the House needed more members willing to buck the speaker's priorities.

"We've got to either make sure we have the current speaker support those principles, or we've got to get the votes in the House to make sure we're going to get those principles passed," Abbott said.

Republicans say the divisions are actually a sign of health within the party. Republican consultant Eric Bearse said the GOP is so dominant that the focus is less on Democrats and more on internal divides within the party.

"In one-party states, the ruling party often cannibalizes itself," said Bearse, who has worked for former Gov. Rick Perry and Straus.

If Democrats were more competitive, the discussions might be broader, her said. Instead, Republicans end up in mini-wars over narrow areas of public policy.

"You end up focusing on bedrooms and bathrooms instead of kids classrooms," Bearse said.

'Fans of free speech'

Republican Party of Texas Chairman James Dickey said he doesn't see the votes of no confidence or even the possible censure proposal of a sitting Republican leader as a problem.

He said the discussion shows that members of the party are free to speak up, and he noted five of the GOP's top 10 platform items passed during the special session.

"As Republicans we are big fans of free speech and open discussions," Dickey said. "I'd argue it is probably a good thing to be able to express these issues openly."

A broader discussion about what Republicans want the party to represent is ongoing, Huls said. He said the growing power of the grassroots is responsible for helping change the State Republican Party's leadership and making changes to party rules to improve the chances of more conservative Republicans winning future House Speakers races.

Huls said if anything shows the changing tide, it's the Harris County party vote on Straus.

"Years ago we tried to get something like this going, but it was not taken seriously," Huls said. "But now its passing with no vocal opposition."