Surging Cruz put on defense over surveillance law
Photo: Scott Morgan, FRE ﻿Sen. Ted Cruz finds himself increasingly on the defensive for...

WASHINGTON - As concerns over home-grown terrorism push to the forefront of a tightening presidential race, Texas Republican Ted Cruz finds himself increasingly on the defensive for backing legislation that critics say weakened the government's ability to track potential attackers.

At the crux of the debate is the USA Freedom Act, a law passed last June that sets limits on the mass collection of phone records and other telecommunications "metadata" - that is, registers of calls, though not their contents.

The law ended a more intrusive program that raised alarms over privacy after it was brought to light by former National Security Agency worker Edward Snowden.

In the wake of last week's mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., and reports that the historical calling records in the case are now off-limits to FBI investigators, several GOP rivals have taken aim at the USA Freedom Act in general, and Cruz in particular.

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below.

The question came up Monday in an interview with nationally syndicated radio host Mike Gallagher, who questioned Cruz about the need to give the intelligence community the ability to monitor the calls, texts and emails "for example, (of)a homegrown terrorist who's living in San Bernardino."

Replied Cruz: "Absolutely, and what the USA Freedom Act did is strengthen our ability to do so."

But a host of critics, particularly rivals Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio, who is neck-and-neck with Cruz in some polls, charge that the USA Freedom Act did exactly the opposite.

Rubio's new attack line mirrors his recent sparring with Cruz over U.S. policy in Syria and defense spending. It also comes as Cruz commands the top spot in the latest Monmouth University poll of likely Iowa Republican caucusgoers – his first lead in any early state poll of the 2016 cycle.

Cruz registered 24 percent support in the Republican contest, marking a clear lead over past poll leader Donald Trump, at 19 percent in the Monmouth poll released Monday. Rubio followed at 17 percent, with a skidding Ben Carson now at 13 percent. Jeb Bush stood at 6 percent, and Rand Paul was at 4 percent.

'Critical information'

As Carson falls and the race reshuffles, Rubio cited a new Associated Press story over the weekend reporting that the government's ability to review five years' worth of telephone records for the married couple involved in the California massacre lapsed just four days earlier when the National Security Agency's mass surveillance program was formally shut down.

"Just four days before the terrorist attack in California this week, the USA Freedom Act limited our access to critical information about potential threats," Rubio said. "Because too many in Washington have failed to grasp the nature of this enemy, we have less access to intelligence information now than we did just days ago."

In a CBS interview on Friday, the Florida Republican said that was why he opposed the USA Freedom Act in the Senate. "It took away the right to collect metadata, which means that we can now not access the phone records of individuals that we either suspect of being involved in terrorism or who carry out an attack to see who they were coordinating or talking to."

The Cruz campaign says the charge is false because U.S. intelligence services can still track terrorist suspects and access their phone records through court order.

Responding to Rubio, the Cruz campaign cited a letter in May by the Director of National Intelligence James Clapper, who told Congress that the intelligence community believes that the USA Freedom Act "preserves the essential operational capabilities of the telephone metadata program and enhances other intelligence capabilities needed to protect our nation and its partners."

Cruz campaign national chairman Chad Sweet, who also served in the CIA's National Clandestine Service and as chief of staff at the Department of Homeland Security, also weighed in, arguing that it's inaccurate to assert that counterterrorism officials can't target someone who carries out an attack.

"The USA Freedom Act preserves America's ability to track down, kill or prosecute America's enemies, particularly those who have carried out attacks," he said.

Older records off-limits

But in pressing the attack, the Rubio campaign has used Cruz's own words against him, citing an interview on Fox News last week where the Texas Republican boasted about ending the government's collection of metadata.

"What the USA Freedom Act did was two things," Cruz said. "Number one, it ended the federal government's bulk collection of phone metadata. It ended the federal government having your cellphone information and my cellphone information."

In an email to reporters Friday, Rubio aide Alex Conant said "the truth is that because of Senator Cruz's legislation, the federal government can only access terrorists' metadata by jumping through hoops that are extensive & not conducive to fast-moving investigations. In some cases, the phone companies may not maintain the data and/or provide access to it."

The Associated Press story cited by Rubio noted that under the new USA Freedom Act, authorities are limited to roughly two years' worth of calling records for the California attackers, and that those records must come directly from a phone company. Under a recent shutdown order by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, the NSA's longer historical calling records are now off-limits to investigators, even with a warrant.

FBI Director James Comey declined to tell the Associated Press whether the NSA program's shutdown affected the government's terrorism investigation in California.

"I won't answer, because we don't talk about the investigative techniques we use," Comey said. "I'm not going to characterize it."

But last week's fatal shooting of 14 people in California have prompted new calls for reviewing the USA Freedom Act. Bush, criticizing President Barack Obama's Sunday night terrorism address, told Fox News Monday that the president "should have said that we should restore the metadata program … to make sure that we're safe here in the homeland."