Lawmakers collect pay for expenses in recess
AUSTIN - After a two-week hiatus smack-dab in the middle of the Legislature's special session, the Texas House returned to work Monday - for all of an hour or so.

Texans would never know the lower chamber has been adjourned since June 3, based on the overwhelming number of House lawmakers that kept receiving a taxpayer-funded $150 daily stipend for living expenses.

Only 26 of the 150 lawmakers in the lower chamber declined their per diem payments over the last two weeks when the full House stood silent, according to records obtained by the Houston Chronicle / San Antonio Express-News.

In addition to their $600 monthly salary, Texas lawmakers earn a $150 allotment for each day of a regular and special session to help defray costs associated with travel, food and housing.

Lawmakers are free to accept or turn down the money, and the per diem payments automatically are processed unless legislative bookkeepers are specifically instructed to withhold payments.

Those House lawmakers turning down at least a portion of their daily stipends over the last two weeks are set to save Texans in the neighborhood of $40,000 in costs.

That, however, is a fraction of the roughly $400,000 that the state's taxpayers have had to shell out so far to House lawmakers since the special session started in late May. Except for a 19-member House panel focused on redistricting, the rest of the lower chamber has had no mandate to work, essentially given the green light to cut out of Austin on June 3 and return Monday.

'The people's work'

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below. Texas

"Those per diems are there to cover a lawmaker's travel and living expenses when they're in Austin doing the people's work," said Craig McDonald, executive director of Texans for Public Justice, a state watchdog group. "The public should be outraged that the majority of members are sitting at home collecting thousands of dollars when they should have carried out this business during the regular session."

Not every House member collecting the per diem twiddled his thumbs during the special session lull, some lawmakers say. They claim to have made frequent visits to their offices in the Capitol to lobby for proposals to be added to the special session call or to try to save bills from Gov. Rick Perry' veto pen.

Other lawmakers argue they are deserving of the per diems because they have been working on state issues in their districts since the regular session gaveled out on May 27, though watchdog groups say that allotment specifically is designated for work done in Austin.

"It's a special (session). It is what it is and the work continues. I don't have any heartburn over it," said Rep. Sylvester Turner, D-Houston, who, like the other 22 lawmakers that are part of the Harris County House delegation, accepted per diems during the two-week adjournment period. Rep. Sarah Davis, R- West University Place, declined a portion of her daily stipend.

Turner said he has been busy meeting with constituents, even taking time to attend the House redistricting road show when it came to Houston last week.

"Each member has to be comfortable with these per diems," he said. "For those who believe that they're not working enough to justify the per diem, they have the opportunity to turn it down."

Some turned it down

The more than two-dozen House lawmakers that deferred at least a chunk of their special session per diems include Speaker Joe Straus, Rep. Lyle Larson, R-San Antonio and four committee chairs.

The reasons for doing so vary - some cited personal business out of the state and some said they did it out personal preference - but the decisions were strategic, nonetheless.

"I talked about it with several other lawmakers and we said 'you know, that way nobody can criticize you that you were not tending to state business those days,'" said Larson. "It's a personal preference."

He added, "There are people, though, who can justify it because they're still having to pay for their housing in Austin."

The time frames for declining the per diems also varied.

Larson, the only member of the Bexar County delegation other than Straus to turn down the daily stipend, did not accept his per diem for three days at the beginning of the month and three days last week. Rep. Byron Cook, R-Corsicana and chairman of the State Affairs Committee, told House accountants in a June 5 letter he did "not wish to receive any per diem for the 83rd First Called Special Session."

All 26 House lawmakers declining payments are Republicans.

6 senators said no

In the Senate, Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst and at least six other Republican senators, including Joan Huffman of Houston, and Glenn Hegar of Katy, turned down all or a portion of their per diems for the special session.

The Senate has been on a different schedule from the House, meeting several times since the special session began. The bulk of the work, however, has fallen on the chamber's redistricting panel so far.

One senator who is not on the election map panel, but has taken the per diem payments is tea party darling and fiscal hawk Sen. Donna Campbell, R-New Braunfels, who cast one of four votes against the state budget during the regular session because it was not conservative enough.

A spokesman defended the payments because she has been "in the district quite a bit," advocated for the abortion issue to be added to the special session agenda and attended a bill-signing with Perry. "She's doing the work her constituents want her to do," Campbell spokesman Jon Oliver said.