Early vote sets record in county
The first week of early voting set turnout records and ran smoothly despite concerns about the state's new voter identification law, Harris County Clerk Stan Stanart said Sunday.

After polls closed Sunday night, the county reported 52,170 people had cast ballots the past seven days, 37,828 in-person and 14,342 by mail. That is more than double the 24,091 ballots cast in the first week of early voting in 2011 and exceeds a high mark of 30,463 for a non-presidential election set in 2009 when Houston had an open mayoral race.

The popularity of early voting nationwide has increased in recent years. Beginning in 2004, more than half of Texas voters cast early ballots in-person or by mail.

Stanart partly attributed this year's record-setting pace to the education efforts of his staff to make sure voters understood Texas' new voter identification law.

Rice University political scientist Bob Stein disagreed.

Because early voters tend to be older - the mean age in Harris County is 64 - Stein said the new law would have little effect on a demographic unlikey to have moved or changed names in recent years.

"Candidates are what drive turnout," Stein said, noting big advertising spending by Mayor Annise Parker and top challenger Ben Hall, as well as the mailing and door-to-door campaigns of candidates in a handful of competitive council races.

He also credited a slew of African-American candidates with energizing those communities to vote at a higher rate than some other groups, according to Stein's early polling.

Who is voting early?

Political analyst Kyle Johnston backed up Stein with his own analysis.

Looking at the names of every person who cast a Harris County ballot in the first five days, Johnston predicted the characteristics of who has voted so far. Johnston said his predictions, in some cases based off assumptions about surnames, usually are accurate within 5 percentage points.

African-Americans lead minority voting with 32 percent of the ballots cast so far, which Johnston said is higher than usual and could grow because black and Latino voters historically cast ballots at a higher rate during the second week of early voting when hours extend to 7 p.m.

Others have speculated the record numbers, across all demographics, could be driven by two high-profile bond measures to decide the fate of the Astrodome and a proposed city-county inmate processing center.

In addition to mayoral and council races, voters must choose school board trustees, community college trustees and weigh proposed state constitutional amendments.

Stanart lauded his staff for walking voters through the first election with Texas' voter identification law, reporting that just 5 of the 40 cases in which people had to cast provisional ballots were tied to the new law. Two had not brought any identification to the polls and the other three had long-expired identification, he said.

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below. Local

The Associated Press reported that rules requiring that a voter's name on IDs exactly match that listed in voter registration databases are especially problematic for women.

Even a state district judge in Corpus Christi complained recently that the ID and voter registration she had used for years were questioned when she went to the polls because one listed her maiden name as her middle name.

What counts as ID?

The voter ID law, championed by conservative lawmakers, was approved in 2011 as a way to combat voter fraud but did not take effect until this summer because of legal challenges. It requires voters to produce picture identification. The list of acceptable photo identification includes a Texas driver's license, a concealed handgun license, a passport, a military ID, a citizen certificate with a naturalization photo or a state-issued election identification certificate.

"We don't have a hint of that," Stanart said of difficulties reported elsewhere in the state.

When problems arise, he said poll workers are trained to do on-site verification and direct voters to check the box that functions as an affidavit. About 40 percent of registered Harris County voters have mismatched addresses that could require additional verification, Stanard said.

"It only takes a few seconds extra," he said.

Early voting continues through Nov. 1st. Election day is Nov. 5th.