Abbott, lawmakers tell CPS to step up reform efforts
Photo: TOM REEL, STAFF Governor Greg Abbott was the guest speaker at the Rotary Club of...

AUSTIN - Gov. Greg Abbott and the state's two highest-ranking lawmakers Wednesday directed the head of the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services to immediately implement "stop-gap measures" to stem a backlog of cases involving potential child abuse or neglect.

In the letter, Abbott, Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick and House Speaker Joe Straus said it was "completely unacceptable" that caseworkers were not making timely visits with at-risk children.

State law requires investigators to make contact with children no later than 72 hours after receiving an initial report, though in high-priority cases in which a child's injuries could result in death or serious harm, the deadline is 24 hours.

"While we appreciate your proactive approach to trying to address these concerns, a lack of timely contact only exacerbates backlogs through the entire system and potentially leaves a child in a dangerous situation," the letter said.

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below. Houston

The trio called on the department's commissioner, Henry Whitman Jr., to develop a plan to hire and train more investigators and caseworkers, "reinforce the culture of accountability at all levels of management," and develop partnerships with faith-based organizations to help recruit families willing to take in children in the Child Protective Services system.

The letter orders Whitman to prioritize caseworker hires in the state's most critical regions for at-risk children but does not specify where those areas are.

Whitman is also directed to report back to Abbott, Patrick and Straus by the end of next week on his plan for carrying out their orders. The Texas Legislature, which convenes in January, will address funding and resource needs as lawmakers assemble a state budget, but the department must begin changing course earlier, the leaders said.

As of Oct. 10, CPS investigators in Harris County have seen 91 percent of all children whose cases meet the 72-hour threshold, according to Tejal Patel, the agency's spokeswoman for the region. She said the county's size and the inability to find families remain caseworkers' main challenges to making contact with children in the Houston area.

Whitman did not address the letter's specific instructions but said he agreed with the lawmakers' goal.

The Austin American-Statesman reported last week that, despite management changes and increased attention to the matter, the agency failed to contact more than 14,000 at-risk children across Texas within the law's proscribed time frame.

Patrick, who presides over the Texas Senate, has asked state Sen. Jane Nelson, R-Flower Mound, to convene the chamber's Finance Committee, which she chairs, to determine how to fund CPS's needs. A hearing is scheduled for Oct. 26 in Austin, where agency officials have been invited to testify about their plans.

Legislative leaders are expected to put CPS reform and funding at the top of their agendas for the 140-day session.

Madeline McClure, CEO of the child advocacy group TexProtects, said the letter was a positive step for lawmakers' efforts to reform the agency's practices.

"I was heartened by the response from the Big Three that they are pulling their collective concerns together, in one page, and really coming up with the direction for the department, for Hank Whitman to utilize state resources," she said.

She said the average salary for a state case worker in Texas is about $38,000, while others with social work degrees employed by schools or hospitals make on average $68,000.