Abbott's call to monitor Army exercises draws criticism
Photo: Jay Janner, MBO Bob Welch, standing at left, and Jim Dillon display a sign at a...

AUSTIN - Greg Abbott's letter directing the Texas State Guard to monitor U.S. Army soldiers taking part in training exercises in Bastrop and other parts of the state drew widespread surprise and criticism from Austin to Washington on Wednesday as pundits and officials questioned what the governor was thinking.

While Abbott's aides played down the move as a normal step to tamp down some Bastrop residents' concerns that the military exercises presaged an invasion and a disarming of the populace by the federal government, some state lawmakers and even the White House were asking what Abbott was worried about.

"I have no idea what he's thinking," White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said in response to a reporter's question about Abbott's letter to the Texas Guard the day before.

"The individuals participating in the exercise won't be traveling incognito," Earnest said at a news briefing in Washington. "They'll be wearing armbands,"

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below. Local

To some, Abbott's directive and its response was reminiscent of his predecessor, Rick Perry, whose remarks about secession a few years ago made national headlines and more than a few punchlines.

"Abbott's pandering to paranoid, secessionist fools would be comical if it wasn't so costly and frightening," said Glenn Smith, director of Austin-based Progress Texas PAC, a Democratic Party group.

"Abbott has the state military confronting the U.S. military because some nut cases fear, what, armed U.S. takeover of Texas? Seriously? What next? Will Abbott call out the troops to protect us from alien abduction, abominable snowmen and Bigfoot, or should I say an invasion of Bigfeet? What will this bit of extremist theater cost Texas taxpayers? Abbott should tell us. Now."

Abbott aides insisted there would be no additional costs to the state to monitor the Army exercises.

'Safe and secure'

In directing the state guard to monitor the Operation Jade Helm 15 military training in Texas, Abbott said he was taking the step "to ensure that Texas communities remain safe and secure."

"During the training operation, it is important that Texans know their safety, constitutional rights, private property rights and civil liberties will not be infringed," Abbott wrote in his letter to Maj. Gen. Gerald "Jake" Betty, commander of the State Guard.

"Directing the State Guard to monitor the operation will allow Texas to be informed of the details of military personnel movements and training exercise schedules, and it will give us the ability to quickly and effectively communicate with local communities, law enforcement, public safety personnel and citizens."

Abbott closed the letter by recognizing Texas' "long history of supporting our military forces and our proud tradition of training, deploying and supporting our active-duty troops and returning veterans."

The directive quickly stoked a storm that had been building on social media for several weeks, with right-wing conspiracy theorists warning that it was a cover story for President Barack Obama to declare martial law or was a prelude to a federal move to seize personal weapons in Texas.

Those theories and others culminated in a contentious public meeting on Monday in Bastrop, where residents angrily protested the plans to hold one of the exercises there.

U.S. military officials have said the seven-state training exercise announced in March will involve about 1,200 U.S. Special Operations troops, including at 17 locations across Texas. It is the latest in a series of such exercises that have been going on for years.

At the Bastrop meeting, Army Lt. Col. Mark Lastoria, a spokesman for the Operations Special Command, spent two hours answering questions from a sometimes hostile crowd of about 150 area residents. The exercise is designed to prepare U.S. Special Operations troops to handle foreign threats, he said.

Many in the crowd clearly were not convinced.

"You may have issues with the administration," Lastoria told the crowd at one point, according to a story in the Austin American-Statesman. "So be it. But this institution right here has been with you for over 200 years. I've worn this uniform across five different administrations for 27 years."

Applause and protests

Within hours after Abbott's directive was made public on Tuesday, online applause and protests heated up anew. Self-styled "patriot" group members suggested they may monitor the exercises on their own.

Abbott aides said the swirling issues and concerns were one reason he asked the Texas Guard to monitor the exercises, not any concern that any of the conspiracy theories may be valid.

"Governor Abbott deeply trusts and respects the United States military," said Amelia Chasse, Abbott's press secretary.

Abbott's move drew criticism inside the Capitol on Wednesday as several lawmakers questioned why the governor would trust federal troops enough to deploy them along the Texas border for months, but now thinks they need to be monitored in routine training exercises.

"I don't understand the reasoning behind the governor's directive," said state Sen. Carlos Uresti, D-San Antonio, a former Marine Corps captain.

"This would be like sending in the Marines to monitor the Army or vice versa. Why would he want to do that?"

Bo Collier, 61, a retired environmental engineer who was among the protesters at the Bastrop meeting, said Abbott was spot on with his order.

"(Abbott) knows we can't trust anything Washington says," Collier said. "Think about this, sir: The federal government has militarized our police. They want to do away with the Second Amendment. I believe this is a step to gain intelligence for martial law at some point in the future. You may call me crazy, but just wait, the signs are there."

Observe sees political move

As for what Abbott may have been thinking, Jim Henson, director of the Texas Politics Project at the University of Texas at Austin, suggested in his online blog that politics were at play.

"The governor's hailing of the members of the U.S. military even as he registers concern about potential threats to Texans rights and liberties seems to be waving toward two sets of attitudes among his conservative base," Henson said, citing recent polling.

"While the governor's letter certainly invoked respect for military personnel, the fact that it opened with concerns about safety, security, and protection against the infringement of rights and liberties suggests that he was also seeking to frame his response around Texans' - and conservatives' - negative attitudes toward the federal government."

As of Wednesday, the details about how the Texas Guard will monitor the exercises were yet to be finalized.

So were the details of the how any information Abbott receives from the Guard would be provided to the public.