Soros again pumps money into Harris County district attorney's race
Billionaire George Soros again has stepped into the Harris County district attorney's race with a half-million-dollar advertising buy on behalf of Democrat Kim Ogg.

The latest Soros contribution arrives just days after the Ogg campaign filed a quarterly finance report showing she received nearly $135,000 in campaign contributions from a PAC supported by Steve Mostyn, another major Democratic financier in Texas.

The filing also shows a smaller $11,000 in-kind polling donation given in August from the Soros-funded Texas Safety & Justice PAC.

The liberal businessman-philanthropist - and Republican bogeyman - is no stranger to the Harris County contest. Last February, he spent $100,000 in support of Ogg's Democratic primary opponent, Morris Overstreet.

At the time, Ogg discounted the money given to Overstreet, whom she went on to beat by a wide margin.

"I think it's a last-minute money dump to try to buy the nomination," Ogg said at the time.

The only person connected to the Soros-funded PAC in state filings, treasurer Whitney Tymas, did not return calls for comment.

Incumbent Republican District Attorney Devon Anderson's political consultant, Allan Blakemore, criticized the Soros ad buy, accusing Ogg of aligning with forces seeking to take over the district attorney's office.

"She has abandoned the values and standards of our community to become a puppet for those whose clear agenda is to corrupt the rule of law in Harris County," Blakemore said.

Wayne Dolcefino, a spokesman for the Ogg campaign, welcomed the contribution, adding that the race has received national attention following the jailing of a mentally ill rape victim during Anderson's tenure.

"We welcome contributions from anyone in the country who wants to make people safer and actually remember what justice is," Dolcefino said. "This is a local election, but Devon's conduct has made this a national race."

Soros, a Hungarian-American immigrant who made billions in currency speculation, has publicly supported a number of criminal justice reforms, including reducing racial disparities in sentencing and relaxing marijuana restrictions.

Ogg has pledged if elected to redirect tax dollars away from prosecution of misdemeanor marijuana charges toward prosecution of violent criminals.

Soros has also contributed to district attorney races in Florida, Illinois, Mississippi and New Mexico, each through state-specific PACs with variations on the name "Safety and Justice."