Congestion costs nearly $1,500 each for area commuters
Photo: Smiley N. Pool, Staff Image 1 of / 7 Caption Close Image 1 of 7 Traffic on the IH-10 Katy Freeway viewed facing west near Loop 610 on Thursday, April 11, 2013, in Houston. ( Smiley N. Pool / Houston Chronicle ) Traffic on the IH-10 Katy Freeway viewed facing west near Loop 610 on Thursday, April 11, 2013, in Houston. ( Smiley N. Pool / Houston Chronicle ) Photo: Smiley N. Pool, Staff Image 2 of 7

Image 3 of 7

Image 4 of 7

Image 5 of 7

Image 6 of 7

Image 7 of 7 Commuters from The Woodlands area travel south on I-45 on Friday, June 12, 2015, in The Woodlands. Commuters from The Woodlands area travel south on I-45 on Friday, June 12, 2015, in The Woodlands. Photo: Brett Coomer, Houston Chronicle Congestion costs nearly $1,500 each for area commuters 1 / 7 Back to Gallery

Houston-area leaders love to trumpet the region's affordable cost of living and low taxes, but the costs of sitting in traffic are taking a record share of workers' incomes, according to a comprehensive annual study.

The average peak-period commuter in Houston pays $1,490 annually in lost time and wasted fuel because freeways are not flowing, according to the Urban Mobility Scorecard. The scorecard, developed by the Texas A&M University Transportation Institute, assesses congestion in America's 471 urban areas. It is considered a reliable barometer of whether traffic conditions are worsening or improving.

Congestion delays more than 2.4 million commuters daily along the Houston region's 90,000 lane-miles of streets and highways, the study found. Though nearly the same number of workers traveled in the area daily in 2012 and 2014, last year motorists collectively sat in traffic for more than 200 million hours for the first time. This means every worker in the Houston area who travels at peak times wastes on average 61 hours annually because traffic doesn't move as intended.

"There's weeks I feel I wasted 60 hours," said Ralph Doggett, 55, who commutes to downtown Houston from Katy five days a week.

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below.

Congestion in Houston historically has increased along with growth. This trend ebbed when job losses in the mid-1990s resulted in fewer work commuters, and when heavy investment in toll roads and freeways increased road capacity before the population and economic boom began about 15 years ago.

"Those solutions are not necessarily going to work anymore, at least not like they did," said Tim Lomax, a co-author of the scorecard and research fellow at the transportation institute, based in College Station.

In some spots, notably within Loop 610, the price of land will make additional road expansion difficult, and congestion will prompt some people either to avoid the urban core or to choose options other than driving alone, Lomax said. Houston is likely to see jobs follow workers to the suburbs, he said, but the region's increasing density will make public transit a more palatable solution in certain areas even as driving continues to dominate in many parts of Houston.

For the past decade, lack of money has been the primary obstacle to improving commuting options, officials said.

"Every two years, we are adding over 200,000 people to the Houston area and we are not close to adding that kind of capacity," said state Sen. Robert Nichols, R-Jacksonville, chairman of the Transportation Committee.

Lawmakers' resistance to raising taxes or fees, Nichols said, has created a situation where commuters instead pay by wasting their time.

"You have so many members who run on no new taxes," Nichols said. "But yes, I could save you money if you would let me have part of that $1,500 and improve how you get home... We just can't get it done."

Interstate 10, expanded at a cost of more than $2 billion less than a decade ago along much of Ralph Doggett's route outside Loop 610, is the 15th-most congested freeway segment in Texas, according to 2014 figures compiled by the Texas Department of Transportation. It was the eighth-most congested in the Houston area.

Detractors say the transportation institute's methodology, which focuses on comparisons with free-flow conditions rather than on actual travel times, fails to adequately account for the long distances between destinations in spread-out Houston. The institute defines free-flow conditions as the average speed during conditions at which there is no impediment.

The scorecard is done in conjunction with Inrix, which monitors freeway speeds on U.S. streets and highways.

It could be worse, however, according to the scorecard's findings. Houston ranked eighth in the U.S. in per-person delay. Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles topped the list, with peak-period drivers wasting 82 and 80 hours, respectively, in 2014.

Despite having a lower cost of living than many other congested urban areas, Houston ranks fourth nationally when the cost of congestion is calculated. The area's total wasted time and fuel value is $4.9 billion annually; an estimated 94.3 million gallons of fuel are lost to stop-and-go traffic.

Freight movement also suffers. Congestion adds $1.1 billion annually to the price of delivering and shipping goods via truck, according to the scorecard. Only New York, Los Angeles and Chicago shippers lose more money to congestion.

Even adjusting to the value of $1 in 2014, the money lost to commuting is at an all-time high in Houston. With a more diverse economy and growth seemingly inevitable, experts do not expect the cost of congestion to decline.

"If Houston grows by a million people, just keeping that at $1,500 is going to be hard," Lomax said.

To try to keep pace, voters last year approved using money - about $1.7 billion this year - from the state's so-called rainy day fund for transportation projects.

With oil prices declining from their 2013 levels, however, analysts predict the amount shifted from the rainy-day fund to transportation will decrease to between $1 billion and $1.2 billion annually.

Voters in November will decide whether to dedicate a portion of sales and use taxes in the state to transportation, which could raise $2.5 billion for highway projects, starting in 2018.

If approved, along with other changes made in the last legislative session, the money is still short of what TxDOT and transportation researchers believe Texas needs for highways and transit annually, just to keep congestion at current levels at highways maintained.

If Houston can benefit from additional funding, it's critical to spend the money wisely, officials and researchers agreed. With roughly four out of five people driving alone to work, highway investment is inevitable. Many of those plans are likely to include tolls and high-occupancy lanes to encourage transit and carpool use, and to place the cost on users rather than on taxpayers at large.

The planned redesign of Interstate 45 north of downtown Houston, for example, adds managed lanes similar to those along I-10.

Once the I-45 work, estimated to cost more than $6 billion, is completed, Lomax said Houston's core will likely have to focus on transit and alternatives to freeway widening.

"I think Houston is coming to that point where the widening areas are going to be drying up," Lomax said, noting the cost of land around downtown freeways is increasingly cost-prohibitive.