Ted Cruz: Border security before birthright revocation
Photo: Andrew Harnik, STF FILE- In this July 29, 2015, file photo, Republican presidential...

Ted Cruz is a good lawyer, especially when it comes to advancing the conservative legal tradition that has defined his career.

As a former clerk to Chief Justice William Rehnquist, an icon on the right, the senator has forged ahead through an underdog challenge in Texas to major fights with GOP colleagues in Washington. Through it all, he has hewed to his interpretation of the Constitution, and it, perhaps more than much else, has won the devotion of small-government types.

Now, he finds himself having a lawyerly argument about an issue that has come to dominate the Republican primary: the end of birthright citizenship. Donald Trump highlighted issue in his immigration reform proposal, but Cruz more than any other leading GOP candidate has fiercely defended Trump and his idea.

"I welcome Donald Trump articulating this view," Cruz told right-wing talk show host Michael Medved on Wednesday. "It is a view I have long held. We should end granting automatic birthright citizenship to the children of those who are here illegally."

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below. Texas Take: The Podcast

He added: "I think it is possible, but any constitutional amendment by its nature is difficult to achieve."

However, a video, which has been on YouTube since 2011, shows Cruz essentially waiving conservatives off the idea of amending the Constitution, and much more.

"The 14th Amendment provides for birthright citizenship," he said in the video, as polished a politician then as he is now. "I've looked at the legal arguments against it, and I will tell you, as a Supreme Court litigator, those arguments are not very good. As much as someone may dislike the policy of birthright citizenship, it's in the U.S. Constitution."

As the Houston Chronicle's Kevin Diaz reported, Cruz goes on to opine that he doesn't like when a federal judge "sets aside the Constitution because their policy preferences are different," seeming to say a jurist who were to rule against the idea that birthright citizenship is enshrined in the Constitution would be misreading the document.

"I think it's a mistake for conservatives to be focusing on trying to fight what the Constitution says on birthright citizenship," Cruz concludes. "I think we are far better off focusing on securing the border, because birthright citizenship wouldn't be an issue if we didn't have people here illegally."

On Thursday, Cruz's campaign rejected the idea that the candidate had changed his position at all. His focus on securing the border first is complimentary to his desire to get rid of birthright citizenship, not contradictory, a campaign spokeswoman said.

"The problem is that millions of people are coming here illegally and having children here, which perpetuates the problem," Catherine Frazier told me. "Yes, the senator supports ending birthright citizenship to those who are here illegally, but we have to focus on securing the border."

Securing the border, rather than amending the Constitution, is the most immediate way to solve that problem, she said. The campaign pointed to a Pew Hispanic Center survey that reports about 350,000 births every year, or 8 percent nationwide, come from at least one parent who is not in the country legally.

So Cruz sees both ending birthright citizenship and securing the border as two parts of the same larger narrative, but he has chosen to champion the border security argument above all else in the GOP race. Keep out those who try to come here illegally and the country wouldn't have have this problem, his thinking goes.

Still, the debate around citizenship isn't going to end anytime soon. The fiercest back and forth may end up being within the Republican Party, between those who support Cruz's tight focus on the border, those who want to end the birthright above all else, and others who balk at this conversation entirely.