Houston Effectively Ends Veteran Homelessness
Becomes Largest City in the Nation to Create System to House any Homeless Veteran

Mayor Annise Parker announced today that Houston has effectively ended veteran homelessness. Over 35 local agencies collaborated to build a nationally-recognized response system that has housed over 3,650 homeless veterans in just over 3 years, and has the resources to house every homeless veteran (or those at risk of homelessness) in Harris and Fort Bend Counties. United States Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julián Castro, U.S. Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert F. McDonald, U.S. Department of Labor Secretary Thomas E. Perez, and U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness Executive Director Matthew Doherty, as well as hundreds of veterans, service members, local and national stakeholders, elected officials, and community leaders joined Mayor Parker at Union Station in downtown Houston to celebrate the historic achievement.

“Too often those that answered the call of service still find themselves struggling long after leaving the military. Houston is there for our heroes, and just like on the battlefield, we will leave no one behind,” said Mayor Parker. “From regular provider coordination meetings and aligning local and federal resources, to dedicated street outreach teams and a coordinated assessment system that identifies, assesses, refers and navigates homeless veterans to housing, the Houston region has come together as a team to transform our homeless response system to effectively end veteran homelessness.”

Houston is the fourth largest city in the United States, with the second largest veteran population (300,000). Approximately 3,000 veterans return to Houston every year, and it is an unfortunate reality that some veterans will experience housing instability and may become homeless. However, Houston is engaged with all known veterans who have been identified as experiencing homelessness and has put in place a rapid identification and outreach system for responding to new instances of homelessness among veterans. Moreover, Houston has the capacity and resources to respond to future needs by preventing homelessness when possible or rapidly rehousing homeless veterans into safe and stable housing.

“Our courageous veterans deserve the opportunity to experience the American Dream they’ve risked so much to defend,” said HUD Secretary Julián Castro. “Thanks to our coalition of federal and local leadership, Houston has developed the tools to identify and support every veteran in the city experiencing homelessness. We look forward to sharing its innovative strategy with folks all across the nation. Together, we can ensure that every veteran, in every community, enjoys the chance to build a brighter tomorrow.”

In June 2014, Mayor Parker accepted First Lady Michelle Obama’s Mayors Challenge to End Veteran Homelessness. Over 604 local leaders across the nation have accepted the Challenge, including 460 mayors, seven governors, and 137 other county and city officials. Houston is the first of the nation’s 40 largest cities to accomplish this Challenge.

"Today, every homeless veteran in Houston has a permanent housing option available to them,” said Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert McDonald. “We are proud of the vital role that our Michael E. DeBakey Medical Center played in creating and continuing to operate a system capable of consistently responding to a large steady state volume of veterans who experience housing instability, helping them rapidly return to permanent housing.”

Department of Labor Secretary, Thomas E. Perez added, “Homeless veterans face complex challenges, and addressing them requires the federal government, local leadership, funders and non-profits to join forces to provide comprehensive solutions. Houston’s achievement illustrates what we can accomplish when we break down silos and work together toward common goals. We look forward to working with the Houston region to further prevent and reduce homelessness through expanded access to housing and job training opportunities.”

Houston’s effort to end veteran homelessness is part of the region’s multi-faceted, community-driven initiative to prevent and reduce homeless, known as The Way Home. In addition to effectively ending veteran homelessness, nearly 70 local governmental, business, faith, non-profit and charitable organizations are working together to end chronic homelessness and reduce family and youth homelessness in Houston. Since 2012, the coordinated, collective efforts of The Way Home have reduced overall homelessness in Houston by nearly 50%.

“Houston’s remarkable progress is proof positive of what can be accomplished when a strong network of community partners collaborate with federal agencies to end Veteran homelessness,” added USICH Executive Director Matthew Doherty. “We are grateful for the hard work and dedication of everyone who has contributed to this work, and we appreciate the strong example Houston is providing of the efficient systems that are needed to achieve, but also to sustain, the end of Veteran homelessness throughout the country.”

To learn more about The Way Home and Houston’s collaborative system to prevent and end homelessness, visit www.thewayhomehouston.org. Any veteran experiencing housing instability is encouraged to call the VA Homeless Veteran Hotline at 1-877-4AID-VET, or visit the McGovern VA Drop-in Center at 1418 Preston Street.