Hiring Foreign Workers for Higher-skilled Occupations
Requirements

Employers, who wish to hire a TFW in a higher-skilled position, must ensure that all requirements of the Stream are met.

Processing Fee

Employers must pay $275 for each position requested (e.g. $275 x number of positions=total payment) to cover the cost of processing a labour market opinion ( LMO ) application.

The processing fee payment (in Canadian dollars) can be made by: certified cheque (payable to the Receiver General for Canada) money order (postal or bank) Visa MasterCard American Express

There will be no refund in the event of a negative LMO , or if the application is withdrawn or cancelled by the employer since the fee covers the assessment process and not the outcome.

, or if the application is withdrawn or cancelled by the employer since the fee covers the assessment process and not the outcome. Employers requesting to have their LMO application reconsidered, as a result of a negative LMO , must submit a new application and processing fee for each position.

application reconsidered, as a result of a negative , must submit a new application and processing fee for each position. Refunds will only be available if a fee was collected in error (e.g. an incorrect fee amount was processed).

Note:

The LMO processing fee does not apply to higher-skilled positions related to on-farm primary agriculture such as farm managers/supervisors and specialized livestock workers (specifically National Occupational Classification ( NOC ) codes 8251, 8252, 8253, 8254 and 8256).

Language Restriction

A distinct language assessment factor has been introduced as subsection 203 (1.01) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations ( IRPR ). As a result, English and French are the only languages that can be identified as a job requirement both in LMO applications and in job advertisements by employers, unless they can demonstrate that another language is essential for the job.

Note:

The language restriction does not apply to higher-skilled positions related to on-farm primary agriculture such as farm managers/supervisors and specialized livestock workers (specifically National Occupational Classification ( NOC ) codes 8251, 8252, 8253, 8254 and 8256).

Education/Training and Experience

Employers must ensure that the TFW is being hired to fill a skilled position that requires a post-secondary education (e.g. university degree, college diploma or apprenticeship training). In addition, employers are responsible for verifying that the TFW has all the necessary training, qualifications and experience to perform the work in Canada.

Regulated Occupations

Employers hiring a TFW in regulated occupations in Canada must ensure that arrangements are made with the appropriate regulatory body for the certification, registration or licensing of the TFW . A "regulated" occupation is one where a professional or regulatory body has the authority to set entry requirements and standards of practice that lead to a certification, registration or licence (e.g. doctors, engineers, nurses, skilled trade occupations with compulsory certification).

Citizenship and Immigration Canada ( CIC ) will consider whether the TFW has the necessary qualifications to perform the work in Canada before issuing a work permit.

Business Licence or Documentation

All new employers to the Temporary Foreign Worker Program ( TFWP ) must provide a copy of their provincial/territorial/municipal business licence (where applicable) to show that they are actively engaged in the business where the TFW will be working.

Depending on the business, new and returning employers may also be required to submit a copy of one or more of the following documents:

Proof of recruitment (e.g. copy of advertisement and information to support where, when and for how long the position was advertised);

Business registration or legal incorporation documents (if first LMO application);

application); Provincial/territorial/municipal business licence (where applicable and if first LMO application);

application); Canada Revenue Agency ( CRA ) documents (where applicable and if first LMO application), including: T4 Summary of Remuneration Paid (most current year ending) Schedules 100 and 125 of the T2 Corporation Income Tax Return (for corporations only - 2 most recent returns filed) T2125 Statement of Business or Professional Activities (for sole proprietorships/partnerships - 2 most recent returns filed)

) documents (where applicable and if first application), including: Business contracts for goods and/or services;

Provincial/territorial documents, such as: workplace safety and insurance (e.g. workers compensation board) clearance letter, or other appropriate documentation;

Attestation by a lawyer, notary public or chartered accountant confirming that the business exists and the main activity of the business;

Provincial/territorial documentation requirements: Alberta – Employment Agency Business Licence ( Alberta’s Fair Trading Act ) if applicable. British Columbia – Employment Agency Licence ( British Columbia’s Employment Standards Act ) if applicable. Manitoba – Certificate of Registration ( Manitoba’s Worker Recruitment and Protection Act ). Nova Scotia – Employers must, as of August 1, 2013, obtain a certificate of registration, valid for one year, from the province's Labour Standards, if they are planning to hire a foreign worker. The application form for a certificate is currently available online.



Union Consultation

Although it is not a mandatory requirement, if the position being filled by the TFW is unionized, it is recommended that employers:

work actively with union representatives to recruit unemployed Canadians and permanent residents;

consult the union on its position regarding the hiring of a TFW for the available job;

for the available job; confirm that the conditions of the collective agreement (e.g. wages, working conditions) will apply to the TFW .

Note:

ESDC/Service Canada may contact the union for more information.

The position offered to the TFW cannot affect current or foreseeable labour disputes at the workplace, or the employment of any Canadian or permanent resident workers involved in these disputes.

Third-party Representatives and Recruiters

Employers do not need to use the services of a third-party representative or recruiter to apply for a TFW . However, employers who choose to use the services of one of these individuals or organizations must pay for all of the fees associated with the service and meet all of the applicable requirements.

Representatives assist employers by providing services, such as:

explaining and providing advice on the TFWP ;

; completing and submitting the application form and all required documents;

communicating with ESDC /Service Canada on the employer’s behalf; and

/Service Canada on the employer’s behalf; and representing the employer during the application process.

Employers who wish to use the services of a representative, paid or unpaid, must complete and submit Schedule A - Appointment of a Third-party Representative. Employers must identify their representative and not simply the firm/organization employing this person.

Paid Representatives

Individuals representing or assisting employers in exchange for compensation (e.g. money, goods or services) must be authorized under section 91 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act ( IRPA ), which means they have to be a member in good standing with:

a Canadian provincial/territorial law society, or a student-at-law under its supervision;

the Chambre des notaires du Québec;

the Province of Ontario’s law society as a paralegal; or

the Immigration Consultants of Canada Regulatory Council ( ICCRC ).

Employers should visit Citizenship and Immigration Canada ( CIC ) to verify that a specific representative is authorized to represent them or provide immigration advice.

Unpaid Representatives

Individuals representing employers for free (e.g. do not collect fees or other forms of compensation) are not subject to any restrictions under the IRPA . These individuals are usually family members, non-for-profit or religious organizations that assist employers who may not be able to complete the application process on their own.

Recruiters

Recruiters can assist employers by providing services such as:

placing job advertisements for the recruitment of TFWs;

screening potential employees;

making travel arrangements; and

negotiating wages/salaries on behalf of the employer.

Employers, using the services of a paid recruiter to represent them during the LMO application process, must complete the Third-party, Recruiter or Employer Agency Information section of the application form as well as the separate Schedule A - Appointment of a Third-party Representative. The paid recruiter representing the employer must be a member of one of the groups authorized under section 91 of the IRPA .

If a paid representative is not authorized under the IRPA , ESDC /Service Canada will continue to process the application, but will communicate with the employer directly. However, a copy of a signed letter stating that the employer is no longer using the services of the original representative will be required before the employer can:

hire another paid authorized representative; or

work with an unpaid representative.

Employers who wish to appoint another representative must also submit a new Schedule A - Appointment of a Third-party Representative.