Randi Weingarten, Teachers Union Head, Sounds Off On Atlanta Cheating Scandal
Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, blamed "test-crazed" education policies in sharp comments released Tuesday regarding a massive standardized-test cheating scandal in Atlanta.

A 65-count indictment, announced by prosecutors Friday, alleges that more than 35 educators were involved in a conspiracy to inflate students' test scores within Atlanta Public Schools.

In a joint statement Tuesday, Weingarten and Verdaillia Turner, president of the Georgia Federation of Teachers, declared, "Standardized tests have a role in accountability, but today they dominate everything else and too often don’t even correlate to what students need to know to succeed." They added that school districts in Atlanta, Washington, D.C., and elsewhere have put "enormous pressure" on teachers to improve scores.

As the first of the indicted educators surrendered Tuesday, critics of standardized-testing policies are describing the alleged misdeeds in Atlanta as a natural reaction to this pressure.

In a blog post published Monday, David Callahan, editor of Cheatingculture.com, blamed an excessive focus on quantitative performance measures and called the scandal the human answer to the question, "What happens when you change incentives so that low test numbers translate into pain and high test numbers translate into awards?"

The Associated Press reports that a 21-month-long investigation -- including hundreds of interviews with school administrators, students, parents and teachers -- brought out stories of teachers artificially inflating test scores for their own purposes.

In one case, a third-grader failed a benchmark exam but passed another standardized test "with flying colors" in the same year. Now in the ninth grade, the student reads at a fifth-grade level.

"I have a 15-year-old now who is behind in achieving her goal of becoming what she wants to be when she graduates. It's been hard trying to help her catch up," Justina Collins, the girl's mother, said at a news conference, according to AP.

In her comments, Weingarten, who has vocally opposed standardized testing in the past, stopped short of excusing the teachers but asked whether schools are spending too much time preparing students for the tests.

Read the full release below.