Jeb Bush Had Another Private Email Account As Florida Governor
ASSOCIATED PRESS

WASHINGTON (AP) - As Florida governor, Jeb Bush used another, previously unreported email address, records show - the newest wrinkle in an evolving debate over public officials' use of private email accounts.

When Bush released thousands of emails from his tenure as Florida's governor as part of his preparations to run for president next year, he did so from the email account he shared openly, jeb@jeb.org.

Those emails also include references to another email address, jeb@gencom.net. Bush said through a spokeswoman that he was unaware of the account, although records showed that people wrote to him there more than 400 times between 1999 and 2004.

The same records show no replies from Bush coming from that address. Instead, when Bush responded, he did so from his more well-known email address. Writers sometimes also reached the governor at jeb@jebbush.org or jeb@myflorida.com.

Bush's spokeswoman, Kristy Campbell, said Bush had no knowledge of the other email account. "He doesn't know what that email address is," she told The Associated Press Tuesday.

There's no indication this other account was used in any improper or secretive way.

But its existence - and the mystery around it - show the potential complications when public officials, like Bush and Hillary Rodham Clinton, use private email accounts to conduct public business. Republican Bush and Democrat Clinton are two likely contenders in the 2016 race for the White House.

Both have fielded questions in recent weeks over their email use, particularly Clinton, who has faced scrutiny for conducting State Department business from her private account. An AP review of Bush's emails spotlighted cases in which top donors sought to sway the governor on political appointments during his two terms in office.

The gencom address traces to ElectroNet Broadband Communications of Tallahassee, Florida's capital. The company did not immediately respond to a phone message Tuesday from the AP with questions about the Bush email address.

The majority of emails sent to Bush at that address came in 1999, and a slow trickle followed in ensuing years. Just one came in 2004, from a South Florida businessman who wrote to Bush at both addresses about a university board meeting. Several writers used both email addresses when contacting Bush.

Others reached Bush simply through the gencom account - writing to him on a range of issues from judicial appointments to the federal raid that captured the Cuban child Elian Gonzalez to state labor and literacy issues.

Though Bush said he knew nothing of that address, the emails clearly reached him: Bush often wrote back from his other account. In 1999, a writer corresponded with Bush about appointments to Brevard Community College. The email chain includes a reply, "Please respond to jeb@jeb.org."

© 2015 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved.

Also on HuffPost: Jeb Bush Jeb Bush

Share 1 of 16 Jeb Bush Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush waves while being introduced before speaking at the National Automobile Dealers Association convention in San Francisco, Friday, Jan. 23, 2015. (AP Photo/Jeff Chiu) Share this slide:

ASSOCIATED PRESS Jeb Bush Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush waves while being introduced before speaking at the National Automobile Dealers Association convention in San Francisco, Friday, Jan. 23, 2015. (AP Photo/Jeff Chiu) ASSOCIATED PRESS image Jeb Bush Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush pauses for a photo as he greets people in the audience after speaking during the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) in National Harbor, Md., Friday, Feb. 27, 2015. (AP Photo/Carolyn Kaster) ASSOCIATED PRESS image Jeb Bush Former Florida Governor Jeb Bush takes a selfie with an Iowa resident after speaking at a Pizza Ranch restaurant on March 7, 2015 in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. (Photo by Scott Olson/Getty Images) Scott Olson via Getty Images image Jeb Bush Former Florida Governor Jeb Bush speaks to reporters after an event at a Pizza Ranch restaurant on March 7, 2015 in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. (Photo by Scott Olson/Getty Images) Scott Olson via Getty Images image Jeb Bush Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and his son, Texas Land Commissioner George P. Bush, sit on a campaign bus during an interview Tuesday, Oct. 14, 2014, in Abilene, Texas. (AP Photo/LM Otero) ASSOCIATED PRESS image Jeb Bush Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush gestures during an education forum in Nashville, Tenn., on Wednesday, March 19, 2014 with U.S. Sen. Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn). (AP Photos/Erik Schelzig) ASSOCIATED PRESS image Jeb Bush Victoria Sheard of Dallas receives a kiss on the cheek from former governor Jeb Bush during a book autograph session after a speaking engagement at the Dallas Council of World Affairs Wednesday, April 24, 2013. (AP Photo/Tony Gutierrez) ASSOCIATED PRESS image Jeb Bush Former Florida Governor Jeb Bush attends a luncheon hosted by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs on February 18, 2015 in Chicago, Illinois. (Photo by Scott Olson/Getty Images) Scott Olson via Getty Images image Jeb Bush 2012 Republican presidential candidate and former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney is seated with former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush as they fly on Romney's campaign plane to Miami, Florida, on Wednesday, Oct. 31, 2012. (AP Photo/Charles Dharapak) ASSOCIATED PRESS image Jeb Bush Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush reacts in front of golfer Phil Mickelson after making a putt in The Barclays Pro-Am golf tournament at Bethpage State Park in Farmingdale, N.Y., Wednesday, Aug. 22, 2012. (AP Photos/Henny Ray Abrams) ASSOCIATED PRESS image Jeb Bush President Barack Obama is introduced by former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush before speaking at Miami Central Senior High School in Miami, Friday, March 4, 2011. Education Secretary Arne Duncan is at center. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais) ASSOCIATED PRESS image Jeb Bush Former first lady Barbara Bush greets her son, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, with a kiss as she arrives a the 2010 Presidential Medal of Freedom ceremony, Tuesday, Feb. 15, 2011, in the East Room of the White House in Washington. (AP Photo/Carolyn Kaster) ASSOCIATED PRESS image Jeb Bush President George H. W. Bush -- with his son, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush -- enters the West Wing of the White House to meet with President Barack Obama on Saturday, Jan. 30, 2010, in Washington. (AP Photo/Alex Brandon) ASSOCIATED PRESS image Jeb Bush Governor Rick Scott (left) greets supporters as Jeb Bush embraces Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart (R-Fla.). (Carl Juste/Miami Herald/TNS via Getty Images) Miami Herald via Getty Images image Jeb Bush Then-President George W. Bush jokes with his brother, then-Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, on Monday, Nov. 6, 2006, in Pensacola, Fla., where Bush was drumming up support for local Republican candidates. (AP Photo/Mari Darr~Welch) ASSOCIATED PRESS image Jeb Bush Former President George H.W. Bush, then-President George W. Bush and then-Florida Gov. Jeb Bush pose in front of the aircraft carrier George H.W. Bush after participating in the christening ceremony in Newport News, Va., Saturday, Oct.. 7, 2006. (AP Photo/Lawrence Jackson) ASSOCIATED PRESS image