Donald Trump Goes After Immigrants Again, Claiming To Have Facts
Presidential candidate Donald Trump painted himself further into a corner Wednesday by spewing another batch of anti-immigrant rhetoric on CNN.

In rambling remarks from a phone interview scheduled to air Wednesday night, Trump blamed immigrants for "mind-boggling" rape statistics.

"Well if you look at the statistics of people coming, you look at the statistics on rape, on crime, on everything coming in illegally into this country it's mind-boggling!" Trump said to host Don Lemon in a clip shown on "The Situation Room."

Trump said his information came from a Fusion article, but he apparently misread the story.

Lemon corrected him, and pointed out that Fusion's figures show 80 percent of women and girls from Central America are victims of rape while immigrating to the United States.

"Well, somebody's doing the raping, Don! I mean somebody's doing it! Who's doing the raping? Who's doing the raping?" Trump responded, according to the CNN clip.

Yes, Donald, who is doing the raping? Accurate stats about sex crimes are hard to come by, partially because only 30 percent of sexual assaults are reported, according to the National Sex Offender Public Website. But in 2013, about 66 percent of suspect of forcible rape were white and 31 percent were black, according to the FBI.

Trump's latest tirade is reminiscent of the derogatory remarks he uttered while announcing his run for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination.

"When Mexico sends its people, they're not sending their best. They're not sending you," Trump said. "They're sending people that have lots of problems, and they're bringing those problems with us. They're bringing drugs. They're bringing crime. They're rapists. And some, I assume, are good people."

Trump's business partners are fleeing from him like rats on a sinking ship. Univision dropped the Miss USA pageant because of his remarks. NBC also cut ties, saying it would no longer broadcast Miss USA, as well as the Miss Universe contest and "The Apprentice." Macy's will stop carrying Trump menswear, and professional golf organizations that schedule tournaments at Trump-owned courses put out a statement criticizing the mogul.

New York City Mayor Bill De Blasio said Wednesday the city is reviewing its contracts with Trump, such as real estate deals, in light of his xenophobic comments.

CORRECTION: An earlier version of this post incorrectly said NBC owned Univision.