Jerry Brown Signs Automatic Voter Registration In California
California Gov. Jerry Brown (D) on Saturday signed a bill that will automatically register voters, which was sent to him by the Democratic-controlled state legislature in September.

Since there are between 6 and 7 million Californians who remain unregistered to vote, voting rights advocates see the measure as a way to save money, boost security and reduce barriers to participation in elections. The state experienced record low turnout for a regularly scheduled general election last November, in which just 42 percent of Californians who were registered voted.

Brown had until Oct. 11 to either sign or reject the California New Motor Voter Act.

"In a free society, the right to vote is fundamental," said California Secretary of State Alex Padilla, who had sponsored the bill, in a statement. "I applaud Governor Brown for his leadership and bold action to increase voter participation in our state."

The way automatic registration works is relatively simple: Eligible citizens are registered to vote when they show up at a Department of Motor Vehicles office to obtain a driver’s license or state ID. The DMV gives the eligible voter a chance to opt out if they prefer not to register. If the person does not opt out, the DMV electronically transfers their voter registration information to the Secretary of State’s office, rather than making election officials enter data by hand from paper registration forms. (The federal National Voter Registration Act of 1993 already requires states to give eligible voters the opportunity to register to vote when they apply for a new or renewed driver’s license.)

Various voting rights groups, like the Brennan Center for Justice, had pushed the legislation. iVote, a group focusing on automatic registration, spent six figures on newspaper advertisements asking Californians to voice their support for the bill. Sixty-nine percent of all Californians and 67 percent of likely voters favor the proposal, according to a survey from the Public Policy Institute of California.