Official Website of Edward D. Kleinbard
Edward Kleinbard

Edward D. Kleinbard is the Robert C. Packard Trustee Chair in Law at the USC's Gould School of Law, and a Fellow at The Century Foundation. Kleinbard was one of four individuals honored as 2016 International Tax Person of the Year by the nonpartisan policy organization Tax Analysts. He is the author of a book, We Are Better Than This: How Government Should Spend Our Money, published by Oxford U. Press. In reviewing the book, Pulitzer prize-winning journalist David Cay Johnston described it as "a masterpiece of tax, fiscal, and economic policy."

Kleinbard joined USC Gould in 2009. Before joining USC Law, Kleinbard served as Chief of Staff of the U.S. Congress's Joint Committee on Taxation. The JCT Staff are the nonpartisan tax resource to Congress, helping legislators to formulate legislation, writing analyses of legislative proposals or tax issues of interest to the Congress, and estimating the revenue consequences of legislative proposals.

Kleinbard's work focuses on the taxation of capital income, international tax issues, and the political economy of taxation. Kleinbard's recent papers include Competitiveness Has Nothing to Do With It (Tax Notes), Stateless Income (Florida Tax Review), The Lessons of Stateless Income (Tax Law Review), Through a Latte Darkly: Starbucks's Stateless Income Planning (Tax Notes), The Better Base Case (Tax Notes), Herman Cain's 9-9-9 Plan (Tax Notes), and Tax Expenditure Framework Legislation (National Tax Journal). Kleinbard has testified before the Congress on tax policy matters, and has written opinion pieces for the Wall Street Journal, New York Times, the Huffington Post, CNN.com, and other media outlets.

Prior to his appointment to the Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation, Kleinbard was for over 20 years a partner in the New York office of Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP. Kleinbard received his JD from Yale Law School, and his MA in History and BA in Medieval and Renaissance Studies from Brown University.

Recent Presentations:

What's a Government Good for? Fiscal Policy in an Age of Inequality. Presented at University of George 115th Sibley Lecture, February 5, 2018; ABA Section on Taxation 2018 Mid-Year Meeting, February 10, 2018.

Perversion of the Tax Policymaking Process, January 29, 2018

To watch Kleinbard deliver "Searching for our Fiscal Soul" at TEDX Livermore, please visit: https://youtu.be/16F04Jr-m10

To watch Kleinbard discuss his book and, more generally, fiscal policy, please go to https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tdo0huuHx-I

For more information about the book and Kleinbard's scholarship, please visit: http://www.edwardkleinbard.com/