Congressman John Kline : 2009 Press Releases : John Kline Opposes National Defense Bill Saddled With Controversial Provision
WASHINGTON – For the first time in his seven years in Congress, Minnesota Congressman John Kline opposed the national defense authorization bill today in the U.S. House of Representatives because of a divisive social policy provision included in the bill.



The National Defense Authorization Act, legislation which serves as the annual budgetary and policy blueprint for the national security activities of the Departments of Defense and Energy, is traditionally free from political manipulation and receives broad, bipartisan support. But the bill voted on today included extraneous social policy provisions unrelated to our nation’s defense and cut a critical benefit on which our veterans depend.



“It is a shame that majority leadership would jeopardize a bill that is critical to the success of our sons and daughters in uniform to push their political agenda,” said Congressman Kline, a 25-year Marine Corps veteran who retired at the rank of Colonel. “Our troops deserve the resources they need to complete their mission, but I cannot sit idly by while Democrats use our Soldiers, Sailors, Airmen, and Marines as political chess pieces to pass a completely unrelated and ill-conceived ‘hate crimes’ bill which is a direct assault on our First Amendment freedoms.”



Congressman Kline, whose son has served in Iraq and Afghanistan and is scheduled to return to Afghanistan early next year, voted for the defense bill in the House of Representatives in June before it was saddled with extraneous, controversial, harmful social policy. He is a proponent of provisions in the final conference report that support our veterans of today and tomorrow, including:

Providing our troops with a 3.4-percent pay increase for our troops – one-half a percentage point more than the President’s request;

Increasing active duty end strength by more than 55,000, which is essential to easing the burden on our current forces;

Prohibiting any increases to TRICARE Prime and TRICARE Standard health care fees.

“Not only is the ‘hate crimes’ provision an unnecessary distraction from this bill’s intent to provide our men and women in uniform with the resources they need to protect and defend our nation, the measure supersedes state laws, threatens free speech, erodes equal justice under the law, and ultimately will have a chilling effect on religious leaders and others who express their constitutionally-protected beliefs,” said Kline. “I disdain racism, sexism, and bigotry, but under this legislation, any pastor, preacher, priest, rabbi or imam who gives a sermon out of their moral traditions about sexual practices could be found guilty of a federal crime.”



In his fourth term in Congress, Congressman Kline is a member of the House Armed Services Committee. He is also the Senior Republican on the House Education and Labor Committee.