ISIS Wants Barron Trump Dead, Calls For Supporters To Kill President's Son
The Islamic State group, also known ISIS, wants President Donald Trump's 11-year-old son Barron Trump dead, a report said Tuesday. Social media accounts of pro-ISIS groups shared personal details of Barron, calling for his assassination, the Washington Free Beacon reported.

The Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI) translated the mass calls for murder on the popular "Telegram" app. In the message posted Tuesday, one ISIS supporter shared the name of the school Barron attends in Washington D.C. The message was posted along with a Google map that pinpointed the school's location.

MEMRI reportedly claimed that the supporter, who used the name "Dak Al-Munafiqeen" — Arabic for "striking the hypocrites" wrote: "Barron Trump goes to this school in Washington," along with the Google map and a photo of him. The message was accompanied by the hashtag "Handle the son of the mule of America." The MEMRI also said that several pro-ISIS Telegram channels shared the post "to widely disseminate the call for assassination."

In June, Barron moved to Washington D.C. with his mother Melania Trump, nearly five months after his father was sworn in as the president of the U.S. Barron, who is the first son in the White House since John F Kennedy Jr., is attending St. Andrews Episcopal School, a private preparatory school located at 8804 Postoak Road, Potomac, Maryland.

Donald Trump has been a vocal critic of ISIS, signing executive orders including travel bans from largely Muslim majority countries and even calling for the death penalty for Sayfullo Saipov, a 29-year-old Uzbek immigrant who killed eight people in a truck attack in Manhattan on Halloween this year.

The call for Barron's assassination comes as the young boy appeared into the public eye for the holiday season. On Monday, Barron was seen with the first lady greeting the 2017 White House Christmas tree, which, according to TMZ is about 20 feet high. Photos shared on social media show Barron standing next to Melania as the not-yet-decorated tree arrived at the White House.

The first family is all set to celebrate the festivities by spending both Thanksgiving and Christmas at the “Winter White House,” Mar-a-Lago.

It is not uncommon for ISIS to issue threats during the holiday season. On Monday, reports surfaced about pro-ISIS Wafa’ Media Foundation distributing a propaganda poster showing a beheaded Pope Francis. Last week, another image shared on pro-ISIS social media accounts featured a masked man behind the wheel of a car approaching St. Peter’s Basilica in the Vatican. The poster’s caption read, “Christmas Blood. So wait…”