Who Is The White House Chef? What you Need To Know About The Woman Who Cooks The President's Food
If President Donald Trump’s tweets are any indication, the man loves food.

The new president has yet to chose a new White House chef, but it’s unlikely that Trump will pick Colonel Sanders — mainly because the Kentucky Fried Chicken founder died 37 years ago.

So it looks as if, for the time being, Trump’s meals will be cooked by Cristeta Comerford, the Filipino-American woman hired to be the White House executive chef in 2005.

This means Comerford will have worked as head chef under three presidents: President George W. Bush, President Barack Obama, and now, President Trump. But she’s been at the White House a lot longer than that; she began working there as an assistant chef in 1995, under President Bill Clinton.

Comerford is “trained in French classical techniques” and specializes in “ethnic and American cuisine,” according to a press release from 2005, after First Lady Laura Bush hired her for the top job.

When the Obamas moved into the White House, they liked Comerford's cooking so much, they decided to keep her.

"Also the mom of a young daughter, I appreciate our shared perspective on the importance of healthy eating and healthy families,” first lady Michelle Obama said at the time.

But just because the Trump administration has yet to announce a new executive chef, that doesn’t mean it won’t be hiring someone else.

Media outlets have been speculating about potential hires since the election in November. A local magazine, The Washingtonian, threw out a few guesses: David Burke, who heads the cooking at BLT Prime in the Trump International Hotel; Jose Isidori, Trump’s past personal chef who also oversaw Trump hotel restaurants from 2003 to 2008; and Jean-Georges Vongerichten, who catered Trump and Melania’s wedding in 2005.

Vongerichten donated money to the Democratic National Committee and President Obama in 2012, though, so he's probably not Trump’s first pick.