Watch Live: Donald Trump Speaks At FreedomFest In Las Vegas Live Stream
This story has been updated.

Update, 1:15 p.m. EDT:​ In a broad, meandering speech at Freedom Fest in Las Vegas, Donald Trump discussed subjects ranging from immigration to media bias, and from Sgt. Bergdahl to the national debt. Throughout the speech, Trump stressed his own skill as a negotiator and his ability to make better "deals" for America.

"I want to be a nice person," Trump said in his speech, denouncing the media attention paid to a politician's character. "I am a nice person ... but I think what people want today is competence," adding that "we are led by stupid people."

Trump focused much of his speech on foreign policy, criticizing President Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton and Jeb Bush for what he described as weak leadership, suggesting that only he would "bring our deals back" and "bring our money back" by using the "best negotiators."

In reference to Obama's use of the term ISIL (Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant) instead of ISIS (Islamic State of Iraq and Syria), Trump guffawed, saying of Obama that "he is such a divisive person."

Trump also described Hillary Clinton as "the worst secretary of state in the history" of the United States, and alleged that Bush would cater to special interests.

Regarding what he described as media bias against him, particularly after his controversial remarks on Mexican immigrants, Trump claimed that the press cut many of his statements in half, suggesting that "it's hard for a conservative Republican to get good press."

A source within the Republican party told CNN on Wednesday that Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus called Trump earlier this week to ask him to tone down his rhetoric on illegal immigration, suggesting that it might alienate Hispanic voters.

Original story: Donald Trump, real estate mogul and current contender for the Republican nomination for president, is speaking at the FreedomFest convention in Las Vegas Sunday, with a speech titled "What the American Dream Means to Me, And How Can We Make America Great Again." FreedomFest, which bills itself as "the World's Largest Gathering of Free Minds," is a three-day libertarian convention founded by investor Mark Skousen in 2002. It will also features Sen. Marco Rubio later this weekend.

Trump, an outsider candidate, has gained momentum in the race since attacking undocumented immigrants in his opening speech, and is currently in a dead heat with Jeb Bush, the former governor of Florida, for the Republican nomination according to a recent Reuters/Ipsos poll. While Trump gained political support after his speech denouncing immigrants as "rapists" and "criminals," several companies, including NBCUniversal, Univision, Macy's, Serta and NASCAR have cut ties with him. He has also been lambasted by other Republican candidates.

"Everybody has a belief that we should control our borders," Bush said last week. "But to make these extraordinarily kind of ugly comments is not reflective of the Republican Party. Trump is wrong on this."

At FreedomFest, Trump plans to talk about immigration and jobs, according to his billing.

Watch the video live below: