Southern Standard, Bredesen: New ethics rules for top executive-branch workers
Home

Return To Main Website

All Archives

E-Store Search By Keyword << back



Bredesen: New ethics rules for top executive-branch workers



NASHVILLE (AP) — Executive-branch managers who leave their jobs would be barred from lobbying for one year and would undergo ethics training under reforms proposed by Gov. Phil Bredesen to prove "to the public just how serious we are about earning their trust back."



In a speech Wednesday night at a dinner honoring the state's top public servants, the governor cited at least two key recommendations made by an advisory committee he set up to strengthen ethics laws.



"That's why I've asked my legal staff to begin the process of incorporating these recommendations into executive orders and draft legislation that will apply specifically to the executive branch of state government," Bredesen said in his speech.



"I believe it is my fundamental responsibility to do everything within my power — everything within our collective power — to peer inside the workings of government in Tennessee and fix what is broken."



Bredesen told The Associated Press Wednesday that the reforms would at first apply to the commissioner, deputy commissioners and assistant commissioners of each state agency under the executive branch — about 150 people in all. The rules could eventually extend further downward into the departments.



The so-called "revolving door" rule has been discussed as way to discourage the practice of state officials or legislators who resign from state office to take lucrative jobs with private companies that often have business before the state.



In August, former House Minority Leader Tre' Hargett raised eyebrows when he announced he was resigning as he considered leaving politics for a job as a pharmaceutical industry lobbyist. The Bartlett Republican changed his mind on the lobbying job, but stepped down from his leadership role anyway.



The formation of the the governor's Citizen Advisory Group on Ethics in Government was mostly spurred by the ongoing Tennessee Waltz bribery scandal, which so far has led to indictments against seven current or former elected officials. Prosecutors have said there could be more arrests.



There have also been cases of sexual harassment involving two top government officials. After learning that documents looking into the allegations were shredded, Bredesen ordered a halt to the practice.



"These new requirements build upon an ethics policy I put in place when I took office almost three years ago," the governor said. "By going ahead and implementing these recommendations for the executive branch, we're taking that very important first step toward earning back the trust of the Tennessee people."



Bredesen has contemplated calling a special session to put the recommendations made by the advisory panel into legislation. He responded Wednesday to some speculation that he would call the session in November.



"I don't think we're going to be ready in November to do it," he said. "I think the most likely time is after the first of the year, when the legislature comes back. That's when most of them seem to want it."



State Rep. Rob Briley, D-Nashville, one of a handful of state lawmakers present, welcomed the proposals on ethics training and lobbying.



"I don't have a problem with those at all," he said. Briley said the revolving door for lobbyists is "a problem for legislators and we ought to acknowledge that. I think it should apply both to legislators and members of the executive branch."



A joint House and Senate panel formed to discuss ethics reform has also been considering the list of recommendations from the citizen's group, but talks last week became bogged down in details of cash contributions and questions on the financing of Black Caucus.