Southern Standard, Bredesen seeks policy on harassment investigations
Home

Return To Main Website

All Archives

E-Store Search By Keyword << back



Bredesen seeks policy on harassment investigations



NASHVILLE (AP) — Gov. Phil Bredesen, dealing with criticism over his administration's handling of sexual harassment investigations, promised a consistent policy for handling the claims in the future.



The governor also said he does not believe anyone close to him is the subject of investigation records that have been withheld in a public documents request for recent sexual harassment cases.



"I am not aware of any other cases involving anyone who I would know, a commissioner or something like that," Bredesen told The Associated Press Tuesday. "There are certainly none others that have appeared anywhere in the governor's office. I have gone around and asked people about that."



Bredesen said that next week he will have the state attorney general and personnel director help to draft a policy that is the same for high-ranking and low-ranking employees alike.



"We're trying to do the right thing," Bredesen said.



Bredesen said some changes in policy may require investigators to never refer to victims by name, making sure their identity will be kept confidential.



The state is withholding some harassment records requested by The Tennessean and The Associated Press. Bredesen said he has been advised that attorney-client privilege trumps the state's public records law.



In those cases, it is impossible to tell who is the subject of the investigation and what was done.



The governor said he is trying to balance competing issues by making sure victims are protected, while making sure that the public and reporters have access to investigation files.



Last week, Bredesen ordered a halt to the practice of shredding investigation documents in some harassment investigations. That followed the revelation that investigative notes in the cases of two former Bredesen appointees were shredded.



Bredesen said he first learned of the practice of shredding documents after he demoted Mack Cooper, his top lobbyist, for sexual harassment. When he found out earlier this month that documents looking into an unsubstantiated harassment allegation against Correction Commissioner Quenton White had also been shredded, he ordered a halt to the practice.



The Women's Political Caucus in Nashville has backed Bredesen's handling of the investigations, while open records groups and political foes have been critical of revelations that documents have been shredded.



"Mainly what we are after is to be able to keep from disclosing victims names because that discourages women and others from coming forward," said Beth Fortune, president of the Nashville Women's Political Caucus.



Bredesen said he feels a little stung by criticism that his administration is mucking up sexual harassment allegations or protecting harassers. He said he went out of his way, for instance, to make sure Cooper was publicly disciplined.



"I think if you are to dissect the ones that came through here, they have been dealt with very severely," the governor said.



White, who promoted an aide found to have committed sexual harassment and had his driver's license suspended for not paying a ticket, resigned last week citing negative news coverage.



Bredesen said he has probably hurt himself politically by being so hard-nosed about the issue of sexual harassment, and doing what he can to protect victims of harassment. Bredesen first said earlier this year that state government had a problem with sexual harassment.



"I hate it when women — or for that matter men because sometimes it happens to men — have to put up with that kind of nonsense in the workplace," Bredesen said. "I'm just a bear about it."



Bredesen said victims are very reluctant to come forward, are embarrassed and often think they have may done something wrong.



"And I don't know how to get these people to come forward without giving them some assurance that somebody's not going to take the whole file and everything they said and turn it over to somebody," Bredesen said. "I just think there ought to be some protection there for that information."



Bredesen said part of the problem is that tolerance for sexual harassment has decreased dramatically over the years. Public records laws and ways of handling the cases haven't changed to deal with increased enforcement.



He said he hopes to fix that with new policies next week and perhaps new public records laws down the road.