Global Database on Elections and Democracy
VAP Turn­out The table below shows data for the field VAP Turnout, which is part of our database Voter Turnout. The countries shown can be limited by region and by field value. The data has been verified where possible. You can click on a country to view all data for that country, or on the button to the right of each entry to see when the data was last reviewed. You can also help us make the database better by suggesting updates or corrections. Field - Select - Voter Turnout Total vote Registration VAP Turnout Voting age population Population Invalid votes Freedom house Freedom house - Political Rights Freedom house - Civil liberties Compulsory voting Voter Turnout Total vote Registration VAP Turnout Voting age population Population Invalid votes Freedom house Freedom house - Political Rights Freedom house - Civil liberties Compulsory voting Voter Turnout Total vote Registration VAP Turnout Voting age population Population Invalid votes Freedom house Freedom house - Political Rights Freedom house - Civil liberties Compulsory voting Parliament type Quota type in Lower House Total seats in Lower House Seats held by women in the Lower House Seats held by men in the Lower House Constitutional quota details Lower House Electoral law quota details Lower House Political funding legislation quota details Lower House Legal sanctions for non-compliance in Lower House Rank-order rules Lower House Quota type in Upper House Total seats in Upper House Seats held by women in the Upper House Seats held by men in the Upper House Constitutional quota details Upper House Electoral law quota details Upper House Political funding legislation quota details Upper House Legal sanctions for non-compliance in Upper House Rank-order rules Upper House Quota type sub-national level Constitutional quota details sub-national level Electoral law quota details sub-national level Political funding legislation quota details sub-national level Legal sanctions for non-compliance sub-national level Rank-order rules sub-national level Voluntary political party quotas Additional information about gender quotas Electoral system Upper House Sources for gender quotas Quota party Display this entry? Is there a ban on donations from foreign interests to political parties? Is there a ban on donations from foreign interests to candidates? Is there a ban on corporate donations to political parties? Is there a ban on corporate donations to candidates? Is there a ban on donations from corporations with government contracts or partial government ownership to political parties? Is there a ban on donations from corporations with government contracts or partial government ownership to candidates? Is there a ban on donations from Trade Unions to political parties? Is there a ban on donations from Trade Unions to candidates? Is there a ban on anonymous donations to political parties? Is there a ban on anonymous donations to candidates? Is there a ban on state resources being given to or received by political parties or candidates (excluding regulated public funding)? Is there a ban on any other form of donation? Is there a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a political party over a time period (not election specific)? If there is a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a political party over a time period (not election specific), what is the limit? Is there a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a political party in relation to an election? If there is a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a political party in relation to an election, what is the limit? Is there a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a candidate? If there is a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a candidate, what is the limit? Are there provisions for direct public funding to political parties? If there are provisions for direct public funding to political parties, what are the eligibility criteria? If there are provisions for direct public funding to political parties, what is the allocation calculation? If there are provisions for direct public funding to political parties, are there provisions for how it should be used (“ear marking”)? Are there provisions for free or subsidized access to media for political parties? If there are provisions for political parties’ free or subsidized access to media, what criteria determine access allocation? Are there provisions for free or subsidized access to media for candidates? Are there provisions for any other form of indirect public funding? Is the provision of direct public funding to political parties related to gender equality among candidates? Are there provisions for other financial advantages to encourage gender equality in political parties? Is there a ban on vote buying? Are there bans on state resources being used in favour or against a political party or candidate? Are there limits on the amount a political party can spend? If there are limits on the amount a political party can spend, what is the limit? Are there limits on the amount a candidate can spend? If there are limits on the amount a candidate can spend what is the limit for spending? Do political parties have to report regularly on their finances? Do political parties have to report on their finances in relation to election campaigns? Do candidates have to report on their campaign finances? Is information in reports from political parties and/or candidates to be made public? Must reports from political parties and/or candidates reveal the identity of donors? What institution(s) receives financial reports from political parties and/or candidates? Is it specified that a particular institution(s) is responsible for examining financial reports and/or investigating violations? What other institutions have a formal role in political finance oversight? What sanctions are provided for political finance infractions? Electoral System Family Electoral System for National Legislature Number of tiers Legislative size (directly elected) Legislative size (Voting members) Electoral system for the president Model of electoral management Electoral management body Name of electoral management body Number of electoral management body members Term of office Responsible for selection Responsible for appointing or electing the chair of the electoral management body Party or expert based membership Legal provisions for mandatory referendums at national level Legal provisions for optional referendums at national level Legal provisions for citizens' initiatives at national level Legal provisions for agenda initiatives at national level Legal provisions for recall at national level Legal provisions for direct democracy at the regional level Legal provisions for direct democracy at the local level What is the legal basis for direct democracy at the national level? What is the legal basis for administrative requirements for direct democracy at the national level? The body responsible for administering direct democracy mechanisms at the national level First referendum/initiative held Has there been a national referendum since 1980? Issues in relation to which referendums are mandatory at the national level Issues in relation to which referendums are optional at the national level Issues excluded from being the subject of referendums at the national level Issues of sub-national referendums regulated at the national level Who can initiate an optional referendum at the national level? Who is responsible for drafting the referendum question? Who decides on the final form of the ballot text? Quorum requirements for a referendum to be valid Requirements for a referendum to pass Are referendum results binding? Issues that can be proposed by citizens using the initiative process at the national level Issues excluded from being the subject of an initiative at the national level Who may propose the registration of an initiative? Materials to accompany an application for registration Who determines the title of an initiative? What disqualifies a proposed title of an initiative? Who is responsible for checking the legality of initiatives? At which stage legality check is conducted? Who decides the final ballot text when the initiative is put to a vote? When does voting take place once an initiative is qualified for ballot? Which individuals/positions may be subject to the recall? What are the grounds for recall? What restrictions are there in relation to the time period in which an individual or position can be recalled? When is the recall put to the vote? When does the election to replace an individual who has been recalled take place? Can an individual who is the subject of a recall stand on the ballot for his/her own replacement? How many signatures are required to start the formal decision making stage of a direct democracy mechanism? What is the deadline for collecting required number of signatures? Restrictions in relation to the individuals who can sign the proposal Where can proposals be signed? What information must signatories provide when signing the proposal? Restrictions in relation to signature collection What forms of checks are undertaken to verify signatures? Who checks the signatures? Challenges to election results - Legislative - First instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges to election results - Legislative - Who may file a complaint? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Filing fee/deposit amount (in local currency) Challenges to election results - Legislative - Maximum complaint time since occurrence or discovery Challenges to election results - Legislative - Maximum complaint time since announcement of election results Challenges to election results - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges to election results - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges to election results - Legislative - Possibility to appeal Challenges to election results - Legislative - What remedies are available in the first instance? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Last instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges to election results - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit in the last instance? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Filing/deposit fee amount (local currency) in the last instance Challenges to election results - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing in the last instance Challenges to election results - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision in the last instance Challenges to election results - Legislative - What remedies are available in the last instance? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Number of levels of adjudication Challenges to election results - Legislative - Maximum adjudication time for the full process from when the complaint is filed at the first instance body until a decision is reached at the last instance Challenges to election results - Presidential - First instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges to election results - Presidential - Who may file a complaint? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges to election results - Presidential - Maximum complaint time since occurrence or discovery Challenges to election results - Presidential - Maximum complaint time since announcement of election results Challenges to election results - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges to election results - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges to election results - Presidential - Possibility to appeal Challenges to election results - Presidential - What remedies are available in the first instance? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Last instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges to election results - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit in the last instance? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Filing/deposit fee amount (local currency) in the last instance Challenges to election results - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing in the last instance Challenges to election results - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision in the last instance Challenges to election results - Presidential - What remedies are available in the last instance? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Number of levels of adjudication Challenges to election results - Presidential - Maximum adjudication time for the full process from when the complaint is filed at the first instance body until a decision is reached at the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - First instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Who may file a complaint? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Maximum complaint time since occurrence or discovery Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Maximum complaint time since announcement of election results Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Possibility to appeal Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - What remedies are available in the first instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Last instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit in the last instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Filing/deposit fee amount (local currency) in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - What remedies are available in the last instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Number of levels of adjudication Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Maximum adjudication time for the full process from when the complaint is filed at the first instance body until a decision is reached at the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - First instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Who may file a complaint? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Maximum complaint time since occurrence or discovery Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Maximum complaint time since announcement of election results Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Possibility to appeal Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - What remedies are available in the first instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Last instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit in the last instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Filing/deposit fee amount (local currency) in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - What remedies are available in the last instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Number of levels of adjudication Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Maximum adjudication time for the full process from when the complaint is filed at the first instance body until a decision is reached at the last instance Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - What institution(s) has the power to impose non-criminal sanctions for campaign finance infractions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - What types of sanctions can be imposed for campaign finance infractions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Can the imposed sanctions be appealed? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - If appeal is possible, what is the competent body to hear the appeal? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - What is the maximum time to submit an appeal since imposition of sanctions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Possibility to further appeal Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - What remedies are available? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - What institution(s) has the power to impose non-criminal sanctions for campaign finance infractions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - What types of sanctions can be imposed for campaign finance infractions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Can the imposed sanctions be appealed? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - If appeal is possible, what is the competent body to hear the appeal? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - What is the maximum time to submit an appeal since imposition of sanctions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Possibility to further appeal Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - What remedies are available in the first instance? Does the law criminalize any election-related offenses? What type of law provides for election-related criminal offences? Which types of election-related misconducts are regarded as criminal offences? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to electoral fraud? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to incentive driven voter coercion? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to threat driven voter coercion? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to obstructing the electoral process? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to voter registration? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to unlawful conduct of campaign financing? Who carries out investigation for election-related criminal offenses? Who prosecutes election-related criminal offences? Election type Voting method First year Comments Voter registration and identification - How is the national electoral register created? Voter registration and identification - If electoral register is created by the EMB, which method is used? Voter registration and identification - If electoral register is created by the EMB, what type of technology used for collecting registration data? Voter registration and identification - If the EMB uses technology to collect voter registration data, is biometric data captured and used during registration? Voter registration and identification - Is biometric data used in voter identification at polling stations? Voter registration and identification - Is technology used for identifying voters at polling stations (electronic poll books)? Voter registration and identification - How technology is used in relation paper voter lists? E-Voting - Is e-voting currently used in any elections with EMB participation? E-Voting - If e-voting is currently being used, what type(s) of technology used? E-Voting - If e-voting is currently being used, is it taking place in controlled or uncontrolled environment? E-Voting - If e-voting is currently being used, is it available for all voters or only some groups of voters? E-voting - If e-voting is NOT currently being used, what is the current status of e-voting in general? Processing of results - Are official election results processed by an electronic tabulation system? Processing of results - If official election results processed by an electronic tabulation system, at which level results are entered into an electronic tabulation system? Processing of results - In the last national election, how many days did it take for the EMB to establish final results? Processing of results - In the last national election, how many days did it take for the EMB to announce certified results? Usage of open source software in election administration - Does the country use open source software in electoral processes? Usage of open source software in election administration - What are the key reasons for or against using open source systems? Usage of open source software in election administration - What types of open source systems have been considered or used? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country provide individual online voter registration/polling assignment checks? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish the statistical overview of voter lists online? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish full voter registers at the polling station level online? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish full voter registers at the national level online? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish the lists of parties and/or candidates registered for elections online? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish the election (voting) results online? Online data publication by EMBs - If the country publishes the election (voting) results online, what is the level of aggregation? Online data publication by EMBs - If the country publishes the election (voting) results online, what is the level of detail? Online data publication by EMBs - If the country publishes the election (voting) results online, what is the timing of publication of results? Online data publication by EMBs - If the country publishes the election (voting) results online, are historical results also available? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish seat allocation data online? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish candidate/party financing reports online? Region - Any - Africa - Eastern Africa - Middle Africa - Northern Africa - Southern Africa - Western Africa Americas - Caribbean - Central America - Northern America - South America Asia - Central Asia - Eastern Asia - South-Eastern Asia - Southern Asia - Western Asia Europe - Eastern Europe - Northern Europe - Southern Europe - Western Europe Oceania - Australia and New Zealand - Melanesia - Micronesia - Polynesia

Description

The voter turnout as defined as the percentage of the voting age population that actually voted

Read more in the glossary

Countries

Options Hide countries without approved data

Filter countries

Limit to countries with values between and (Empty = no limit)

Click on the column headers to sort the data