VAP Turn­out (Field view)
Global database on elections and democracy Database home

About the database

FAQ

Maps Customise the data Display data for: - Country - Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Congo, Democratic Republic of Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Cyprus (North) Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic East Timor Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands (Malvinas) Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Holy See (Vatican City State) Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea, Dem. People's Republic of Korea, Republic of Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Dem. Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic (1993-) Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia, Federated States of Moldova, Republic of Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territory, Occupied Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Islands Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Republic of The Congo (Brazzaville) Reunion Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Helena Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and The Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan (‡) Tajikistan Tanzania, United Republic of Thailand Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Wallis and Futuna Vanuatu Venezuela Western Sahara Viet Nam Virgin Islands, British Virgin Islands, U.S. Yemen Yugoslavia, FR/Union of Serbia and Montenegro Yugoslavia, SFR (1943-1992) Zambia Zimbabwe - Field - Parliamentary - Voter Turnout Parliamentary - Total vote Parliamentary - Registration Parliamentary - VAP Turnout Parliamentary - Voting age population Parliamentary - Population Parliamentary - Invalid votes Parliamentary - Freedom house Parliamentary - Freedom house - Political Rights Parliamentary - Freedom house - Civil liberties Parliamentary - Compulsory voting Presidential - Voter Turnout Presidential - Total vote Presidential - Registration Presidential - VAP Turnout Presidential - Voting age population Presidential - Population Presidential - Invalid votes Presidential - Freedom house Presidential - Freedom house - Political Rights Presidential - Freedom house - Civil liberties Presidential - Compulsory voting EU Parliament - Voter Turnout EU Parliament - Total vote EU Parliament - Registration EU Parliament - VAP Turnout EU Parliament - Voting age population EU Parliament - Population EU Parliament - Invalid votes EU Parliament - Freedom house EU Parliament - Freedom house - Political Rights EU Parliament - Freedom house - Civil liberties EU Parliament - Compulsory voting Parliament type Quota type in Lower House Total seats in Lower House Seats held by women in the Lower House Seats held by men in the Lower House Constitutional quota details Lower House Electoral law quota details Lower House Political funding legislation quota details Lower House Legal sanctions for non-compliance in Lower House Rank-order rules Lower House Quota type in Upper House Total seats in Upper House Seats held by women in the Upper House Seats held by men in the Upper House Constitutional quota details Upper House Electoral law quota details Upper House Political funding legislation quota details Upper House Legal sanctions for non-compliance in Upper House Rank-order rules Upper House Quota type sub-national level Constitutional quota details sub-national level Electoral law quota details sub-national level Political funding legislation quota details sub-national level Legal sanctions for non-compliance sub-national level Rank-order rules sub-national level Voluntary political party quotas Additional information about gender quotas Electoral system Upper House Sources for gender quotas Is there a ban on donations from foreign interests to political parties? Is there a ban on donations from foreign interests to candidates? Is there a ban on corporate donations to political parties? Is there a ban on corporate donations to candidates? Is there a ban on donations from corporations with government contracts or partial government ownership to political parties? Is there a ban on donations from corporations with government contracts or partial government ownership to candidates? Is there a ban on donations from Trade Unions to political parties? Is there a ban on donations from Trade Unions to candidates? Is there a ban on anonymous donations to political parties? Is there a ban on anonymous donations to candidates? Is there a ban on state resources being given to or received by political parties or candidates (excluding regulated public funding)? Is there a ban on any other form of donation? Is there a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a political party over a time period (not election specific)? If there is a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a political party over a time period (not election specific), what is the limit? Is there a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a political party in relation to an election? If there is a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a political party in relation to an election, what is the limit? Is there a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a candidate? If there is a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a candidate, what is the limit? Are there provisions for direct public funding to political parties? If there are provisions for direct public funding to political parties, what are the eligibility criteria? If there are provisions for direct public funding to political parties, what is the allocation calculation? If there are provisions for direct public funding to political parties, are there provisions for how it should be used (“ear marking”)? Are there provisions for free or subsidized access to media for political parties? If there are provisions for political parties’ free or subsidized access to media, what criteria determine access allocation? Are there provisions for free or subsidized access to media for candidates? Are there provisions for any other form of indirect public funding? Is the provision of direct public funding to political parties related to gender equality among candidates? Are there provisions for other financial advantages to encourage gender equality in political parties? Is there a ban on vote buying? Are there bans on state resources being used in favour or against a political party or candidate? Are there limits on the amount a political party can spend? If there are limits on the amount a political party can spend, what is the limit? Are there limits on the amount a candidate can spend? If there are limits on the amount a candidate can spend what is the limit for spending? Do political parties have to report regularly on their finances? Do political parties have to report on their finances in relation to election campaigns? Do candidates have to report on their campaign finances? Is information in reports from political parties and/or candidates to be made public? Must reports from political parties and/or candidates reveal the identity of donors? What institution(s) receives financial reports from political parties and/or candidates? Is it specified that a particular institution(s) is responsible for examining financial reports and/or investigating violations? What other institutions have a formal role in political finance oversight? What sanctions are provided for political finance infractions? Electoral System Family Electoral System for National Legislature Number of tiers Legislative size (directly elected) Legislative size (Voting members) Electoral system for the president Model of electoral management Legal provisions for mandatory referendums at national level Legal provisions for optional referendums at national level Legal provisions for citizens' initiatives at national level Legal provisions for agenda initiatives at national level Legal provisions for recall at national level Legal provisions for direct democracy at the regional level Legal provisions for direct democracy at the local level What is the legal basis for direct democracy at the national level? What is the legal basis for administrative requirements for direct democracy at the national level? The body responsible for administering direct democracy mechanisms at the national level First referendum/initiative held Has there been a national referendum since 1980? Challenges to election results - Legislative - First instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges to election results - Legislative - Who may file a complaint? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges to election results - Legislative - Maximum complaint time since occurrence or discovery Challenges to election results - Legislative - Maximum complaint time since announcement of election results Challenges to election results - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges to election results - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges to election results - Legislative - Possibility to appeal Challenges to election results - Legislative - What remedies are available in the first instance? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Last instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges to election results - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit in the last instance? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Filing/deposit fee amount (local currency) in the last instance Challenges to election results - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing in the last instance Challenges to election results - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision in the last instance Challenges to election results - Legislative - What remedies are available in the last instance? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Number of levels of adjudication Challenges to election results - Legislative - Maximum adjudication time for the full process from when the complaint is filed at the first instance body until a decision is reached at the last instance Challenges to election results - Presidential - First instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges to election results - Presidential - Who may file a complaint? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges to election results - Presidential - Maximum complaint time since occurrence or discovery Challenges to election results - Presidential - Maximum complaint time since announcement of election results Challenges to election results - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges to election results - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges to election results - Presidential - Possibility to appeal Challenges to election results - Presidential - What remedies are available in the first instance? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Last instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges to election results - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit in the last instance? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Filing/deposit fee amount (local currency) in the last instance Challenges to election results - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing in the last instance Challenges to election results - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision in the last instance Challenges to election results - Presidential - What remedies are available in the last instance? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Number of levels of adjudication Challenges to election results - Presidential - Maximum adjudication time for the full process from when the complaint is filed at the first instance body until a decision is reached at the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - First instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Who may file a complaint? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Maximum complaint time since occurrence or discovery Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Maximum complaint time since announcement of election results Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Possibility to appeal Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - What remedies are available in the first instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Last instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit in the last instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Filing/deposit fee amount (local currency) in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - What remedies are available in the last instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Number of levels of adjudication Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Maximum adjudication time for the full process from when the complaint is filed at the first instance body until a decision is reached at the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - First instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Who may file a complaint? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Maximum complaint time since occurrence or discovery Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Maximum complaint time since announcement of election results Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Possibility to appeal Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - What remedies are available in the first instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Last instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit in the last instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Filing/deposit fee amount (local currency) in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - What remedies are available in the last instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Number of levels of adjudication Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Maximum adjudication time for the full process from when the complaint is filed at the first instance body until a decision is reached at the last instance Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - What institution(s) has the power to impose non-criminal sanctions for campaign finance infractions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - What types of sanctions can be imposed for campaign finance infractions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Can the imposed sanctions be appealed? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - If appeal is possible, what is the competent body to hear the appeal? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - What is the maximum time to submit an appeal since imposition of sanctions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Possibility to further appeal Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - What remedies are available? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - What institution(s) has the power to impose non-criminal sanctions for campaign finance infractions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - What types of sanctions can be imposed for campaign finance infractions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Can the imposed sanctions be appealed? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - If appeal is possible, what is the competent body to hear the appeal? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - What is the maximum time to submit an appeal since imposition of sanctions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Possibility to further appeal Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - What remedies are available in the first instance? Does the law criminalize any election-related offenses? What type of law provides for election-related criminal offences? Which types of election-related offences are punishable under law? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to electoral fraud? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to incentive driven voter coercion? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to threat driven voter coercion? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to obstructing the electoral process? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to voter registration? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to unlawful conduct of campaign financing? Who carries out investigation for election-related criminal offenses? Who prosecutes election-related criminal offences? Election type Voting method First year Comments Voter registration and identification - How the national electoral register is created? Voter registration and identification - If electoral register is created by the EMB, which method is used? Voter registration and identification - If electoral register is created by the EMB, what type of technology used for collecting registration data? Voter registration and identification - If the EMB uses technology to collect voter registration data, is biometric data captured and used during registration? Voter registration and identification - Is the biometric data used in voter identification at polling stations? Voter registration and identification - Is technology used for identifying voters at polling stations (electronic poll books)? Voter registration and identification - How technology is used in relation paper voter lists? E-Voting - Is e-voting currently used in any elections with EMB participation? E-Voting - If e-voting is currently being used, what type(s) of technology used? E-Voting - If e-voting is currently being used, is it taking place in controlled or uncontrolled environment? E-Voting - If e-voting is currently being used, is it available for all voters or only some groups of voters? E-voting - If e-voting is NOT currently being used, what is the current status of e-voting in general? Processing of results - Are official election results processed by an electronic tabulation system? Processing of results - If official election results processed by an electronic tabulation system, at which level results are entered into an electronic tabulation system? Processing of results - In the last national election, how many days did it take for the EMB to establish final results? Processing of results - In the last national election, how many days did it take for the EMB to announce certified results? Usage of open source software in election administration - Does the country use open source software in electoral processes? Usage of open source software in election administration - What are the key reasons for or against using open source systems? Usage of open source software in election administration - What types of open source systems have been considered or used? Go to a specific database: Voter Turnout

Gender quotas

Political Finance

Electoral System Design

Electoral Management Design

Direct Democracy

Electoral Justice

Voting from Abroad

ICTs in Elections Please also visit our partner databases: Boundary delimitation

Voter registration

Vote counting

Media and elections

Voter education Feedback I find this page: (Very

useful) 5 4 3 2 1 (Not

useful) If you would like to, you are welcome to supply a comment as well:

If you would like an answer, please enter your email address: