International IDEA
See also the publications Voter Turnout Since 1945: A Global Report and Voter Turnout in Western Europe since 1945: A Regional Report , which are based on the data in this database. Compulsory Voting Jump to section Which countries practice compulsory voting? Infographic: Compulsory Voting in the World

(Click to expand)

What is compulsory voting? Most democratic governments consider participating in national elections a right of citizenship. Some consider that participation at elections is also a citizen's civic responsibility. In some countries, where voting is considered a duty, voting at elections has been made compulsory and has been regulated in the national constitutions and electoral laws. Some countries go as far as to impose sanctions on non-voters. Compulsory voting is not a new concept. Some of the first countries that introduced mandatory voting laws were Belgium in 1892, Argentina in 1914 and Australia in 1924. There are also examples of countries such as Venezuela and the Netherlands which at one time in their history practiced compulsory voting but have since abolished it. Advocates of compulsory voting argue that decisions made by democratically elected governments are more legitimate when higher proportions of the population participate. They argue further that voting, voluntarily or otherwise, has an educational effect upon the citizens. Political parties can derive financial benefits from compulsory voting, since they do not have to spend resources convincing the electorate that it should in general turn out to vote. Lastly, if democracy is government by the people, presumably this includes all people, then it is every citizen's responsibility to elect their representatives. The leading argument against compulsory voting is that it is not consistent with the freedom associated with democracy. Voting is not an intrinsic obligation and the enforcement of the law would be an infringement of the citizens' freedom associated with democratic elections. It may discourage the political education of the electorate because people forced to participate will react against the perceived source of oppression. Is a government really more legitimate if the high voter turnout is against the will of the voters? Many countries with limited financial capacity may not be able to justify the expenditures of maintaining and enforcing compulsory voting laws. It has been proved that forcing the population to vote results in an increased number of invalid and blank votes compared to countries that have no compulsory voting laws. Another consequence of mandatory voting is the possible high number of "random votes". Voters who are voting against their free will may check off a candidate at random, particularly the top candidate on the ballot. The voter does not care whom they vote for as long as the government is satisfied that they fulfilled their civic duty. What effect does this immeasureable category of random votes have on the legitimacy of the democratically elected government? A figure depicting the exact number of countries that practice compulsory voting is quite arbitrary. The simple presence or absence of mandatory voting laws in a constitution is far too simplistic. It is more constructive to analyze compulsory voting as a spectrum ranging from a symbolic, but basically impotent, law to a government which systematic follow-up of each non-voting citizen and implement sanctions against them. This spectrum implies that some countries formally have compulsory voting laws but do not, and have no intention to, enforce them. There are a variety of possible reasons for this. Not all laws are created to be enforced. Some laws are created to merely state the government's position regarding what the citizen's responsibility should be. Mandatory voting laws that do not include sanctions may fall into this category. Although a government may not enforce mandatory voting laws or even have formal sanctions in law for failing to vote, the law may have some effect upon the citizens. For example, in Austria voting is compulsory in only two regions, with sanctions being weakly enforced. However, these regions tend to have a higher turnout average than the national average. Other possible reasons for not enforcing the laws could be complexity and resources required for enforcement. Countries with limited budgets may not place the enforcement of mandatory voting laws as a high priority still they hope that the presence of the law will encourage the citizens to participate. Can a country be considered to practice compulsory voting if the mandatory voting laws are ignored and irrelevant to the voting habits of the electorate? Is a country practicing compulsory voting if there are no penalties for not voting? What if there are penalties for failing to vote but they are never or are scarcely enforced? Or if the penalty is negligible? Many countries offer loopholes, intentionally and otherwise, which allow non-voters to go unpunished. For example, in many countries it is required to vote only if you are a registered voter, but it is not compulsory to register. People might then have incentives not to register. In many cases, like Australia, an acceptable excuse for absence on Election Day will avoid sanctions. The diverse forms compulsory voting has taken in different countries refocuses the perception of it away from an either present or absent practice of countries to a study of the degree and manner in which the government forces its citizens to participate. Which countries practice compulsory voting? Laws, Sanctions & Enforcement Below is a table containing all the countries that have a law that provides for compulsory voting. The first column lists the name of the country, the second column the type of sanctions that the relevant country imposes against non-voters and the third column contains the information on to what extent the compulsory voting laws are enforced in practice. Country Type of Sanction Enforced Year Introduced Comments Argentina 1, 2, 4 Yes 1912 - Australia 1, 2 Yes 1924 - Austria (Tyrol) 1, 2 Yes Practiced from 1929 to 2004 The region of Tyrol. Austria (Vorarlberg) 2, 3 Yes Practiced from 1929 to 1992 The region of Vorarlberg. Austria (Styria) N/A Yes Practiced from 1929 to 1992 The region of Styria. Belgium 1, 2, 4, 5 Yes 1892 (men) Women in 1949. Bolivia None/4 No 1952 18 years of age(married); 21 years of age (single) Brazil 2 Yes N/A Voluntary for illiterates and those over 70. Military conscripts cannot vote. Chile 1, 2, 3 Yes Practiced from 1925 to 2012 Chile abandoned compulsory voting in 2012.

Congo, Democratic Republic of the N/A N/A N/A

Costa Rica None No N/A - Cyprus 1, 2 Yes 1960 - Dominican Republic None No N/A 18 years of age, married persons regardless of age;

Members of the military and national police cannot vote. Ecuador 2 Yes 1936 Compulsory for literate persons ages 18-65, optional for other eligible voters. Egypt 1, 2 No 1956 This is the year from which we have found the earliest law. Fiji 1, 2, 3 Yes Practiced from 1992 to 2006

Fiji abandoned compulsory voting in 2014

France (Senate only) 2 No 1950's or 60's - Gabon N/A No N/A - Greece None

No 1926

Administrative sanctions, including prohibition to issue a passport, a driving license or an occupational license, were officially lifted in year 2000 Guatemala None No N/A Guatemala abandoned compulsory voting in 1990 Honduras None No N/A - Italy 5 No Practised from 1945 to 1993 - Lebanon N/A N/A N/A 21 years of age; compulsory for all males; authorized for women at age 21 with elementary education; excludes military personnel Liechtenstein 1, 2 Yes N/A - Luxembourg 1, 2 Yes N/A Voluntary for those over 70. Mexico None / 5 No N/A - Nauru 1, 2 Yes 1965 - Netherlands - No Practised from 1917 to 1967 - Panama N/A N/A N/A - Paraguay 2 No N/A Up to age 75 Peru 2, 4 Yes 1933 Until the age of 75. Philippines None No Attempt to practice 1972-1986 under martial law. - Spain N/A No Practiced from 1907 to 1923

Singapore 4 Yes N/A The non-voter is removed from the voter register until he/she reapplies and provides a reason. Switzerland (Schaffhausen) 2 Yes 1904 Practised in only one canton. Abolished in other cantons in 1974 Thailand None No N/A - Turkey 1, 2 Yes N/A - Uruguay 2, 4 Yes 1934 Law not in practice until 1970. U.S.A (Georgia) N/A No

Stated in 1777 Constitution of Georgia. Venezuela N/A N/A

Practiced until 1993 The numbers listed in the column for Type of Sanction stands for different types of sanctions. These are as follows: 1. Explanation. The non-voter has to provide a legitimate reason for his/her abstention to avoid further sanctions, if any exist. 2. Fine. The non-voter faces a fine sanction. The amount varies between the countries, for example 3 Swiss Francs in Switzerland, between 300 and 3 000 ATS in Austria, 200 Cyprus Pounds in Cyprus, 10-20 Argentinean Pesos in Argentina, 20 Soles in Peru etc. 3. Possible imprisonment. The non-voter may face imprisonment as a sanction, however, we do not know of any documented cases. This can also happen in countries such as Australia where a fine sanction is common. In cases where the non-voter does not pay the fines after being reminded or after refusing several times, the courts may impose a prison sentence. This is usually classified as imprisonment for failure to pay the fine, not imprisonment for failure to vote. 4. Infringements of civil rights or disenfranchisement. It is for example possible that the non-voter, after not voting in at least four elections within 15 years will be disenfranchised in Belgium. In Peru the voter has to carry a stamped voting card for a number of months after the election as a proof of having voted. This stamp is required in order to obtain some services and goods from some public offices. In Singapore the voter is removed from the voter register until he/she reapplies to be included and submits a legitimate reason for not having voted. In Bolivia the voter is given a card when he/she has voted so that he/she can proof the participation. The voter would not be able to receive his/her salary from the bank if he/she can not show the proof of voting during three months after the election. 5. Other. For example in Belgium it might be difficult getting a job within the public sector if you are non-voter. There are no formal sanctions in Mexico or Italy but possible arbitrary or social sanctions. This is called the "innocuous sanction" in Italy, where it might for example be difficult to get a daycare place for your child or similar but this is not formalised in any way at all.

Voter Turnout Access the Voter Turnout Database Display VT data for: Country Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Congo, Democratic Republic of Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Cyprus (North) Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands (Malvinas) Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Holy See (Vatican City State) Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea, Dem. People's Republic of Korea, Republic of Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Dem. Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic (1993-) Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia, Federated States of Moldova, Republic of Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territory, Occupied Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Islands Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Republic of The Congo (Brazzaville) Reunion Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Helena Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and The Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan (‡) Tajikistan Tanzania, United Republic of Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Wallis and Futuna Vanuatu Venezuela Western Sahara Viet Nam Virgin Islands, British Virgin Islands, U.S. Yemen Yugoslavia, FR/Union of Serbia and Montenegro Yugoslavia, SFR (1943-1992) Zambia Zimbabwe Field Voter Turn­out Total vote Regi­­stration VAP Turn­out Voting age popu­­lation Popu­lation Invalid votes Freedom house Freedom house - Political Rights Freedom house - Civil liberties Compulsory voting Voter Turn­out Total vote Regi­stration VAP Turn­out Voting age popu­lation Popu­lation Invalid votes Freedom house Freedom house - Political Rights Freedom house - Civil liberties Compulsory voting Voter Turn­out Total vote Regi­stration VAP Turn­out Voting age popu­lation Population Invalid votes Freedom house Freedom house - Political Rights Freedom house - Civil liberties Compulsory voting Why a Voter Turnout website?

Methodology and Sources



Compulsory voting

External voting

Publications on Voter Turnout

Links and Resources



Glossary

FAQ Voter Turnout Analyzer Visualize and share your data To the tool Voter Turnout in Western Europe since 1945: A Regional Report

Voter Turnout since 1945: A Global Report

Engaging the Electorate: Initiatives to Promote Voter Turnout From Around the World Global database on elections and democracy Database home

About the database

FAQ

Maps Customise the data Display data for: - Country - Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Congo, Democratic Republic of Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Cyprus (North) Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands (Malvinas) Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Holy See (Vatican City State) Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea, Dem. People's Republic of Korea, Republic of Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Dem. Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic (1993-) Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia, Federated States of Moldova, Republic of Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territory, Occupied Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Islands Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Republic of The Congo (Brazzaville) Reunion Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Helena Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and The Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan (‡) Tajikistan Tanzania, United Republic of Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Wallis and Futuna Vanuatu Venezuela Western Sahara Viet Nam Virgin Islands, British Virgin Islands, U.S. Yemen Yugoslavia, FR/Union of Serbia and Montenegro Yugoslavia, SFR (1943-1992) Zambia Zimbabwe - Field - Voter Turnout Total vote Registration VAP Turnout Voting age population Population Invalid votes Freedom house Freedom house - Political Rights Freedom house - Civil liberties Compulsory voting Voter Turnout Total vote Registration VAP Turnout Voting age population Population Invalid votes Freedom house Freedom house - Political Rights Freedom house - Civil liberties Compulsory voting Voter Turnout Total vote Registration VAP Turnout Voting age population Population Invalid votes Freedom house Freedom house - Political Rights Freedom house - Civil liberties Compulsory voting Parliament type Quota type in Lower House Total seats in Lower House Seats held by women in the Lower House Seats held by men in the Lower House Constitutional quota details Lower House Electoral law quota details Lower House Political funding legislation quota details Lower House Legal sanctions for non-compliance in Lower House Rank-order rules Lower House Quota type in Upper House Total seats in Upper House Seats held by women in the Upper House Seats held by men in the Upper House Constitutional quota details Upper House Electoral law quota details Upper House Political funding legislation quota details Upper House Legal sanctions for non-compliance in Upper House Rank-order rules Upper House Quota type sub-national level Constitutional quota details sub-national level Electoral law quota details sub-national level Political funding legislation quota details sub-national level Legal sanctions for non-compliance sub-national level Rank-order rules sub-national level Voluntary political party quotas Additional information about gender quotas Electoral system Upper House Sources for gender quotas Is there a ban on donations from foreign interests to political parties? Is there a ban on donations from foreign interests to candidates? Is there a ban on corporate donations to political parties? Is there a ban on corporate donations to candidates? Is there a ban on donations from corporations with government contracts or partial government ownership to political parties? Is there a ban on donations from corporations with government contracts or partial government ownership to candidates? Is there a ban on donations from Trade Unions to political parties? Is there a ban on donations from Trade Unions to candidates? Is there a ban on anonymous donations to political parties? Is there a ban on anonymous donations to candidates? Is there a ban on state resources being given to or received by political parties or candidates (excluding regulated public funding)? Is there a ban on any other form of donation? Is there a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a political party over a time period (not election specific)? If there is a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a political party over a time period (not election specific), what is the limit? Is there a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a political party in relation to an election? If there is a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a political party in relation to an election, what is the limit? Is there a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a candidate? If there is a limit on the amount a donor can contribute to a candidate, what is the limit? Are there provisions for direct public funding to political parties? If there are provisions for direct public funding to political parties, what are the eligibility criteria? If there are provisions for direct public funding to political parties, what is the allocation calculation? If there are provisions for direct public funding to political parties, are there provisions for how it should be used (“ear marking”)? Are there provisions for free or subsidized access to media for political parties? If there are provisions for political parties’ free or subsidized access to media, what criteria determine access allocation? Are there provisions for free or subsidized access to media for candidates? Are there provisions for any other form of indirect public funding? Is the provision of direct public funding to political parties related to gender equality among candidates? Are there provisions for other financial advantages to encourage gender equality in political parties? Is there a ban on vote buying? Are there bans on state resources being used in favour or against a political party or candidate? Are there limits on the amount a political party can spend? If there are limits on the amount a political party can spend, what is the limit? Are there limits on the amount a candidate can spend? If there are limits on the amount a candidate can spend what is the limit for spending? Do political parties have to report regularly on their finances? Do political parties have to report on their finances in relation to election campaigns? Do candidates have to report on their campaign finances? Is information in reports from political parties and/or candidates to be made public? Must reports from political parties and/or candidates reveal the identity of donors? What institution(s) receives financial reports from political parties and/or candidates? Is it specified that a particular institution(s) is responsible for examining financial reports and/or investigating violations? What other institutions have a formal role in political finance oversight? What sanctions are provided for political finance infractions? Electoral System Family Electoral System for National Legislature Number of tiers Legislative size (directly elected) Legislative size (Voting members) Electoral system for the president Model of electoral management Legal provisions for mandatory referendums at national level Legal provisions for optional referendums at national level Legal provisions for citizens' initiatives at national level Legal provisions for agenda initiatives at national level Legal provisions for recall at national level Legal provisions for direct democracy at the regional level Legal provisions for direct democracy at the local level What is the legal basis for direct democracy at the national level? What is the legal basis for administrative requirements for direct democracy at the national level? The body responsible for administering direct democracy mechanisms at the national level First referendum/initiative held Has there been a national referendum since 1980? Challenges to election results - Legislative - First instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges to election results - Legislative - Who may file a complaint? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Filing fee/deposit amount (in local currency) Challenges to election results - Legislative - Maximum complaint time since occurrence or discovery Challenges to election results - Legislative - Maximum complaint time since announcement of election results Challenges to election results - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges to election results - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges to election results - Legislative - Possibility to appeal Challenges to election results - Legislative - What remedies are available in the first instance? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Last instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges to election results - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit in the last instance? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Filing/deposit fee amount (local currency) in the last instance Challenges to election results - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing in the last instance Challenges to election results - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision in the last instance Challenges to election results - Legislative - What remedies are available in the last instance? Challenges to election results - Legislative - Number of levels of adjudication Challenges to election results - Legislative - Maximum adjudication time for the full process from when the complaint is filed at the first instance body until a decision is reached at the last instance Challenges to election results - Presidential - First instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges to election results - Presidential - Who may file a complaint? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges to election results - Presidential - Maximum complaint time since occurrence or discovery Challenges to election results - Presidential - Maximum complaint time since announcement of election results Challenges to election results - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges to election results - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges to election results - Presidential - Possibility to appeal Challenges to election results - Presidential - What remedies are available in the first instance? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Last instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges to election results - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit in the last instance? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Filing/deposit fee amount (local currency) in the last instance Challenges to election results - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing in the last instance Challenges to election results - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision in the last instance Challenges to election results - Presidential - What remedies are available in the last instance? Challenges to election results - Presidential - Number of levels of adjudication Challenges to election results - Presidential - Maximum adjudication time for the full process from when the complaint is filed at the first instance body until a decision is reached at the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - First instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Who may file a complaint? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Maximum complaint time since occurrence or discovery Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Maximum complaint time since announcement of election results Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Possibility to appeal Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - What remedies are available in the first instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Last instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit in the last instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Filing/deposit fee amount (local currency) in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - What remedies are available in the last instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Number of levels of adjudication Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Legislative - Maximum adjudication time for the full process from when the complaint is filed at the first instance body until a decision is reached at the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - First instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Who may file a complaint? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Maximum complaint time since occurrence or discovery Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Maximum complaint time since announcement of election results Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Possibility to appeal Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - What remedies are available in the first instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Last instance body dealing with electoral disputes Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit in the last instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Filing/deposit fee amount (local currency) in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision in the last instance Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - What remedies are available in the last instance? Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Number of levels of adjudication Challenges related to political party and candidate nomination and registration - Presidential - Maximum adjudication time for the full process from when the complaint is filed at the first instance body until a decision is reached at the last instance Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - What institution(s) has the power to impose non-criminal sanctions for campaign finance infractions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - What types of sanctions can be imposed for campaign finance infractions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Can the imposed sanctions be appealed? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - If appeal is possible, what is the competent body to hear the appeal? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - What is the maximum time to submit an appeal since imposition of sanctions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - Possibility to further appeal Challenges related to campaign financing - Legislative - What remedies are available? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - What institution(s) has the power to impose non-criminal sanctions for campaign finance infractions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - What types of sanctions can be imposed for campaign finance infractions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Can the imposed sanctions be appealed? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - If appeal is possible, what is the competent body to hear the appeal? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Is there a legally mandated filing fee and/or deposit? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Filing fee/deposit amout (in local currency) Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - What is the maximum time to submit an appeal since imposition of sanctions? Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Requirement to hold a hearing Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Requirement to issue reasoned decision Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - Possibility to further appeal Challenges related to campaign financing - Presidential - What remedies are available in the first instance? Does the law criminalize any election-related offenses? What type of law provides for election-related criminal offences? Which types of election-related misconducts are regarded as criminal offences? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to electoral fraud? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to incentive driven voter coercion? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to threat driven voter coercion? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to obstructing the electoral process? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to voter registration? What penalties are envisioned for offences related to unlawful conduct of campaign financing? Who carries out investigation for election-related criminal offenses? Who prosecutes election-related criminal offences? Election type Voting method First year Comments Voter registration and identification - How is the national electoral register created? Voter registration and identification - If electoral register is created by the EMB, which method is used? Voter registration and identification - If electoral register is created by the EMB, what type of technology used for collecting registration data? Voter registration and identification - If the EMB uses technology to collect voter registration data, is biometric data captured and used during registration? Voter registration and identification - Is biometric data used in voter identification at polling stations? Voter registration and identification - Is technology used for identifying voters at polling stations (electronic poll books)? Voter registration and identification - How technology is used in relation paper voter lists? E-Voting - Is e-voting currently used in any elections with EMB participation? E-Voting - If e-voting is currently being used, what type(s) of technology used? E-Voting - If e-voting is currently being used, is it taking place in controlled or uncontrolled environment? E-Voting - If e-voting is currently being used, is it available for all voters or only some groups of voters? E-voting - If e-voting is NOT currently being used, what is the current status of e-voting in general? Processing of results - Are official election results processed by an electronic tabulation system? Processing of results - If official election results processed by an electronic tabulation system, at which level results are entered into an electronic tabulation system? Processing of results - In the last national election, how many days did it take for the EMB to establish final results? Processing of results - In the last national election, how many days did it take for the EMB to announce certified results? Usage of open source software in election administration - Does the country use open source software in electoral processes? Usage of open source software in election administration - What are the key reasons for or against using open source systems? Usage of open source software in election administration - What types of open source systems have been considered or used? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country provide individual online voter registration/polling assignment checks? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish the statistical overview of voter lists online? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish full voter registers at the polling station level online? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish full voter registers at the national level online? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish the lists of parties and/or candidates registered for elections online? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish the election (voting) results online? Online data publication by EMBs - If the country publishes the election (voting) results online, what is the level of aggregation? Online data publication by EMBs - If the country publishes the election (voting) results online, what is the level of detail? Online data publication by EMBs - If the country publishes the election (voting) results online, what is the timing of publication of results? Online data publication by EMBs - If the country publishes the election (voting) results online, are historical results also available? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish seat allocation data online? Online data publication by EMBs - Does the country publish candidate/party financing reports online? Go to a specific database: Voter Turnout

Gender quotas

Political Finance

Electoral System Design

Electoral Management Design

Direct Democracy

Electoral Justice

Voting from Abroad

ICTs in Elections New Please also visit our partner databases: Boundary delimitation

Voter registration

Vote counting

Media and elections

Voter education Feedback I find this page: (Very

useful) 5 4 3 2 1 (Not

useful) If you would like to, you are welcome to supply a comment as well:

If you would like an answer, please enter your email address: