Amid escalating violence in Afghanistan, rising opposition in Germany to military mission

BERLIN: The German Foreign Ministry confirmed Sunday that a German woman working with a Christian aid agency in Afghanistan was abducted in Kabul on Saturday, ending a week in which three German security officers were killed by a roadside bomb and a German engineer was still being held hostage by the Taliban.

"We can confirm that a woman has been abducted," said a ministry spokeswoman. "The Foreign Ministry's crisis team is engaged in working toward a solution in close contact with the Afghan authorities," she added.

The ministry would not say whether the Taliban or criminal gangs were involved in the abduction. On Sunday, Ali Shah Paktiawal, chief of police criminal investigations in Kabul, ruled out any involvement by the Taliban but did not say who was responsible. Esmatullah Dauladzai, the provincial police chief of Kabul, said it was premature to say who was involved.

Regardless of which movement is responsible, the escalating violence in Afghanistan is becoming a political issue in Germany, where the Social Democratic Party, which is in coalition with Chancellor Angela Merkel's conservative bloc, is beginning to question the continuing presence of the 3,200 German soldiers there.

During their party congress in October, the Social Democrats will hold a special session on Afghanistan. According to internal polls, over 50 percent of party members, many of whom come from the traditional pacifist wing, want the German Army to be withdrawn from Afghanistan. An opinion poll carried out by Forsa reported that over 60 percent of Germans wanted the troops brought home.

The new Left Party is proposing to go further. Oskar Lafontaine, a former chairman of the Social Democrats and now a leader of the Left Party, wants all German troops withdrawn not only from Afghanistan but from other missions, including Kosovo, Macedonia, the Horn of Africa and Lebanon. This pacifist stance, combined with a more populist stance toward the economy, appears to be gaining ground.

An opinion poll published last week by the Allensbach Institute gave the Left Party 11 percent of the vote if elections were held Sunday. The Social Democrats were struggling at 27 percent, a historic low.

The Left Party is an amalgam of the Party of Democratic Socialists, successors to the former East German communist party, and West German trade unionists and traditional leftist voters who have become disillusioned with the more centrist policies of the Social Democrats, and with what it regards as its militaristic approach.

Before he refused to participate in the Iraq war, former Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, a Social Democrat, had pushed for Berlin to support the NATO bombing campaign in Kosovo and to send troops to Afghanistan in early 2002 as part of a broad UN-backed coalition to bring security and stability to the country.

German troops in Afghanistan are based in the northern region of Kunduz, which is relatively quiet and stable compared to the east and south, where NATO-led forces are facing tough resistance from Taliban fighters. Nevertheless, three German soldiers were killed in May by a suicide bomber while on foot patrol in Kunduz, bringing the number of German soldiers killed in the country to 23. Since the May attack, the soldiers have become extremely cautious; they carry out patrols in armored personnel carriers and are confined to their headquarters once daylight fades, according to NATO officials.

In the south, NATO forces consisting mainly of British, Canadian and Dutch soldiers are engaged in a combat mission to defeat the Taliban.

A commander of the British Army, which has contributed 7,700 troops, said Sunday that its forces were stretched but were winning the battle.

The commander, General Richard Dannatt, in an interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation insisted that the Taliban were being pushed back.

The 31-year-old woman abducted Saturday started work in Afghanistan with her husband more than a year ago for a German-based international group that specializes in HIV/AIDS programs.

She was eating in a restaurant when four men in a car pulled up to the premises, according to the Afghan police authorities as reported by The Associated Press. One of them entered the restaurant, pulled out a pistol, approached the woman's table and took her away, the report said. The police chased the speeding car and opened fire, colliding with a taxi and killing its driver, it said.

On Sunday, a private Afghan television station broadcast what it said was a video of the woman, showing her sitting on the floor of a room, her head covered with a white scarf, according to The AP. The woman identified herself as Christina Maier and said, "I am O.K."