Kenya's new prime minister Raila Odinga takes oath of office
Raila Odinga being sworn into office as Kenya's prime minister on Thursday. (Khalil Senosi/The Associated Press)

Kenya's new prime minister Raila Odinga takes oath of office

NAIROBI, Kenya: Kenya's opposition leader was sworn into office as the country's prime minister Thursday, fulfilling a key step in a power-sharing deal aimed at ending a deadly political crisis in the East African nation.

Within hours, a feared gang promised to heed new Prime Minister Raila Odinga's call to stop its campaign of terror in the capital — one small sign that resolving Kenya's political crisis could help return peace and stability to the fragile nation.

More than 1,000 people were killed and 300,000 displaced following the December elections that both Odinga and President Mwai Kibaki claimed to win. With the violence escalating, the rivals agreed in February to share power — but then wrangled for weeks over how to divide up their coalition Cabinet.

On Thursday, ministers finally took up their positions, 20 each from Kibaki's and Odinga's camps. Kibaki's party retained the key finance and internal security ministries and Raila's allies will head up agriculture and oversee local government.

The entire government, including Odinga, swore an oath of loyalty to the president.

"Kenyans will be watching your performance and they'll judge you by the services you deliver," Kibaki said at the inauguration ceremony.

Odinga said Kenya was embarking on a new era of unity.

"We have been to hell and back. Never in our history will we return to this time," he said. "We are not creating two governments in one: It is one government."

He also used his inauguration to address the Mungiki gang that has been terrorizing the capital. At least 14 people have died since the banned gang launched a protest against police Monday that has paralyzed parts of Nairobi.

"I want to tell our brothers the Mungiki we shall talk to them. We should stop beating each other. We should stop killing each other," Odinga said in Swahili. "We should speak together as Kenyans."

Later, he told local Citizen TV he was expressing a personal view that had yet to be decided as policy.

But the Mungiki responded by promising to call off their violent protests at Odinga's request.

"We have waited for Raila to be prime minister for 20 years," senior gang leader Stephen Njenga said, adding that gang leader Maina Njenga prophesied Odinga's rise two decades ago. "Raila has asked us to call off the strike and because we respect him, we will honor his request."

"We will give him time to look into our issues."

Kenya is a key U.S. ally and regional economic and military powerhouse that for years was one of the most stable nations in East Africa. But the disputed December elections laid bare frustrations over poverty and corruption — and ethnic rivalries in a country where Kikuyus, the tribe Kibaki belongs to, are perceived to dominate others, including the Luo, Odinga's ethnic group.

The apparent olive branch offered to the Mungiki, a gang dedicated to spreading Kikuyu culture, by Odinga, a Luo, is another strange strand in Kenya's web of politics, ethnicity and violence.

Many Mungiki say they were approached during the violence by Kikuyu politicians to act as an ethnic militia but refused to get heavily involved because the gang was angered by the extrajudicial killings of more than 450 Kikuyu youths last year.

The gang blamed police in Kibaki's administration in the deaths. A government-funded human rights organization also found "strong circumstantial" evidence implicating authorities. However, police deny the charges.

Tackling gangs is only one of a long list of problems awaiting the new government.

"There's lots of work ahead — constitutional reform, land reform, the program that will create employment for the youth," former U.N. chief Kofi Annan, who brokered the peace deal, reminded the two leaders.

They also must assure Kenyans they will now focus on rebuilding Kenya and cracking down on crime and corruption.

Many backed creating a joint government to resolve the political standoff — but balked at expanding the government at a time when hundreds of thousands are homeless from the violence earlier this year.

Groups like anti-corruption watchdog MARS Kenya have criticized the size of the Cabinet, the largest in Kenya's history. Activist Mwalimu Mati described such a dramatic increase in the number of posts in a country notorious for corruption as "putting out the fire with gasoline."

But Odinga urged Kenyans — many of whom scrape by in polluted slums on less than a dollar a day in his own constituency: "Don't look at the size of the Cabinet but its product."