Speed
Among enforcement methods, speed cameras stand apart because they don't require the presence of an officer. By deploying cameras, communities are able to enforce speed limits much more consistently than they can using traditional enforcement.

Most speed cameras measure the speed of a vehicle at a single spot. Fixed cameras use either radar or detectors embedded in the road surface to measure a vehicle's speed. Mobile cameras are placed at the roadside in marked or unmarked police cars, containers, poles, etc., and use radar or laser to measure speeds. Some communities require mobile cameras to be manned. In either fixed or mobile systems, if a vehicle is traveling faster than a predetermined speed, the date, time, location and speed are recorded along with a photo of the vehicle.

More recent technology can measure average speeds over a certain distance. In this case, cameras located at two or more points record time-stamped images of all vehicles that pass them. Automatic license-plate recognition is used to match individual vehicles so that average speeds between the two points can be calculated. Time-stamped pictures of speeding vehicles are used as evidence of speeding. Point-to-point speed cameras have been used to enforce speed limits in countries such as Australia and the United Kingdom.

Speed cameras usually are programmed so they will not be activated unless a vehicle is traveling significantly faster than the posted limit — typically 10 or 11 mph faster, although in certain places such as school zones the tolerance may be lower.

Automated speed enforcement can substantially reduce speeding on a wide range of roads. IIHS studies of cameras on residential roads in Maryland, on a high-speed roadway in Arizona and on city streets in the District of Columbia found that the proportion of drivers exceeding speed limits by more than 10 mph declined by 70, 88 and 82 percent, respectively, six to eight months after cameras were introduced (Retting et al., 2008; Retting et al., 2008; Retting & Farmer, 2003).

An IIHS study in Montgomery County, Md., found that about 7½ years after the speed camera program began, the cameras were associated with a 10 percent reduction in mean speeds and a 62 percent reduction in the likelihood that a vehicle was traveling more than 10 mph above the speed limit on camera-eligible roads, almost all of which had cameras (Hu & McCartt, 2016).

A 2010 review published by the Cochrane Collaboration, an international public health organization, examined 35 studies from various countries. The authors concluded that speed cameras — including fixed, mobile, overt and covert devices — cut average speeds by 1-15 percent and the percentage of vehicles traveling above the speed limits or designated speed thresholds by 14-65 percent compared with sites without cameras (Wilson et al;. 2010).

Speed cameras have also been shown to reduce crashes and crash injuries. Speed camera enforcement in Montgomery County was associated with an 8 percent reduction in the likelihood that a crash on a camera-eligible road was speeding-related and a 19 percent reduction in the likelihood that a crash involved an incapacitating or fatal injury (Hu & McCartt, 2016). A corridor approach, in which cameras were periodically moved along the length of a roadway segment, provided an additional 30 percent reduction in the likelihood that a crash involved an incapacitating or fatal injury over and above the effect of the cameras.

In its 2010 review, the Cochrane Collaboration summarized 28 studies that reported the effect on crashes and found reductions of 8-49 percent for all crashes, 8-50 percent for injury crashes and 11-44 percent for crashes involving fatalities and serious injuries, in the vicinity of camera sites (Wilson et al;. 2010). Over wider areas, the review found reductions of 9-35 percent for all crashes, and 17-58 percent for crashes involving fatalities and serious injuries. Reviewed studies with longer duration showed that these trends were either maintained or improved with time.

Speed cameras were in operation in 137 U.S. communities in 14 states and the District of Columbia during 2018, according to media sources and other public information tracked by IIHS, up from only four Arizona and Utah communities in 1995. Peoria, Ariz., and Paradise Valley, Ariz., were the first two communities to implement speed cameras in 1987. Cameras are used statewide in highway work zones in Illinois, Maryland and Oregon.

Trends in the number of U.S. communities with speed cameras

U.S. communities using speed cameras

Despite some vocal opposition to camera enforcement, telephone surveys in jurisdictions with speed-camera programs show a majority of drivers support them.

A 2014 IIHS survey of 900 licensed drivers ages 18 and older residing in Montgomery County, Md., found that 62 percent of drivers favored automated speed enforcement on residential streets about 7½ years after camera ticketing began (Hu & McCartt, 2016). A 2017 national survey of drivers ages 16 and older indicated that 48 percent supported the use of speed cameras on residential streets (AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety, 2018).

A 2012 IIHS survey of 801 District of Columbia residents found strong support for speed cameras (Cicchino et al., 2014). D.C. has used speed cameras since 2001. In the survey, 88 percent of residents said that speeding was a serious threat to their personal safety. Seventy-one percent of residents who had driven a car in D.C. in the past month and 90 percent of residents who had not driven supported speed cameras.

In Scottsdale, Ariz., 63 percent of drivers surveyed prior to the start of automated enforcement said speed cameras should be used on an urban freeway where camera enforcement was planned. After speed cameras were operational, 77 percent of drivers supported their use (Retting et al., 2008).

NHTSA and the Federal Highway Administration have issued guidance for implementing speed camera programs that can increase a community’s support for them.