Giri Rajendran: What now for European defence spending?
By Giri Rajendran, Research Associate for Defence and Economics

The crisis in Ukraine has caused strategic planners across Europe to sit up and take notice. One question that is already being reflected upon is whether cuts to European defence budgets have gone too far. At the EU–US summit on 26 March, President Barack Obama voiced his concerns over diminished levels of defence spending in many NATO European states, warning that: ‘The situation in Ukraine reminds us that our freedom isn’t free, and we’ve got to be willing to pay for the assets, the personnel, the training that’s required to make sure that we have a credible NATO force and an effective deterrent force.’

In a similar vein, NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen recently argued that, in the current security climate, every ally ‘needs to invest the necessary resources in the right capabilities’. This message was reinforced by his deputy, Ambassador Alexander Vershbow, who said: ‘If there was ever any doubt, the crisis now makes clear why we must invest sufficiently in defence and security, and why we cannot just keep cutting our defence budgets every year while others around the world continue to boost theirs.’

European defence outlays have declined significantly since the end of the Cold War. According to NATO data, real defence expenditure per capita in NATO Europe has fallen to just over half the levels seen in 1990, and is down by more than a fifth since 2000. These long-term reductions were accelerated by the 2008 transatlantic financial crisis, as Western states slashed defence outlays further as governments prioritised fiscal consolidation. Data contained in The Military Balance 2014 indicates that Europe (including non-NATO states) collectively now spends only about 1.4% of GDP on defence. This is one of the lowest proportions of GDP spent on defence of any region of the world – the only region that spends appreciably less on defence (as a proportion of GDP) is Latin America. Within NATO, only four out of 28 member states currently meet the Alliance’s 2% spending target: the US, UK, Greece and Estonia. Even Germany – the economic powerhouse of Europe – only allocates 1.3% of GDP to defence, a figure that is lower than the NATO European average of around 1.6% of GDP. This average budgetary allocation in NATO Europe is itself down from around 2.5% of GDP in the early 1990s.

The reduction in European defence spending levels stands in stark contrast to trends in emerging economies. As first identified in The Military Balance 2013, Asian military spending in 2012 overtook that of NATO Europe for the first time in modern history. This is further illustrated in the 2014 edition, which demonstrated that between 2011 and 2013 virtually all the increases in global defence spending occurred in regions other than North America and Europe (see above). Without a near-term return to economic growth in the Eurozone, defence spending levels could fall further in the years to come; for European states, defence on the whole remains a discretionary area of government spending that has to compete with other spending priorities, such as social and healthcare expenditure. Significantly, although Europe still spends around 3–4 times more than Russia on defence, Russian military expenditure in 2013 was more than 30% higher in real terms than it was in 2008, and current Russian plans envision a further real increase in defence outlays of at least another 30% by 2016 – at which point Russian defence outlays are projected to be running at close to 4% of GDP.

Russian actions in Crimea notwithstanding, the Ukraine crisis is in the short-term unlikely to reverse these trends in most European states, many of which will probably remain constrained by broader fiscal pressures. For example, the imperatives of deficit reduction mean it seems unlikely that Europe’s two largest defence spending states (the UK and France) will depart substantially from their existing defence budget trajectories. This will be even truer in Southern Europe, where fiscal austerity has already seen some of the largest percentage reductions in defence outlays on the continent. For example, spending levels in Spain and Italy are already some 20% lower in real terms than they were prior to the crisis, and the Italian parliament is currently considering significant cuts to the purchase of F-35 Joint Strike Fighters, in order to further reduce military expenditure.

The exception to this general trend is likely to be Eastern and Northern European states. In several of these countries defence spending levels have been broadly maintained in recent years, and in some cases even increased (for example, in Poland and Norway). It is possible that these states will consider additional budgetary allocations or more innovative ways of delivering (singly or jointly) defence capabilities. Poland is proposing to accelerate its acquisition timetables, while the Czech Republic, Latvia, Lithuania, Sweden and Estonia are reportedly reviewing their military expenditure levels in light of now-heightened threat perceptions.

But while these developments may indicate an uptick in defence outlays in Europe’s eastern and northern regions, it remains to be seen whether the Ukraine crisis will reverse the now two-decade-long decline in overall spending levels as a proportion of GDP in Europe as a whole.