Illinois Human Rights Act.
Illinois Compiled Statutes Information maintained by the Legislative Reference Bureau Updating the database of the Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) is an ongoing process. Recent laws may not yet be included in the ILCS database, but they are found on this site as Public Acts soon after they become law. For information concerning the relationship between statutes and Public Acts, refer to the Guide Because the statute database is maintained primarily for legislative drafting purposes, statutory changes are sometimes included in the statute database before they take effect. If the source note at the end of a Section of the statutes includes a Public Act that has not yet taken effect, the version of the law that is currently in effect may have already been removed from the database and you should refer to that Public Act to see the changes made to the current law.

HUMAN RIGHTS

(775 ILCS 5/) Illinois Human Rights Act. 775 ILCS 5/Art. 2



(775 ILCS 5/Art. 2 heading) ARTICLE 2. EMPLOYMENT

775 ILCS 5/2-101 (775 ILCS 5/2-101) (from Ch. 68, par. 2-101)

Sec. 2-101. Definitions. The following definitions are applicable strictly in the context of this Article.

(A) Employee.

(1) "Employee" includes:

(a) Any individual performing services for remuneration within this State for an employer; (b) An apprentice;

(c) An applicant for any apprenticeship.

For purposes of subsection (D) of Section 2-102 of this Act, "employee" also includes an unpaid intern. An unpaid intern is a person who performs work for an employer under the following circumstances: (i) the employer is not committed to hiring the person performing the work at the conclusion of the intern's tenure; (ii) the employer and the person performing the work agree that the person is not entitled to wages for the work performed; and (iii) the work performed:

(I) supplements training given in an educational environment that may enhance the employability of the intern; (II) provides experience for the benefit of the person performing the work; (III) does not displace regular employees;

(IV) is performed under the close supervision of existing staff; and (V) provides no immediate advantage to the employer providing the training and may occasionally impede the operations of the employer. (2) "Employee" does not include:

(a) (Blank);

(b) Individuals employed by persons who are not "employers" as defined by this Act; (c) Elected public officials or the members of their immediate personal staffs; (d) Principal administrative officers of the State or of any political subdivision, municipal corporation or other governmental unit or agency; (e) A person in a vocational rehabilitation facility certified under federal law who has been designated an evaluee, trainee, or work activity client. (B) Employer.

(1) "Employer" includes:

(a) Any person employing 15 or more employees within Illinois during 20 or more calendar weeks within the calendar year of or preceding the alleged violation; (b) Any person employing one or more employees when a complainant alleges civil rights violation due to unlawful discrimination based upon his or her physical or mental disability unrelated to ability, pregnancy, or sexual harassment; (c) The State and any political subdivision, municipal corporation or other governmental unit or agency, without regard to the number of employees; (d) Any party to a public contract without regard to the number of employees; (e) A joint apprenticeship or training committee without regard to the number of employees. (2) "Employer" does not include any religious corporation, association, educational institution, society, or non-profit nursing institution conducted by and for those who rely upon treatment by prayer through spiritual means in accordance with the tenets of a recognized church or religious denomination with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by such corporation, association, educational institution, society or non-profit nursing institution of its activities. (C) Employment Agency. "Employment Agency" includes both public and private employment agencies and any person, labor organization, or labor union having a hiring hall or hiring office regularly undertaking, with or without compensation, to procure opportunities to work, or to procure, recruit, refer or place employees.

(D) Labor Organization. "Labor Organization" includes any organization, labor union, craft union, or any voluntary unincorporated association designed to further the cause of the rights of union labor which is constituted for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or apprenticeships or applications for apprenticeships, or of other mutual aid or protection in connection with employment, including apprenticeships or applications for apprenticeships.

(E) Sexual Harassment. "Sexual harassment" means any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when (1) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment, (2) submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or (3) such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.

(F) Religion. "Religion" with respect to employers includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief, unless an employer demonstrates that he is unable to reasonably accommodate an employee's or prospective employee's religious observance or practice without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer's business.

(G) Public Employer. "Public employer" means the State, an agency or department thereof, unit of local government, school district, instrumentality or political subdivision.

(H) Public Employee. "Public employee" means an employee of the State, agency or department thereof, unit of local government, school district, instrumentality or political subdivision. "Public employee" does not include public officers or employees of the General Assembly or agencies thereof.

(I) Public Officer. "Public officer" means a person who is elected to office pursuant to the Constitution or a statute or ordinance, or who is appointed to an office which is established, and the qualifications and duties of which are prescribed, by the Constitution or a statute or ordinance, to discharge a public duty for the State, agency or department thereof, unit of local government, school district, instrumentality or political subdivision.

(J) Eligible Bidder. "Eligible bidder" means a person who, prior to contract award or prior to bid opening for State contracts for construction or construction-related services, has filed with the Department a properly completed, sworn and currently valid employer report form, pursuant to the Department's regulations. The provisions of this Article relating to eligible bidders apply only to bids on contracts with the State and its departments, agencies, boards, and commissions, and the provisions do not apply to bids on contracts with units of local government or school districts.

(K) Citizenship Status. "Citizenship status" means the status of being:

(1) a born U.S. citizen;

(2) a naturalized U.S. citizen;

(3) a U.S. national; or

(4) a person born outside the United States and not a U.S. citizen who is not an unauthorized alien and who is protected from discrimination under the provisions of Section 1324b of Title 8 of the United States Code, as now or hereafter amended. (Source: P.A. 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 99-758, eff. 1-1-17; 100-43, eff. 8-9-17.)

775 ILCS 5/2-102 (775 ILCS 5/2-102) (from Ch. 68, par. 2-102)

Sec. 2-102. Civil rights violations - employment. It is a civil rights violation:

(A) Employers. For any employer to refuse to hire, to segregate, or to act with respect to recruitment, hiring, promotion, renewal of employment, selection for training or apprenticeship, discharge, discipline, tenure or terms, privileges or conditions of employment on the basis of unlawful discrimination or citizenship status. (A-5) Language. For an employer to impose a restriction that has the effect of prohibiting a language from being spoken by an employee in communications that are unrelated to the employee's duties. For the purposes of this subdivision (A-5), "language" means a person's native tongue, such as Polish, Spanish, or Chinese. "Language" does not include such things as slang, jargon, profanity, or vulgarity. (B) Employment agency. For any employment agency to fail or refuse to classify properly, accept applications and register for employment referral or apprenticeship referral, refer for employment, or refer for apprenticeship on the basis of unlawful discrimination or citizenship status or to accept from any person any job order, requisition or request for referral of applicants for employment or apprenticeship which makes or has the effect of making unlawful discrimination or discrimination on the basis of citizenship status a condition of referral. (C) Labor organization. For any labor organization to limit, segregate or classify its membership, or to limit employment opportunities, selection and training for apprenticeship in any trade or craft, or otherwise to take, or fail to take, any action which affects adversely any person's status as an employee or as an applicant for employment or as an apprentice, or as an applicant for apprenticeships, or wages, tenure, hours of employment or apprenticeship conditions on the basis of unlawful discrimination or citizenship status. (D) Sexual harassment. For any employer, employee, agent of any employer, employment agency or labor organization to engage in sexual harassment; provided, that an employer shall be responsible for sexual harassment of the employer's employees by nonemployees or nonmanagerial and nonsupervisory employees only if the employer becomes aware of the conduct and fails to take reasonable corrective measures. (E) Public employers. For any public employer to refuse to permit a public employee under its jurisdiction who takes time off from work in order to practice his or her religious beliefs to engage in work, during hours other than such employee's regular working hours, consistent with the operational needs of the employer and in order to compensate for work time lost for such religious reasons. Any employee who elects such deferred work shall be compensated at the wage rate which he or she would have earned during the originally scheduled work period. The employer may require that an employee who plans to take time off from work in order to practice his or her religious beliefs provide the employer with a notice of his or her intention to be absent from work not exceeding 5 days prior to the date of absence. (E-5) Religious discrimination. For any employer to impose upon a person as a condition of obtaining or retaining employment, including opportunities for promotion, advancement, or transfer, any terms or conditions that would require such person to violate or forgo a sincerely held practice of his or her religion including, but not limited to, the wearing of any attire, clothing, or facial hair in accordance with the requirements of his or her religion, unless, after engaging in a bona fide effort, the employer demonstrates that it is unable to reasonably accommodate the employee's or prospective employee's sincerely held religious belief, practice, or observance without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer's business. Nothing in this Section prohibits an employer from enacting a dress code or grooming policy that may include restrictions on attire, clothing, or facial hair to maintain workplace safety or food sanitation. (F) Training and apprenticeship programs. For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to discriminate against a person on the basis of age in the selection, referral for or conduct of apprenticeship or training programs. (G) Immigration-related practices.

(1) for an employer to request for purposes of satisfying the requirements of Section 1324a(b) of Title 8 of the United States Code, as now or hereafter amended, more or different documents than are required under such Section or to refuse to honor documents tendered that on their face reasonably appear to be genuine; or (2) for an employer participating in the E-Verify Program, as authorized by 8 U.S.C. 1324a, Notes, Pilot Programs for Employment Eligibility Confirmation (enacted by PL 104-208, div. C title IV, subtitle A) to refuse to hire, to segregate, or to act with respect to recruitment, hiring, promotion, renewal of employment, selection for training or apprenticeship, discharge, discipline, tenure or terms, privileges or conditions of employment without following the procedures under the E-Verify Program. (H) (Blank).

(I) Pregnancy. For an employer to refuse to hire, to segregate, or to act with respect to recruitment, hiring, promotion, renewal of employment, selection for training or apprenticeship, discharge, discipline, tenure or terms, privileges or conditions of employment on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth. Women affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth shall be treated the same for all employment-related purposes, including receipt of benefits under fringe benefit programs, as other persons not so affected but similar in their ability or inability to work, regardless of the source of the inability to work or employment classification or status. (J) Pregnancy; reasonable accommodations.

(1) If after a job applicant or employee, including a part-time, full-time, or probationary employee, requests a reasonable accommodation, for an employer to not make reasonable accommodations for any medical or common condition of a job applicant or employee related to pregnancy or childbirth, unless the employer can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the ordinary operation of the business of the employer. The employer may request documentation from the employee's health care provider concerning the need for the requested reasonable accommodation or accommodations to the same extent documentation is requested for conditions related to disability if the employer's request for documentation is job-related and consistent with business necessity. The employer may require only the medical justification for the requested accommodation or accommodations, a description of the reasonable accommodation or accommodations medically advisable, the date the reasonable accommodation or accommodations became medically advisable, and the probable duration of the reasonable accommodation or accommodations. It is the duty of the individual seeking a reasonable accommodation or accommodations to submit to the employer any documentation that is requested in accordance with this paragraph. Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, the employer may require documentation by the employee's health care provider to determine compliance with other laws. The employee and employer shall engage in a timely, good faith, and meaningful exchange to determine effective reasonable accommodations. (2) For an employer to deny employment opportunities or benefits to or take adverse action against an otherwise qualified job applicant or employee, including a part-time, full-time, or probationary employee, if the denial or adverse action is based on the need of the employer to make reasonable accommodations to the known medical or common conditions related to the pregnancy or childbirth of the applicant or employee. (3) For an employer to require a job applicant or employee, including a part-time, full-time, or probationary employee, affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth to accept an accommodation when the applicant or employee did not request an accommodation and the applicant or employee chooses not to accept the employer's accommodation. (4) For an employer to require an employee, including a part-time, full-time, or probationary employee, to take leave under any leave law or policy of the employer if another reasonable accommodation can be provided to the known medical or common conditions related to the pregnancy or childbirth of an employee. No employer shall fail or refuse to reinstate the employee affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth to her original job or to an equivalent position with equivalent pay and accumulated seniority, retirement, fringe benefits, and other applicable service credits upon her signifying her intent to return or when her need for reasonable accommodation ceases, unless the employer can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the ordinary operation of the business of the employer. For the purposes of this subdivision (J), "reasonable accommodations" means reasonable modifications or adjustments to the job application process or work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position desired or held is customarily performed, that enable an applicant or employee affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth to be considered for the position the applicant desires or to perform the essential functions of that position, and may include, but is not limited to: more frequent or longer bathroom breaks, breaks for increased water intake, and breaks for periodic rest; private non-bathroom space for expressing breast milk and breastfeeding; seating; assistance with manual labor; light duty; temporary transfer to a less strenuous or hazardous position; the provision of an accessible worksite; acquisition or modification of equipment; job restructuring; a part-time or modified work schedule; appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials, or policies; reassignment to a vacant position; time off to recover from conditions related to childbirth; and leave necessitated by pregnancy, childbirth, or medical or common conditions resulting from pregnancy or childbirth. For the purposes of this subdivision (J), "undue hardship" means an action that is prohibitively expensive or disruptive when considered in light of the following factors: (i) the nature and cost of the accommodation needed; (ii) the overall financial resources of the facility or facilities involved in the provision of the reasonable accommodation, the number of persons employed at the facility, the effect on expenses and resources, or the impact otherwise of the accommodation upon the operation of the facility; (iii) the overall financial resources of the employer, the overall size of the business of the employer with respect to the number of its employees, and the number, type, and location of its facilities; and (iv) the type of operation or operations of the employer, including the composition, structure, and functions of the workforce of the employer, the geographic separateness, administrative, or fiscal relationship of the facility or facilities in question to the employer. The employer has the burden of proving undue hardship. The fact that the employer provides or would be required to provide a similar accommodation to similarly situated employees creates a rebuttable presumption that the accommodation does not impose an undue hardship on the employer. No employer is required by this subdivision (J) to create additional employment that the employer would not otherwise have created, unless the employer does so or would do so for other classes of employees who need accommodation. The employer is not required to discharge any employee, transfer any employee with more seniority, or promote any employee who is not qualified to perform the job, unless the employer does so or would do so to accommodate other classes of employees who need it. (K) Notice.

(1) For an employer to fail to post or keep posted in a conspicuous location on the premises of the employer where notices to employees are customarily posted, or fail to include in any employee handbook information concerning an employee's rights under this Article, a notice, to be prepared or approved by the Department, summarizing the requirements of this Article and information pertaining to the filing of a charge, including the right to be free from unlawful discrimination, the right to be free from sexual harassment, and the right to certain reasonable accommodations. The Department shall make the documents required under this paragraph available for retrieval from the Department's website. (2) Upon notification of a violation of paragraph (1) of this subdivision (K), the Department may launch a preliminary investigation. If the Department finds a violation, the Department may issue a notice to show cause giving the employer 30 days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected, the Department may initiate a charge of a civil rights violation. (Source: P.A. 100-100, eff. 8-11-17; 100-588, eff. 6-8-18.)

775 ILCS 5/2-103 (775 ILCS 5/2-103) (from Ch. 68, par. 2-103)

Sec. 2-103. Arrest Record.

(A) Unless otherwise authorized by law, it is a civil rights violation for any employer, employment agency or labor organization to inquire into or to use the fact of an arrest or criminal history record information ordered expunged, sealed or impounded under Section 5.2 of the Criminal Identification Act as a basis to refuse to hire, to segregate, or to act with respect to recruitment, hiring, promotion, renewal of employment, selection for training or apprenticeship, discharge, discipline, tenure or terms, privileges or conditions of employment. This Section does not prohibit a State agency, unit of local government or school district, or private organization from requesting or utilizing sealed felony conviction information obtained from the Department of State Police under the provisions of Section 3 of the Criminal Identification Act or under other State or federal laws or regulations that require criminal background checks in evaluating the qualifications and character of an employee or a prospective employee.

(B) The prohibition against the use of the fact of an arrest contained in this Section shall not be construed to prohibit an employer, employment agency, or labor organization from obtaining or using other information which indicates that a person actually engaged in the conduct for which he or she was arrested.

(Source: P.A. 96-409, eff. 1-1-10.)

775 ILCS 5/2-104 (775 ILCS 5/2-104) (from Ch. 68, par. 2-104)

Sec. 2-104. Exemptions.

(A) Nothing contained in this Act shall prohibit an employer, employment agency, or labor organization from:

(1) Bona Fide Qualification. Hiring or selecting between persons for bona fide occupational qualifications or any reason except those civil-rights violations specifically identified in this Article. (2) Veterans. Giving preferential treatment to veterans and their relatives as required by the laws or regulations of the United States or this State or a unit of local government, or pursuant to a private employer's voluntary veterans' preference employment policy authorized by the Veterans Preference in Private Employment Act. (3) Unfavorable Discharge From Military Service.

(a) Using unfavorable discharge from military service as a valid employment criterion when authorized by federal law or regulation or when a position of employment involves the exercise of fiduciary responsibilities as defined by rules and regulations which the Department shall adopt; or (b) Participating in a bona fide recruiting incentive program, sponsored by a branch of the United States Armed Forces, a reserve component of the United States Armed Forces, or any National Guard or Naval Militia, where participation in the program is limited by the sponsoring branch based upon the service member's discharge status. (4) Ability Tests. Giving or acting upon the results of any professionally developed ability test provided that such test, its administration, or action upon the results, is not used as a subterfuge for or does not have the effect of unlawful discrimination. (5) Merit and Retirement Systems.

(a) Applying different standards of compensation, or different terms, conditions or privileges of employment pursuant to a merit or retirement system provided that such system or its administration is not used as a subterfuge for or does not have the effect of unlawful discrimination. (b) Effecting compulsory retirement of any employee who has attained 65 years of age and who, for the 2-year period immediately preceding retirement, is employed in a bona fide executive or a high policymaking position, if such employee is entitled to an immediate nonforfeitable annual retirement benefit from a pension, profit-sharing, savings, or deferred compensation plan, or any combination of such plans of the employer of such employee, which equals, in the aggregate, at least $44,000. If any such retirement benefit is in a form other than a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) or if the employees contribute to any such plan or make rollover contributions, the retirement benefit shall be adjusted in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Department, so that the benefit is the equivalent of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) under a plan to which employees do not contribute and under which no rollover contributions are made. (c) Until January 1, 1994, effecting compulsory retirement of any employee who has attained 70 years of age, and who is serving under a contract of unlimited tenure (or similar arrangement providing for unlimited tenure) at an institution of higher education as defined by Section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965. (6) Training and Apprenticeship programs. Establishing an educational requirement as a prerequisite to selection for a training or apprenticeship program, provided such requirement does not operate to discriminate on the basis of any prohibited classification except age. (7) Police and Firefighter/Paramedic Retirement. Imposing a mandatory retirement age for firefighters/paramedics or law enforcement officers and discharging or retiring such individuals pursuant to the mandatory retirement age if such action is taken pursuant to a bona fide retirement plan provided that the law enforcement officer or firefighter/paramedic has attained: (a) the age of retirement in effect under applicable State or local law on March 3, 1983; or (b) if the applicable State or local law was enacted after the date of enactment of the federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act Amendments of 1996 (P.L. 104-208), the age of retirement in effect on the date of such discharge under such law. This paragraph (7) shall not apply with respect to any cause of action arising under the Illinois Human Rights Act as in effect prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1997. (8) Police and Firefighter/Paramedic Appointment. Failing or refusing to hire any individual because of such individual's age if such action is taken with respect to the employment of an individual as a firefighter/paramedic or as a law enforcement officer and the individual has attained: (a) the age of hiring or appointment in effect under applicable State or local law on March 3, 1983; or (b) the age of hiring in effect on the date of such failure or refusal to hire under applicable State or local law enacted after the date of enactment of the federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act Amendments of 1996 (P.L. 104-208). As used in paragraph (7) or (8):

"Firefighter/paramedic" means an employee, the duties of whose position are primarily to perform work directly connected with the control and extinguishment of fires or the maintenance and use of firefighting apparatus and equipment, or to provide emergency medical services, including an employee engaged in this activity who is transferred to a supervisory or administrative position. "Law enforcement officer" means an employee, the duties of whose position are primarily the investigation, apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of criminal offenses, including an employee engaged in this activity who is transferred to a supervisory or administrative position. (9) Citizenship Status. Making legitimate distinctions based on citizenship status if specifically authorized or required by State or federal law. (B) With respect to any employee who is subject to a collective bargaining agreement:

(a) which is in effect on June 30, 1986,

(b) which terminates after January 1, 1987,

(c) any provision of which was entered into by a labor organization as defined by Section 6(d)(4) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206(d)(4)), and (d) which contains any provision that would be superseded by Public Act 85-748, Public Act 85-748 shall not apply until the termination of such collective bargaining agreement or January 1, 1990, whichever occurs first.

(C)(1) For purposes of this Act, the term "disability" shall not include any employee or applicant who is currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs, when an employer acts on the basis of such use.

(2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply where an employee or applicant for employment:

(a) has successfully completed a supervised drug rehabilitation program and is no longer engaging in the illegal use of drugs, or has otherwise been rehabilitated successfully and is no longer engaging in such use; (b) is participating in a supervised rehabilitation program and is no longer engaging in such use; or (c) is erroneously regarded as engaging in such use, but is not engaging in such use. It shall not be a violation of this Act for an employer to adopt or administer reasonable policies or procedures, including but not limited to drug testing, designed to ensure that an individual described in subparagraph (a) or (b) is no longer engaging in the illegal use of drugs.

(3) An employer:

(a) may prohibit the illegal use of drugs and the use of alcohol at the workplace by all employees; (b) may require that employees shall not be under the influence of alcohol or be engaging in the illegal use of drugs at the workplace; (c) may require that employees behave in conformance with the requirements established under the federal Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. 701 et seq.) and the Drug Free Workplace Act; (d) may hold an employee who engages in the illegal use of drugs or who is an alcoholic to the same qualification standards for employment or job performance and behavior that such employer holds other employees, even if any unsatisfactory performance or behavior is related to the drug use or alcoholism of such employee; and (e) may, with respect to federal regulations regarding alcohol and the illegal use of drugs, require that: (i) employees comply with the standards established in such regulations of the United States Department of Defense, if the employees of the employer are employed in an industry subject to such regulations, including complying with regulations (if any) that apply to employment in sensitive positions in such an industry, in the case of employees of the employer who are employed in such positions (as defined in the regulations of the Department of Defense); (ii) employees comply with the standards established in such regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, if the employees of the employer are employed in an industry subject to such regulations, including complying with regulations (if any) that apply to employment in sensitive positions in such an industry, in the case of employees of the employer who are employed in such positions (as defined in the regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission); and (iii) employees comply with the standards established in such regulations of the United States Department of Transportation, if the employees of the employer are employed in a transportation industry subject to such regulations, including complying with such regulations (if any) that apply to employment in sensitive positions in such an industry, in the case of employees of the employer who are employed in such positions (as defined in the regulations of the United States Department of Transportation). (4) For purposes of this Act, a test to determine the illegal use of drugs shall not be considered a medical examination. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to encourage, prohibit, or authorize the conducting of drug testing for the illegal use of drugs by job applicants or employees or making employment decisions based on such test results.

(5) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to encourage, prohibit, restrict, or authorize the otherwise lawful exercise by an employer subject to the jurisdiction of the United States Department of Transportation of authority to:

(a) test employees of such employer in, and applicants for, positions involving safety-sensitive duties for the illegal use of drugs and for on-duty impairment by alcohol; and (b) remove such persons who test positive for illegal use of drugs and on-duty impairment by alcohol pursuant to subparagraph (a) from safety-sensitive duties in implementing paragraph (3). (Source: P.A. 99-152, eff. 1-1-16, 99-165, eff. 7-28-15; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

775 ILCS 5/2-105 (775 ILCS 5/2-105) (from Ch. 68, par. 2-105)

(Text of Section before amendment by P.A. 100-698 )

Sec. 2-105. Equal Employment Opportunities; Affirmative Action.

(A) Public Contracts. Every party to a public contract and every eligible bidder shall:

(1) Refrain from unlawful discrimination and discrimination based on citizenship status in employment and undertake affirmative action to assure equality of employment opportunity and eliminate the effects of past discrimination; (2) Comply with the procedures and requirements of the Department's regulations concerning equal employment opportunities and affirmative action; (3) Provide such information, with respect to its employees and applicants for employment, and assistance as the Department may reasonably request; (4) Have written sexual harassment policies that shall include, at a minimum, the following information: (i) the illegality of sexual harassment; (ii) the definition of sexual harassment under State law; (iii) a description of sexual harassment, utilizing examples; (iv) the vendor's internal complaint process including penalties; (v) the legal recourse, investigative and complaint process available through the Department and the Commission; (vi) directions on how to contact the Department and Commission; and (vii) protection against retaliation as provided by Section 6-101 of this Act. A copy of the policies shall be provided to the Department upon request. (B) State Agencies. Every State executive department, State agency, board, commission, and instrumentality shall:

(1) Comply with the procedures and requirements of the Department's regulations concerning equal employment opportunities and affirmative action; (2) Provide such information and assistance as the Department may request. (3) Establish, maintain, and carry out a continuing affirmative action plan consistent with this Act and the regulations of the Department designed to promote equal opportunity for all State residents in every aspect of agency personnel policy and practice. For purposes of these affirmative action plans, the race and national origin categories to be included in the plans are: American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Black or African American, Hispanic or Latino, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. This plan shall include a current detailed status report: (a) indicating, by each position in State service, the number, percentage, and average salary of individuals employed by race, national origin, sex and disability, and any other category that the Department may require by rule; (b) identifying all positions in which the percentage of the people employed by race, national origin, sex and disability, and any other category that the Department may require by rule, is less than four-fifths of the percentage of each of those components in the State work force; (c) specifying the goals and methods for increasing the percentage by race, national origin, sex and disability, and any other category that the Department may require by rule, in State positions; (d) indicating progress and problems toward meeting equal employment opportunity goals, including, if applicable, but not limited to, Department of Central Management Services recruitment efforts, publicity, promotions, and use of options designating positions by linguistic abilities; (e) establishing a numerical hiring goal for the employment of qualified persons with disabilities in the agency as a whole, to be based on the proportion of people with work disabilities in the Illinois labor force as reflected in the most recent employment data made available by the United States Census Bureau. (4) If the agency has 1000 or more employees, appoint a full-time Equal Employment Opportunity officer, subject to the Department's approval, whose duties shall include: (a) Advising the head of the particular State agency with respect to the preparation of equal employment opportunity programs, procedures, regulations, reports, and the agency's affirmative action plan. (b) Evaluating in writing each fiscal year the sufficiency of the total agency program for equal employment opportunity and reporting thereon to the head of the agency with recommendations as to any improvement or correction in recruiting, hiring or promotion needed, including remedial or disciplinary action with respect to managerial or supervisory employees who have failed to cooperate fully or who are in violation of the program. (c) Making changes in recruitment, training and promotion programs and in hiring and promotion procedures designed to eliminate discriminatory practices when authorized. (d) Evaluating tests, employment policies, practices and qualifications and reporting to the head of the agency and to the Department any policies, practices and qualifications that have unequal impact by race, national origin as required by Department rule, sex or disability or any other category that the Department may require by rule, and to assist in the recruitment of people in underrepresented classifications. This function shall be performed in cooperation with the State Department of Central Management Services. (e) Making any aggrieved employee or applicant for employment aware of his or her remedies under this Act. In any meeting, investigation, negotiation, conference, or other proceeding between a State employee and an Equal Employment Opportunity officer, a State employee (1) who is not covered by a collective bargaining agreement and (2) who is the complaining party or the subject of such proceeding may be accompanied, advised and represented by (1) an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois or (2) a representative of an employee organization whose membership is composed of employees of the State and of which the employee is a member. A representative of an employee, other than an attorney, may observe but may not actively participate, or advise the State employee during the course of such meeting, investigation, negotiation, conference or other proceeding. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit any person who is not licensed to practice law in Illinois to deliver any legal services or otherwise engage in any activities that would constitute the unauthorized practice of law. Any representative of an employee who is present with the consent of the employee, shall not, during or after termination of the relationship permitted by this Section with the State employee, use or reveal any information obtained during the course of the meeting, investigation, negotiation, conference or other proceeding without the consent of the complaining party and any State employee who is the subject of the proceeding and pursuant to rules and regulations governing confidentiality of such information as promulgated by the appropriate State agency. Intentional or reckless disclosure of information in violation of these confidentiality requirements shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor. (5) Establish, maintain and carry out a continuing sexual harassment program that shall include the following: (a) Develop a written sexual harassment policy that includes at a minimum the following information: (i) the illegality of sexual harassment; (ii) the definition of sexual harassment under State law; (iii) a description of sexual harassment, utilizing examples; (iv) the agency's internal complaint process including penalties; (v) the legal recourse, investigative and complaint process available through the Department and the Commission; (vi) directions on how to contact the Department and Commission; and (vii) protection against retaliation as provided by Section 6-101 of this Act. The policy shall be reviewed annually. (b) Post in a prominent and accessible location and distribute in a manner to assure notice to all agency employees without exception the agency's sexual harassment policy. Such documents may meet, but shall not exceed, the 6th grade literacy level. Distribution shall be effectuated within 90 days of the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1992 and shall occur annually thereafter. (c) Provide training on sexual harassment prevention and the agency's sexual harassment policy as a component of all ongoing or new employee training programs. (6) Notify the Department 30 days before effecting any layoff. Once notice is given, the following shall occur: (a) No layoff may be effective earlier than 10 working days after notice to the Department, unless an emergency layoff situation exists. (b) The State executive department, State agency, board, commission, or instrumentality in which the layoffs are to occur must notify each employee targeted for layoff, the employee's union representative (if applicable), and the State Dislocated Worker Unit at the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity. (c) The State executive department, State agency, board, commission, or instrumentality in which the layoffs are to occur must conform to applicable collective bargaining agreements. (d) The State executive department, State agency, board, commission, or instrumentality in which the layoffs are to occur should notify each employee targeted for layoff that transitional assistance may be available to him or her under the Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance Act administered by the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity. Failure to give such notice shall not invalidate the layoff or postpone its effective date. As used in this subsection (B), "disability" shall be defined in rules promulgated under the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act.

(C) Civil Rights Violations. It is a civil rights violation for any public contractor or eligible bidder to:

(1) fail to comply with the public contractor's or eligible bidder's duty to refrain from unlawful discrimination and discrimination based on citizenship status in employment under subsection (A)(1) of this Section; or (2) fail to comply with the public contractor's or eligible bidder's duties of affirmative action under subsection (A) of this Section, provided however, that the Department has notified the public contractor or eligible bidder in writing by certified mail that the public contractor or eligible bidder may not be in compliance with affirmative action requirements of subsection (A). A minimum of 60 days to comply with the requirements shall be afforded to the public contractor or eligible bidder before the Department may issue formal notice of non-compliance. (D) As used in this Section:

(1) "American Indian or Alaska Native" means a person having origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America, including Central America, and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment. (2) "Asian" means a person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent, including, but not limited to, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam. (3) "Black or African American" means a person having origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa. Terms such as "Haitian" or "Negro" can be used in addition to "Black or African American". (4) "Hispanic or Latino" means a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race. (5) "Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander" means a person having origins in any of the original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands. (Source: P.A. 99-933, eff. 1-27-17.)



(Text of Section after amendment by P.A. 100-698 )

Sec. 2-105. Equal Employment Opportunities; Affirmative Action.

(A) Public Contracts. Every party to a public contract and every eligible bidder shall:

(1) Refrain from unlawful discrimination and discrimination based on citizenship status in employment and undertake affirmative action to assure equality of employment opportunity and eliminate the effects of past discrimination; (2) Comply with the procedures and requirements of the Department's regulations concerning equal employment opportunities and affirmative action; (3) Provide such information, with respect to its employees and applicants for employment, and assistance as the Department may reasonably request; (4) Have written sexual harassment policies that shall include, at a minimum, the following information: (i) the illegality of sexual harassment; (ii) the definition of sexual harassment under State law; (iii) a description of sexual harassment, utilizing examples; (iv) the vendor's internal complaint process including penalties; (v) the legal recourse, investigative and complaint process available through the Department and the Commission; (vi) directions on how to contact the Department and Commission; and (vii) protection against retaliation as provided by Section 6-101 of this Act. A copy of the policies shall be provided to the Department upon request. Additionally, each bidder who submits a bid or offer for a State contract under the Illinois Procurement Code shall have a written copy of the bidder's sexual harassment policy as required under this paragraph (4). A copy of the policy shall be provided to the State agency entering into the contract upon request. (B) State Agencies. Every State executive department, State agency, board, commission, and instrumentality shall:

(1) Comply with the procedures and requirements of the Department's regulations concerning equal employment opportunities and affirmative action; (2) Provide such information and assistance as the Department may request. (3) Establish, maintain, and carry out a continuing affirmative action plan consistent with this Act and the regulations of the Department designed to promote equal opportunity for all State residents in every aspect of agency personnel policy and practice. For purposes of these affirmative action plans, the race and national origin categories to be included in the plans are: American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Black or African American, Hispanic or Latino, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. This plan shall include a current detailed status report: (a) indicating, by each position in State service, the number, percentage, and average salary of individuals employed by race, national origin, sex and disability, and any other category that the Department may require by rule; (b) identifying all positions in which the percentage of the people employed by race, national origin, sex and disability, and any other category that the Department may require by rule, is less than four-fifths of the percentage of each of those components in the State work force; (c) specifying the goals and methods for increasing the percentage by race, national origin, sex and disability, and any other category that the Department may require by rule, in State positions; (d) indicating progress and problems toward meeting equal employment opportunity goals, including, if applicable, but not limited to, Department of Central Management Services recruitment efforts, publicity, promotions, and use of options designating positions by linguistic abilities; (e) establishing a numerical hiring goal for the employment of qualified persons with disabilities in the agency as a whole, to be based on the proportion of people with work disabilities in the Illinois labor force as reflected in the most recent employment data made available by the United States Census Bureau. (4) If the agency has 1000 or more employees, appoint a full-time Equal Employment Opportunity officer, subject to the Department's approval, whose duties shall include: (a) Advising the head of the particular State agency with respect to the preparation of equal employment opportunity programs, procedures, regulations, reports, and the agency's affirmative action plan. (b) Evaluating in writing each fiscal year the sufficiency of the total agency program for equal employment opportunity and reporting thereon to the head of the agency with recommendations as to any improvement or correction in recruiting, hiring or promotion needed, including remedial or disciplinary action with respect to managerial or supervisory employees who have failed to cooperate fully or who are in violation of the program. (c) Making changes in recruitment, training and promotion programs and in hiring and promotion procedures designed to eliminate discriminatory practices when authorized. (d) Evaluating tests, employment policies, practices and qualifications and reporting to the head of the agency and to the Department any policies, practices and qualifications that have unequal impact by race, national origin as required by Department rule, sex or disability or any other category that the Department may require by rule, and to assist in the recruitment of people in underrepresented classifications. This function shall be performed in cooperation with the State Department of Central Management Services. (e) Making any aggrieved employee or applicant for employment aware of his or her remedies under this Act. In any meeting, investigation, negotiation, conference, or other proceeding between a State employee and an Equal Employment Opportunity officer, a State employee (1) who is not covered by a collective bargaining agreement and (2) who is the complaining party or the subject of such proceeding may be accompanied, advised and represented by (1) an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois or (2) a representative of an employee organization whose membership is composed of employees of the State and of which the employee is a member. A representative of an employee, other than an attorney, may observe but may not actively participate, or advise the State employee during the course of such meeting, investigation, negotiation, conference or other proceeding. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit any person who is not licensed to practice law in Illinois to deliver any legal services or otherwise engage in any activities that would constitute the unauthorized practice of law. Any representative of an employee who is present with the consent of the employee, shall not, during or after termination of the relationship permitted by this Section with the State employee, use or reveal any information obtained during the course of the meeting, investigation, negotiation, conference or other proceeding without the consent of the complaining party and any State employee who is the subject of the proceeding and pursuant to rules and regulations governing confidentiality of such information as promulgated by the appropriate State agency. Intentional or reckless disclosure of information in violation of these confidentiality requirements shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor. (5) Establish, maintain and carry out a continuing sexual harassment program that shall include the following: (a) Develop a written sexual harassment policy that includes at a minimum the following information: (i) the illegality of sexual harassment; (ii) the definition of sexual harassment under State law; (iii) a description of sexual harassment, utilizing examples; (iv) the agency's internal complaint process including penalties; (v) the legal recourse, investigative and complaint process available through the Department and the Commission; (vi) directions on how to contact the Department and Commission; and (vii) protection against retaliation as provided by Section 6-101 of this Act. The policy shall be reviewed annually. (b) Post in a prominent and accessible location and distribute in a manner to assure notice to all agency employees without exception the agency's sexual harassment policy. Such documents may meet, but shall not exceed, the 6th grade literacy level. Distribution shall be effectuated within 90 days of the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1992 and shall occur annually thereafter. (c) Provide training on sexual harassment prevention and the agency's sexual harassment policy as a component of all ongoing or new employee training programs. (6) Notify the Department 30 days before effecting any layoff. Once notice is given, the following shall occur: (a) No layoff may be effective earlier than 10 working days after notice to the Department, unless an emergency layoff situation exists. (b) The State executive department, State agency, board, commission, or instrumentality in which the layoffs are to occur must notify each employee targeted for layoff, the employee's union representative (if applicable), and the State Dislocated Worker Unit at the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity. (c) The State executive department, State agency, board, commission, or instrumentality in which the layoffs are to occur must conform to applicable collective bargaining agreements. (d) The State executive department, State agency, board, commission, or instrumentality in which the layoffs are to occur should notify each employee targeted for layoff that transitional assistance may be available to him or her under the Economic Dislocation and Worker Adjustment Assistance Act administered by the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity. Failure to give such notice shall not invalidate the layoff or postpone its effective date. As used in this subsection (B), "disability" shall be defined in rules promulgated under the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act.

(C) Civil Rights Violations. It is a civil rights violation for any public contractor or eligible bidder to:

(1) fail to comply with the public contractor's or eligible bidder's duty to refrain from unlawful discrimination and discrimination based on citizenship status in employment under subsection (A)(1) of this Section; or (2) fail to comply with the public contractor's or eligible bidder's duties of affirmative action under subsection (A) of this Section, provided however, that the Department has notified the public contractor or eligible bidder in writing by certified mail that the public contractor or eligible bidder may not be in compliance with affirmative action requirements of subsection (A). A minimum of 60 days to comply with the requirements shall be afforded to the public contractor or eligible bidder before the Department may issue formal notice of non-compliance. (D) As used in this Section:

(1) "American Indian or Alaska Native" means a person having origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America, including Central America, and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment. (2) "Asian" means a person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent, including, but not limited to, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam. (3) "Black or African American" means a person having origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa. Terms such as "Haitian" or "Negro" can be used in addition to "Black or African American". (4) "Hispanic or Latino" means a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race. (5) "Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander" means a person having origins in any of the original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands. (Source: P.A. 99-933, eff. 1-27-17; 100-698, eff. 1-1-19.)

775 ILCS 5/2-106 (775 ILCS 5/2-106)

Sec. 2-106. Interagency Committee on Employees with Disabilities.

(A) As used in this Section:

"State agency" means all officers, boards, commissions, and agencies created by the Constitution in the executive branch; all officers, departments, boards, commissions, agencies, institutions, authorities, universities, bodies politic and corporate of the State; and administrative units or corporate outgrowths of the State government which are created by or pursuant to statute, other than units of local government and their officers, school districts, and boards of election commissioners; all administrative units and corporate outgrowths of the above and as may be created by executive order of the Governor.

"State employee" means an employee of a State agency.

(B) The Interagency Committee on Employees with Disabilities, created under repealed Section 19a of the Personnel Code, is continued as set forth in this Section. The Committee is composed of 18 members as follows: the Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission or his or her designee, the Director of Veterans' Affairs or his or her designee, the Director of Central Management Services or his or her designee, the Secretary of Human Services or his or her designee, the Director of Human Rights or his or her designee, the Director of the Illinois Council on Developmental Disabilities or his or her designee, the Lieutenant Governor or his or her designee, the Attorney General or his or her designee, the Secretary of State or his or her designee, the State Comptroller or his or her designee, the State Treasurer or his or her designee, and 7 State employees with disabilities appointed by and serving at the pleasure of the Governor.

(C) The Director of Human Rights and the Secretary of Human Services shall serve as co-chairpersons of the Committee. The Committee shall meet as often as it deems necessary, but in no case less than 6 times annually at the call of the co-chairpersons. Notice shall be given to the members in writing in advance of a scheduled meeting.

(D) The Department of Human Rights shall provide administrative support to the Committee.

(E) The purposes and functions of the Committee are: (1) to provide a forum where problems of general concern to State employees with disabilities can be raised and methods of their resolution can be suggested to the appropriate State agencies; (2) to provide a clearinghouse of information for State employees with disabilities by working with those agencies to develop and retain such information; (3) to promote affirmative action efforts pertaining to the employment of persons with disabilities by State agencies; and (4) to recommend, where appropriate, means of strengthening the affirmative action programs for employees with disabilities in State agencies.

(F) The Committee shall annually make a complete report to the General Assembly on the Committee's achievements and accomplishments. Such report may also include an evaluation by the Committee of the effectiveness of the hiring and advancement practices in State government.

(G) This amendatory Act of the 99th General Assembly is not intended to disqualify any current member of the Committee from continued membership on the Committee in accordance with the terms of this Section or the member's appointment.

(Source: P.A. 99-314, eff. 8-7-15.)

775 ILCS 5/2-107 (775 ILCS 5/2-107)

Sec. 2-107. Helpline to report sexual harassment and discrimination.

(a) The Department shall, no later than 3 months after the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly, establish and maintain a sexual harassment and discrimination helpline. The Department shall help persons who contact the Department through the helpline find necessary resources, including counseling services, and assist in the filing of sexual harassment and discrimination complaints with the Department or other applicable agencies. The Department may recommend individual seek private counsel, but shall not make recommendations for legal representation. The helpline shall provide the means through which persons may anonymously report sexual harassment and discrimination in both private and public places of employment. In the case of a report of sexual harassment and discrimination by a person subject to Article 20 or 25 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, the Department shall, with the permission of the reporting individual, report the allegations to the Executive Inspector General or Legislative Inspector General for further investigation.

(b) The Department shall advertise the helpline on its website and in materials related to sexual harassment and discrimination, including posters made available to the public, and encourage reporting by both those who are subject to sexual harassment and discrimination and those who have witnessed it.

(c) All communications received by the Department via the helpline or Internet communication shall remain confidential and shall be exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.

(d) As used in this Section, "helpline" means a toll-free telephone with voicemail capabilities and an Internet website through which persons may report instances of sexual harassment and discrimination.

(e) The Department shall annually evaluate the helpline and report to the Clerk of the House of Representatives and the Secretary of the Senate in electronic form only, in the manner that the Clerk and the Secretary shall direct, the following information: (i) the total number of calls received, including messages left during non-business hours; (ii) the number of calls reporting sexual discrimination claims; (iii) the number of calls reporting harassment claims; (iv) the number of calls reporting sexual harassment claims; (v) the number of calls that were referred to each Executive Inspector General; and (vi) the number of calls that were referred to the Legislative Inspector General.

(Source: P.A. 100-554, eff. 11-16-17; 100-588, eff. 6-8-18.)

Top