TRAVAIL legal databases
Working Conditions Laws Database Working Time - Minimum Wages - Maternity Protection



The ILO Working Conditions Laws Database provides a picture of the regulatory environment of working time, minimum wages and maternity protection in more than 100 countries around the world. It contains comprehensive legal information, which allows you to conduct customized research on a specific country, to compare the legislation of several countries or regions on a particular subject or to perform searches by text. For selected issues, a historical comparison is possible.



Please "browse by category" if you want to compare topics for several countries, "browse by country" to generate a country profile, click on "free search" to untertake a free search and consult the guide "How to use this database" for further information.



The Database was last updated from early 2011 through mid-2012. The exact date of the most recent update is indicated for each country.









ILO Working Conditions Laws Database Disclaimer:

Summaries and full texts in the Working Conditions Laws Database are provided for information purposes only and are not intended to replace consultation of the authentic legal texts. We update the database regularly but are unable to guarantee that the laws it contains are always complete, accurate and the most recent version. Please



Use and citation of this database:

When using or publishing information from this database, please site the website as your source.

ILO Working Conditions Laws Database. ILO, Geneva. Available at:



The database has been updated with the financial assistance of the European Union under the ILO/EC Project "Monitoring and Assessing Progress on Decent Work" (MAP). The views expressed herein can in no way be taken to reflect the official opinion of the European Union. Summaries and full texts in the Working Conditions Laws Database are provided for information purposes only and are not intended to replace consultation of the authentic legal texts. We update the database regularly but are unable to guarantee that the laws it contains are always complete, accurate and the most recent version. Please contact us if you have updated information. For information purposes, the Database contains links to other websites. Their inclusion does not signify responsibility for, or approval of, their content by the ILO.When using or publishing information from this database, please site the website as your source.ILO Working Conditions Laws Database. ILO, Geneva. Available at: http://www.ilo.org/dyn/travail The database has been updated with the financial assistance of the European Union under the ILO/EC Project "Monitoring and Assessing Progress on Decent Work" (MAP). The views expressed herein can in no way be taken to reflect the official opinion of the European Union. Publications & Information Sheets Working Conditions Laws 2012