World Economic Outlook Database April 2015
For the latest GDP data for the following countries please check the "Projected % Change" table in the left column of the individual country pages:

The World Economic Outlook (WEO) database contains selected macroeconomic data series from the statistical appendix of the World Economic Outlook report, which presents the IMF staff's analysis and projections of economic developments at the global level, in major country groups and in many individual countries. The WEO is released in April and September/October each year. Use this database to find data on national accounts, inflation, unemployment rates, balance of payments, fiscal indicators, trade for countries and country groups (aggregates), and commodity prices whose data are reported by the IMF. Data are available from 1980 to the present, and projections are given for the next two years. Additionally, medium-term projections are available for selected indicators. For some countries, data are incomplete or unavailable for certain years. World Economic Outlook on Google Public Data Explorer offers select indicators from the latest online WEO database, such as GDP growth and inflation. Changes to the April 2015 Database On January 1, 2015, Lithuania became the 19th country to join the euro area. Data for Lithuania are not included in the euro area aggregates because Eurostat has not fully released the consolidated data for the group, but the data are included in the advanced economies and subgroups aggregated by the WEO.

As in the October 2014 WEO, data for Syria are excluded from 2011 onward because of the uncertain political situation.

As in the October 2014 WEO, the consumer price projections for Argentina are excluded because of a structural break in the data. Please refer to note 6 in Table A7 for further details.

Because of the ongoing IMF program with Pakistan, the series from which nominal exchange rate assumptions are calculated are not made public—the nominal exchange rate is a market-sensitive issue in Pakistan.

The series from which the nominal exchange rate assumptions are calculated are not made public for Egypt because the nominal exchange rate is a market-sensitive issue in Egypt.