WHERE IMMIGRATION IS MORE THAN A PRACTICE
EDUCATION

Mr. Kuck received his B.A. degree from Brigham Young University in 1986. He earned his J.D. degree, cum laude, from Arizona State University Law School in 1989. He is admitted to practice law in Georgia, Washington, D.C., and Arizona.

EXPERTISE

Mr. Kuck is the Managing Partner of Kuck Immigration Partners LLC - The Immigration Law Firm, and oversees its nationwide immigration practice. His practice focuses on U.S. Immigration and Nationality Law and international migration matters. Mr. Kuck assists employers and employees with business and professional visas, labor certifications, immigrant visas, consular representation, and citizenship matters. Mr. Kuck also maintains an active Federal Court practice focusing on immigration issues. He has represented asylum seekers in more than 600 trials before the Immigration Courts. Mr. Kuck also advises employers on compliance procedures in verifying the work eligibility of all new employees as required under the I-9 employer sanctions provisions of the Federal Law and is a leader in training and compliance with programs on the E-Verify and IMAGE. His clients include technology firms, manufacturers, multinational corporations, individual investors and entrepreneurs, as well as families, individual immigrants and asylum seekers.

PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES

Mr. Kuck is the immediate past National President of the American Immigration Lawyers Association (AILA). He has served on the National Executive Committee of AILA for seven years. Previously, Mr. Kuck served on the Board of Governors of AILA for six years. Three of those years he was one of 21 elected members of the National Board of Governors, two of those years he spent as Chair of the Atlanta Chapter, and he served for one year as the National Chair of the Young Lawyers Division. He previously served as Chair of AILAs USCIS Headquarters Liaison Committee and Chair of AILAs Consumer Protection Committee, and has served on various other National Liaison Committees for AILA. Additionally, Mr. Kuck is also the Editor-in-Chief of The AILA Litigation Toolbox, a hands-on approach to litigating immigration issues.

Mr. Kuck is a Founding Fellow of the Alliance of Business Immigration Lawyers (ABIL). Mr Kuck serves on the International Board for the J. Rueben Clark Law Society, and is a member and currently serves as its President of the Board of Governors of the Georgia Asylum Immigration Network (GAIN). Mr. Kuck also served for seven years on the Board of Directors of the Latin American Association. Since 1999, he has taught both the Introductory and Advanced Immigration Law Seminars at the University of Georgias School of Law as an Adjunct Professor of Law. He is currently a part of the group of attorneys in Georgia litigating against the HB-87 law.

AWARDS AND RECOGNITIONS

Mr. Kuck has again been named by Atlanta Magazine as a Georgia Super Lawyer in the field of Immigration Law for 2012.

Mr. Kuck was also named one of 100 of the most influential Georgians by Georgia Trend Magazine in 2011.

Mr. Kuck is listed in Who's Who of International Corporate Immigration Attorneys, Chambers USA, Americas Leading Lawyers for Business, Chambers Global, The Worlds Leading Lawyers for Business, and in The Best Lawyers in America. His active federal litigation practice has resulted in seven precedent decisions published by the Federal District and Circuit Courts of Appeal. Mr. Kuck has written numerous articles on various U.S. immigration law subjects, has testified before Congress on immigration matters, and has spoken at various legal, industry, business, and civic organizations on a broad range of immigration topics.

In 2009, Mr. Kuck was recognized for his years of serves at AILA. Mr. Kuck was awarded the Benjamin Landey Pro Bono Award by Catholic Social Services, and AILA's Joseph F. Minsky Young Lawyer Award.

Mr. Kuck is frequently quoted in the press, and has appeared on CBS, NBC, Fox News, CNN, MSNBC, Democracy Now, CNBC, National Public Radio, as well as numerous radio stations and written publications, including The New York Times, Washington Post, Los Angeles Times, The New Yorker, The Wall Street Journal, Business Week, The National Journal, The Miami Herald, and The Atlanta Journal Constitution.