Gov. Mike Pence makes cuts to trim $141M shortfall
CLOSE

Buy Photo Pence (Photo: Charlie Nye/The Star)Buy Photo

For four of the past five months, state revenue has been below targets — not a good way for Indiana to start the fiscal year.

So Gov. Mike Pence on Monday announced cuts to reduce the $141 million shortfall: trims to state agency and university funding and the sale of the state’s executive airplane.

The shortfall has occurred even before the income tax cut that Pence lobbied hard for during the past legislative session takes effect in 2015.

Who’s feeling the brunt of the cuts?

All state agencies and universities, which also had to cut back in July, at Pence’s direction.

“The cost-saving measures we are implementing today will ensure that Indiana remains fiscally sound during these uncertain times,” Pence said in a statement. “Fiscal integrity is the foundation of prosperity.”

He is even selling the state-owned King Air plane that he uses to fly around the state. The sale will generate about $2.5 million, said state budget director Brian Bailey, who said the money would go to the Indiana State Police for capital expenses, probably to purchase a helicopter.

Pence will fly commercial or lease private planes, both of which will cost less than operating the state plane, Bailey said.

State agencies will be required to hold back an additional 1.5 percent — $25 million — of their appropriations for the next seven months, the remainder of the fiscal year. That’s on top of 3 percent, or $50 million, reduced in July.

State universities will be told to hold back 2 percent — $27 million — of their operational expenses. Student aid, capital expenses and debt service payments will not be affected.

Bailey pointed out that since universities received a 5.4 percent funding hike in operational budgets this fiscal year, they still will get 3.3 percent more than in fiscal year 2013.

In addition, $2.5 million in planned expenses this year for the Indiana Biosciences Research Institute will be delayeduntil fiscal year 2014.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-888-357-7827. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

However, the joint private-public institute still will receive $10 million this fiscal year in state funds, which are expected to be matched by private funds. The state has committed to contributing $25 million to the institute over two years.

The institute, with partners Eli Lilly and Co., Dow AgroSciences and other life science companies, is designed to bring jobs and cachet to the state while developing treatments for common Hoosier problems, such as diabetes and obesity.

All of these steps will save the state $57 million this fiscal year.

Call Star reporter Barb Berggoetz at (317) 444-6294. Follow her on Twitter: @barbberg.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1djfTXf