State budget deal includes modest school spending hike
CLOSE

Buy Photo Fifth grade teacher Eddie Rangel works with students at IPS Key Learning Community School on Monday, April 13, 2015. (Photo: Matt Detrich/The Star)Buy Photo Story Highlights Creates a $100 tax credit for teachers who spend their own money on classroom supplies

Urban schools lose money while fast-growing suburban schools see increases.

Charter schools get $500 more per student if they receive school grades of "A" to "C."

House and Senate Republican leaders were set to unveil a roughly $32 billion, two-year budget that includes modest increases in school funding, with more money for suburban schools and some charter schools but less spending on Indiana's urban schools.

House lawmakers were expecting to receive the final budget proposal Tuesday evening after days of negotiations. House and Senate leaders and Gov. Mike Pence and staff bounded from office to office Tuesday.

House Speaker Brian Bosma, R-Indianapolis, provided the broad outlines of the new budget to reporters Tuesday evening.

The new budget, which will take effect July 1 and last through June 2017, includes $464 million in new school spending, a roughly 2.3 percent annual increase, slightly better than the recent national rate of inflation.

Indiana's suburban school districts, including Zionsville, Hamilton Southeastern and others, were poised to win the most in the new budget, while Indianapolis Public Schools, Gary Schools Corp. and other urban districts were set to lose millions of dollars each.

Republicans, who supported the dramatic change in education spending, argued it was needed to fix per-student funding disparities in which more money was going to the state's poorest districts while wealthier districts suffered.

"We make significant progress on the gap between the highest- and lowest-spending schools," Bosma said. "But we give a softer landing to some of the urban schools that felt they were suffering too much of a loss."

Indianapolis Public Schools is set to take a sizable hit in the new budget, but not as bad as first proposed by either the House or Senate. IPS is receiving roughly $240.5 million this year, but that would drop to $230.3 million next year before creeping back up to $233.8 million in 2017.

Hamilton Southeastern Schools, one of the state's largest suburban districts, sees a sharp increase in spending. State support jumps from $110.9 million this year to $119.7 million next year and $124.7 million in 2017. Zionsville Schools, which pushed hard for the new school funding, will see its spending jump from $5.5 million this year, to $5.6 million next year and $5.8 million in 2017.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-888-357-7827. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

At the core of the change is a rewrite in how the state calculates the "complexity" piece of school funding, which tracks poverty. The state's urban school districts will see the amount spent per student drop by a couple hundred dollars each, but the rural and suburban schools gain a little for each student.

Calculated over thousands of students for each district, the change equates to a shift of millions of dollars.

Charter schools, which had been seeking a $1,500 per student increase in the budget, will instead get $500 more per student, and only if they receive school grades of "A" to "C." They can also get the extra money if they perform as well as their public school counterpart. Rather than permanent increases, the money will be given out as grants, at about $10 million per year.

Charter schools would also be allowed to apply for loans from the state's common school fund, up to a combined total of $50 million.

That provision concerned Senate Appropriations Chairman Luke Kenley, R-Noblesville, who noted that many charter schools are in bad financial shape.

The budget proposal reflects a mash-up of the priorities sought by House Republicans and Senate Republicans, who each oversee legislative supermajorities.

Pence, who entered the session with modest requests of lawmakers, will get an $84 million economic development fund he sought, but with "tax amnesty" money they wanted for other plans. It follows a last-minute lobbying effort from Pence, which included gift bags and a campaign-style website that were openly mocked by some lawmakers. But the governor's call for more spending on charter schools, which was supported by the House, was largely curtailed by the Senate.

Pence declined to offer details as he left Bosma's office early Tuesday evening.

"Stay tuned," he said. "I'm very confident when Hoosiers look at this budget they'll see a balanced budget that put a priority on education and helped raise the fortunes and opportunities for all of our schools."

The small group of lawmakers and budget staff put the finishing touches on the state budget Tuesday amid continuing economic troubles for the state. The most recent estimate of tax collections, released two weeks ago, found the state poised to come in $213 million lighter than previously expected.

It forced state lawmakers to reconsider their plans for the next two years, but nothing quite as drastic as previous spates of bad news, including a December 2013 report that spurred Pence to sell the state plane and order spending cuts.

The downturn is being caused by lagging growth in wages and income, signs of a soft state economy.

Other priorities in the new budget include $100 million a year for highway expansion, half as much as lawmakers initially wanted. There is also a scaled-back $100 tax credit for teachers who spend their own money on classroom supplies and money for teacher performance grants, though not as much as the $40 million a year the Senate wanted.

Lawmakers are now set to consider the budget before wrapping up work Wednesday, the final day of the 2015 session.

The approval of how the state will spend its tax money over the next two years caps a surprisingly rocky 2015 session, punctuated more by unexpected disasters such as Pence's state-run news service and fallout from the Religious Freedom Restoration Act.

A handful of other items hung in the balance Tuesday as the clock ticked down, including funding for an Indianapolis soccer stadium and a proposal to expand gambling as Indiana casinos struggle to compete with bordering states.

Call Star reporter Tony Cook at (317) 444-6081. Follow him on Twitter: @indystartony. Call Star reporter Tom LoBianco at (317) 444-7136. Follow him on Twitter: @tomlobianco.

Budget highlights

•Increases K-12 education funding $464 million over two years, a roughly 2.3 percent annual increase.

•Urban schools lose money while fast-growing suburban schools see increases.

•Charter schools get $500 more per student if they receive school grades of "A" to "C," for a total increase of about $10 million per year.

•Creates a $100 tax credit for teachers who spend their own money on classroom supplies

•Includes funding for teacher performance grants, but not as much as the $40 million a year some lawmakers wanted

•Provides $84 million for a regional city economic development fund, paid for with a "tax amnesty" program.

•Sets aside only $100 million a year for highway expansion, half as much as lawmakers initially wanted.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1zkIY4R