Supervisors reject $200K proposal for opioid treatment in Prince William
Prince William County supervisors are declining to move ahead with a stopgap measure designed to expand treatment programs for opioid addicts, opting instead to further study other funding sources for drug treatment and explore legal action against opioid manufacturers.

Supervisor Frank Principi, D-Woodbridge, had proposed that the county spend $200,000 on a variety of measures through the end of the fiscal year to beef up its substance abuse treatment programs, now that Prince William has recorded a surge in opioid overdoses in recent years.

But the board voted 5-2 on Dec. 12 to defer any consideration of additional funding to fight the opioid epidemic until it starts up fiscal 2019 budget discussions in February. Principi and Supervisor John Jenkins, D-Neabsco, were the lone votes against the deferral. At-Large Chairman Corey Stewart was absent from the meeting while hitting the campaign trail for Republican Roy Moore in the race for a U.S. Senate seat in Alabama.

Supervisor Pete Candland, R-Gainesville, did direct county attorney Michelle Robl to investigate the possibility of the county following in the footsteps of other localities around the country and filing a lawsuit against opioid manufacturers for aggressively marketing the powerful prescription painkillers. Yet, in general, the board was unwilling to act on Principi’s proposal until it could take a closer look at state and federal funding opportunities to combat opioid abuse in the county.

“Any money we spend will be spent more wisely and effectively if it’s coupled with state money,” said Supervisor Marty Nohe, R-Coles. “I think we should be working with the state in whatever we do, rather than trying to plow forward on our own.”

But Principi argued that the problem in the county is severe enough that lawmakers can’t afford to wait to address it.

Prince William police rolling out Narcan to officers The Prince William County Police Department is equipping officers with the medication Naloxo…

The money he hoped to spend, drawn from the county’s contingency fund, would have gone toward hiring two new substance abuse counselors on a temporary basis and buying medication to help addicts wean themselves off the drugs, which can include everything from heroin and fentanyl to prescription painkillers. Principi didn’t want to wait until the county could approve its new budget this spring, or for state and federal lawmakers to act, when he sees such a clear need right now.

“We should not be sitting idly by while catastrophe looms,” Principi said. “This isn’t a political issue. It’s a moral issue.”

Principi pointed to the county’s spike in overdose deaths as a particularly concerning statistic — police recorded a 40-percent increase in fatal opioid overdoses from 2012 to 2016, with 49 deaths last year. County police spokesman Sgt. Jonathan Perok said 24 fatal overdoses were recorded through June of this year.

Principi is also concerned that the county’s community services division has experienced such a surge in demand that it can’t offer substance abuse counseling in a timely fashion.

Alan Wooten, the department’s executive director, told the board that his staff has had to put more people on a waitlist for treatment than in past years, and are moving them off the list at a much slower pace than they have before. In 2014, Wooten noted that an average of 45 people were waiting for treatment at any given time, and they waited an average of 30 days to receive counseling. This year, the department has averaged 70 people on the list, and only been able move them into treatment after an average of 81 days on the list.

Wooten cautioned that those numbers don’t precisely show the severity of opioid abuse in Prince William, as his department is required by law to move opioid and intravenous drug addicts into treatment programs within 14 days of contacting them, rather than putting them on a waitlist. But he did note that increased demand among opioid addicts has affected everyone seeking treatment.

“It’s impacting anybody with a substance abuse issue,” Wooten said.

But because Principi had primarily framed his proposal as a way to move everyone off the county’s waiting list for treatment, his fellow supervisors expressed concern that it wasn’t the most direct approach for addressing the issue. Candland, in particular, worried that spending $200,000 might be a “good headline,” but not a sure method to actually “address the opioid epidemic.”

“We have to put in serious dollars to work through this, but it’s premature until we hear back from Gov. [Terry] McAuliffe and see the federal proposals on this,” Candland said.

On Dec. 11, McAuliffe announced his intention to include $76 million in his new biennial budget proposal to combat opioid addiction and expand mental health programs around the state, largely in the form of sending money to localities, though the General Assembly will have a key role to play in shaping the budget as well.

Meanwhile, a commission on the opioid crisis convened by President Donald Trump delivered a report last month with recommendations on how to address the issue, though Congress has yet to act on those suggestions.

County Executive Christopher Martino noted that the rest of his staff was also thinking about how to expand treatment programs in great detail, though they won’t present a new budget proposal to the board until February.

But Candland did still want to take some action on the issue in the meantime, which is why he directed county lawyers to study the prospect of suing drug manufacturers in more detail. More than 100 states and cities have already filed suits against opioid producers, and Candland wants to see the county evaluate the prospect of joining an existing effort or mounting a legal challenge of its own.

He spoke emotionally about a close relative who recently battled opioid addiction, noting that it it’s “turned their life and their family’s life upside down.” Though he was among the sharpest critics of Principi’s proposal, he still stressed that the county needs to do something to confront this growing challenge.

“Somebody has to answer for this,” Candland said. “These drugs didn’t just show up on our doorstep one day, they were shoved down the throats of patients.”