Florida Insurance Assessments
Background

Many states have established “residual markets” that provide coverage to individuals and businesses that cannot find insurance in the private marketplace. In Florida, the residual insurer is Citizens Property Insurance Corporation, a state-run insurer with more than one million customers. While private insurers must charge rates high enough to have money on hand in advance to pay claims, Citizens charges rates that may be insufficient to handle claims resulting from a major hurricane. If Citizens runs out of money to pay claims, it charges its customers an assessment on future policy premiums to make up the difference – and if that amount of money is not enough to pay Citizens’ claims, then all other policyholders in the state are assessed. These assessments are taxes that defer the cost of hurricanes, paying off the debt over time. Assessments come in three tiers: 1. Policyholder Surcharge. This one-time charge of up to 45 percent of the annual premium goes to Citizens policyholders only, and if it does not solve the deficit, then the next assessment tier kicks in. 2. Regular Assessment. All property and casualty insurers pay this one-time assessment of up to 18 percent of the annual statewide premium they collect. Insurers must pay this tax within 30 days of receiving notice and are permitted to get the money back by passing the charge on to policyholders when policies renew the next year. 3. Emergency Assessment. If a deficit still remains, Citizens charges both its policyholders and nearly all other property and casualty policyholders (such as auto and business policies) an Emergency Assessment of up to 10 percent of the premium, which can be spread over up to 30 years. Two other state entities also levy assessments if they experience deficits: o Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund (FHCF) charges all policyholders an Emergency Assessment of up to 6 percent of the premium, and the o Florida Insurance Guaranty Association (FIGA), which pays the claims of failed insurers, assesses up to 2 percent of an annual premium at a time.