9th Circuit Judge Who Struck Down Trump’s Travel Ban Busted In Sleazy Scandal – Investment Watch
0 Shares

Isn’t it grand seeing the Swamp drain itself???

CHECKMATE!!!

This new movement that is sweeping the nation taking aim at holding powerful men accountable for sexual harassment, misconduct, and assault has now named a prominent Liberal jurist as a serial harasser.

It’s now being reported that six former far left liberal Ninth Circuit clerks and externs are now saying that the liberal Judge Alex Kozinski subjected them to sexual comments and unwelcome situations.

One of the former Kozinski clerks, Heidi Bond, who was his clerk between 2006 and 2007 has gone on the record with allegations that on multiple occasions the judge summoned her alone to his chambers in order to show her pornography which was unrelated to any case before the judge. He then asked if the images turned her on. Bond recounts at least three different instances of being shown porn by her boss and says the experiences were shocking. She has also written an extremely disturbing first-person account of her experiences of clerking for Judge Kozinski where she also details Kozinski isolating her from her co-clerks to discuss his sexual history

The Fallout continues today as Harvard Law students seek to stop future attacks:

In August, a group of Harvard and Yale law students sent a memo to the Judicial Conference of the United States — the policy-making body for U.S. federal courts — urging the conference to a “adopt reforms regarding the role and responsibilities of law schools in reporting and responding to complaints of harassment and other abusive workplace practices.” That memo came in response to recommendations put forward by the Federal Judiciary Workplace Conduct Working Group, a committee formed following reports that former Ninth Circuit Judge Alex Kozinski sexually harassed several of his clerks and employees.

Kozinski, who stepped down in the wake of the allegations, has said he never intended to make his clerks uncomfortable.

In October, members of the Pipeline Parity Project penned an open letter to the Judicial Conference calling for three policies they believed were missing from the working group’s recommendations: a climate survey, an informal reporting structure, and a centralized office to receive reports. Hundreds of students from law schools across the country signed the letter. Pipeline Parity Project members also sent recommendations to the Judicial Conference earlier this month.

Second-year Law student and Pipeline Parity Project member Emma R. Janger said in an interview Thursday that the group set out at its founding to organize in response to Kozinski’s alleged sexual harassment of clerks. “One of the absolutely founding sort of impetuses for Pipeline was the allegations that came out against Ninth Circuit Judge Alex Kozinski,” Janger said. “One of the reasons Pipeline was founded was in response . . . the fact that as much as the allegations sent shockwaves, by many important players in the legal profession, Kozinski’s harassment was viewed as an open secret.”

The Washington Post Reports:

Prominent appeals court Judge Alex Kozinski accused of sexual misconduct

Judge Alex Kozinski of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit, pictured in 2003. Six women — all former clerks or externs in the 9th Circuit — alleged to The Washington Post in recent weeks that Kozinski, now 67, subjected them to a range of inappropriate sexual conduct or comments.

A former clerk for Judge Alex Kozinski said:

therepublicanfighter.com/9th-cir…6BxTz2_llI