Interdisciplinary Scientific Research staff, Devon Brewer director
Devon D. Brewer, Ph.D., Director, has broad training and experience in the social and health sciences. Much of his past research has focused on social networks, research methods and design, memory and cognition, drug abuse, violence, crime, sexual behavior, and infectious disease (including sexually transmitted diseases, blood-borne pathogens, respiratory infections, and gastroenteric infections).



He earned his bachelor's degree in anthropology from the University of Washington and his doctorate in social science from the University of California, Irvine. Prior to founding Interdisciplinary Scientific Research, Dr. Brewer held research positions at the University of Washington, an administrative position with Public Health-Seattle and King County, and teaching positions at the University of Washington, Pacific Lutheran University, and Tulane University, among other universities. He has been a principal investigator on federal research grants and authored/co-authored more than 60 scientific publications (see Projects, Publications, and Dr. Brewer's curriculum vitae). Dr. Brewer also serves as an Affiliate Assistant Professor in several departments at the University of Washington, occasionally teaching, lecturing, and advising students.



Kathleen D. Brewer, MS, Associate Director, has extensive training and experience in mental health services, social welfare, and program and fiscal management. Her work has focused on providing mental health and social work services to families and children in clinical and community settings. Ms. Brewer has served in government and non-profit agencies, managed multi-project programs with large budgets, and coordinated agency and university collaborations in research and clinical care. She earned her bachelor's degree in psychology from the University of Washington and her master's degree in community and clinical psychology from California State University, Long Beach.



International Network of Experts. In many of our projects, we collaborate with accomplished scientists and other professionals who have special expertise. Our project teams are uniquely qualified to conduct high quality research.