Sara Lee Analyst Day Review (SLE,D,UN,TXN)
Sara Lee (NYSE: SLE) used the forum of a recent analyst meeting to review the company's accomplishments over the last few years. It also outlined a comprehensive strategy for fiscal 2011 and beyond. The company plans to grow earnings through cost cutting and more stock buybacks. (To learn more, see A Breakdown Of Stock Buybacks.)

IN PICTURES: 9 Simple Investing Ratios You Need To Know



Review



Sara Lee has increased operating profit by 30% since fiscal 2008, and it raised margins over that time frame by 200 basis points. The company has accomplished this through cost cutting, selling off various businesses and improving its product mix.



Fiscal 2011



Sara Lee estimates that it will earn 88-95 cents in adjusted earnings per share (EPS) from continuing operations in fiscal 2011 (ending June 30, 2011). This is an increase from the 76 cents reported in fiscal 2010.



The EPS growth will be accomplished through cost cutting, lower pension expense and continuing a share repurchase program begun several years ago.



This cost cutting is continuing, as Sara Lee just announced the elimination of 390 jobs in Europe. The company estimates that this will save $39 million annually in expenses.



Sara Lee is also cutting its interest expenses, as the company just issued $800 million of a two-part note deal. The note proceeds will be used to retire a higher cost issue already outstanding. Another company that recently issued debt for the same purpose - a $250 million five-year issue - was Dominion Resources (NYSE: D).



Project Accelerate



Sara Lee calls its cost-cutting program Project Accelerate, and the company said that the program realized $131 million in benefits in fiscal 2010.



Although Sara Lee will grow EPS, fiscal 2011 sales will be flat, according to the company. This is due to unfavorable exchange rates, one less week in fiscal 2011 and the exiting of certain businesses by the company. (To learn more, see 6 Factors That Influence Exchange Rates.)



Commodity Prices



Like many food companies, Sara Lee is facing rising prices for commodity inputs into some of its products, including coffee beans, protein and wheat. Despite this inflation, the company is confident that it can pass on the higher costs through price increases.



"We have confidence that our brands will be able to pass along commodity price increases during fiscal '11, even though the ride may be a bit bumpy from quarter to quarter," said Mark Garvey, interim CFO of Sara Lee.



Capital Strategy



Sara Lee has plans for the cash it will generate over the next several years. The company will repurchase up to $3 billion of its own stock with the bulk of the purchases early in that time frame.



Sara Lee has also pledged to keep its annual dividend at 44 cents per share, and it has pledged to raise it at an upcoming board meeting in October. The company is also contributing $200 million to its pension plan.



Another company that raised its dividend recently is Texas Instruments (NYSE: TXN), which raised its quarterly dividend by a penny per share, bringing the annual dividend to 52 cents per share.



Recent News



Sara Lee is in the middle of a management transition since Brenda Barnes, CEO, resigned in August after suffering from health problems. Marcel Smits, the CFO, was named the interim CEO until a decision is made on a replacement.



The company is in the midst of selling off its body care division to Unilever (NYSE: UN) for $1.3 billion. The European Commission is currently reviewing the deal and recently extended the deadline for a decision until October 26.



A Tasty 2011



Sara Lee will reap the benefits of its cost-cutting program to help grow earnings in fiscal 2011. The company will also return substantial capital to shareholders through more buybacks of stock and a possible dividend increase.



Use the Investopedia Stock Simulator to trade the stocks mentioned in this stock analysis, risk free!