Institute for Research on Poverty
The Institute for Research on Poverty (IRP) at the University of Wisconsin–Madison is a center for interdisciplinary research into the causes and consequences of poverty and inequality and the impact of related policies and programs. As the National Poverty Research Center sponsored by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, IRP coordinates the U.S. Collaborative of Poverty Centers in an integrated set of activities with the ultimate goal of improving the effectiveness of public policies to reduce poverty and inequality and their impacts on the well-being of the American people.

Overview

The Institute for Research on Poverty (IRP) at the University of Wisconsin–Madison is dedicated to advancing understanding of the causes and consequences of U.S. poverty and inequality. It collects and analyzes information, continually updated from state and national data and special-purpose studies, on the evolving condition of low-income individuals and families and policies and programs to improve their well-being and increase self-sufficiency.

Having operated since 1966, IRP has built a cumulative program of interdisciplinary research, collaborating with and supporting a corps of some 200 research Affiliates comprising leading scholars in Economics, Sociology, Public Affairs, Public Health, Political Science, Law, Business, Social Work, and other disciplines, at UW–Madison and institutions across the nation.

The work of these researchers has created a well-rounded understanding of the issues, documenting that individual and family characteristics and circumstances—along with structural, social, and institutional forces—interact to generate poverty and inequality, which are themselves linked to well-being throughout the life course.

These findings build on the knowledge base that maps a way forward through development of evidence-based antipoverty public policies.

National Poverty Research Center

As the national Poverty Research Center, IRP coordinates a formal network of poverty centers, the U.S. Collaborative of Poverty Centers (CPC), which combines resources to create a sustainable, nationwide infrastructure that facilitates the exchange of applied poverty-policy research and findings among researchers, policymakers, and policy practitioners.

These themes help guide IRP's Center research, training, and dissemination activities, noted below. However, IRP's research program is much broader and more extensive, addressing national, state, and sub-state issues in policy-relevant ways.

Research

U.S. Collaborative of Poverty Centers (CPC)

Thematic Networks

Annual Poverty Research and Policy Forum

Learning Exchanges

Rapid-Response Technical Assistance

In-Residence Affiliate Visits at ASPE

Small Grant Competitions

Scholars-in-Residence Program for Underrepresented Groups

Innovative Data Efforts to Inform Policy Workshop

Summer Research Workshop

Summative Antipoverty Policy Volume

Training

Dissemination

Additional Research Activities

IRP leverages ASPE funding to gain support from a variety of public and private entities for meetings, conferences, graduate student research assistants, data collection, programmers, publications, and course-release time for faculty principal investigators in ways that complement IRP's Poverty Research Center activities.

These entities include the University of Wisconsin–Madison, UW–Madison Vice Chancellor for Research and Graduate Education, Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation, Wisconsin Department of Children and Families, U.S. Department of Education, U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Science Foundation, Smith Richardson Foundation, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families, Kellogg Foundation, Pew Charitable Trusts, Buffett Foundation, W. T. Grant Foundation, Ford Foundation, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Russell Sage Foundation, Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation, David and Lucille Packard Foundation, and Annie E. Casey Foundation.

Selected examples of research supported by these and other organizations include: