09/24/13: Meeting With President Rouhani After the United Nations Address!
Meeting With President Rouhani After the United Nations Address!

A group of American Muslim community leaders, in addition to Congressmen Keith Ellison and André Carson were invited by Iran's mission at the United Nations in NY to have dinner and conversation with the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Dr. Hassan Rouhani last Tuesday night, right after the address of President Rouhani at the General Assembly.

In the beginning of the meeting, the president addressed the Muslim religious and political leaders on the current conditions of the Muslim ummah.

Dr. Rouhani considered sectarian fighting, violence, terrorism and civil wars in parts of the Islamic World as main challenges and asked the religious leaders to emphasize on education of the youth and awareness of the communities against extremism which fuels Islamophobia.

The president answered some questions and concerns of the guests regarding the situation in Syria and other Muslim countries.

Following the president remarks, Minister Louis Farrakhan, Congressmen Ellison and some of the imams made some comments.

Imam Elahi thanked president Rouhani for meeting with the religious leaders despite his extremely short time and busy schedule in NY.



He appreciated the Presidents peaceful, constructive and promising approach to the world and said only those who may have disease in their hearts or warmongers may oppose the president prudent position.

Imam Elahi briefed the president on the Code of Honor between the Shia and Sunni scholars which was signed at Islamic House of Wisdom in 2007 and also similar declarations signed in LA, Chicago and recently in DC and gave a copy of the covenants to the president.



Imam asked President Rouhani to facilitate an American delegation of interfaith to visit Iran and continue the journey of dialogue with the religious and political leaders of Islamic Republic.

At the end of this historic meeting, President Rouhani expressed his hope that this kind of engagement will be the path of Muslims everywhere they live. He asked the Muslims to respect the laws of the country wherever they live and set a role model, representing the true teachings of Islam.