Hillary Clinton on Crime Democratic Jr Senator (NY); Secretary of State-Designee





Longtime advocate of death penalty, with restrictions

Source: Pew Forum on Religion and Politics 2008 Jan 1, 2008

Address the unacceptable increase in incarceration

A: I think that the results--not only at the federal level but at the state level--have been an unacceptable increase in incarceration across the board & now we have to address that. At the time, there were reasons why the Congress wanted to push through a certain set of penalties and increase prison construction and there was a lot of support for that across a lot of communities. It’s hard to remember now but the crime rate in the early 1990s was very high. But we’ve got to take stock now of the consequences, so that’s why I want to have a thorough review of all of the penalties, of all the kinds of sentencing, and more importantly start having more diversion and having more second chance programs.

Source: 2007 Iowa Brown & Black Presidential Forum Dec 1, 2007

Mandatory sentences have been too widely used

We have to do all of these things: We do have to go after racial profiling. I’ve supported legislation to try to tackle that. We have to go after mandatory minimums. You know, mandatory sentences for certain violent crimes may be appropriate, but it has been too widely used. And it is using now a discriminatory impact. We need diversion, like drug courts. Non-violent offenders should not be serving hard time in our prisons. They need to be diverted from our prison system.

Source: 2007 Democratic Primary Debate at Howard University Jun 28, 2007

Pushed to expand AMBER alerts & for stricter sex penalties

Source: 2006 intro to It Takes A Village, by H. Clinton, p.303 Dec 12, 2006

Police & firemen refused to shake her hand at Ground Zero

Source: Madame Hillary, by R. Emmett Tyrell, p. 63 Feb 25, 2004

2001: police & firemen refused her handshake at Ground Zero

It was likely no surprise to Hillary that there is bad blood between her and the police, fire and other "first responders." Still, the depth of their disdain had to have come as a shock when police and firemen refused to shake her hand at the ruins of the World Trade Center.

2000: NYPD needs higher pay and better minority relations

The more Giuliani continued with his divisive rhetoric, the more determined I was to offer a different approach. I laid out a plan for improving relations between the police & minorities, including better recruitment, training and compensation for the NYPD. Giuliani's handling of the Dorismond case was wrong. Instead of easing the tensions and uniting the city, he had poured salt into the wound.

Tap into churches to avoid more Louima & Diallo cases

Source: New York Times, A29 Mar 9, 2000

Led early crusade for rape evidence and crisis centers

Source: The Inside Story, by Judith Warner, p. 91 Aug 1, 1999

Supports citizen patrols & 3-Strikes-You’re-Out

The other half of community policing, of course, is the community’s role. Citizens have to be active participants in crime prevention. In Houston, nearly a thousand new officers added to the city’s police force since 1991 have been joined by thousands of citizen patrollers observing and reporting suspicious or criminal behavior in an anticrime campaign.

Supports “Three Strikes” and more prison

We need more police, we need more and tougher prison sentences for repeat offenders. The three strikes and you’re out for violent offenders has to be part of the plan. We need more prisons to keep violent offenders for as long as it takes to keep them off the streets.

Source: Unique Voice, p.189-90: Remarks at Annual Women in Policing Aug 10, 1994

Voted YES on reinstating $1.15 billion funding for the COPS Program.

Proponents recommend voting YES because:

This amendment reinstates the COPS Program. I remind everyone, when the COPS Program was functioning, violent crime in America reduced 8.5% a year for 7 years in a row. Throughout the 1990s, we funded the COPS Program at roughly $1.2 billion, and it drove down crime. Now crime is rising again. The COPS Program in the crime bill worked, and the Government Accounting Office found a statistical link between the COPS grants and a reduction in crime. The Brookings Institution reported the COPS Program is one of the most cost-effective programs we have ever had in this country. Local officials urgently need this support.

Opponents recommend voting NO because:

The COPS Program has some history. It was started by President Clinton. He asked for 100,000 police officers. He said that when we got to 100,000, the program would stop. We got to 110,000 police officers and the program continues on and on and on.

This program should have ended 5 years ago or 6 years ago, but it continues. It is similar to so many Federal programs that get constituencies that go on well past what their original purpose was. It may be well intentioned, but we cannot afford it and we shouldn't continue it. It was never thought it would be continued this long.

More funding and stricter sentencing for hate crimes.

Title: To provide Federal assistance to States and local jurisdictions to prosecute hate crimes.

Summary: Provide technical, forensic, prosecutorial, or other assistance in the criminal investigation or prosecution of any violent crime that is motivated by prejudice based on the race, color, religion, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, or disability of the victim or is a violation of hate crime laws.

Award grants to assist State and local law enforcement officials with extraordinary expenses for interstate hate crimes. Award grants to State and local programs designed to combat hate crimes committed by juveniles. Prohibit specified offenses involving actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, or disability. Increase criminal sentencing for adult recruitment of juveniles to commit hate crimes. Collect and publish data about crimes that manifest evidence of prejudice based on gender.

Source: House Resolution Sponsorship 01-HR1343 on Apr 3, 2001

Require DNA testing for all federal executions.

Title: To reduce the risk that innocent persons may be executed.

Summary: Authorizes a person convicted of a Federal crime to apply for DNA testing to support a claim that the person did not commit: the Federal crime of which the person was convicted; or any other offense that a sentencing authority may have relied upon when it sentenced the person with respect to such crime. Prohibits a State from denying an application for DNA testing made by a prisoner in State custody who is under sentence of death if specified conditions apply. Provides grants to prosecutors for DNA testing programs. Establishes the National Commission on Capital Representation. Withholds funds from States not complying with standards for capital representation. Provides for capital defense incentive grants and resource grants. Increases compensation in Federal cases, and sets forth provisions regarding compensation in State cases, where an individual is unjustly sentenced to death. Adds a certification requirement in Federal death penalty prosecutions. Expresses the sense of Congress regarding the execution of juvenile offenders and the mentally retarded.

Source: House Resolution Sponsorship 01-HR912 on Mar 7, 2001

Increase funding for "COPS ON THE BEAT" program.

COPS Improvements Act of 2007 - Amends the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to make grants for public safety and community policing programs (COPS ON THE BEAT or COPS program). Revises grant purposes to provide for:

the hiring or training of law enforcement officers for intelligence, antiterror, and homeland security duties; the hiring of school resource officers; school-based partnerships between local law enforcement agencies and local school systems to combat crime, gangs, drug activities, and other problems facing elementary and secondary schools; innovative programs to reduce and prevent illegal drug (including methamphetamine) manufacturing, distribution, and use; and enhanced community policing and crime prevention grants that meet emerging law enforcement needs.

Authorizes the Attorney General to make grants to: assign community prosecutors to handle cases from specific geographic areas and address counterterrorism problems, specific violent crime problems, and localized violent and other crime problems; and develop new technologies to assist state and local law enforcement agencies in crime prevention.

Source: COPS Improvements Act (S.368/H.R.1700) 07-S368 on Jan 23, 2007

Reduce recidivism by giving offenders a Second Chance.

Recidivism Reduction and Second Chance Act of 2007 Amends the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to expand provisions for adult and juvenile offender state and local reentry demonstration projects to provide expanded services to offenders and their families for reentry into society.

Directs the Attorney General to award grants for: state and local reentry courts; Comprehensive and Continuous Offender Reentry Task Forces; pharmacological drug treatment services to incarcerated offenders; technology career training for offenders; mentoring services for reintegrating offenders into the community; pharmacological drug treatment services to incarcerated offenders; prison-based family treatment programs for incarcerated parents of minor children; and a study of parole or post-incarceration supervision violations and revocations.



Source: Second Chance Act (S.1060/H.R.1593) 08-S1060 on Mar 29, 2007

Search for...



X

Page last updated: Jan 27, 2010