Neighborhood poverty, urban residence, race/ethnicity, and asthma: Rethinking the inner-city asthma epidemic
Jump to Section Methods Results Population characteristics Prevalence of asthma in urban poor (inner-city) and other poor areas Associations with current asthma prevalence Race/ethnicity Neighborhood poverty Individual-level household poverty Residence in an urban neighborhood Asthma morbidity Discussion Supplementary data References

Data were drawn from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) 2009-2011. The NHIS is a survey conducted annually by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), which is part of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). It has a multistate probability design that covers all 50 states and the District of Columbia and is intended to be representative of the civilian noninstitutionalized population living in the United States. Black, Asian, and Hispanic populations are oversampled to increase precision of estimates in certain subgroups. Data collection is done in person using a computer-assisted personal interviewing mode. The overall response rate for the child section of these surveys ranged from 71% to 75%.21x21NHIS Survey Description: 2009. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, US Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta (GA);

Google ScholarSee all References, 22x22NHIS Survey Description: 2010. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, US Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta (GA);

Google ScholarSee all References, 23x23NHIS Survey Description: 2011. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, US Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta (GA);

Google ScholarSee all References Because asthma is not reliably diagnosed in young children, the sample population was limited to children aged 6 to 17 years.

To evaluate the effect of geographic variables on asthma outcomes, we linked participants' census tracts, as classified by the 2000 Census, to 2 additional data sets: the 2006 NCHS Urban-Rural Classification Scheme for Counties and the 2000 US Census. The 2006 NCHS Urban-Rural Classification scheme divides counties into 6 categories based on population density and other measures of urbanization: (1) large metro, central; (2) large metro, fringe; (3) medium metro; (4) small metro; (5) micropolitan; and (6) noncore. Generally, “large metro, central” is considered the urban core, whereas “large metro, fringe” is thought to be equivalent to “suburban.”24x24Ingram, D.D. and Franco, S.J. NCHS urban-rural classification scheme for counties. Vital Health Stat 2. ; : 1–65

PubMed | Google ScholarSee all References Because there were relatively few people residing in small metro, micropolitan, and noncore areas, these categories were combined and classified as small metro/rural areas. The 2000 Census provided the percentage of households living at below the federally defined poverty level in each census tract. This was generally treated as a continuous variable in our analyses, although in some analyses we defined inner-city neighborhoods as census tracts located in large metro central areas with 20% or more of households at below the poverty line.9x9Busse, W.W. The National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases networks on asthma in inner-city children: an approach to improved care. J Allergy Clin Immunol. ; 125: 529–539

Abstract | Full Text | Full Text PDF | PubMed | Scopus (27) | Google ScholarSee all References Household income was defined as household income divided by the federally defined poverty level.

Ever asthma was defined by a yes answer to the following question: “Has a doctor or other health professional EVER told you that [name] had asthma?” Other questions that defined asthma were as follows: “Does [name] still have asthma?,” which was used for current asthma. “During the past 12 months, has [name] had an episode of asthma or an asthma attack?,” which was used for an asthma episode. “During the past 12 months, did [name] have to visit an emergency room or urgent care center because of [his/her] asthma?,” which was for an asthma emergency department visit.

Race/ethnicity was by self-report and recoded in the NHIS data in the following categories: Hispanic, non-Hispanic white (called “white” here), non-Hispanic black (called “black” here), non-Hispanic Asian (called “Asian” here), and all other race/ethnicities, a group comprising less than 1% of the total population. Because it has been previously reported that Puerto Rican Hispanics have different asthma risk than other Hispanics,25x25Lara, M., Akinbami, L., Flores, G., and Morgenstern, H. Heterogeneity of childhood asthma among Hispanic children: Puerto Rican children bear a disproportionate burden. Pediatrics. ; 117: 43–53

Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (205) | Google ScholarSee all References we created a separate race/ethnicity category for those of Puerto Rican heritage. Hereafter, “Hispanic” refers to non-Puerto Rican Hispanics.

Although multilevel modeling is often used in analyses of the association between neighborhood factors and disease, multilevel modeling typically requires at least 25 subjects per group (in this case census tract),26x26Duncan, C., Jones, K., and Moon, G. Context, composition and heterogeneity: using multilevel models in health research. Soc Sci Med. ; 46: 97–117

Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (413) | Google ScholarSee all References and in this analysis there were an average of only 4 subjects per census tract. Thus, for this analysis, standard survey methods were used with sample weights and strata provided in the survey. This accounts for the complex survey design, correctly adjusts the variances for clustering within a sampling unit, and does not require a minimum number of subjects per group. For analyses of individual-level income, the CDC provides multiply imputed data for subjects missing income data. These data are generated by the CDC by using sequential regression multivariate imputation implemented with the module IMPUTE with IVEware (www.isr.umich.edu/src/smp/ive)27x27Multiple imputation of family income and personal earnings in the National Health Interview Survey: methods and examples. Division of Health Interview Statistics, National Center for Health Statistics, Hyatsville (MD);

Google ScholarSee all References and were analyzed with the MI ESTIMATE commands in Stata, which accounts for the imputation uncertainty using the methods of Rubin.28x28Rubin, D.B. Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys. Wiley, New York; ( )

Crossref | Google ScholarSee all References Three logistic regression models for prediction of current asthma, asthma episodes, and emergency department visits in the past year were generated: crude bivariate analyses; multivariate models adjusted for age, sex, race/ethnicity, region of residence, neighborhood-level poverty, and urban/rural status; and multivariate models additionally adjusted for household income. To determine whether race/ethnicity or metropolitan residence modified the relationship between poverty and asthma, we also investigated interactions between these factors and constructed stratified models. Model diagnostics included the Pearson goodness-of-fit test, visual examination of the data, and sensitivity analyses excluding very large values. Individual- and neighborhood-level poverty were examined for collinearity, and because the collinearity was not strong (variance inflation factor of 1.2), both variables were included in some models. Because we identified differences in the relationship between current asthma and both neighborhood- and individual-level poverty between Hispanics and non-Hispanics, we stratified these analyses into (1) Hispanics and (2) all others, including Puerto Ricans. Our analyses confirmed that children of Puerto Rican heritage were more similar to non-Hispanic populations than Hispanics in the relationship between asthma and poverty (data not shown), supporting this method of stratification. Sensitivity analyses of the main model were done, including the following variables: (1) whether the child had a well-child visit in the past year and (2) whether the child had at any point been uninsured in the past year. A significance level of .05 was used. All analyses were done with Stata 13/SE software (StataCorp, College Station, Tex). Because census tract information is not available in the public NHIS data set, these analyses were conducted at the Research Data Center with approval from the NCHS Research Ethics Review Board. Data collection for the NHIS was approved by the NCHS Research Ethics Review Board.