After taking a stand by taking a knee in London, Jaguars players moving on after anthem protest
Jaguars cornerback A.J. Bouye will stand for “The Star-Spangled Banner” before Sunday’s game at the New York Jets after being one of 15 players who took a knee last week.

Special teams captain Arrelious Benn hopes the Jaguars’ 53 players stand as one with their arms locked together.

And coach Doug Marrone and multiple Jaguars players said Wednesday there have been no internal discussions about again protesting President Donald Trump’s comments about the league and his urging of owners to “fire” players who kneel for the anthem.

Bouye and 14 other players took a knee before the Jaguars’ win over Baltimore in London while the rest of the roster plus owner Shad Khan and the coaching, medical and equipment staffs stood side-by-side and locked arms.

More than 200 players took a knee for the anthem during last week’s NFL games, starting with the Jaguars and Ravens at Wembley Stadium. The players from Pittsburgh, Seattle and Tennessee stayed in the locker room.

Since last week’s games, the national media coverage has been intense, but the Jaguars’ locker room had a “We’re moving on,” feel following their first practice since returning to the United States.

The consensus from a sampling of opinions: The Jaguars will stand for the anthem, but may continue to lock arms; the players were protesting Trump’s comments and their intention was not to insult the flag, song or military; and there is no division in the locker room between players who took a knee and those who did not.

“It’s not something that I publicly care to speak on right now,” free safety Tashaun Gipson said. “I stand by what I did, but it’s not something I want to focus on right now.”

During his regular press conference on Wednesday, Marrone said he had not been informed if players intend to again take a knee. Marrone was asked if he expects to be told of a planned protest by the players (if they do one) ahead of Sunday’s kickoff.

“I haven’t talked to the players yet, but obviously, I would like to be informed, like anything,” Marrone said. “Just a common courtesy in any issue that we have. If I have an issue, I want to make sure I inform the team. If the team has an issue, I want to make sure they inform me. And like we said, communication is a big thing.”

The night before the Ravens game, the Jaguars’ captains and other veteran players met with Marrone, Khan and members of the team’s front office to discuss their options and finalize a plan.

Bouye said he had told fellow Jaguars defensive backs that he will not take a knee.

“I’ve already said what I needed to say,” Bouye said. “What (Dallas Cowboys owner) Jerry Jones did (Monday) was a perfect example. All we want is to bring awareness. We can have a moment of silence before the flag.”

Before the Cowboys-Cardinals game, Jones and his team’s players and coaches walked onto the field together, took a knee and then stood with their arms locked for the anthem.

RELATED

Jaguars, Khan take lead in protesting Trump’s criticism of NFL

After President Trump’s comments, several Jaguars take knee for anthem

Mayor Lenny Curry: It’s ‘stupid’ not to stand for the anthem, but Constitution protects such things

Bouye said taking a knee should not be viewed as a sign of disrespect toward the flag, the song or the military.

“I don’t have a problem with the military at all; I have family in the military,” Bouye said. “It’s nothing (about) disrespecting the flag. I’m going to stand (Sunday) and I’m going to stand when we come home (to play the Los Angeles Rams on Oct. 15).”

Bouye added: “The main response that I’ve been getting from what I’ve been doing is that I need to shut up because I’m getting paid.”

Benn grew up in Washington, D.C., “singing the anthem since I was a little kid in school — that’s how you started off your morning growing up in that school system.”

For his part, Benn disagreed with players taking a knee.

“I never felt the need to do that — I never felt that would change things,” he said. “I hope we just continue to lock arms and do that all together.”