The State of the Nation’s Housing 2018
Join us as we mark the 30th anniversary of The State of the Nation’s Housing at the National Press Club in Washington, DC.

The State of the Nation's Housing, which has been released annually since 1988, describes key trends in both national and metro-level homeownership and rental markets, and reviews key economic and demographic trends that are shaping current and future demand in those markets. The 30th anniversary report also examines how some of today’s conditions echo the past and are a yardstick for the progress we as a nation have and have not made in fulfilling the promise of a decent, affordable home for all.

REGISTER TO ATTEND the release event at the National Press Club on Tuesday, June 19 from 4:00 - 6:30 pm.

Note: This event will also be webcast live. (No registration required; video will stream on our website.)

PROGRAM

4:00 pm

Welcome from Don Chen, Director, Just Cities and Regions, Ford Foundation

4:05 pm

JCHS Report Presentation

4:30 pm

Panel Conversation with:

Alana Semuels, Staff Writer, The Atlantic (moderator)

Staff Writer, The Atlantic (moderator) Chris Herbert, Managing Director, Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies

Managing Director, Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies Eric Belsky, Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Federal Reserve System; Former Managing Director, Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies

Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Federal Reserve System; Former Managing Director, Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies Shaun Donovan, Former Secretary, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; Former Director, U.S. Office of Management and Budget

Former Secretary, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; Former Director, U.S. Office of Management and Budget George McCarthy, President and CEO, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy

5:30 pm

Reception to celebrate The State of the Nation's Housing 30th Anniversary

Join the conversation on Twitter with #harvardhousingreport

Media Contact: Kerry Donahue, (617) 495-7640, kerry_donahue@harvard.edu

Looking for a previous State of the Nation's Housing report? Visit our Working Papers & Reports page.