PRINCE

This Thing Called Life: Prince, Race, Sex, Religion, and Music (Bloomsbury Academic, 2018)

What were Prince’s politics? What did he believe about God? And did he really forsake the subject-sex-that once made him the most subversive superstar of the Reagan era? In this illuminating thematic biography, Joseph Vogel explores the issues that made Prince one of the late 20th century’s most unique, controversial, and fascinating artists.

Since his unexpected death in 2016, Prince has been recognized by peers, critics, and music fans alike. President Barack Obama described him as “one of the most gifted and prolific musicians of our time.” Yet in spite of the influx of attention, much about Prince’s creative life, work, and cultural impact remains thinly examined. This Thing Called Life fills this vacuum, delving deep into seven key topics-politics, sound, race, gender, sex, religion, and death-that allow us to see Prince in fresh, invigorating new ways. Accessible and timely, This Thing Called Life takes the reader on a journey through the catalog and creative revolution of one of America’s most compelling and elusive icons.

Now available for pre-order!

“I wrote a book about Prince, so I know how hard it is. This Thing Called Life is a great one. Smart, thorough, and illuminating, Vogel’s book is a must-have for fans of Prince.” – Touré, author of I Would Die 4 U: Why Prince Became an Icon (2013)

“What a welcome and inspiring addition to the pages devoted to Prince’s life! A rare and complex artist is better understood when viewed through his art, and not just his personal history. Vogel chooses this route to explore the extramusical dialectic that Prince helped to shape, including gender, race, sex, and religious views. This Thing Called Life is erudite, accurate, and, above all, entrancing.” – Susan Rogers, Professor of Music Production and Engineering, Berklee College of Music, USA, and Prince’s recording engineer

“Tackling a notoriously private musician of hieroglyphic complexity, Vogel deconstructs Prince’s astounding body of work with refreshing clarity and remarkable insight. Meticulous and thoughtful, Vogel brings a scholarly richness to the study of an icon who deserves the royal treatment.” – Jason King, Director of Global Studies at The Clive Davis Institute of Recorded Music, New York University, USA

Articles on Prince

“This Thing Called Life: In Memory of Prince.” Huffington Post. April 21, 2016.

“Prince and Michael Jackson: The Rivalry and the Revolution.” PopMatters. April 29, 2016.