John McCain for President
During Portsmouth Visit McCain Champions Nuclear Power





By Amanda Dumond, Foster's Daily Democrat, NH

December 7, 2007 Article Excerpt: PORTSMOUTH - Arizona Sen. John McCain was adamant Thursday afternoon that nuclear power needs to be part of a national discussion on climate change and energy resources. While addressing a group of about 60 people at a forum at Seacoast Media Group, the Republican presidential candidate also said the issue of climate change is tied closely to America's energy consumption and national security.



With dictator-like presidents in oil-rich Venezuela, Russia and Iran, who are ignoring basic human rights, it's crucial to find other fuel and energy sources, he said.



"It seems to me Americans have not made enough of a connection of how this money that is ours (that) is going into the pockets of these people is contributing to future challenges in the world," he also said.



McCain said that not only nuclear energy but also coal, solar, wind and tide technologies should be considered as alternative fuel sources that will reduce America's dependence on foreign oil.



He said he recognizes the issue with nuclear energy is dealing with its waste product, and securing existing nuclear waste sites also is important to America's national security.



Doug Bogen of Portsmouth, who works with the Clean Water Action group, said he has concerns about McCain's stance on nuclear energy because today's technology uses coal to fire its power plants and building new, more advanced facilities is very complex and costly.



"Why couldn't we put the money elsewhere in real renewable energy systems" like wind, solar and tide? Bogen asked.



McCain replied that those "true clean technologies" cannot support or sustain the power needs of the country alone. He added that nuclear power can be considered safe because American submarines have been sailing the seas with their own "nuclear power plants" and never once had an accident.



He also said the United States can learn from European nations, especially France, in creating safe and clean nuclear energy.



During the start of the forum, McCain noted as well that President George W. Bush and his administration have failed to adequately address climate change and the need for his party to remember its roots.



"It's time we as Republicans, and I say this as a proud Republican, return to the tradition of Theodore Roosevelt," McCain added. "He was probably one of the nation's greatest conservationists ... He expanded our national parks. He set up national monuments ... He loved the beauty of this nation."



Click here to read the rest of this article.