McCain-Palin 2008
MCCAIN ECONOMIC PLAN FOR LOW TAXES AND GOVERNMENT SPENDING



Cut Taxes On The Middle Class



Cut Taxes For Middle Class Families: Hard-working American families need lower taxes. John McCain will permanently repeal the Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) -- a tax that will be paid nearly exclusively by 25 million middle class families. John McCain will repeal this onerous tax, saving middle class families nearly $60 billion in a single year. Under McCain's plan, a middle class family with children set to pay the AMT will save an average of over $2,700 -- a real tax cut for working families. Pro-Growth Tax Policy



Keep Tax Rates Low: Entrepreneurs are at the heart of American innovation, growth and prosperity. Entrepreneurs create the ultimate job security -- a new, better opportunity if your current job goes away. Entrepreneurs should not be taxed into submission. John McCain will make the Bush income and investment tax cuts permanent, keeping income tax rates at their current level and fighting the Democrats' plans for a crippling tax increase in 2011. Left to their devices, Democrats will impose a massive $100 billion tax hike, almost $700 per taxpayer every year. Eliminating Wasteful Spending



Stop Earmarks, Pork-Barrel Spending, And Waste: John McCain will veto every pork-laden spending bill and make their authors famous. As President, he will seek the line-item veto to reduce waste and eliminate earmarks that have led to corruption. Earmarks restrict America's ability to address genuine national priorities and interfere with fair, competitive markets.



Leadership, Courage And Choices: Reduced spending means making choices. John McCain will provide the courageous leadership necessary to control spending, including: Eliminate broken government programs. The federal government itself admits that 1 in 5 programs do not perform.

Reform our civil service system to promote accountability and good performance in our federal workforce.

Eliminate earmarks, wasteful subsidies, and pork-barrel spending.

Reform procurement programs and cut wasteful spending in defense and non-defense programs. Vision for Prosperity in the 21st Century



Entitlement, Trade, Health Care, and Energy Reform: John McCain will reform our entitlements programs to ensure retirement security for Americans, pursue a free trade agenda while assisting displaced workers, reform our health care system to address skyrocketing costs, and deliver a national energy strategy that declares independence from the risk bred by our reliance on oil imported from petro-dictators. For more on these issues, see John McCain's Economic Plan: Bold Solutions For American Prosperity Cut Taxes On The Middle ClassEntrepreneurs are at the heart of American innovation, growth and prosperity. Entrepreneurs create the ultimate job security -- a new, better opportunity if your current job goes away. Entrepreneurs should not be taxed into submission. John McCain will make the Bush income and investment tax cuts permanent, keeping income tax rates at their current level and fighting the Democrats' plans for a crippling tax increase in 2011. Left to their devices, Democrats will impose a massive $100 billion tax hike, almost $700 per taxpayer every year.John McCain will veto every pork-laden spending bill and make their authors famous. As President, he will seek the line-item veto to reduce waste and eliminate earmarks that have led to corruption. Earmarks restrict America's ability to address genuine national priorities and interfere with fair, competitive markets.John McCain will reform our entitlements programs to ensure retirement security for Americans, pursue a free trade agenda while assisting displaced workers, reform our health care system to address skyrocketing costs, and deliver a national energy strategy that declares independence from the risk bred by our reliance on oil imported from petro-dictators. For more on these issues, see John McCain's Economic Plan: Bold Solutions For American Prosperity