Joni Ernst for Iowa
Creating Jobs Joni supports pro-growth tax and economic policies that will unleash the full potential of America’s free market economy and create new, better paying jobs so that more of our neighbors have jobs to go to each day in order to support their families. Joni believes the free market is the greatest job creating machine ever built, but only when the government gets out of the way. She supports rolling back Washington-created job-killing regulations that are crushing small business.

Growing Our Economy Joni will fight to continue Iowa’s economic growth – meaning an influx of even more businesses to the state and a resulting increase in jobs. She believes that by ensuring markets remain open to exports for Iowa goods and promoting innovation that makes Iowa more competitive in today’s global marketplace, Iowa will continue its current upward economic and job growth trajectory.

Real and Meaningful Health Care Reform Joni is staunchly opposed to the Obamacare law. Joni supports immediate action to repeal Obamacare and replace it with common sense, free-market alternatives that put patients first, and health care decisions back in the hands of each of us rather than Washington bureaucrats.

Restoring Fiscal Responsibility Washington has a spending addiction and Joni is committed to breaking it. It’s simple: Government must stop spending more money than it takes in. That’s why Joni supports a Balanced Budget Amendment to the Constitution to force Washington to stop the reckless spending and live within its means.

Protecting Social Security and Medicare Joni believes strongly that Social Security and Medicare must be preserved and protected for our seniors of today and tomorrow. She opposes any efforts to change the promised benefits for today’s seniors. At the same time she supports reforms that will strengthen both Social Security and Medicare to ensure the long-term health of both programs for her daughters and grandchildren and their generations.

Honoring America’s Heroes: Our Veterans As a Lt. Colonel and battalion commander in the Iowa Army National Guard, Joni knows first-hand the incredible service, and sacrifices, our men and women in uniform have made, and continue to make, on behalf of our great nation and state. In the senate, she will fight as hard for them, and their families, as they have fought for us. That means caring for wounded warriors, immediately working toward the betterment of the broken VA benefit system, and improving veteran education and job training programs.

Protecting Innocent Life Joni believes life begins at conception, that all innocent life is precious, and that we must cherish and protect the unborn.

Keeping America Strong in the World Joni believes in a strong national defense because she knows the world is a safer place when America is the strongest nation on the planet. She believes that military readiness cannot be allowed to fall victim to Washington politics or bureaucratic maneuvering. Joni also believes that American foreign policy must be consistent and strong – never giving our enemies hesitation as to America’s resolve to defend herself and her interests across the globe, whether by diplomatic means or use of force.

Fixing the Broken Federal Tax System The IRS is a disaster riddled with scandal. The greatest nation on earth should not have one of the most political, bureaucratic, out of control tax agencies on the planet. Our system is backwards. Joni believes real, fundamental tax reform will require more than tweaks to the tax code. It’s time to scrap it and start over, to broaden our tax system by making it fairer, flatter, simpler and more certain.