Morrisey to attend Republican National Convention
HARPERS FERRY-Attorney General Patrick Morrisey will be attending the 2016 Republican National Convention this week in Cleveland, Ohio, and he said he’s excited to attend.

“I’m looking forward to using the opportunity to discuss some of the really great things we’ve been doing here in West Virginia – from stopping Obama’s federal overreach, to our work combating the substance abuse epidemic, to our efforts to improve the state’s business climate,” Morrisey said. “It’s a great chance to collaborate with other leaders from around the country, share ideas and brag about our great state.”

The convention will take place at the Quicken Loans Arena, and approximately 2,470 delegates and 2,302 alternative delegates are expected to attend from all 50 states, Washington, D.C., and five U.S. territories. This is the fourth time the convention will be held in Ohio, with the state also hosting the event in 1876, 1924 and 1936.

Morrisey is the only delegate going to the GOP convention in the tri-county area of the Eastern Panhandle, and he will be representing Jefferson County. Morrisey, a resident of Harpers Ferry, has acted as West Virginia’s attorney general since being elected Nov. 6, 2012 and sworn into office Jan. 14, 2013, and is the first Republican to hold the office since 1933.

Citizens of West Virginia voted Morrisey as a delegate for the convention during the May 10 primary election.

Morrisey said his decision to become a delegate representing Jefferson County at the convention was conceived as a responsibility he believes all elected officials have.

“This is, without a doubt, a very important election. I think it is our duty as citizens and as elected representatives to take an active role in ensuring that we change the path our country is headed down,” Morrisey said. “We cannot afford a third term of Obama’s job-killing policies.”

Morrisey will be facing off against two opponents in the November general election, including Karl Kolenich, a Libertarian from Buckhannon, and Doug Reynolds, a Democrat from Huntington.

Although Morrisey registered to be a delegate and remains uncommitted to a particular presidential candidate, he said he will support the Republican nominee regardless.

“When I first signed up to be a delegate, the primary was wide open, so I did not commit to any particular candidate because it was too early to tell what would unfold,” Morrisey said. “I intend to support the nominee, because electing Hillary Clinton would be devastating for West Virginia. I look forward to supporting the team to defeat Hillary Clinton in November.”

Republican presidential candidate front-runner Donald Trump announced Friday his selection of Indiana Gov. Mike Pence as his running mate.

The purpose of the convention is to officially nominate the Republican party candidate for president and vice president, and to adopt the party’s platform and rules.

Morrisey said he’s happy about being selected as a delegate to attend the convention, and he looks forward to traveling to Cleveland.

“I think it’s going to be a fantastic week for the Republican Party to present a new direction for our country,” Morrisey said.

The convention will officially begin Monday.

For more information, visit convention.gop.

??

Staff writer Emily Daniels can be reached at 304-263-8931 ext. 132 or on Twitter @emilykdaniels.