5-21
than 130,000 similar stories told by parents of children whose lives have been changed because of the wonderful services offered by the Texas Scottish Rite Hospital, it is our pleasure, all of us, to join Senator Fraser and Linda in welcoming the representatives of the Texas Scottish Rite Hospital and thanking them truly for changing so many lives and bringing so much happiness to so many children and their parents. May God bless you always and inspire you to continue to excel and, Chase, you look great. Thank you. Senator Moncrief: Thank you Mr. President. Members, Senator Fraser, I can't even imagine you standing here, trying to express your appreciation, nor you, Senator West. I thank my lucky stars that I'm not here doing the same thing, but at the same time, as Senator Zaffirini just mentioned, for those thousands of parents out there who can't stand here on the Senate floor and thank you publicly on their behalf, I do. You spread your wings wide and you touch many lives on a daily basis, and yet you do it without fanfare, you do it without a great deal of attention, or the spotlight being cast, but you do it because you do care and because you have that compassion that we in Texas are known for. Your professionalism and your concern are very important to all of us and we cannot thank you enough for everything you have done and will continue to do. God bless. Senator Harris: I, too, am one of those families that is very grateful for what you've done for my family. I have four sons who have extreme cases of dyslexia. Two of them were in public schools. They kept being told they were stupid, that they didn't have the capability to learn, that they need to be put in mentally retarded classes, because they had dyslexia. I'm proud to report that one of those boys has already gotten his degree; the youngest one is at UTA in pre-law; one of the boys, unfortunately, died; and the other boy is beyond help, he is a bareback bronc rider on the rodeo circuit, but you did give him an education. You even helped him develop a love, and for God's sake, don't ask me how he got this screwy gene, you even helped him develop, because you taught him how to read, a love of Shakespeare. And the only criticism I have of you, back in the days when my wife finally found out about you, you were the best kept secret in Texas. She had to go through a multitude of sources to find out about Scottish Rite Hospital and to find out how they could evaluate for dyslexia. But you have no idea what a difference it made in those two oldest boys who were being told they were stupid in class, to find out that they had a learning disability, and how well both of them did immediately thereafter, and how well it prepared us to help the younger two boys from the very beginning to where they didn't go through the level of frustration that their two big brothers did. And from my standpoint, there's no way I can thank you enough. Thank you. Senator Staples: Thank you Mr. President. I, too, rise to join my colleagues in congratulating the Texas Scottish Rite Hospital. My daughter, Elizabeth, is a current patient of the hospital, scheduled for an appointment as soon as we get out of this session in June. When she was two months old, she was diagnosed with a congenital dislocated hip, and all of you who are parents can certainly understand what that does to you with a newborn. We were referred to the Texas Scottish Rite Hospital and I just cannot express the appreciation from my family for the compassion and concern. After going through several different procedures to try to correct the deficiency, she had surgery my first session as a freshman state Representative and was in a full-body cast for about eight weeks. But the really special thing about the hospital is that you