Feingold campaign wants Johnson ad dropped
All Politics Blog From Milwaukee, Madison and beyond, a daily dose of political news and glimpses behind the scenes SHARE

By of the

U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold's campaign on Sunday asked the Ron Johnson for Senate campaign to pull a television ad that has been airing statewide in recent days that incorrectly reports that Feingold "has not worked anywhere outside of politics."

The Johnson campaign responded quickly and indicated without directly saying so that it would not pull the ad.

The letter to Johnson's campaign was sent by George Aldrich, Feingold's campaign manager. It was made available to the Journal Sentinel on Sunday afternoon.

In the letter, Aldrich writes that the statement, made by an actor in the ad, "is a blatantly false statement and if you have proof that it's true we encourage you to make it available to the public."

Aldrich writes that, as a young man, Feingold worked for his family's title and abstract business. Feingold also worked his way through college at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

After Feingold received his law degree at Harvard University, Feingold worked for two different law firms: Foley and Lardner and LaFollette and Sinykin. Feingold has said his clients were in the business world.

"You have every right to ignore the media but you have the responsibility to the people of Wisconsin to tell the truth," Aldrich writes. "Given the fact that your TV ad rises to a level which is so intentionally false, so untrue and wrong, we encourage you to do the right thing and take down instead of trying to mislead voters in an effort to win the election."

The ad in question, which you can see here, is part of Johnson's strategy to paint Feingold as a career politician. Feingold has served in the Wisconsin Senate, and is seeking his fourth term in the U.S. Senate.

Sara Sendek, a Johnson campaign spokeswoman, said in a statement that, "Senator Feingold agrees that he is a career politician and says he is proud to be a 'career politician.' He stated this at a recent press conference and at the Newsmaker Luncheon where he confirmed the assertion by saying 'Guilty as Charged.'

"Senator Feingold did practice as a lawyer for two firms for a short period of time, but both of those firms are involved in political work. He has spent 28 of 30 years as a politician - more than enough time to accurately describe that as a career. Two years as a highly paid lawyer a quarter of a century ago hardly constitutes any sort of real world experience with a business or creating jobs."

That brought a response from John Krause, a top Feingold campaign aide. "Ron Johnson's campaign admits that their ad is false when they say Russ Feingold has never worked outside politics, yet they choose to continue running an ad that isn't true," Kraus said in an e-mail.

On Sunday, Johnson was interviewed by Mike Gousha of WISN-TV (Channel 12) and was asked about the ad. Johnson admitted that Feingold had worked in the private sector, but stuck to his contention that Feingold is a career politician. Here is what Johnson said:

"Well I guess I’m not a 100% sure why Senator Feingold takes such offense by being called a career politician. I think it’s.. it’s a fact. If you take a look at his history he, you know, what has he done in his life? You know, he went off to Harvard, went off to Oxford, came back, worked for a couple of years in a law firm, probably while he was running for election for the State Senate; and he just served 10 years in the State Senate, now he’s served close to 18 years in the U.S. Senate.

In Tuesday's primary, Johnson and fellow Republicans Dave Westlake and Stephen Finn are vying for the Republican nomination to run against Feingold.