Redistricting pushes boundaries to help a Republican congressman
Click image to enlarge

Democrat Dave Obey calls it "highly manipulative" and "crassly political."

Republican Paul Ryan calls it a "status-quo map" with "clean lines."

They're talking about the congressional redistricting plan Republicans are preparing to move through the state Legislature in the coming weeks.

Hundreds of thousands of voters would see their representation in Congress change under the plan, from Milwaukee's North Shore suburbs to Ozaukee County, the Fox Valley, the North Woods and central and western Wisconsin.

That's a lot of change.

Redistricting scholar Michael McDonald says some of the biggest changes "appear to be largely unnecessary" to equalize the populations of the state's congressional districts.

"You have a plan that looks to be politically motivated," said McDonald, a political scientist at George Mason University in northern Virginia.

"When . . . one party controls the process, they're going to do this," says McDonald.

This is the first Wisconsin redistricting since the 1950s in which one party has controlled the governor's office and both chambers of the Legislature, meaning Republicans have a free hand politically to create any map that can withstand legal challenge.

Judging from a draft outline obtained by the Journal Sentinel, the plan has one key objective: protecting Republican freshman Sean Duffy, who represents Wisconsin's 7th Congressional District in northern Wisconsin, the seat that Dave Obey, a Democrat, held for decades.

The partisan makeup of the 7th would change more than any other district in the state under the new plan, which hasn't gone to the Legislature yet for action.

Democrat Barack Obama won the current Duffy district with almost 56% of the vote in 2008. But his total in the "redrawn" Duffy district would have been two to three points lower, based on an analysis of the new map. Obama's victory margin in the 7th was 13.4 points. His margin in the "redrawn" 7th would have been roughly eight points.

In effect, the GOP map makes the state's most competitive congressional district a few points more Republican than it is now.

That's a significant boost for Duffy, who will be one of the Democrats' top national targets next year. It's the difference between losing a race by two points and winning it by three.

The GOP redistricting plan accomplishes this by moving fairly large numbers of people in and out of the 7th District.

Duffy's seat needs to grow by a little more than 20,000 people to meet the legal requirement that all eight House seats have the same population. On paper, that could be done by simply expanding Duffy's district a bit southward into Democrat Ron Kind's 3rd District, which needs to lose almost the same number of people.

Instead, the GOP plan shifts about 150,000 of Duffy's current constituents out of the 7th, and replaces them with about 170,000 people who now live in neighboring districts.

These big population swaps affect 13 different counties, and involve one notable example of creative line drawing. The plan carves out of Duffy's district a sizable Democratic chunk of central Wisconsin (Portage County and eastern Wood County) and splices it to Kind's western Wisconsin seat, using Adams County as a connecting corridor.

All together, Duffy would be losing areas that voted 60% for Obama in 2008, or seven points more Democratic than the nation as a whole. He would be gaining areas that gave Obama 48%, or five points less than the U.S. as a whole.

This isn't the first time a redistricting map in Wisconsin has boosted incumbents on both sides of the aisle. It happened after the 2000 census when Democratic Beloit was shifted from Republican Ryan's district to Democrat Tammy Baldwin's district, making them both safer politically.

But this map is more contorted than its recent predecessors. There isn't another Wisconsin congressional district in recent decades that looks quite like the lopsided "Y" now envisioned for Kind's district, whose irregular shape is the by-product of moving Democratic voters out of Duffy's district.

Former congressman Obey, who negotiated the past several congressional maps for Wisconsin Democrats, is disdainful of this one.

"They have shredded communities of interest," Obey said of the GOP. "The 3rd District has always been a Mississippi River district. The 7th has been a central Wisconsin Valley district."

He calls the large population shifts in and out of the 7th "a huge degree of unnecessary disruption."

Among the communities removed from Duffy's district are three Democrat-leaning cities: Stevens Point, which Obama won by 38 points; Wisconsin Rapids, which he won by 19 points; and Chippewa Falls, which he won by 18 points. Portage, which would be removed in its entirety from the 7th, is one of the most Democratic counties in Wisconsin. Obama carried it by 28 points.

Meanwhile, Duffy's district would absorb new Republican turf such as St. Croix and Vilas counties, which both voted for Republican John McCain in 2008 and overwhelmingly for Republican Scott Walker in the 2010 governor's race.

"For any serious-minded person who looks at it, it will be apparent in a second that the adjustments were made not to equalize population but simply to carve out areas of the state for one district or another based only on partisan preference," says Obey.

Janesville Congressman Paul Ryan, who took the lead in drafting the plan, defends it on several grounds.

In an interview, Ryan said Duffy's district is still "very competitive," which it is. In 2008, it was only three points more Democratic than the U.S. as a whole, based on the presidential vote. Under the new lines, that Democratic edge would all but disappear.

Ryan also contends the GOP showed restraint by not writing Duffy's potential Democratic opponent Pat Kreitlow out of the 7th.

"We made sure at Duffy's insistence that his opponent stays in the district," said Ryan. Under the GOP plan, Kreitlow's home outside the city of Chippewa Falls is just inside the 7th District.

And Ryan says the GOP plan is nothing like the wholesale gerrymander that Democrats are pushing in Illinois, a plan that aggressively targets several Republican incumbents in that state.

"We didn't want to take advantage of the situation," says Ryan. "We didn't want to try to pull an Illinois-type of stunt. . . . We kept the partisan makeup the same. We didn't flip these districts."

Under the GOP plan, Ryan's seat gets slightly more Republican by trading Greenfield in Milwaukee County for a slice of southern Waukesha County, but the overall partisan shift amounts to less than a percentage point. The other GOP districts - represented by Reid Ribble, Tom Petri and Jim Sensenbrenner - change even less in their partisan tilt, though their boundaries are altered.

The district that sees the biggest partisan shift, after Duffy's, is Kind's. That's because Republicans could not make Duffy's seat more Republican without making the neighboring Kind seat more Democratic. It's a trade-off the GOP accepted: gaining a few points for Duffy while reducing the party's future chances of winning back the 3rd - a seat Republicans held before Kind won it in the mid-1990s, and almost won back last fall.

Duffy would not comment for this story. Neither would Kind, whose spokesman said he'd talk about the plan once it's finalized and officially introduced.

Going into this process, Republicans were limited by the state's political geography in how much they could "improve" Duffy's seat for the party. There weren't that many options for shedding Democratic areas and annexing Republican ones. This map does everything it could to accomplish those goals short of a wholesale makeover of the state's congressional lines.

McDonald describes the draft GOP plan as a move in the direction of more aggressive partisan line-drawing.

"The threat in the long run, once you start going down this path . . . is it just sets you on this course where eventually these districts are going to string themselves all over the state," he says.