Fiscal Bureau report offers alternatives to ending residency
A new Legislative Fiscal Bureau report on the thorny topic of residency rules for local units of government offers an array of alternatives to Gov. Scott Walker's proposal to end the practice.

The report, written for the Legislature's Joint Finance Committee, is a balanced account of the pros and cons of ending the practice of residency rules for public employees. More than 100 municipalities in the state have some form of residency, including Milwaukee.

The committee is expected to consider the residency issue at its meeting next Thursday. Walker's proposal to end residency is part of his executive budget, but there has been debate among legislators whether the issue should be considered as a separate piece of legislation.

The Fiscal Bureau reports that case law is on the side of Milwaukee on the subject of residency, noting that the U.S Supreme Court and various state courts "have tended to uphold the constitutionality of the municipal residency requirements, generally siding with the public interests of governments and its policy reasons for such requirements."

Specific to Milwaukee, the report notes that city officials believe the end of residency would add to the economic concerns of the city and the Milwaukee Public Schools. On the other hand, the report states that opponents of residency rules feel it violates equal protection clauses and the freedom to travel and move across city limits.

The report says that the average salary of a teacher, police officer or firefighter in Milwaukee is higher than that of the average household in the city.

"Given the income discrepancy that exists, it is conceivable that if large numbers of public employees are able to relocate and reside outside the city limits, the levels of employment, incomes, and home values in certain neighborhoods of the city could be negatively impacted," the report says.

The report also raises the possibility that if residency rules are removed, there would be out-migration from Milwaukee. "Given that public employees, their unions, and associations want relief from the residency requirements in Milwaukee, it would seem somewhat evident that providing that relief could lead to some number of those public employees migrating out of the city," the report says.

The Milwaukee Police Association, Milwaukee Professional Firefighters Local 215, and the Wisconsin Professional Police Association have lobbied in favor of ending residency. In addition to Mayor Tom Barrett and the Common Council, the League of Wisconsin Municipalities are fighting to retain residency rules statewide.

The Fiscal Bureau report also lists some alternatives for legislators to consider. They include: