Despite judge's order Capitol protests continue
Video Loading...

Madison -- Demonstrators gathered in the Capitol Tuesday for their longrunning singing protest in spite of a federal judge's ruling and a declaration by police that it was an "unlawful assembly."

Dozens of protesters sang protest songs in the rotunda and, as they have every weekday for more than two years now, held signs with slogans such as "Wisconsin Bought and Paid For" and "I am Woman Hear Me Roar." But a federal judge's ruling last week is raising questions about the future of the protests against Gov. Scott Walker that began during the labor demonstrations at the Capitol in the spring of 2011.

Last week, U.S. District Judge William Conley in Madison struck down two parts of the Walker administration's restrictions on demonstrations, giving a moral victory to the protesters. But Conley left much of the remaining rules in place, including those requiring permits for larger events.

In a 47-page opinion, Conley blocked the administration from requiring a permit for "events" in the statehouse rotunda of 20 people or fewer but left the permit requirement in place for indoor events as large as Tuesday's sing-along.

Using a bullhorn, police attempted to remind protesters that their unpermitted protest was larger than the 20 person limit. With their voices barely heard among the singing and noise, the police told demonstrators they faced arrest and citation if they didn't disperse or move their event onto the Capitol Square outside.

The demonstrators ignored police, singing labor standards such as "Solidarity Forever."

Department of Administration spokeswoman Stephanie Marquis had no immediate comment.

Protester Bart Munger said that in spite of Conley's decision he believed he had the right to protest the government in the Capitol.

"I understand the process (Conley) went through but I don't agree with it because it's a unique situation," Munger said of the statehouse, saying it should receive more consideration as a place of dissent.

In his opinion, Conley adcknowledged the statehouse played a central role in the geography of Madison and its civic life that allowed for "a certain level of disturbance that would not be proper in a typical state office building or even a typical state capitol." But he also said that state officials could set reasonable limits and regulation on larger events.

The Walker administration's rules had allowed for no more than three protesters without a permit inside the Capitol.

The Capitol rules lawsuit decided by Conley had been brought by protester Michael Kissick of Madison and the American Civil Liberties Union of Wisconsin.