More on Mary Burke and the state Department of Commerce
Madison -- Mary Burke's announcement Monday of a run against Gov. Scott Walker will likely sharpen debate over the state’s flagship jobs agency.

Walker dissolved the Commerce Department in 2011 and replaced it with the quasi-public Wisconsin Economic Development Corp., saying it would be more nimble and better able to meet the needs of business.

The economic development corporation received a tough audit earlier this year that found it didn’t require financial statements from companies receiving incentives, gave awards to ineligible businesses and didn’t adequately follow up to see if businesses receiving incentives were creating jobs. Walker has said all the problems the audit found have been fixed or are being fixed.

But the Commerce Department faced its share of controversies as well. A 2006 audit found the state had more than 150 economic development programs that often overlapped and were not adequately tracked. Burke served as secretary from February 2005 to October 2007, and the audit came out during her tenure.

Nothing shows the double edge of WEDC and the Department of Commerce for both Burke and Walker like the Flambeau Rivers Paper Mill, the main employer that had shut down in the small North Woods community of Park Falls.

In her video Monday, Burke touted her work with that plant, saying, “We reopened the mill in Park Falls.”

The Doyle administration accomplished that by giving millions of dollars in loans and grants to two ventures headed by local logger William "Butch" Johnson, who bought the plant out of bankruptcy in 2006. Johnson has given many thousands of dollars in political donations to every governor in the state since Tommy Thompson in the early 1990s, including Walker and former Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle.

As of December 2012, Johnson had paid back $2.5 million of the original $4 million state loan to Flambeau River Papers, but had fallen nearly $500,000 behind on payments. The company, however, has also kept the town alive by employing as of last year 325 workers, who receive $22 million a year in payroll and millions more in benefits.

A separate biofuels company aimed at making the mill energy self-sufficient, was abandoned last year after attracting a separate $3 million state loan and $2 million grant. Most of that loan is very unlikely to be paid back.

The loans to Flambeau River were the largest among more than $12 million in loans to state businesses that WEDC failed to track systematically, a debacle that led to the resignation of WEDC’s chief financial officer last year.