Ron Johnson accuses group of "environmental jihad" with ad
When under attack by a special-interest group, politicians have a few options.

They can respond in kind. They can ignore the attack. Or, if they are Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson, they can turn it into a fundraising opportunity.

According to the liberal Talking Points Memo, Johnson has sent out an email complaining about an attack TV spot aired by the League of Conservation Voters. The environmental group has announced that it is spending $2 million to criticize three House Republicans and Johnson, a first-term Republican.

In the email, Johnson accused the league of engaging in an "environmental jihad." He asked for "an urgent contribution."

"The League of Conservation Voters is one of the many attack dog groups used by President (Barack) Obama, the Democrats and the extreme left to weaken, defeat and silence conservatives," Johnson said in the email obtained by Talking Points.

"They use TV ads -- filled with smears -- because they work. Their ads attacking me will start in a few days. The League of Conservation voters is not an organization with a balanced approach to a cleaner environment. They are an extreme left group on an environmental jihad."

The new ad, which has begun running in Green Bay, chides the Oshkosh Republican for taking$109,550 in career campaign contributions from the oil and gas industry even while opposing measures aimed at curbing global warming.

Washington Post blogger Greg Sargent looks at why the league is spending money to attack Johnson, even though he is not up for re-election until 2016:

Attacks on Republican officials over climate change are part of a long term strategy, an effort to bait them into high profile exchanges over the issue that will likely command media coverage. Making elected officials pay a steep political price for climate denialism may seem like a long way off, but perhaps environmentalists can muscle the issue into the political discussion.

Go here to read his full analysis.