State could need a budget repair bill
Madison -- The state could need a budget repair bill by next summer if its prospects don’t improve, the Legislature’s non-partisan budget office reported Wednesday.

That projection is still subject to change, and an Oct. 15 report from Gov. Scott Walker’s administration could give a clearer picture about whether a repair bill is needed, the Legislative Fiscal Bureau found in its latest memo.

Last week, the Walker administration reported that state tax collections fell short of expectations by $281 million last fiscal year.

If the state doesn't make up this missing money by June 30, 2015 — either through higher-than-expected tax revenue or lower-than-expected spending going forward — the state budget would be $115 million in the red by next summer.

That projected shortfall is more than enough to trigger the $79 million threshold in state law for a budget repair bill, the fiscal bureau reported.

However, the number is just a projection and could change. Walker has already said that he plans to trim state spending to help close the gap. Tax revenues could also improve or further fall behind projections.

Walker and other Republicans have said that lawmakers don't have to take action because his administration will address the problem.

"There's no need to do a budget repair bill," Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said Wednesday.

Senate Minority Leader Chris Larson (D-Milwaukee) saw things differently.

“This is just further proof that Walker and legislative Republicans are pushing our state backwards by putting corporate and political giveaways before the economic health and security of our neighbors," he said in a statement.

For now, the state's rainy day fund has enough money — $280 million — to cover the projected shortfall, though Walker and lawmakers would have to pass a law to use it for that purpose.

The Oct. 15 report on the fiscal year closed on June 30 will give final numbers on how much the state took in and spent during that twelve month period. That will help to determine how serious the budget shortfall is.