Groups decry chief justice referendum
All Politics Blog From Milwaukee, Madison and beyond, a daily dose of political news and glimpses behind the scenes SHARE

By of the

Madison -- Groups called on voters Monday to reject a proposed amendment to the Wisconsin constitution that would allow state Supreme Court justices to select their chief justice, rather than have the position go to the most senior member of the court.

If approved April 7, the change is expected to dislodge Chief Justice Shirley Abrahamson from the court's top job. Abrahamson would remain on the high court but no longer have administrative control of it.

Mike Wilder of Wisconsin Voices said at a Capitol news conference that the current system -- where voters elected Abrahamson to a 10-year term in 2009 knowing she was chief -- is working.

"The voters of Wisconsin should be able to keep power to chose the chief justice, not a handful of judges," he said.

The groups represented at the news conference said the Republican-backed effort was a partisan attack on Abrahamson.

"It's quite clear Wisconsin is reaching a meltdown stage," said Bert Brandenburg, executive director of Justice at Stake, who called the proposal "pure political hardball."

GOP lawmakers approved the measure twice -- in 2013 and again this year -- which now sends it to voters for a final decision. Supporters have characterized the measure as one that makes the court fairer.

“Allowing the members of Wisconsin’s Supreme Court to choose their chief justice is a common sense reform that represents the democratic process at its very core,” said a January statement from Sen. Tom Tiffany (R-Hazelhurst), one of the measure's sponsors.

"It is imperative that our Supreme Court justices have the ability to choose who they think is most qualified for the position," said a statement from another backer, Rep. Rob Hutton (R-Brookfield).

The referendum will be held the same day voters decide whether to give another term to Justice Ann Walsh Bradley or replace her with Rock County Judge James Daley. Bradley, a close confidant of Abrahamson, opposes the constitutional change, while Daley supports it.