Democrats blast Schimel for signing onto anti-abortion legal paper
Madison – Democrats attacked Republican attorney general candidate Brad Schimel on Friday for signing onto a legal paper advocating for a years-long plan to make abortion illegal in nearly all cases.

“Schimel is in cahoots with Wisconsin Right to Life to make abortion a crime in Wisconsin,” state Rep. Chris Taylor (D-Madison) told reporters in a conference call.

In an interview, Schimel said he opposes abortion but dismissed how Taylor had portrayed him.

Schimel, the Waukesha County district attorney, is running against Susan Happ in the Nov. 4 election for attorney general. Happ is the Jefferson County district attorney and a Democrat.

Wisconsin Right to Life in 2012 issued a white paper that contends the U.S. Supreme Court in the next decade could overturn Roe vs. Wade, the 1973 decision that legalized abortion nationwide.

Wisconsin has a statute predating Roe that makes abortion a crime, with the only exception being instances where two doctors have determined the woman’s life is in danger. That law can’t be enforced because of the Supreme Court ruling.

The Wisconsin Right to Life paper argues that statute would make abortion illegal in Wisconsin immediately if Roe were overturned. It contends keeping that statute in place is the best way to achieve that goal and argues against adopting a so-called “personhood amendment” to the state constitution.

Schimel is listed as one of the “attorneys who agree with the content and conclusions of the legal white paper.”

“I respect the law of the land, and the law of the land is Roe v. Wade. That’s all there is to that,” Schimel said Friday. “I’m pro-life and I make no apologies for that.”

Wisconsin Right to Life disseminated its legal findings two years ago. The liberal group One Wisconsin Now recently posted it on its website as a way to criticize Schimel for his opposition to abortion.

Happ has said she would not defend a 2013 law requiring doctors who perform abortions to have admitting privileges at a hospital within 30 miles of their clinics. That law has been blocked while a judge considers whether it is constitutional.

Schimel has said he would defend that law.