Walker reproduces his coalition – and his victories – from 2010 and 2012
Walker fans enjoy early returns in West Allis. Credit: Rick Wood

By of the

Republican Gov. Scott Walker put together the same coalition of voters Tuesday that elected him in 2010 and 2012, winning decisively among men, rural and suburban voters, married voters, older voters and regular churchgoers.

In some cases, the demographic fault lines in Wisconsin were even deeper than they were in those earlier races, according to the Wisconsin exit poll done by Edison Research.

Walker, for instance, did even better among men this time, winning them by a whopping 21 points, while doing worse among women, losing them by 9 points. A large gender gap grew even larger.

The Wisconsin electorate was also even more polarized along party lines than it was in Walker’s two previous victories, with only 6 percent of Democrats crossing over to back Walker and 4 percent of Republicans crossing over to back Burke.

But in a state where most voters chose sides over their governor some time ago, Walker’s third victory was in most ways a repeat of the first two.

Walker once again won independents, this time by 11 points, slightly better then he did in the 2012 recall election.

He once again got almost universal support from voters in his own party, winning 96% of the Republican vote.

He won both rural and suburban voters decisively.

He won frequent churchgoers — more than a third of the electorate — overwhelmingly.

He won married men by 24 points, while losing unmarried women by 25.

He lost voters with family incomes under $50,000 but won those with higher incomes.

He lost voters under 40, but won everyone else.

In almost every respect, this election featured the same demographic and political fault lines as the 2010 and 2012 races, with the same result.

Walker benefited from an electorate that was slightly more Republican than Democratic, as was the electorate in his recall victory of 2012, according to the exit polls. It was a group of voters unhappy with President Barack Obama — 56% said they disapproved of the job Obama was doing — and dissatisfied with the direction of the country: 64% said the country was seriously off on the wrong track.

A higher share of Wisconsin voters in this election disapproved of Obama than in the conservative wave election of 2010.

At the same time, there was discontent with both political parties. While 58% had negative feelings about the Obama administration, 56% had negative feelings about Republican leaders in Congress.

Among the voting groups that favored Democrat Mary Burke Tuesday: union households, which supported her almost two to one; urban voters, unmarried voters, under-40 voters, and moderates, who supported her over Walker 52% to 46%.

Burke also got a higher share of her own party’s voters (93%) than the Democrat who lost to Walker in 2010 and 2012, Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett.

But Burke needed to do at least one of two things to win Tuesday. She needed to perform significantly better than Barrett with large GOP-leaning groups like men and rural voters. That didn’t happen. Or she needed to make the electorate bluer by turning out sporadic Democratic voters in significantly larger numbers, and that didn’t appear to happen either.

Burke’s margin among urban voters – 23 points -- was also smaller than Barrett’s in both 2010 and 2012.

Final turnout figures were not available late Tuesday, but some counties were reporting vote totals just a little bit lower than the 2012 recall fight, which was the highest turnout for a governor’s race in Wisconsin in more than 60 years.

Walker won the state’s most Republican county, Washington, by 52 points and roughly 35,000 votes. That was almost identical to Walker’s performance in the recall election more than two years ago.

The same thing happened in GOP-leaning Fond du Lac County, where Walker won by 29 points and more than 12,000 votes. Those margins were also almost identical to his margins in the 2012 recall election. And the pattern repeated itself in the Republican county of St. Croix, on the outskirts of the Twin Cities.

In the exit polls, almost half of Wisconsin voters said the economy was their number one issue, though that figure was lower than it was in the 2010 mid-term election.

About eight in 10 voters said they worried about the direction of the nation’s economy in the next year, and almost four in 10 said they were very worried.

Voters were mixed about Wisconsin’s economy, which was a major point of debate in the campaign.

Just under half of voters said economic conditions were better in Wisconsin than four years ago, and about four in 10 said the job situation in their area was better today than four years ago.

On issues, almost two-thirds of voters said they favored raising the minimum wage, and roughly half said the state should legally recognize same-sex marriage.

Walker’s victory keeps alive his potential prospects to seek the 2016 GOP presidential nomination, though only 42% of Wisconsin voters said he would make a good president, according to the exit poll.

A slightly higher number — 46% — said GOP congressman Paul Ryan of Janesville would make a good president.

Graphic: Scott Walker's path to victory

More Election Coverage

Results: Statewide races, mapped by county | Complete state, local results | Around the U.S.

Section: Election 2014