Walker would bring a unique political history to a 2016 bid
If he seeks the White House in 2016, Scott Walker won’t just be running on his record as governor.

He’ll also be running on his record as a vote-getter.

Everyone in a wide-open GOP field will be making an argument to primary voters, activists and donors about their ability to win a national election.

And for all the current and former governors and senators who end up running, that argument will be based heavily on their personal, home-state election history.

It’s a pretty distinctive history in Walker’s case: three wins four years apart in a fierce battleground state; the only governor to survive a recall election; and arguably the most polarizing governor in the country, with a rare ability to mobilize supporters and opponents alike.

Does Walker’s election track record give him a stronger case than other Republicans when it comes to carrying the purple states that will decide the 2016 contest?

Here is a look at some things that jump out about Walker’s performance as a statewide candidate, and their implications for a 2016 run:

Swing-state success.Walker has now won three races since 2010 in a state that has voted Democratic for president seven straight times. No other Republican can say that. By contrast, a number of GOP hopefuls have won their elections in comfortably red states, telling us less about their electability in purple America.

Among them: Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky, Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, outgoing Gov. Rick Perry of Texas, former Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas and Gov. Bobby Jindal of Louisiana.

Walker isn’t the only potential GOP candidate who has prospered in a swing state. Others include Ohio Gov. John Kasich, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush. (We’re leaving Wisconsin congressman Paul Ryan out of this analysis because he hasn’t run for statewide office).

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has the best resume of all when it comes to winning on challenging turf, cruising to re-election last year in the solidly blue state of New Jersey.

Walker’s three victories here don’t prove he can carry his own state or other key battlegrounds as a presidential candidate. Since the 1980s, Republicans have had great success in governor’s races in Wisconsin but no success in presidential contests, which typically draw a bigger and more diverse electorate.

But Walker’s winning streak in a purple state gives him a political credential and bragging point that potential rivals from red states don’t have.

Inspiring extreme partisan division. Walker’s election track record has featured dramatic partisan schisms. In the Wisconsin exit poll Nov. 4, he won 96% of the vote from Republicans and 6% of the vote from Democrats. That 90-point partisan gap was the biggest of any 2014 candidate for governor in states where exit polls were done.

The same pattern showed up repeatedly in state-level surveys during Walker’s first term. Walker is the most polarizing governor in America by this measure.

This distinction is both strength and weakness. It suggests a divisive politician who has had almost no success appealing to voters in the other party. It also suggests a politician who galvanizes voters in his own party like crazy — an asset in both primaries and general elections.

Wisconsin’s big turnout Nov. 4 — roughly 55% of voting-age adults — is another testament to Walker’s ability to rouse voters on both sides. It was the second-highest turnout in the country. And despite the drop in turnout nationally, it was Wisconsin’s highest midterm turnout in more than 60 years.

How does Walker compare to other potential GOP candidates when it comes to the level of partisan division he inspires?

The starkest contrast is with another swing-state governor, John Kasich of Ohio.

Exit polls show Kasich won 25% of Democratic voters in Ohio, compared to 6% for Walker in Wisconsin. The gender gap was half as big for Kasich as it was for Walker. And Kasich won a much larger share of the minority vote (26%) than Walker did.

Kasich benefited from having a weak Democratic opponent and running in a state that is arguably more conservative than Wisconsin. But it’s impossible to imagine any circumstance under which Walker could win 25% of the Democratic vote after the conflict and division of his first term.

Whether either of them runs, Walker and Kasich represent two contrasting political styles. Kasich sees himself as trying to bridge some partisan divisions. He has parted with conservatives on a few big issues. And he won a remarkably broad re-election victory. Walker doesn’t have the history or option of running as a “uniter.” He hasn’t split with conservatives on any big policy. Instead, he would run as a fighter who cut a very conservative path in a swing state, took the other side’s best shots and prevailed.

Narrowness of victories.Walker won re-election on Nov. 4 by 5.7 points, similar to his 2010 margin and slightly smaller than his 2012 recall margin. Because Wisconsin is so divided and because many pre-election polls suggested a closer race, that roughly 6-point margin looms very large today. It has boosted perceptions of Walker as a credible 2016 candidate.

At the same time, by historical standards it was a narrow victory for a would-be presidential candidate. No sitting senator or governor in modern times has parlayed a home-state election that close and competitive into a presidential nomination. Few have even tried. Kasich won his 2014 race by 31 points, Cruz won his 2012 race by 16 points, Rubio won his 2010 race by 19 points and Paul won his 2010 race by 12 points.

Walker’s narrower victory margin isn’t necessarily a political negative. It’s partly a reflection of his state’s competitiveness. And winning tough races has become his political calling card.

But it’s one more thing that makes his potential presidential candidacy so distinctive and unusual.

In this and other ways, Walker would bring a unique election history to the 2016 race.

Follow Craig Gilbert On Twitter @WisVoter