Johnson talks 2016 rematch with Feingold
Russ Feingold and Sen. Ron Johnson pose for a photograph before a debate in their first matchup in 2010. Credit: Getty Images

By of the

Republican Sen. Ron Johnson says his rematch with Democrat Russ Feingold offers “the very same stark contrast” as their 2010 race, between a career businessman and a career politician.

“He spent his prior 30 years basically building big government,” Johnson said of his potential challenger in an interview after Feingold announced his candidacy last week. “I think the voters of Wisconsin ... if they take a look at things objectively, will start realizing that big government that Senator Feingold is dedicated to continue to build, which is certainly what he’d do in another term as senator, isn’t working so good.”

Assuming Feingold is the Democratic nominee, Johnson will be defending his seat against the same man he took it from 41/2 years ago.

This is a look at their rematch from the incumbent’s perspective (we wrote about Feingold’s view of the race Monday).

Johnson calls recent polls showing Feingold in the lead “totally meaningless. I don’t pay attention to them, I don’t worry about them.”

At the same time, Johnson recognizes he’s at the top of the Democrats’ target list in 2016. Wisconsin’s U.S. Senate race is widely expected to be one of the two or three most hotly contested in the country.

“It’s absolutely going to be a competitive race, there is no doubt about it,” he says.

How Johnson sees his opponent. While he is the incumbent this time instead of the challenger, Johnson views himself as the Washington outsider and Feingold as the Washington insider. He derides Feingold as a “career politician” who is “addicted” to politics.

Just as Feingold portrays Johnson as a knee-jerk defender of Big Money and corporate power, Johnson portrays Feingold as a knee-jerk defender of Big Government.

“He wants to grow government. I actually want to grow the private-sector economy where you have long-term self-sustaining jobs created,” Johnson said. “In such uncertain times, Wisconsinites, Americans, are looking for a sense of security. And again, if they just look at things objectively, decades of liberal policies, liberal programs that Sen. Feingold supports, they haven’t worked.”

Johnson said Feingold’s accusation that he takes the side of “multimillionaires and billionaires” is “political demagoguery.”

And he said the 2016 race presents “the same issue” as the 2010 contest did:

“Do you really think that the ever-expanding, more powerful, more controlling big government is the solution or do you think it’s more of a problem? I think it’s more of a problem. ... I’ll point out Sen. Feingold was the deciding vote on Obamacare. That’s not working out so good for Wisconsinites.”

Unintended consequences. Johnson argues that Feingold’s Senate record shows the “unintended consequences” of liberal policy-making. His chief example is Feingold’s best-known legislative accomplishment: the 2002 McCain-Feingold campaign finance law, signed by President George W. Bush but weakened by a series of Supreme Court rulings. Johnson refers to it disdainfully as Feingold’s “signature” achievement, calling it “an abject failure.” Echoing an argument that other opponents of the law have made, he contends that a set of rules aimed at reducing the role of money in campaigns simply drove money from the two major parties to independent groups, where it’s less subject to disclosure.

“It didn’t bring big money out of politics. It actually decreased transparency and just drove money into the outside groups,” Johnson said. “It made money more opaque. It drove it outside the accountable political process.”

Trade. While Feingold touts his opposition to two big trade bills coming before Congress — “fast track” trade authority for the president and a trade agreement with other nations in the Pacific region — Johnson places himself squarely on the other side of that debate.

“I am for free and fair trade, because in the state of Wisconsin, we’ve got a lot of jobs, we’ve got a lot of agricultural interests, that rely on exports. We’ve got a lot of manufacturers that rely on export business. So I think the last thing we want to do is engage in trade wars that put those jobs at risk,” Johnson said. “There are a lot of jobs created because we import goods as well. Free trade does help all economies. And there are dislocations. There are protections against those dislocations. We all support being able to help workers that have been displaced. But we’ve got to look at the broader view. If we don’t engage in free trade, the American economy will be sitting back on the outside looking in.”

Foreign policy and national security. After four years in the Senate, Johnson became the chairman this year of the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. He argues his chairmanship is one more reason for voters to send him back to the Senate, saying it is helpful to Wisconsin interests. Johnson said he has used his chairmanship to hold hearings and advance the inquiry into abuses at the VA Medical Center in Tomah, which he says could lead to broader VA reforms.

“Sen. Feingold was a senator for 18 years. I don’t believe he was ever chairman of a key committee like I am after only four years. He won’t be chairman as a newly elected senator,” Johnson said. “I think the citizens of Wisconsin have to realize the benefits to Wisconsin of having somebody in my position as chairman of the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. ... It’s an important responsibility and it has some real advantages.”

The two candidates also have huge differences over national security, from their views on the Iran nuclear negotiations (Feingold is supportive, Johnson highly critical) and the Patriot Act. Feingold supports a bill passed by the House last week to prohibit the National Security Agency’s bulk surveillance of Americans’ call records. Johnson said he’s “highly concerned” about that bill and the government surveillance program has been “blown out of proportion.”

“We’re reducing our ability to gather information that we’re going to need to keep this nation safe,” said Johnson, who said more broadly of his differences with Feingold: “I’m actually recognizing the reality” of the threats and challenges from ISIS, Russian leader Vladimir Putin, insecure borders and other sources.

“These are some very real threats we face,” Johnson said. “Effective intelligence can be our first line of defense.”

Handicapping the race. Johnson acknowledges one factor that makes his re-election more challenging — that presidential turnouts tend to be bigger, more diverse and more favorable to Democrats than midterm turnouts. Johnson got elected in a midterm (2010) but must now seek re-election in a presidential year (2016).

“The presidential electorate is different from the off year,” he said.

But Johnson notes that Republican George W. Bush came within a fraction of winning the state in 2000 and 2004 (which saw the highest turnout rate in contemporary times in Wisconsin). And he says the GOP’s broad success in recent years electing Republican House members, building large legislative majorities and winning three contests for governor since 2010 are proof of the party’s organizational and “structural” strength in Wisconsin. That will serve him well in his rematch with Feingold, he said.

“That’s the grass-roots effort that will certainly help in any statewide race, the Senate race as well as the presidential race,” Johnson said. “From the standpoint of party structure, we’re in pretty good shape.”

Johnson said he views himself as “the messenger” when it comes to “hard truths” about threats to national security as well as the “crushing burden” on future taxpayers of entitlement spending and the national debt.

His mission is “forcing the political process to face the reality” of these problems, he said.

“I realize a lot of people don’t pay attention ... but I’ve done everything I can” to communicate his views on these issues, Johnson said. “There’s an awful lot of information — there are an awful lot of problems — that I don’t think the American public fully understands, because let’s face it, politicians on both sides have lied to the American public.”

Follow Craig Gilbert on Twitter @WisVoter