Terrorism issue a political wild card in Johnson-Feingold race
Republican U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson and Democratic challenger Russ Feingold both have vulnerabilities in how the public perceives their approach to terrorism. Some see Johnson as too hawkish, while others say Feingold is too dovish. Credit: Journal Sentinel files

By of the

Washington — In the wake of the Paris and San Bernardino, Calif., attacks, one in five Americans says terrorism is the country’s most important problem, according to a poll released last week by the New York Times.

Before the attacks, it was one in 25 Americans.

“We’ve gone through a whole series of electoral cycles in which a democracy waging a war has been able to do this without any political candidate thinking (national security) was central to their election campaign,” says Steve Biddle, a political scientist and expert on the military at George Washington University. “That is changing now.”

If you had to list the biggest election “wild cards” in the Wisconsin rematch between Republican Sen. Ron Johnson and Democratic challenger Russ Feingold, the volatile issue of terrorism might be right at the top.

Here is a look at some of the potential political challenges that national security poses for each candidate in Wisconsin’s U.S. Senate race:

Feingold. At a time of rising alarm over terrorism, Republicans are convinced the former Senate Democrat is vulnerable on security issues.

One reason is President Barack Obama’s sagging ratings on this front.

In the latest CBS/New York Times nationwide poll, 34% approve and 57% disapprove of the president’s handling of terrorism, an all-time low for him.

Feingold’s opponents will do everything they can to tie him to Obama.

“He thinks this is a historically great foreign policy president,” Johnson says of Feingold. “I think that’s a huge difference between the two of us.”

Feingold has been broadly supportive of Obama and praises the president’s recent address to the nation on terrorism, saying he showed the “seriousness of the problem” without fear-mongering or sounding “panicky.”

Feingold has criticized Obama for earlier downplaying the threat of the Islamic State. He says, “We’re going to have to be more aggressive in dealing with ISIS” when it comes to cutting off its supply of arms, oil revenues and financing. The Democrat is also calling for a significant expansion of America’s “human intelligence” effort.

Republicans think Feingold, an often-skeptical voice about military force and government surveillance, is vulnerable when it comes to his own record, as well.

In a recent interview, national GOP chairman Reince Priebus called Feingold “the biggest dove in America.” He said GOP candidates will have the advantage of running in a cycle when foreign policy and national security — issues that often (but not always) help Republicans — are front and center for the first time in a decade.

Priebus and Johnson both portray Feingold’s 2001 vote against the Patriot Act — he was the only senator to vote no — as a symbol of softness.

Feingold, who served on the Senate’s intelligence and foreign relations committees, rejects those labels. He says he has a long record of “doing whatever I could to stop the threat of organizations all the way from al-Qaida to Boko Haram (in Nigeria) … to ISIS.”

It will take “a balance of diplomatic, economic and military options” to “take the lifeblood away” from the Islamic State, he contends.

“There is no way we can just invade our way into solving this,” says Feingold. “When I’ve been faced with the tough questions, I made the right calls … I voted for going into Afghanistan. I voted against going into Iraq. I voted against the USA Patriot Act because it was flawed, but have worked hard to make sure we have very strong intelligence.”

The Patriot Act is an example of how the national security debate could play out in unpredictable ways. Both sides seem to think it helps them politically, since they are equally eager to talk about it. Feingold has weathered attacks on the issue in the past. But the issue itself crosses party lines today, as a large number of Republicans joined Democrats in Congress this past summer to amend the Patriot Act to stop the government’s mass collection of Americans’ phone records.

Johnson. Just as Republicans will portray Feingold as too dovish, Democrats will portray Johnson as too hawkish. Johnson has called for the use of significant U.S. ground forces to drive the Islamic State out of Iraq and Syria.

“He’s going to have a problem, because people aren’t there” with him, Democratic pollster Paul Maslin says of Johnson and “boots on the ground.”

Feingold, who touts his own vote against going to war in Iraq, contends Johnson “has learned no lessons from Iraq. He won’t even have the nerve to admit Iraq was a mistake. And he’s talking about invading (again), without a plan.”

Some recent polls show support growing among Americans for committing ground troops against ISIS. But the public is still very divided. Johnson is among the most aggressive voices in his party in proposing a ground invasion, which carries political risks.

“Let’s face it. Islamic terrorists declared war on us, and they continue to declare war on us. You don’t end war just by saying you end wars. Either both sides have to agree or one side has to defeat the other,” says Johnson.

He rejects the notion that he’s overeager to get into another ground war. And Johnson contends the U.S. could assemble an international coalition of military forces if Obama exercised more leadership.

“I would be incredibly cautious about committing the finest among us for any kind of military action,” says Johnson. “I’ve never spoken of unilateral action. What I’ve been talking about for quite some time is leading. American has withdrawn … What I’ve been discussing is America leading a committed coalition of the willing.”

Asked if it isn’t going to take more than 20,000 to 25,000 troops to retake and hold the territory now held by ISIS, Johnson says, “What’s the alternative? … This is a real and growing threat. If Paris doesn’t convince enough Americans … I hope, I hope we don’t need a Paris-like attack in America to convince us.”

Maslin, who has polled for Feingold in the past, argues that the GOP presidential race also poses risks for Johnson. Many Republicans think a Trump nomination would be a major political blow to the party’s U.S. Senate prospects and leave a man with no government experience delivering the party’s message on foreign policy. A Ted Cruz nomination could make it harder to attack Feingold over the Patriot Act, since Cruz has also argued the Patriot Act went too far in compromising civil liberties.

“The conventional wisdom would be that Democrats have more vulnerability on (national security), but I think the Iraq war legacy gives Republicans a little vulnerability, too,” says George Washington University political scientist Elizabeth Saunders, who studies the role of national security in American elections.

Saunders says it’s rare for national security to be a major driver in elections.

“It takes some sort of salient event that happens pretty close to the election or is as big as 9-11 to really force it on the agenda,” she says.

And that’s one of many reasons the issue of national security is such a wild card in this race.

We don’t know, even after Paris and San Bernadino, whether it will recede politically or loom even larger 10 months from now.

We don’t know if there will be more attacks before next November.

We don’t know how a Democratic president and Republican Congress will respond to unfolding events at home and abroad next year.

We don’t know who will be facing off at the top of the ticket for president.

And therefore we don’t know how the 2016 presidential matchup will shape the national security debate in Senate and congressional races.

In short, we don’t know whether the issue of terrorism will be decisive for Johnson and Feingold — and if so, how it will cut politically.

But we do know that voters in Wisconsin will be choosing between two men with starkly different views on the subject, and that neither candidate is at all shy about their differences.

Follow Craig Gilbert on Twitter @WisVoter