Koch-funded group revises anti-Feingold ad on Tomah scandal
By of the

A super PAC funded by the Koch brothers has begun airing a revised ad attacking former U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold after three TV stations quit running the original spot.

But the message hasn't changed.

And neither has the response.

Feingold officials said Monday that they will continue to lobby Wisconsin TV stations to pull the plug on the updated commercial.

"Absolutely," said a top Feingold staffer.

The TV commercial by the Freedom Partners Action Fund, which is backing U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, tries to link Feingold to the over-prescription scandal at the Tomah VA Medical Center. But instead of citing just one memo, the revised ad says Feingold received "multiple memos outlining veteran harm."

Freedom Partners is spending $2 million on the ad run. Johnson, a Republican, and Feingold, a Democrat, square off in November.

“The substance of the ad is the same -- multiple memos showing veteran harm at Tomah were marked delivered to Senator Feingold, and he did nothing," said Bill Riggs, spokesman for Freedom Partners.

But Michael Tyler, a spokesman for Feingold, said Johnson and his allies knew the original ad was "based on a lie" and the revised version is no better.

"Johnson's allies are now trying to weasel their way back onto the airwaves with more deception," Tyler said.

The original ad focused on a 2009 memo about problems at the Tomah facility. Feingold and the author of the memo contend Feingold didn't receive that memo at the time, prompting Feingold's lawyers to call on TV stations around the state to pull the plug on the ad.

To read their letter, click here.

Three stations -- two in Green Bay and one in Madison -- did just that late last week. During a conference call with reporters on Monday, a lawyer for Feingold's campaign called this move "exceedingly rare." The ad is not running in the Milwaukee market.

The revised TV spot, which was completed over the weekend, sought to bolster its claims by asserting that Feingold received "multiple memos" about problems at the Tomah medical center. Pictured in the ad is part of a 2008 memo in which union officials complained to aides for Feingold and other Wisconsin lawmakers about the hospital's then-chief of staff, David Houlihan.

"The idea (Feingold) had no knowledge of a major scandal unfolding in his state over the course of two years should be alarming to most voters in Wisconsin," said Riggs, the spokesman for Freedom Partners, which is funded by billionaire industrialists Charles and David Koch. Feingold was ousted by Johnson in 2010.

But Tyler said the '08 memo cited in the revised ad says "absolutely nothing about the tragic overprescription of opioids at the Tomah VA." Instead, union officials claimed in the two-page note that Houlihan was creating a hostile work environment with his authoritarian and erratic management style.

The memo does say Houlihan -- a psychiatrist whose license was recently restored -- was prescribing medication without seeing patients. Some veterans had dubbed Houlihan the "Candy Man" for his supposedly easy and widespread distribution of painkillers.

"The Kochs would rather double down on a lie than accept the truth that Senator Johnson has failed Wisconsin's veterans miserably," Tyler said.

Reached Monday after a campaign event, Feingold ripped both versions of the ad, accusing the super PAC of a “shameless attempt to exploit the death of a veteran for political purposes.”

Ryan Honl, the Tomah whistleblower featured in the ad, said he stands by everything he said in the commercial. He added: "I won’t be intimidated by Russ Feingold or his lawyers’ attempts to silence me. Unfortunately, this is what happens to whistleblowers, and this is why so many are afraid to speak up."

Feingold's campaign aired its own ad last week criticizing Johnson's office for failing to act on a 2014 complaint on the same issue at the Tomah hospital.

The ad highlights a radio interview in which Johnson said his office may have taken action “had this not occurred during an election cycle, when there’s an awful lot of turnover . . . when people are looking at doing job interviews and stuff.”

Bill Glauber of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.