Supreme Court candidates blast Rebecca Bradley for getting GOP help
By of the

Madison – Rival campaigns are criticizing Wisconsin Supreme Court Justice Rebecca Bradley for getting help from the state Republican Party to ensure she gets her name on the ballot.

GOP Gov. Scott Walker appointed Bradley to the high court after Justice N. Patrick Crooks died in September. She is one of four candidates seeking a 10-year term on the court in the spring election.

To get on the ballot, the candidates must gather at least 2,000 signatures. The chairman of the state Republican Party, Brad Courtney, sent a mass email on Tuesday seeking volunteers to help gather signatures.

“As Governor Walker’s appointee to the Supreme Court, Justice Bradley has already demonstrated herself to be a strong voice for conservatism on the court,” Courtney wrote.

The campaigns of all of Bradley's opponents blasted her for working closely with the GOP.

“The Bradley campaign and the Republican Party are essentially one and the same,” said a statement from Milwaukee County Circuit Court Judge Joe Donald's campaign manager, Andy Suchorski.

“Their goal is not to elect a fair, impartial justice to the Wisconsin Supreme Court. Rather, their goal is to ensure the election of Scott Walker’s handpicked candidate, Rebecca Bradley, so she can advance their conservative agenda.”

Also critical of Bradley was Appeals Judge JoAnne Kloppenburg, who is also seeking the seat on the Supreme Court.

“The people of Wisconsin deserve an independent court and this kind of politicking undermines their confidence that the court will act as a check and balance on the political branches of government,” Kloppenburg said in a statement.

Madison attorney Claude Covelli is running for Supreme Court, and his campaiagn manager, Brad Wojciechowski, called the arrangement a sign the court was being politicized.

"We need to elect a candidate who is free of political taint or obligation. The latest example of the Walker machine playing politics with our judicial system is the exact opposite of what Wisconsinites deserve," Wojciechowski said in a statement.

Suchorski, Wojciechowski and Kloppenburg's campaign consultant, Melissa Mulliken, have worked on Democratic campaigns in the past. They said the candidates they represent are not working with the Democratic Party because judges are supposed to be nonpartisan and independent.

Asked about the GOP help, Bradley spokeswoman Madison Wiberg said in a statement that the justice “is thrilled to have bipartisan support throughout the state of Wisconsin.”

“As a sitting justice on the state Supreme Court she has always maintained that it is essential to our legal system to have independent justices who will apply the law impartially and free of political agendas,” her statement said.

State Republican Party spokesman Pat Garrett said the GOP “is happy to support candidates, like Justice Rebecca Bradley, who are committed to upholding the rule of law and adhering to the Wisconsin constitution.”

A Feb. 16 primary will narrow the field to two candidates for the April 5 general election.