Chris Abele spends nearly $500,000 for ad blitz on local TV stations
By of the

If you want a feel for the Milwaukee County exec's race, know this:

Chris Abele, the multimillionaire incumbent, has recently purchased nearly $500,000 of TV air time in the weeks before the April 5 election and unveiled a third ad criticizing his opponent, state Sen. Chris Larson -- this one on the issue of tax increases.

Larson, meanwhile, has bought a little less than $10,000 of TV air time on the four local network stations so he can broadcast his lone ad, an upbeat commercial laying out his political agenda.

Abele's latest TV spot criticizes Larson for saying he would back a one-cent sales tax increase for Milwaukee County.

"Larson says he’d triple Milwaukee County’s sales tax . . . and raise our property taxes," the Abele ad says. "Larson’s plan to triple the county tax means seniors and the poor actually pay more -- instead of big business and the wealthy paying their fair share."

Josh Kilroy, campaign manager for Larson, said the TV spot fails to point out that Larson's plan would use the sales tax increase to lower property taxes. Until the sales tax is increased, Larson has said he would aim to keep property tax hikes in line with the rate of inflation.

"Abele's plan is to let property taxes continue to increase," Kilroy said. "No wonder he has to lie about Larson's plan to reduce property taxes by shifting the burden to sales taxes, a third of which are paid by people outside the county."

But Tia Torhorst, Abele's campaign manager, stood by the new ad.

Torhorst said the incumbent has held the line on taxes and reduced the county's debt.

"Senator Larson believes the solution to every challenge is to raise taxes," Torhorst said. "A regressive sales take hike that hits the poor and seniors hardest? Raise it anyways. A property tax hike every year? By his own admission, that's what you'll get with him."

In the primary, Abele spent more than $2 million while Larson dropped only about $110,000. Despite the heavy discrepancy in spending, Larson narrowly edged Abele in the primary.

Both candidates are Milwaukee Democrats.