Public workers' generous benefits come at a price
The rich health benefits enjoyed by workers in the public sector are becoming an increasingly inviting target as cities, counties and school districts struggle with continual budget deficits.

The numbers explain why:

The Milwaukee Public Schools district spends as much as $26,846 a year to provide family coverage for a teacher. The City of Milwaukee spends a bit less than $21,000, and Milwaukee County spends $17,800 to $19,400. The state's cost is slightly less than $20,000 a year for employees in the Milwaukee area.

That's after subtracting the employee's share of the premium, which can range from nothing to $2,160 a year.

In contrast, family coverage from private and public employers costs $13,770 on average nationally and workers on average pay nearly $4,000 of that.

Several forces contribute to the gap between public and private sectors. For one, state law prohibits many public employees from striking and that prohibition comes at a price of ensuring fairness for those employees. In addition, many public workers accept lower salaries in exchange for generous health care benefits.

Milwaukee County Executive Scott Walker, a Republican gubernatorial candidate, and Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett, the Democratic candidate, each have proposals to lower health benefit costs.

Walker wants to make it easier for school districts and local governments to buy insurance through a state-run health benefits program. Barrett would require local governments to insure their workers through a similar program, and he is interested in having schools eventually do the same.

How much money the proposals would save is a question. But both would require legislation.

That's because current state law makes it difficult if not impossible to make any changes in health benefits without the approval of the unions that represent government workers.

Under state law, health benefits that are part of an employee's total compensation are subject to collective bargaining.

But critics of current state law contend that it perpetuates the high health-care costs borne by strapped cities, counties and school districts.

"The status quo rules," said Bob Ziegelbauer, Manitowoc County executive and a state representative running for re-election as an independent.

That's been the case since the 1970s when the state first prohibited strikes by police officers, firefighters, teachers and other public workers. Contract disputes instead are settled by arbitration.

Arbitration cases are determined largely by what similar municipalities, school districts and government entities pay their workers.

This makes it hard for any municipality or school district to change its health benefits, such as increasing deductibles, on its own and to prevail in arbitration.

"You are dead on arrival unless you have some compelling economic issue," said Rob Mulcahy, a management labor attorney at Michael Best & Friedrich.

At the same time, counties, municipalities, school districts and other entities benefit from the law.

"If you are going to prevent strikes in the public sector, you have to pay something for that," Ziegelbauer said.

But Mulcahy said the Legislature could pass a law that made health insurance a permissive subject of bargaining.

This would allow local governments and school districts to carve out health benefits from contract negotiations while still retaining the other parts of the existing laws.

"This is not as difficult as it would seem," Mulcahy said. "This is a clear-cut deal. And to be honest with you, it's been proposed before."

Mulcahy acknowledged that it could lead to changes in health benefits that reduce workers' total compensation. But he said that could be dealt with in contract negotiations on wages.

AFSCME Wisconsin, which represents tens of thousands of city, county and other local government employees, said union members were open to moving to the state health insurance plan but didn't want to give up their rights to negotiate, said Bob Allen, a union spokesman.

"We're very interested in reining in health care costs," he said, "and we believe that moving to the state plan could be a good strategy."

But such a change, he added, would have to be negotiated.

Local governments and school districts now can buy health insurance through a program administered by the Wisconsin Department of Employee Trust Funds.

The department oversees two pools: one for state employees and one for local governments and school districts.

Combining the two would require changing the state's constitution, said Tom Korpady, administrator of the division of insurance services for the Wisconsin Department of Employee Trust Funds.

That process would take at least two years and require a referendum.

Significantly lowering the cost of providing health benefits for public workers without reducing their total compensation could prove difficult.

For one thing, health plans in the public sector typically have minimal deductibles, co-pays and co-insurance. That is one of the key reasons that health benefits for government workers are much more costly.

For another, public sector workers generally pay only a minimal amount of the premium.

Milwaukee city employees pay $480 a year for family coverage. Teachers in MPS don't pay anything toward the cost of their health insurance. State employees pay $1,020 a year for family coverage. Milwaukee County workers pay $840 or $2,160, depending on the plan chosen.

Employees nationally pay an average of 29% of the cost of the premium and the percentage can be much higher for family coverage from a small employer, according to an annual survey of private and public employers released recently by the Kaiser Family Foundation and the Health Research Educational Trust, an affiliate of the American Hospital Association.

Local governments also often have older workforces. In addition, health plans for public workers tend to have more dependents because the lower costs and generous benefits encourage working spouses to not get coverage through their employer when available.

Even innovative approaches have had limited success reining in costs.

In Manitowoc County, Ziegelbauer persuaded workers to accept a high-deductible plan coupled with health savings accounts, tax-free accounts that can be funded by employees and employers.

The move saved the county 20% on its insurance premiums in 2008, even with the county still paying all of the premium and the new plan covering all other out-of-pocket costs. But in the past two years, costs have risen much more sharply.

This year, Manitowoc County is paying $21,300 a year in premiums for family coverage.

Local governments and school districts also have to compete for skilled workers.

"It's in everyone's best interest that our schools attract and retain highly qualified educators, and offering competitive compensation packages is part of that," Christina Brey, a spokeswoman for the Wisconsin Education Association Council, said in an e-mail.

Workers in the public sector aren't immune to the rising health care costs.

Sheri Krause, a lobbyist for the Wisconsin Association of School Boards, said rising health costs were squeezing not only school districts but also their employees.

"The direct effect is that we are less than the national average in teacher pay because of what we pay for health insurance," Krause said.

Whether that would make workers open to moving to a state plan is unknown.

The state plan is really not one plan but rather a marketplace where state employees and retirees have a choice of commercial plans that all provide the same benefits. The plans are grouped in tiers based on their cost, and the employee's share of the cost varies with the tier.

But Korpady said the state might be able to negotiate better contracts with health insurers given its size and bargaining power.

Local governments and school districts also might save some money on administrative costs if they didn't have to shop for health insurance each year.

Todd Berry, president of the Wisconsin Taxpayers Alliance, said switching to the state health plan wouldn't necessarily solve the problem.

"The state plan is no bargain compared to what some employers are doing out there in the marketplace," he said.