Area's health benefits costs soar
The cost of health benefits appears to be rising at a much faster pace in the Milwaukee area than the national average.

Employers reported that the cost of health benefits increased 11% to 13% on average in the Milwaukee area this year, according to the 2010 Greater Milwaukee Employer Health Care Benefits Survey.

That contrasts with a national survey released this month that found health insurance premiums for employers and employees rose an average of 3% for family coverage and 5% for single coverage this year, the smallest overall increase in more than a decade.

One possible factor contributing to the larger local increases: state mandates for broader coverage. The increases have been particularly steep for small employers.

"The small group market is what's driving this," said Dave Jensen, editorial director of HCTrends.com," target="_blank">HCTrends.com, which does the online survey of Milwaukee-area employers.

Nearly seven out of 10 area employers with fewer than 20 workers reported premium increases of more than 11% this year - and more than one in five reported increases of more than 20%.

Large employers in the area - those with 200 or more employees - generally saw increases of 8% to 10% this year.

That also is well above the average found in the national survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation and the Health Research & Educational Trust, an affiliate of the American Hospital Association.

More than 250 employers, representing about 150,000 employees, participated in the local survey, which was done by HCTrends.com with support from the Benefit Services Group, a benefits consultant and insurance broker in Pewaukee; the Business Health Care Group, an employer coalition in southeastern Wisconsin; the Wellness Council of Wisconsin; and the Metropolitan Milwaukee Association of Commerce.

No surprise to some

The double-digit increases found in the Milwaukee-area survey weren't a surprise for some benefit consultants.

Leslie Kitzman, a benefit consultant with R&R Insurance Services in Waukesha, said her clients who are small employers saw increases of 13% to 20% this year - and they are expecting similar increases next year.

One factor, Kitzman said, could be new state mandates that required health insurers to cover adult children younger than 27, provide benefits for children with autism and cover the cost of cochlear implants for hearing-impaired children.

One company, with fewer than 50 people, had 17 adult children added to its health plan when the state mandate went into effect, Kitzman said.

Federal and state legislation also required health plans to provide similar coverage for mental illness as they would for other diseases.

Determining the full cost of the various mandates is difficult. But Jerilyn Lucas, a consultant with Benefit Directions Inc., said, "They've made an impact."

Lucas said part of the difference in the two surveys also could stem from the more generous health plans that are typically offered by employers in the Milwaukee area.

Whether the higher costs reported by employers in the Milwaukee area also might stem from price increases by health care systems is impossible to determine.

Health systems and health insurers do not disclose the prices. But a bill passed by the state Legislature this year will provide more information on what hospitals charge for common procedures and tests, and it eventually could help track price increases over time.

The cost of health benefits also can vary significantly among employers. Some employers, for example, have reported relatively modest increases in health benefit costs in recent years. Surveys of health benefit costs also often vary.

HCTrends.com is trying to structure its survey to allow for better comparisons to the national survey by Kaiser/HRET, Jensen said.

But he noted the Milwaukee survey asks employers how much their health insurance premiums increased, not the amount of the premium. That could affect the results because some people might rely on their perceptions rather than the actual dollar amounts.

Changes to plans

HCTrends.com found that 40% of the area employers surveyed changed their plan design this year, compared with 28% last year. Of those:

• 60% increased health plan deductibles, co-pays or co-insurance.

• 35% increased the employees' share of the premium.

• 38% increased out-of-pocket maximums.

Several employers also imposed surcharges on people who smoke.

The survey also found that 61% of employers had programs in place to assess health risks, such as high blood pressure or diabetes; 58% had preventive care program; and 52% had disease management programs.

Savings accounts

For the first time, the percentage of surveyed employers contributing to health savings or health reimbursement accounts decreased, suggesting that some employers might have stopped contributing to their workers' accounts.

Several employers also reported that they had reduced their contributions to the accounts this year to control costs.

That surprised Lucas of Benefit Directions, who has clients committed to health savings accounts.

"They've said they would rather stop funding 401(k)s," she said, "because the health savings accounts are so important."

Other findings from the survey included:

• Employers are paying 75% to 79% of the cost for single coverage and 70% to 74% of the cost of family coverage this year.

• The percentage of employers providing coverage to same-sex domestic partners increased to 25% this year, up from 14% last year and 11% in 2008. Those employers most likely to offer benefits to same-sex partner were in accounting, law, engineering and other professional fields as well as employers with 500 or more employees.