Ballot bedlam in Racine
By

On the eve of the recall elections, I sat in the press room off to the side of the Waukesha County Expo center, virtually alone. Governor Scott Walker had been declared the winner of the gubernatorial recall election, and after he gave his victory speech, the media room cleared out.

On Twitter, I was still trying to alert people to the fact that the fate of the state senate was still in the balance, and the final race in Racine was going to come down to just a handful of votes. And so it did - John Lehman defeated incumbent senator Van Wangaard by a little more than 800 votes, prompting a recount. So even three weeks after election night, we still may not know who controls the state senate.

Amid reports of dozens of voting irregularities in Racine, yesterday, via the Patch and MacIver, we found out that potentially thousands of new voter registrants were not required to sign a log book, as mandated by state law and Government Accountability Board (GAB) policy. While the state's photo identification requirement has been suspended by the courts, the requirement that a voter must sign a log book in order to receive a ballot had not.

According to the Patch account:

When someone registers to vote on the day of the election, poll workers take the completed registration form and create an entry in the poll book and then duplicate it in a second poll book.

The voter is required to sign their entry in the same book other voters sign their entry in order to cast a ballot — and it's those signatures that are missing in some wards in the June 5 recall election.

It's not known how many signatures are missing, but Racine County Clerk Wendy Christensen said there are entire pages of missing signatures in wards throughout the city.

While some of the missing signatures were found on pages other than where they should have been, it is unclear exactly how many have been discovered elsewhere. It's also unknown why some signatures appear on pages separate from their entries on the poll books.

As noted by my colleague Sunny Schubert, the fact that new registrants were not required to sign log books isn't in itself proof of vote fraud. If one were dedicated enough to get on a bus and head down to cast a fraudulent vote, presumably they wouldn't have a problem scratching out an illegible signature on a log book.

But when taken as one piece of evidence in conjunction with other facts that have come to light (pre-certified voting documents found in a dumpster, partisan groups pulling as many a thousand high school students out of class to go vote), it makes one wonder who benefits from such sloppy and incomplete application of election laws. After all, the wards in which these bookkeeping errors have been found aren't exactly Wangaard Country. Plus, according to MacIver, as many as 78 of the 189 people who worked as official poll workers in Racine may have actually signed recall petitions.

Furthermore, this confusion demonstrates how difficult it is to track down vote fraud once a ballot has been cast. Those who say fraud doesn't exist point to how few cases have been found; but once a ballot goes through the machine, it is impossible to find out who cast it or remove it from the final count. If there were found to be hundreds of improper votes, calling for a re-vote is the only (and least likely) fair thing to do. (Thus, the GAB - which forced strict adherence to its rules throughout the recall process - has now indicated it will ignore the rule requiring the signing of the log book.)

Election laws exist for a reason. But as long as local officials are allowed to apply them capriciously, we will never have the certainty we need as to whether our votes actually mean anything. Racine should be a teachable moment, but it is a lesson many learned years ago.

Editor's Note: Purple Wisconsin is a collection of community bloggers with views from across the political spectrum. The Journal Sentinel hosts these blogs as a way to encourage thoughtful debate about the important issues facing Wisconsin and the Milwaukee region. The opinions voiced here are those of the individual bloggers alone; they are responsible for their posts. The Journal Sentinel does not edit or direct the bloggers in any fashion.