Birth control program takes hit in budget
SHARE

By of the

Gov. Scott Walker's proposal to end funding for a program that provides $3.4 million in grants for family planning was quickly denounced and praised by advocates on both sides of the issue.

Lost in the heated rhetoric that often surrounds family planning, though, was that the governor's proposed budget largely left intact the state program that provides birth control and other health care services to 50,000 women with low to moderate incomes.

The administration has no plans to end that program, said Dennis Smith, secretary of the Department of Health Services.

Women and men, ages 15 to 44, who aren't eligible for BadgerCare Plus, the health program for low-income families with children under 19, are eligible for the program.

The federal government pays for more than 85% of the program's cost.

One state study found that the family planning program has saved hundreds of millions of dollars by preventing pregnancies that would have been paid for by state health programs.

But the program is controversial because girls as young as 15 can get access to birth control without parental consent. If someone is under 19 and lives with a parent, the parents' income is not used to determine eligibility for the program.

Planned Parenthood Advocates of Wisconsin expressed surprise at Smith's statement that the state does not plan to end the program.

"We are heartened to hear that," said Chris Taylor, public policy director for the organization. "Does it make us abandon our caution and the concerns we have? No."

'A matter of priorities'

Wisconsin is one of 28 states that provide family planning services to women with low to moderate incomes.

Walker's proposed budget would end a much smaller public health program that provides grants for family planning to city and county health departments, community health centers and clinics, including nine run by Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin.

The program has a $3.4 million budget this fiscal year, with $1.5 million coming from the federal government, according to the Department of Health Services.

The governor recommended eliminating funding for the program to devote scarce resources to other programs, according to the budget proposal.

"It was purely a matter of priorities," Walker said earlier this month.

That was the proposal praised and denounced by advocates.

"Wisconsin Right to Life applauds Governor Scott Walker for ensuring that taxpayers are not involved in the taking of human life," Barbara Lyons, executive director of the group, said in a statement. "We look forward to working with state legislators to ensure that the governor's budget provision remains intact."

Planned Parenthood operates three clinics that perform abortions in Wisconsin. Those clinics do not receive state grants for family planning services. But abortion opponent groups oppose the organization receiving any state or federal dollars.

Wisconsin Family Planning and Reproductive Health Association and Planned Parenthood Advocates attacked the governor's proposal to end the grant program.

Lon Newman, executive director of Family Planning Health Services, which operates eight clinics staffed by nurses, warned that the loss of the grants could result in his organization closing clinics.

Family Planning Health Services receives about $370,000 from the program, he said, and the grants account for more than 10% of its budget for reproductive health.

Nine clinics operated by Planned Parenthood receive about $1 million from the program, and the grants account for about 4% of its $24 million in revenue.

Birth control coverage

Another provision in Walker's proposed budget would no longer require insurers to cover birth control. The provision, adopted in 2009, would apply to about half of the people in the state who have commercial health insurance.

The state does not regulate the health plans of employers who "self-fund," or pay most of the medical bills of their employees and family members.

Some health plans will continue to cover contraceptives, said Phil Dougherty, deputy director of the Wisconsin Association of Health Plans. "There's a demand for it out in the marketplace for some but not all," he said.

But the main family planning program - put in place by former Gov. Tommy Thompson - would remain in place, according to Smith.

"Tommy Thompson said a pregnant teen has a one-way ticket to poverty," said Planned Parenthood's Taylor.

The program, which had a budget of $27.9 million in the last fiscal year, provides free birth control and other family planning services as well as testing for cervical cancer, sexually transmitted diseases and HIV to people with incomes below $32,670 a year for an individual.

In 2008, the Department of Health Services estimated the program saved the state $487 million from 2003 through 2007 by preventing births by low-income women that would have been paid for by what is now the BadgerCare Plus program.

The report found that the birthrates of teenagers in the program were substantially lower than the birthrates for low-income teenage women in general, and lower than the birthrates for all teenage women from 2003 through 2006.

State Medicaid programs now under the umbrella of BadgerCare Plus paid for 45.6% of all births and 83.8% of the births to teen mothers in Wisconsin in 2008, according to the Department of Health Services. The average cost of each birth that year was $5,904.

The state would need federal approval to end the family planning program. But Smith, who oversaw the Medicaid program during the Bush administration, said he has no plans to seek that approval.

For now, family planning advocates probably will remain wary of the new administration.

"Given what we know and have seen," Taylor said, "we are not optimistic."

Lee Bergquist and Patrick Marley of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.