State budget to rein in aid for family planning
SHARE Budget Coverage Special Section: Ongoing coverage of Gov. Scott Walker's controversial budget-repair bill and the battle over the 2011-'13 state budget

By of the

Wisconsin is on track to join other states that are targeting Planned Parenthood by cutting or ending its access to state and federal dollars.

The Joint Finance Committee, which writes the state budget, voted last month to bar organizations that provide abortions from receiving grants given to city and county health departments, community health centers and clinics for family planning.

Planned Parenthood was the only organization that provides abortions to receive grants from the program.

State and federal law prohibits public funds from being used to pay for abortions. But nine clinics operated by Planned Parenthood were receiving about $1 million a year in state and federal funding under the program.

The nine clinics, in communities such as Fond du Lac, Oshkosh, Beaver Dam and Johnson Creek, do not perform abortions. But social conservatives have long opposed Planned Parenthood's receiving any public funds.

"This is a step in the right direction," said Matt Sande, who oversees legislative affairs for Pro-Life Wisconsin, a group that opposes abortion and public funding for birth control.

But Nicole Safar, legal and policy analyst for Planned Parenthood Advocates of Wisconsin, characterized the committee's move as "a targeted political attack on our organization."

"This put us on the extreme end of states on women's health," Safar said.

Gov. Scott Walker had proposed eliminating the $3.4 million program, funded by a mix of state and federal dollars, to devote resources to other programs.

"It was purely a matter of priorities," the governor said in March.

The Joint Finance Committee, chaired by Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills) and Rep. Robin Vos (R-Burlington), voted to restore some of the funding for the family planning grants but to use only state dollars.

The program had been funded with $1.9 million from the state and $1.5 million from a federal block grant.

The budget committee allocated $1.7 million a year in state money for the family planning grants.

Using only state funds enables Wisconsin to avoid a potential challenge by the federal government to barring Planned Parenthood from applying for the grants.

"It's totally a state program," said Beth Kaplan, a spokeswoman for the Department of Health Services.

The Joint Finance Committee did not go as far as Indiana, which last month effectively barred Planned Parenthood from providing health care services to women covered by the state's Medicaid program.

The Obama administration last week prohibited Indiana from enacting the new law, contending that it violates federal law that allows people covered by Medicaid to choose their health care providers.

The federal government finances more than half of state Medicaid programs, and states typically need federal approval to make changes in their programs.

Can still provide services

Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin still will be able to provide services to women in a state program that provides birth control and other reproductive health services, such as testing for cervical cancer, sexually transmitted diseases and HIV, to 50,000 women with low to moderate incomes.

Individuals from age 15 to 44 who aren't eligible for BadgerCare Plus, the health program for low-income families with children under 19, are eligible for the family planning program. The federal government pays for more than 85% of the program's cost.

Wisconsin is one of 28 states that provide family planning services to women with low to moderate incomes. Dennis Smith, secretary of the Department of Health Services, has said that the state has no plans to end the program.

The governor's budget, however, proposed ending coverage for the roughly 7,000 males in the program. The Joint Finance Committee backed that proposal.

It also voted to require parental notification for minors as well as to take their parents' income into account when determining eligibility for the program.

Girls as young as 15 have access to birth control without parental consent through the program. In addition, if someone is under 19 and lives with a parent, the parents' income is not used to determine eligibility.

The committee also voted to limit eligibility for the program to individuals with incomes of up to $21,780 a year, down from current threshold of $32,670.

Federal approval needed

The state will need federal approval to make those changes in the program, and the Joint Finance Committee's budget instructs the Department of Health Services to seek that approval.

Whether the Obama administration, which supports family planning, would allow the changes is a question.

What is clear is the committee's budget - unless amended - will prevent nine clinics operated by Planned Parenthood from receiving family planning grants. The grants had accounted for about 4% of its $24million in revenue.

The nine clinics provided services, including cervical cancer screens and well-woman exams, to 12,000 people in the 12 months prior to Oct. 15, according to Planned Parenthood.

"If you want to stop abortions, prevent abortion, you need to provide access to family planning," Safar said. "It's common sense."

The clinics, she added, are part of the health systems in the community.

"Providing reproductive health is a nonpartisan issue," Safar said. "It's not political."

She also is confident that the organization has broad support.

But Sande of Pro-Life Wisconsin said that family planning should not be funded with tax dollars. The group's position is that "government-funded birth control" increases promiscuity.

"We would like a total defunding of Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin," Sande said.

"Pregnancy is not a disease," he added. "Birth control is not health care. It's a lifestyle choice."