Why Scott Walker will not act on student loan debt
Rally Point Saul Newton's blog is part of our Purple Wisconsin project. Newton is the Executive Director of the Wisconsin Veterans Chamber of Commerce and a U.S. Army veteran. SHARE

By

Scott Walker’s indifference has a cost, and big banks are paying $4 million to buy it.

Student loan debt has reached crisis proportions, and only continues to intensify. Today, over 40 million people are making payments on over $1.2 trillion of existing student loan debt. In 2012, 71% of graduating college students had student loan debt averaging $29,400. Student loans have now surpassed credit card debt, are the second largest consumer debt in the country, and were the only consumer debt to grow during the Great Recession. Student loan debt presents a clear and present danger to the health and stability of our economy.

Recent college graduates are not alone in bearing the burden of student loan debt. Student loan debt totaling tens or even hundreds of thousands of dollars can take decades to pay off. In an economy that has seen stagnant wages and a shrinking middle class, student loan debt serves as an anchor weighing down the economic mobility of Americans across the demographic spectrum.

A startling report from the non-partisan Government Accountability Office shows that over 700,000 people over the age of 65 are currently making payments on their student loans. Last year, 155,000 people had their social security payments garnished because of outstanding student loan debt. Individuals who are supposed to be enjoying their golden years are making payments on their student loans into their sixties and seventies.

This information comes as recent data released by the White House shows 800,000 borrowers in Wisconsin are currently making payments on federal student loans. While Wisconsin ranks dead last in Midwest private sector job growth, and while our economic growth has lagged behind our neighboring states and the nation, addressing the student loan debt crisis would be an important step in improving the well being of working families across Wisconsin.

Governor Scott Walker has responded to this crisis with devastating indifference.

A bill introduced by Representative Cory Mason (D-Racine) and Senator Dave Hansen (D-Green Bay) would have given some relief to Wisconsin families drowning in student loan debt. The Higher Ed, Lower Debt bill would have allowed borrowers to refinance their student loans just like mortgages or auto loans and allowed borrowers to deduct their student loan payments from their taxes. These common sense reforms fell on deaf ears in the Republican legislature and the Governor’s office.

Despite the support of 54 legislators, Scott Walker allowed the bill to die without a vote. He has dodged questions on the campaign trail about student loans, and the new jobs plan his campaign released makes no mention of any plan to address the issue.

Scott Walker has turned his back on borrowers across the state, and his lack of action is no accident. Data from the Government Accountability Board and the Wisconsin Democracy Campaign shows that Scott Walker has received well over $4 million in campaign contributions from the banking and finance industry. Scott Walker is lining his campaign coffers with donations from companies who in turn pad their bottom line with payments from student loans.

In a state where pay-to-play politics has sadly become the norm for the GOP, Scott Walker’s brazen malfeasance on student loan debt reform is particularly outrageous. Placing a price tag on the Capitol dome will not create jobs or grow our economy, and will do nothing to help borrowers struggling with high-interest student loans.

The banking industry, which directly profits from the high interest student loans burying families in Wisconsin, has purchased the apathy of our Governor.

Borrowers paying $300, $400, $500 and more every month do not have a spare $4 million to give to Scott Walker’s reelection campaign. If we did, then perhaps he’d stand up for us.

Editor's Note: Purple Wisconsin is a collection of community bloggers with views from across the political spectrum. The Journal Sentinel hosts these blogs as a way to encourage thoughtful debate about the important issues facing Wisconsin and the Milwaukee region. The opinions voiced here are those of the individual bloggers alone; they are responsible for their posts. The Journal Sentinel does not edit or direct the bloggers in any fashion.