Wanted: Pied piper for commerce secretary
SHARE

By of the

Shortly before announcing her resignation as Wisconsin's secretary of commerce, Mary Burke issued a harsh criticism of her agency.

The Commerce Department, which ought to be among the state's most influential economic players, has sat on the sidelines while other states vie to recruit new businesses, she said.

"We are not out there selling the state and attracting the companies," Burke said late last month, echoing private-sector criticism.

Her Nov. 1 departure, announced last week, gives Gov. Jim Doyle the opportunity to name a replacement with enough dynamism and private-sector savvy to thrust Wisconsin into the fiercely competitive game of business attraction. It also means that business leaders and executives from around the state will closely scrutinize the nominee's credentials.

"We haven't been there when we need to be," said Tim Sheehy, president of the Metropolitan Milwaukee Association of Commerce.

Julia Taylor, president of the Greater Milwaukee Committee, hopes Doyle names someone with a track record of industrial attraction "in other states or someone who's done it in this state."

"The governor plans to name someone soon," said Matt Canter, spokesman for Doyle.

Burke, 48, a Harvard MBA whose father founded Waterloo-based Trek Bicycle Corp., said she will leave the government post to devote more time to the Boys & Girls Club and a family foundation.

One of Burke's most recent policy moves was a reorganization of her department. The old international division, which traditionally focused on export promotion, will be renamed the Division of Export and Investment. Its mission for the first time explicitly includes recruiting national and international industries.

Other states vastly outspend Wisconsin, Burke and others conceded.

The nonprofit Forward Wisconsin agency, which does marketing but not industrial attraction, has a budget of $600,000, with half that amount supplied by the state and the rest from non-taxpayer donors. In his current budget proposal, Doyle wants to add $590,000 for business attraction.

Burke also hired a director for the department's new attraction efforts. Mickey Judkins, an entrepreneur from Eau Claire, will administer the newly reorganized Commerce Department division and simultaneously manage the Forward Wisconsin promotion agency.

By contrast, the Minnesota Department of Employment and Economic Development proposes spending more than $500,000 next year to market rural economic initiatives alone, a spokeswoman said. And the Michigan Economic Development Corp. has one full-time staffer who routinely shuttles to Europe and another who travels regularly to Japan, both spending much of their time luring businesses to that hard-hit state, a spokesman said.

"You ought to call the folks in Texas - their capacities and funds are at least five times greater," said Mike Shore, a spokesman for the Michigan Economic Development Corp.

Burke directed the agency for 2 1/2 years. Her predecessor, Cory Nettles, left after about two years.

"Both did well with the resources they had, but they have probably one of the weakest tool sets of any state commerce secretary in the country when it comes to incentives, tax breaks, flexible training dollars," Sheehy said.

Target of criticism

In the 2006 governor's race, Doyle's Republican opponent, Mark Green, criticized Doyle for economic passivity.

Doyle administration officials respond that the state has focused on growing its own businesses. His aides talk about "economic gardening" - tending to the soil with tax incentives and taxpayer aid to see what sort of operations spring up without importing industry.

"There is a real opportunity here for the state to put its best face forward for national attraction on key industries," Taylor said. "If you're going to focus on business attraction, you need to be charismatic, do the business of the state, get the governor to the table when you need him."

He or she will also need a lot of stamina.

The commerce secretary, even without the new duties involving industrial attraction, travels nearly as much and is almost as visible as the governor, Sheehy noted. Assuming Doyle wants to lure more business, the new duties will make the job even more exhausting.

Wisconsin is getting into the game just as efforts in the metro Milwaukee region have recorded their first successes. The 2-year-old Milwaukee 7, a seven-county consortium of economic-development organizations, includes a dedicated business attraction team. It has set up a Web site to showcase the region's economy and collected reams of economic data.

Following the M-7's lead, other regional economic-strategy groups have sprung up around the state. They include the New North, an 18-county entity that encompasses Green Bay and Appleton, as well as a new eight-county group around Madison.

Doyle said he hopes the regional groups will coalesce into a statewide business attraction and retention effort, creating a grass-roots business movement that gives the state a partner in its efforts.