Health reform looks to the states
Illinois - The All Kids program, which began this year, will provide health insurance to any child uninsured for six months. Monthly premiums and co-payments are based on the family's income. The state expects to fund the program with savings from moving most of the people in its Medicaid program into managed care, with an emphasis on case and disease management.

West Virginia - A new law gives private insurance companies access to rates negotiated with hospitals, doctors and other health care providers by the West Virginia Public Employees Insurance Agency. The law is designed to make health insurance more affordable for small businesses. Employers will be required to pay 50% of the premium cost for employee-only coverage.

New York - The Healthy New York program provides subsidized insurance for employers of low-wage workers, sole proprietors and individuals. The state pays 90% of medical claims between $5,000 and $75,000.

Massachusetts - The state this year enacted sweeping legislation designed to provide nearly universal coverage for residents. The plan is based on a mix of strategies, including imposing financial penalties on people who do not buy health insurance and providing subsidies tied to income to help low-wage workers buy insurance.

Vermont - A new law provides premium assistance to low-wage workers who can get health insurance through their employers. It also provides sliding-scale subsidies, tied to income, for a new health plan. Employers who do not offer health benefits are assessed an annual fee of $365 for each employee.



Sources: Commonwealth Fund, AcademyHealth, Kaiser Family Foundation Three bills in Congress, including one co-sponsored by Rep. Tammy Baldwin (D-Wis.) and one sponsored by Sen. Russ Feingold (D-Wis.), are designed to use states as laboratories to experiment with new ways to expand health insurance coverage, improve quality and control costs. The goal, in some ways, is to build on current state initiatives. Here are some examples:The All Kids program, which began this year, will provide health insurance to any child uninsured for six months. Monthly premiums and co-payments are based on the family's income. The state expects to fund the program with savings from moving most of the people in its Medicaid program into managed care, with an emphasis on case and disease management.A new law gives private insurance companies access to rates negotiated with hospitals, doctors and other health care providers by the West Virginia Public Employees Insurance Agency. The law is designed to make health insurance more affordable for small businesses. Employers will be required to pay 50% of the premium cost for employee-only coverage.The Healthy New York program provides subsidized insurance for employers of low-wage workers, sole proprietors and individuals. The state pays 90% of medical claims between $5,000 and $75,000.The state this year enacted sweeping legislation designed to provide nearly universal coverage for residents. The plan is based on a mix of strategies, including imposing financial penalties on people who do not buy health insurance and providing subsidies tied to income to help low-wage workers buy insurance.A new law provides premium assistance to low-wage workers who can get health insurance through their employers. It also provides sliding-scale subsidies, tied to income, for a new health plan. Employers who do not offer health benefits are assessed an annual fee of $365 for each employee.Sources: Commonwealth Fund, AcademyHealth, Kaiser Family Foundation Quotable The chemistry that has developed on this issue between members - who hardly ever talk to each other - is remarkable. The chemistry that has developed on this issue between members - who hardly ever talk to each other - is remarkable. Stuart Butler Universal coverage is necessary. But I think states will vary on exactly how they go about it. Universal coverage is necessary. But I think states will vary on exactly how they go about it. U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold (D-Wis.)

Rep. Tammy Baldwin, one of the most liberal members of Congress, and Rep. Tom Price, one of the most conservative, seldom agree on political issues.

Baldwin, a lifelong political activist from Madison, supports universal health care similar to that in Canada and other industrialized countries. Price, an orthopedic surgeon from Roswell, Ga., adamantly opposes the idea.

But the two agree on one thing: Significant health care reform stands little chance of getting through Congress.

That political reality is unlikely to change with the recent election. And it has made Baldwin and Price improbable allies.

The two are backing an approach designed to get around Washington's deadlock on health care reform.

They are part of a group of lawmakers and policy analysts - one that includes Democratic U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold of Wisconsin - that would use states as laboratories to test different approaches for expanding insurance coverage, improving quality and controlling costs.

In some ways, it would be similar to welfare reform, which was modeled in part after a Wisconsin program. The goal would be to find out what works and, maybe just as important, what doesn't.

Its backers contend the idea might be the best hope for moving health care reform forward.

The idea appeals to conservatives and liberals alike. It recognizes that states have taken the lead in health care reform. And it acknowledges that there may not be one sweeping solution that works equally well in states as dissimilar as Massachusetts and Mississippi.

It also concedes that Congress - mired in the debate over whether the solution is more government involvement or less - is unlikely to agree on the best way to reform the health care system.

"It's a way to break through the philosophical divide," Feingold said.

Three bills based on the idea have been introduced in Congress.

Sen. George Voinovich (R-Ohio) and Sen. Jeff Bingaman (D-N.M.) introduced the first bill in May. Feingold introduced his own bill in July.

Baldwin, who has backed the idea for several years, and Price, along with two other co-sponsors, also introduced their bill in July.

The bills all differ slightly. But each would encourage states to come up with ways to make the health care system work better. The proposals would be reviewed by a commission or task force. The most promising ones would be sent to Congress for fast-track approval.

The idea is for the proposals to cross the political spectrum. And, in this, the idea implicitly acknowledges one of the realities of health care reform: No one really knows the best way to expand coverage, control costs and improve quality.

There is no shortage of ideas. But even the best of the lot probably won't work perfectly from the start.

Health care, after all, accounts for more than one-fifth of the U.S. economy.

"You can't possibly know the right solution," said Stuart Butler, a health care economist with the Heritage Foundation, a conservative policy research organization.

"You may be half right," he said. "But it's only by trying these ideas in practice - modifying them based on experience - that you gravitate to a right answer."

Given that hundreds of billions of dollars would be at stake in any sweeping reform at the federal level, some people think it might be wise to experiment on a smaller scale first.

Democrats and Republicans, Butler said, agree on the goal.

"We want everyone in American to get access to health care at a reasonable cost," Butler said.

Similar ideas presented

Two years ago, Butler and Henry Aaron, a health care economist with the Brookings Institution, a liberal-leaning policy research organization, outlined the idea in an article in Health Affairs, a policy journal.

Baldwin and Sen. Paul Wellstone, the late Minnesota Democrat, had come up with a similar idea years earlier. In 1999, the two drafted legislation that would allow states to put in place pilot programs for universal coverage. The bill won support only from Democrats.

It went nowhere.

Years later, at a bipartisan conference on health care, Butler pulled Baldwin aside and told her the idea in a different form could appeal to conservatives.

"It inspired me to say, 'Well, let's give that a try,' " Baldwin said.

After a few false starts, she found a Republican co-sponsor in Price. She has enjoyed working with him, she said.

"But if we were to speak of issues beyond our bill," she added, "we'd be hard pressed to find many on which we'd agree."

Playing to states' differences

Part of the idea's appeal is that states differ economically and politically.

What works in New York might fail miserably Texas.

Some states with relatively generous government programs, for instance, have more middle class people who are uninsured. In those states, modest subsidies, such as tax credits, might work. The same approach, though, would do little in states where more low-income people are uninsured.

The idea being backed by Baldwin, Feingold and others would give states the flexibility to design programs best suited for their economies.

Some of that is taking place now. One example is Gov. Jim Doyle's proposal, called BadgerCare Plus, to allow parents to buy health insurance for their children through the state. Another is Massachusetts' ambitious plan to ensure that everyone in the state has coverage.

"It may be that there's no one best approach," Butler said.

Feingold echoes this.

"Universal coverage is necessary," he said. "But I think states will vary on exactly how they go about it."

At the same time, if a state shows that it can expand coverage or control costs or improve quality, it could set an example for other states. And those states might learn what mistakes to avoid in designing their own programs.

Think of it as setting up a marketplace for competing ideas on how to make the health care system work better.

"The excitement of this is that it doesn't feel ideological," Feingold said. "It feels like different ideas getting a chance to fairly compete with each other."

Disagreement on details

The details of specific bills are likely to spark disagreement and probably will change.

The House bill spearheaded by Baldwin and Price, for instance, is budget neutral. The states' proposals could not cost the federal government money at the end of a five-year period.

What would happen if an idea doesn't work and in the end costs money isn't clear. Baldwin acknowledged that the provision will limit what states can propose.

"We felt it absolutely necessary to push forward on those areas where we had agreement," she said.

The Senate bills are not budget neutral. Feingold's bill, for instance, would cost a projected $32 billion over 10 years. It would be paid for by offsets the senator has proposed.

Feingold has yet to find a Republican co-sponsor. But he said he is talking to Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina.

His bill would fund a limited number of pilot projects and require states to pay part of the cost.

The federal funds, though, would give states an incentive to experiment.

"There's no way this is going to get done with only state resources," Feingold said.

Len Nichols, director of the health policy program at the New America Foundation, a policy research organization that focused on bipartisan solutions, agreed that states will need an incentive.

"You've got to have federal resources," Nichols said. "But you've got to have state ingenuity. And that's what this proposal calls for."

Time-honored tradition

Using states as a laboratory is a time-honored tradition, Nichols said.

Welfare reform, which put time limits and work requirements on assistance for needy families, is one example. Its genesis came from a state - Wisconsin.

Just now, there is more interest than public support for the idea, Nichols said. But he added, "How can you oppose this?"

Whether the proposed bills suffer the same fate as other health care reform proposals is anybody's guess.

"The polarization in Washington means it's very difficult to get anything on health care through," said Butler, of the Heritage Foundation.

Yet Butler, who has worked on health care reform for 27 years, is optimistic.

"The chemistry that has developed on this issue between members - who hardly ever talk to each other - is remarkable," he said.

Baldwin and Price are one example.

"When you think about what it is going to take to get health care reform," Butler added, "a key part of this is going to be trust and the ability to work together."

Everybody's first choice still is for everyone else to agree with them.

"But that," he said, "isn't going to happen."