State is No. 1 in health care
Led by the performance of its hospitals, Wisconsin was ranked first in the nation in health care quality based on information compiled by the federal Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.

The ranking - based on 129 quality measures in four different care settings - gave Wisconsin the highest overall score among 50 states and the District of Columbia.

The state's hospitals also were given the highest score in the country.

The information released Monday marked the first year that the agency compiled and released an overall score for each state. The agency has been releasing state information on health care quality for four years.

Wisconsin historically has ranked high in surveys on health care quality.

"Pretty consistently, we are sitting in the top-performing states," said Dana Richardson, vice president of quality for the Wisconsin Hospital Association.

Wisconsin also was among the five best-performing states in ambulatory care and ranked in the top 25% for nursing home care.

Home health care was the anomaly: The state's overall score was 25, far below the scores of 95 for the top performing states, Michigan and Pennsylvania.

The annual "State Snapshots" from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality are an example of the move by the federal government and others to develop more accurate measures of health care quality - and to make that information available to the public.

That in turn has spurred hospitals and other health care organizations to intensify their efforts to improve quality.

"What gets measured and reported publicly tends to get improved at a faster rate," said Christopher Queram, president and chief executive of the Wisconsin Collaborative for Healthcare Quality.

The public now has access to information that less than a decade ago didn't exist or typically was confidential.

Now, information on how specific hospitals, nursing homes and home health care agencies perform on certain measures is available through Medicare's Web site.

The effort to develop accepted quality measures, though, still remains in its early stages.

"We've made incredible strides over the past five years in terms of the specificity of the measures," said Ed Kelley, director of national health care reports for the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. But he added, "There's still a long way to go."

The scores compiled by the agency are based on an array of performance measures.

Some examples are foot exams for people with diabetes, ease of appointments for people in the Medicare program, low-birth weight babies, recommended care for heart attack patients and avoidable hospitalizations for pediatric asthma patients.

Wisconsin ranked better than average in those areas and others. No state, however, did well in all areas. The state ranked "worse than average," for example, in suicide deaths and avoidable hospitalizations for influenza.

Noting areas where the health care system falls short is one of the goals in compiling the information.

Nationally, only about 59% of adult surgery patients insured by Medicare, for instance, receive antibiotics at the appropriate time. In Wisconsin, the figure was 66.1% - better than the national average but below a respectable score.

Developing good measures of health care quality also is just the first step.

"We also have to think about how we are going to use this data," Kelley said.

Nationally, hospitals have shown significant improvement in some quality measures. The progress in ambulatory care, in contrast, has been slower.

"That's the next challenge," Kelley said.

For now, Wisconsin's hospitals and other health care providers are doing better overall than their counterparts in most states.

"We've made a great start," Queram said. "And we just need to continue improving."