After getting taxpayers' help, Johnson Controls packs its bags
Johnson Controls Inc. will merge with Tyco International to form an Ireland-based company selling Tyco's security and safety systems alongside Johnson Controls' building systems and heating and cooling equipment. Credit: Mike De Sisti

By of the

Johnson Controls Inc. was as patriotic as they come back in 2008, when the U.S. auto industry was teetering on bankruptcy and the Glendale-based maker of car parts knew it desperately needed help from U.S. taxpayers.

The company's president at the time, Keith Wandell, didn't hesitate to ask Congress to support the massive government bailout that ultimately rescued two major U.S. automakers, along with uncounted businesses that provide parts and services to them.

"It saved a whole lot of suppliers that would have gone out of business," said Steve Roell, then Johnson Controls' chief executive.

And the auto bailout wasn't the only government handout to benefit Johnson Controls in the past decade. In 2010, for example, it received $299 million from the Energy Department to ramp up production of hybrid batteries. The state of Michigan awarded it millions of dollars for the same project.

Yet few seem to see any reciprocal loyalty to the U.S. in the company's latest move: a multibillion-dollar merger with Tyco International that will transfer Johnson Controls' corporate headquarters to Ireland — saving it an estimated $150 million on U.S. taxes, an action known as a tax inversion.

With presidential campaigns at full throttle, both sides of the ideological divide were quick to criticize the situation. Democratic presidential hopeful Bernie Sanders called it a "disaster" for companies taking corporate welfare to head overseas. Hillary Clinton, his primary opponent, said the inversion "should be called a PER-version" and slammed the company for being "willing to walk away ...instead of doing what they should to support our country."

Republican elected officials and conservatives said it was another sign that an overhaul of the U.S. corporate tax code is overdue.

"The failure to modernize the federal tax code has pushed American businesses to move overseas," wrote Brett Healy of the free-market Wisconsin-based think tank MacIver Institute. "Our politicians have failed us, not Johnson Controls."

Social responsibility

Corporations need to think about more than their shareholders, because they also have a social responsibility, said Sarah Peck, finance professor at Marquette University, adding: "$150 million a year could go a long way to providing (government) services to the public."

"In the short term they're doing a great job by their shareholders," she said, noting the attention generated by the latest financial offshoring could prompt the federal inversion rules to be changed. "Politically, people are not very happy with the tax inversion — will that loophole be closed?"

While Johnson Controls for now remains a major supplier of auto parts such as car seats and batteries, it also is a leader in the building-controls business — providing energy-efficient heating and cooling equipment and control systems for commercial buildings and skyscrapers, for instance.

It is in the process of a major transition that will spin off its car parts business, while its building controls operation will merge with Tyco, which supplies buildings with fire suppression and security systems.

Under the deal, Johnson Controls would become a subsidiary of Tyco, which would then change its name to Johnson Controls plc.

The spun-off auto parts company will be called Adient, and it will likely call Ireland home, too, although Johnson Controls spokesman Glen Ponczak said that's still to be determined.

Merger documents filed this past week show Adient will be spun off by the Irish parent company after the Johnson Controls-Tyco deal is done. Observers note that Tyco has spun off five or six companies in the recent past and all are domiciled in Ireland.

Good for Milwaukee

Company officials have taken pains to say the deal is good for Milwaukee, because despite the official move to Ireland, both the new Johnson Controls and Adient actually will be run from Milwaukee.

In moving its corporate headquarters, Johnson Controls is doing what plenty of other companies have done. Household names like Apple and Facebook have been criticized for shifting some of their tax burdens to Ireland.

Other examples abound. Eaton Corp., which bought Milwaukee-based Cutler Hammer in the 1970s, shifted its corporate headquarters to Ireland in 2012 after it bought Cooper Industries.

Why base in Ireland rather than Cleveland, which had been Eaton's home before? Because the difference in tax rates is so dramatic and because of the way the U.S. tax code treats multinational companies, an Eaton executive told CFO Magazine in 2013.

"The U.S. tax code, which is a global system, really penalizes companies for taking cash back into the United States," said Richard Fearon, chief financial officer of Eaton, at the time. "That probably isn't the most sensible system, because it causes companies to be reluctant to bring cash back. And of course cash is used for investment, for returning money to shareholders, things that are positive for the United States. Ireland is much more pragmatic, and the tax rate is quite low."

For its part, Tyco hasn't been incorporated in the U.S. for decades.

The company shifted from the U.S. to Bermuda in the late 1990s. After its CEO was imprisoned for defrauding the company of $100 million, the conglomerate later moved its incorporation to Switzerland in 2008 before shifting it to Ireland in 2014. Each time, the company said the move was in the best interest of shareholders.

Ireland has a tax rate of 12.5%, whereas the United States has a tax rate of 35%. Johnson Controls paid $600 million in taxes in its last fiscal year and reported a tax rate of 19% — the result of a variety of global tax maneuvers. Tyco's rate was 12.1%, the company said Friday.

The big driver for large multinational companies to relocate to an international address is that so much of their revenue comes from abroad, said John Samuels of the International Tax Policy Forum. In 1982, multinationals earned less 23% of their income outside the U.S., but that jumped to 54% by 2012.

"Today, with most of their income and almost all of their growth outside the United States, U.S. companies have a lot more to gain by relocating their headquarters to a foreign country with a more hospitable tax regime," said Samuels. "And conversely they have a lot more to lose by remaining in the United States and having their growing global income swept into the worldwide U.S. tax net and taxed at a 35% rate."

But the shift overseas is affecting the U.S. Treasury. Economics professor Kimberly Clausing of Reed College in Oregon estimated in a recent study that as of 2012, corporations had shifted as much as $111 billion overseas through inversions and other tax-saving strategies.

Richard Painter, formerly the chief ethics lawyer for the White House during the administration of President George W. Bush, said one potential downside to the merger and move is that litigation involving the new company will be dealt with by courts in Ireland — just as companies that incorporate in Delaware because of its business-friendly policies often have court cases heard there.

"That means the rights of the shareholder will be determined under Irish law rather than Delaware or Wisconsin law," said Painter. "Issues regarding takeovers, shareholder rights or conflicts involving the CEO ... All of that will be determined by the law the Irish judges apply to a situation that is about as Irish as the song 'God Save the Queen.'"

Expanded opportunities

Moving to take the focus off the migration to Ireland, Johnson Controls and Tyco crafted messages for investors and the public last week that the deal was more about combining two companies and expanded sales opportunity in the years ahead.

Customers of tomorrow will operate in "smart buildings" that house a variety of systems that can talk to one another thanks to industry trends including Big Data and the Internet of Things, said George Oliver, Tyco's CEO, during a conference call Friday.

Johnson Controls was taking pains to reassure customers that it's a good U.S. corporate citizen and that its merger would be good for the country and Wisconsin.

In a memo of talking points for employees to share with customers, the company noted that like Johnson Controls, Tyco is a major U.S. government contractor. "Tyco has a successful and robust government business today, and we will continue as a combined company being a committed business partner to the U.S. government," the company said.

But at the same time, the company said it sees benefits to being "domiciled" in Ireland. Most of its sales come from outside the United States, and most of its employees are outside the country, too.

"Keeping the Irish domicile retains maximum flexibility for our balance sheet and ability to invest in growth opportunities everywhere around the world, including in the United States," the memo says.

The combined business, with $32 billion in global sales, would initially be run by Johnson Controls' Chairman and CEO Alex Molinaroli. He would retain those roles for 18 months, then become executive chairman for another year before leaving the company. Succeeding him will be George Oliver, current chairman of Tyco.

The company calls the merger a "win" for Milwaukee. It's also a win for Molinaroli, who owns nearly $28 million in stock and will see $60 million in stock and options vest in the coming years.

Details of his full golden parachute will be released later, but a revised employment arrangement negotiated in connection with the merger will pay him a retention bonus and stock valued at $20 million.

Johnson Controls "is clearly doing a good job in maximizing the returns to the shareholder," Peck said, providing the savings it delivers don't "get diverted to products that don't make money or excess compensation to the CEO or other executives."

Guy Boulton of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.