Doyle offers $50 million to aid in Marinette shipbuilder bid
Gov. Jim Doyle's administration is offering $50 million in incentives to help an Italian shipbuilder land a U.S. Navy contract that would create more than 1,000 jobs in Marinette and thousands of additional jobs in the region.

If Marinette Marine Corp. wins the contract and accepts the state incentives, the package would be the second largest ever provided by the state, which sees an opportunity to shore up a struggling manufacturing sector by moving Wisconsin companies into defense contracting.

"This is a project that will put Marinette Marine on the map for a long time," Doyle said. "It's like bringing a big auto plant to the state of Wisconsin."

The production of high-speed Navy combat ships, for use in shallow coastal waters, would be the largest defense industry project in Wisconsin since World War II, when submarines were built in Manitowoc.

In dollars it would eclipse the work being performed by Oshkosh Corp., where more than 4,000 people in the Fox Valley are making U.S. military trucks for the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.

"The economic impact is absolutely huge for the region," said Richard McCreary, chief executive of Marinette Marine, which is owned by the Fincantieri Marine Group, an Italian shipbuilder.

Marinette should learn in July whether it has won a contract for the Navy's next 10 littoral combat ships costing several hundred million dollars per vessel. That work alone would take five years to complete, employing several thousand people at Marinette Marine and about 7,000 people in the region - including suppliers and vendors.

Eventually the Navy wants about 55 of the ships, which could create 20 years of work at Marinette - should the company receive all the contract awards.

"It absolutely would be the largest shipbuilding project here since World War II," McCreary said.

The competition

Marinette and defense contractor Lockheed Martin Corp. are competing with General Dynamics Corp. and its partner, Austal USA, an Australian shipbuilder, for the Navy business.

"It will be a winner-take-all" for the 10 ships, McCreary said. In 2014, the Navy will select two shipyards to compete for the remainder of the littoral combat fleet - work which could last for several decades.

"No question, it would be a significant economic blow to the region if we don't get" the contracts, McCreary said.

As part of a series of meetings and phone calls by Doyle and state officials with company executives, federal officials and Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm, the State of Wisconsin offered the incentives in February. In March, Doyle traveled to Italy to meet with Fincantieri executives.

To date, the state's biggest accepted package of incentives is the $70 million committed to Mercury Marine to prevent that company from moving operations to Oklahoma. A larger $115 million state offer to save the General Motors plant in Janesville wasn't accepted or provided because the company decided to shut down the plant.

The incentives committed by Doyle in a letter to Marinette Marine include:

• An estimated $28 million over seven years in so-called enterprise zone tax credits to help cover payroll, training and investments in a plant or equipment. The state tax credits are refundable, meaning that the state could pay all or part of them to Marinette Marine in cash if it has no remaining state tax liability.

• Nearly $1 million in help from the state Department of Workforce Development and the regional Bay Area Workforce Development Board, mostly to train and recruit workers.

• $250,000 from Northeast Wisconsin Technical College to buy and equip an on-site training facility to help prepare workers.

• At least $20 million in federal new markets tax credits that would be issued by the Wisconsin Housing and Economic Development Authority. Those tax credits would depend on Marinette Marine's actual investment but would cover about 20% of the expenses for investments in buildings and equipment.

• Additional help from WHEDA that potentially could run into the millions of dollars to ensure that new employees would have apartments and homes.

• $1.4 million for worker training that is being pledged separately by the State of Michigan.

Doyle said Marinette Marine would receive the state tax credits only as it spends money to hire workers and upgrade its plant - an investment that could reach $100 million.

"Nobody's handing over $50 million in cash," Doyle said. "This more than pays for itself over time."

The state Department of Commerce estimates that the project would create or retain at least 5,000 jobs for Wisconsin workers at Marinette Marine and some 262 in-state suppliers. That's not counting the jobs that would go to Michigan residents living just across the border.

That would include retaining the roughly 900 jobs now at Marinette Marine, adding an additional 1,300 jobs at the company, and another 3,000 jobs at suppliers, Deputy Commerce Secretary Zach Brandon said. The project could cut unemployment 16% in Marinette County, where the unemployment rate stands at 12%, the Commerce Department estimates. Salaries for the union jobs being created at Marinette Marine would average $45,000 a year, Brandon said.

Marinette Marine has built one of the ships, the USS Freedom, and is building a second one that's scheduled to be launched in 2012. The Freedom is based in San Diego.

General Dynamics also has built one of the ships and has another under construction in Mobile, Ala.

Blueprint battle

Ship design and price will determine whether Marinette or General Dynamics wins the contracts.

The General Dynamics ship design is too wide to get out of the Great Lakes, through the St. Lawrence Seaway, and into the open seas. So if Marinette Marine and its design don't win the contract for the next 10 ships, the company could not build future ships using the General Dynamics model.

If Marinette Marine wins, however, its design could be built in later contract phases by either company in either Alabama or Wisconsin, giving the Navy a choice of suppliers.

The Navy says both ships meet its requirements.

But it's easier to launch smaller boats from the Marinette vessel, and its steel hull might offer better protection against floating mines.

The General Dynamics ship has an enormous flight deck for landing helicopters.

"So it comes down to what you value more, helicopters or small boats," said Jim Hasik, a defense industry consultant in Austin, Texas.

Partly for cost reasons, the Navy will choose only one design.

"At the end of the day, because the Navy knows the reputation of the companies involved, this decision is heavily weighted on price," McCreary said.

Politics also could be a factor because both Wisconsin and Alabama - where the General Dynamics ships would be built - have a lot to gain in jobs and economic benefits.

Alabama has not said what incentives it would offer.

"And I would not tell you if I knew," said Bill Pfister, a spokesman for Austal, the General Dynamics partner in the ship project.

There is $4.3 billion in federal money appropriated to build the 10 ships. The Navy is expected to award the first phase of the contract between July and September.

Hopefully the decision comes soon, said U.S. Rep Steve Kagen (D-Wis.).

"We need the jobs now," Kagen said. "Marinette has proven its capabilities. This is not about politics. It is about producing the best ship at the most cost effective price."

Jason Stein reported from Madison and Rick Barrett from Milwaukee.