Area employers called 'bullish' in latest Manpower survey
SHARE

By of the

Keeping pace with upbeat national job-creation trends, employers in Wisconsin as well as the Milwaukee metro area expect "bullish" and "prosperous" hiring prospects in the coming quarter, according to the latest survey of employer confidence by ManpowerGroup Inc.

"We're seeing the signs of a healthy labor market with the outlook improving compared to 2014," said Manpower chief executive Jonas Prising.

The global staffing company's latest workplace poll is more encouraging than many might expect after the economy wobbled in recent months.

Manpower's quarterly index of employer sentiment also is the latest staffing gauge to signal optimism, following a separate report on Friday from the U.S. Labor Department, which showed an unexpectedly strong national burst of hiring in May.

Manpower's quarterly survey breaks out data for major metro areas as well as all 50 states and the nation as a whole. The survey always asks the same single set of questions: "How do you anticipate total employment at your location to change in the coming three months? Will employment increase, decrease or stay the same?"

From July through September, 29% of employers polled in Wisconsin said they plan to add more employees, while only 4% expect to reduce staff, resulting in what the survey calls a "net employment outlook" of 25%. It's the second highest index for the state in the current recovery, just behind 26% in the current quarter.

Meanwhile, another 65% in the metro area expect to maintain their current workforce levels, while 2% are not certain of their hiring plans.

It was a similar story in the four-county Milwaukee metropolitan area, which encompasses Milwaukee, Waukesha, Ozaukee and Washington counties. In the metro region, 29% of employers plan to hire while 2% expect to reduce head counts, yielding a healthy net outlook of 27% — the third strongest index reading throughout the 5-year-old recovery.

Throughout the slow recovery, Manpower has chosen cautious words to interpret the results of its outlook surveys. But in its report Tuesday, the Milwaukee-based staffing company used overtly optimistic words like "bullish" and "prosperous" to describe job markets in both the state and metro area.

Prospects at the national level also remained bright.

Of the more than 11,000 employers surveyed nationwide, 24% expect to add to their workforces and 4% expect to trim workers, creating an employment outlook of 20%. After seasonal adjustments to smooth out fluctuations from weather and school holidays, the national net outlook comes to 16%, which matches the previous two quarters and also remains at the highest levels since the recovery began. State and metro-area data is not seasonally adjusted.

Manpower, which also polls hiring sentiment in many of the world's economies, found that U.S. hiring intentions "are among the strongest globally" in the upcoming quarter.

Milwaukee-based Manpower is the world's third-largest staffing and recruitment firm and has conducted the quarterly survey for more than five decades. Its quarterly indicator provides a forward-looking barometer on hiring that is unavailable from government data, which only looks backward at each month's developments.

The quarterly outlook is a useful leading indicator of overall direction and sentiment, although it reveals little about the actual number of new jobs, whether they are full-time and whether they include benefits. And because the Manpower data does not distinguish whether a company plans to hire a new chief executive or a janitor, it does not attempt to measure how well the new jobs pay.

But as a general weather vane, it has proved useful.

Manpower spokeswoman Mary Ann Lasky pointed to research from Wrightson LLC, an independent economic research firm, which juxtaposed the Manpower predictions with the government jobs data. Going back to 1976, the two moved in parallel.

Lasky noted that Wrightson does the analyses for its own purposes and is not paid by Manpower. At a national level, the poll has a margin of error of plus or minus 0.8 percentage points, Manpower said.

"This demonstrates that our forecasts are directionally in line with what actually happens in the labor market," Lasky said.