Chris Abele's money at work in venture fund
Engineer Suong Do analyzes data at Scanalytics, a new company that makes interactive circuit mats that analyze traffic flow in stores and other places. The firm has funding from Chris Abele’s CSA Partners LLC. Credit: Gary Porter

SHARE

By of the

Milwaukee County Executive Chris Abele has committed at least $10 million of his own money to a venture capital fund that will invest in early-stage companies here and around the Midwest.

Abele started CSA Partners LLC in May and says it could grow to "plenty north" of $15 million if it finds the right opportunities. The fund recently made its first investment in Scanalytics Inc., a Milwaukee company with a software-based system for tracking traffic in retail stores and other locations.

"Right now, the climate in Milwaukee in terms of opportunities, investors, worthwhile ideas and genuine excitement about entrepreneurial growth is about as vibrant and active as it's been for as long as I remember," Abele said. "And we want to be as aggressive a part of it as we can be."

The new fund is investing in early-stage companies, where there has historically been a lack of capital and expertise in the state. It operates across the Midwest, but hopes to make many investments in the Milwaukee area, and possibly move some future portfolio companies here, Abele said.

"If we can bring some of those start-ups here to headquarter in Milwaukee, that's a win-win for all of us," he said.

Abele is the son of John Abele, co-founder of medical device maker Boston Scientific, who has appeared on the Forbe's list of billionaires. He moved to Milwaukee in the mid-1990s after attending Lawrence University in Appleton. Abele could live anywhere in the world, but has "planted a stake" here, said Steve Mech, a CSA Partners managing director.

"He's making a bold promise to not only create jobs, but to make sure people in the Midwest are paying attention that Milwaukee is a center for talent," Mech said.

When asked about ethical issues that could arise because of his political position, Abele said he has tried "to go as far as possible to avoid even the appearance of a conflict." CSA Partners "can't do anything where a company has a direct county relationship," he said.

CSA Partners typically invests $50,000 to $500,000 in a company, and provides mentoring, connections and validation, along with the capital, said Brian Taffora, a managing director. The fund seeks tech-enabled start-ups with innovative business models, Taffora said. Most companies the fund invests in will have no revenue, but potential for it, he said.

"We want to help build great companies in the community we live in — and not only help them grow, but stay here," Taffora said.

Joe Scanlan rejected three angel investing groups before accepting funding from CSA Partners, the co-founder, president and chief executive officer of Scanalytics said.

The CSA Partners team was straightforward about its goals and terms, and honest about its abilities, Scanlan said.

"It was refreshing going to them when they didn't have eight pages of amendments to a term sheet or try to put contingencies on it," he said.

CSA Partners is aware of entrepreneurs' criticism that investors here string out their due diligence to lower the valuation. "We consciously want to show them we're not doing this," said Pat Farley, one of the fund's managing directors.

Scanalytics raised $550,000 in October in a round led by CSA Partners. Madison venture capitalist Ken Johnson and Dan Neely, founder and chief executive officer of Networked Insights, a Chicago marketing analytics firm, participated.

CSA Partners expects to close on at least one more start-up investment in coming weeks, Abele said.

"These are the types of funds that we need to continue to see to support the growing number of entrepreneurs in Wisconsin," said Dan Blake, director of the Wisconsin Angel Network.

There are a handful of early-stage funds in the state, including two that formed in the last two years. Wisconsin Super Angel Fundformed earlier this year and manages more than $5 million. Angels on the Waterformed in 2012 and manages a nearly $2 million fund.

Early-stage funds are "able to take these raw entrepreneurs with good instincts but limited experience and turn them into fundable deals pretty fast and cheap," said Paul Jones, an Angels on the Water board member and a lawyer in Michael Best & Friedrich's Madison office.

It is "outstanding" that CSA Partners is doing early-stage investing, said Drew Hart, chief marketing officer for Quietyme Inc., a Milwaukee start-up.

"They're basically saying that if you're going to do this and put a lot of risk into it, they're one of the organizations in southeastern Wisconsin that will support you," Hart said.