FAA to close 149 air traffic control towers beginning April 7
The Federal Aviation Administration said Friday it has made a final decision to eliminate 149 air traffic control towers that are operated by private contractors, including towers at Timmerman Field in Milwaukee, the Waukesha County Airport and airfields in Kenosha, Oshkosh, Mosinee, La Crosse, Janesville and Eau Claire.

The towers will close beginning April 7.

In early March, the FAA proposed to close 189 contract air traffic control towers as part of its plan to meet the $637 million in cuts required under the federally mandated budget cuts known as "sequestration." The agency announced at the time that it would consider keeping open any of these towers if doing so would be in the national interest.

It reconsidered and restored some of those towers, but none of the Wisconsin towers on the list was spared.

The agency is still considering eliminating overnight shifts at 72 air traffic facilities, including at major airports like Chicago's Midway International and Mitchell International Airport in Milwaukee. There was no word Friday on when that decision will come.

Mitchell airport spokesman Harold Mester said Friday he hadn't heard any updates.

The closures will not force the shutdown of any of those airports, but pilots will be left to coordinate takeoffs and landings among themselves over a shared radio frequency with no help from ground controllers under procedures that all pilots are trained to carry out.

Local officials said they were disappointed in the FAA decision, but said they'll continue to work to try to reverse it.

"We are going to continue to pursue all our options here," said Kurt Stanich, manager of the Waukesha County Airport. Milwaukee and Waukesha county officials have appealed to the state congressional delegation for help.

"I think this is still in process," said Milwaukee County Supervisor Patricia Jursik.

Stanich said a fallback position would likely be to lobby Congress to restore funding for the control towers Oct. 1, the start of the next federal fiscal year.

Barry Bateman, Milwaukee County's airport manager, said the FAA has made assurances that the tower closures could be done without compromising safety. Bateman said he didn't think the change would diminish air traffic at Timmerman.

Stanich, however, said he believes the tower closure will affect safety and could lead to fewer corporate plane landings at Waukesha County Airport.

"There's always an advantage to having someone on the ground to relay (information) between the ground and the pilots in the air," Stanich said.

"We heard from communities across the country about the importance of their towers and these were very tough decisions," Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood said in a statement announcing the cuts.

FAA Administrator Michael Huerta said, "We will work with the airports and the operators to ensure the procedures are in place to maintain the high level of safety at non-towered airports."

The cuts are sure to prompt more fireworks between House Republicans and the Obama administration.

"The FAA must re-evaluate its decision, and the White House must put an end to its political charade," said U.S. Rep James Sensenbrenner (R-Menomonee Falls). The Waukesha County Airport is in his district.

"After the sequester, the FAA funding is at the same level as it was in fiscal year 2008, and we didn't have any threats to close contract towers with the amount of money they got in fiscal 2008," Sensenbrenner said.

"I can't believe that the FAA can't manage these spending reductions when it seemed to perform just fine 4½ years ago."

Timmerman has 31,000 takeoffs and landings a year, while Waukesha County Airport has 57,000. Airports with fewer than 150,000 operations a year were targeted for tower closures. The six air traffic controllers at Timmerman and six at Waukesha County Airport face layoffs under the tower closing order.

The organization that represents small airports said it is unfairly feeling the brunt of the cuts.

"With 251 towers in the contract tower program, the closure of 149 towers represents a nearly 60% reduction for the program - a figure that is far in excess of the 5% cuts being implemented for other areas of the agency's budget," according to a statement from the U.S. Contract Tower Association, an affiliate of the American Association of Airport Executives. "The decision raises serious safety, efficiency, and economic concerns that the agency has failed to consider."

Meanwhile, the annual EAA AirVenture, which is scheduled to take place from July 29 to Aug. 4 at Wittman Regional Airport in Oshkosh, "will not be adversely affected" by the FAA decision, the EAA said in a statement.

The majority of airports in America never had a control tower, said Jeff Baum, CEO of Wisconsin Aviation in Watertown.

There are approximately 14,000 landing sites in the United States. Out of those, about 5,000 are paved runways that are open for public use. About 500 of those have operating control towers.

Airlines have yet to say whether they will continue offering service to airports that lose tower staff.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

***

Coming Sunday

As the sequester closes control towers around the country, billions of dollars in airport improvement projects are moving forward, untouched by the cuts.

TOWER CLOSINGS

The Federal Aviation Administration announced the closing of 149 air traffic control towers beginning April 7. Those airports affected in Wisconsin are: