Budget amendment would allow 7-day workweeks
SHARE

By of the

Seven-day workweeks would be allowed and provisions for a "living wage" would be struck from state statutes, nullifying a lawsuit filed by Wisconsin workers aimed at pressuring Gov. Scott Walker to raise the minimum wage, under last-minute additions to the state budget.

The proposals are part of the package of changes made by the Legislature's Joint Finance Committee late last week. Republicans were largely silent on the changes, and no one from the office of Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills) or Rep. John Nygren (R-Marinette), co-chairs of Joint Finance, was available for comment.

Liberal groups blasted the workweek change. The Wisconsin State AFL-CIO said it was an effort to take the weekend away from workers.

"If we are working all the time, who is going to take care of our families and our communities?" said Stephanie Bloomingdale, the union's secretary-treasurer, in a statement.

The seven-day workweek proposal would allow factory and retail employees to work seven days without a day off, as long as they said in writing that they were doing so voluntarily. Currently, Wisconsin law says such employees must have at least one day of rest every seven days.

Similar legislation was proposed in 2014 by then-Sen. Glenn Grothman of West Bend and Rep. Mark Born of Beaver Dam, both Republicans.

At the time, they said the bill would bring Wisconsin in line with federal law, give workers a way to make extra money and give employers a way to boost production.

The bill, which was supported byWisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce, the state's biggest business lobby, and the Metropolitan Milwaukee Association of Commerce, passed committee but didn't get a floor vote in the Senate.

The "living wage" proposal would strip that term from the statutes and get rid of the process now available in cases where the Department of Workforce Development determines whether an employee is being paid a living wage.

That process involves convening a wage council that represents employers, employees and the public to assist in investigations and determinations.

State law requires that Wisconsin's minimum wage "shall not be less than a living wage." A living wage is defined under the law as "reasonable comfort, reasonable physical well-being, decency and moral well-being."

"This is literally silencing the voices of hundreds of workers who have stepped out of the shadow of poverty and asked the governor to follow the law and address the continuing decline of wages in Wisconsin," said Jennifer Epps-Addison, executive director of Wisconsin Jobs Now, a liberal advocacy group.

Existing state law gives Walker's administration quite a bit of leeway not to raise the minimum wage, which is $7.25 an hour in Wisconsin. But as Walker launches a presidential bid, pressure to raise it could create negative publicity among potential Republican supporters.

Workers file suit

Last fall, Wisconsin Jobs Now and 100 workers used the "living wage" law to force the Department of Workforce Development to consider whether the workers were being paid enough. After the department determined the workers were being paid a living wage, they filed a lawsuit in Dane County Circuit Court.

If the living wage amendment is approved, the lawsuit would be moot because the wage board process the workers used to seek redress would no longer exist, Epps-Addison said.