Chief Executive magazine ranks Wisconsin 17th best for business
SHARE

By of the

A new economic ranking - this one being touted by Gov. Scott Walker - pegs Wisconsin as the country's 17th best state for business.

Chief Executive, a Greenwich, Conn.-based magazine that annually surveys the nation's CEOs on their perceptions of states' business climates, published the latest list, which Walker cited Tuesday in a news release.

The magazine ranked Wisconsin 20th last year, and 43rd in 2009. The increase since 2009 is the second-largest in the country.

The Chief Executive rankings aren't based on data such as tax rates, number of business start-ups, education of the work force or level of venture-capital investment. Rather, they reflect the perceptions of CEOs - a group likely to be friendly to a Republican governor.

The magazine ranks each state based on the survey responses of chief executives whose companies either are based in that state or have operations there. Nationwide, the publication got responses from 736 executives. How many of them rated Wisconsin's business climate wasn't known.

The magazine did, however, feature one prominent Wisconsin CEO - billionaire building materials distributor Diane Hendricks, whom Chief Executive described as having donated "a breathtaking half-million dollars" to Walker's successful recall defense last year.

While the CEOs surveyed by Chief Executive give Wisconsin relatively good marks for business, the state has fared worse in other rankings.

A recent report by the Kauffman Foundation, for example, rated the state low in terms of entrepreneurial activity. Similarly, a study sponsored by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce ranked Wisconsin 44th on economic performance, 41st for innovation and entrepreneurship and 39th for business climate. The state placed better on exports (16th), infrastructure (17th) and talent pipeline (14th), which takes into account educational attainment and performance.

The U.S. Chamber rankings depend in part on how much growth a state has shown over the last decade in areas such as jobs and income. Walker was elected in 2010, succeeding Democrat Jim Doyle, who was governor for the previous eight years.