Feds approve plans for Menominee casino in Kenosha
The Menominee tribe's plans for an off-reservation Indian casino in Kenosha were approved Friday by the U.S. Interior Department — an action that immediately sparked lobbying efforts aimed at Gov. Scott Walker, who has veto power over the project.

Craig Corn, Menominee tribal chairman, said he was told his tribe's application was approved Friday afternoon in an unexpected call from Kevin Washburn, Interior Department assistant secretary for Indian affairs.

The tribe has been trying to open a casino at the now-shuttered Dairyland Greyhound Park in Kenosha since the mid-1990s.

"I said, 'Thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you and thank you,'" Corn said. "The Creator was looking kindly at us today.

"The next step," Corn added, "is Gov. Walker."

Soon after Corn received word of the feds' approval, the Menominee launched a website — casinokenosha.com — that urges people to contact Walker and "Please ask Governor Walker to say YES."

The Forest County Potawatomi tribe has been fighting the Kenosha proposal for years, fearing it would cut into business at the Potawatomi Bingo Casino near Miller Park.

The Menominee website claims the Kenosha project would create about 3,300 permanent jobs and 1,400 construction jobs. The Potawatomi tribe contends that a like number of permanent jobs would be lost in Milwaukee.

The Potawatomi, which won about $363 million from gamblers in the past year, fears a Kenosha casino would tap into its share of the Chicagoland market. Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett on Friday urged Walker to reject the Menominee casino because of "the projected job losses and economic harm it will have on Milwaukee."

The city and Milwaukee County each received $5.5 million in fees this year from the Potawatomi, as part of agreements that provide the local governments with a cut of its annual gambling revenue.

Walker has not said whether he would approve the $800 million Menominee project or two other off-reservation proposals that are still pending before the Interior Department's Bureau of Indian Affairs.

In a statement Friday, his office reiterated the criteria Walker set for approving an off-reservation casino — criteria that would give the Potawatomi, along with any other Wisconsin tribe, effective veto power over the proposed casino. The criteria require that the new gambling venue must result in "no new net gaming" in the state; that it have community support; and that there be a "consensus" among Wisconsin's 11 tribes supporting the new casino.

Walker has said that "consensus" means each tribe must approve the deal — in effect giving each Indian government veto power. That hurdle, however, has not deterred the Menominee so far, which says it could win the support of opponents.

The Potawatomi lashed out at the Interior Department's approval Friday, saying that "behind closed doors" the agency had "changed the review standards" for off-reservation casino proposals.

"The BIA has just made an unprecedented decision in approving an off-reservation casino application for a tribe with NO historical connection to the casino location," Potawatomi Attorney General Jeff Crawford said in the statement.

The statement charged that the Kenosha plan is "detrimental to surrounding communities" and that the Menominee have "repeatedly associated themselves with corrupt and unsuitable developers."

Ken Walsh, the Potawatomi lobbyist who issued the statement, declined to elaborate.

The Menominee and the Potawatomi have both had to cut ties with non-Indian financial backers after various problems arose, including the disclosure of links between the supporters and people with unsavory backgrounds. The Potawatomi issue arose when its Milwaukee casino was first being developed about 20 years ago.

The Ho-Chunk tribe, which is attempting to open an off-reservation casino in Beloit, also is cool to the Menominee proposal and would likely oppose it, said Jon Greendeer, the tribe's president.

"I don't think they will have consensus among all of the tribes," Greendeer said. Walker's requirement that all the tribes agree is the "easiest way of saying no and spreading it out to all of the other tribes," Greendeer said.

Evan Zeppos, a spokesman for the Menominee, said the tribe will reach out to Walker, as well as to all of the other tribes and nearby communities. Two top tribal officials came to Milwaukee Friday evening to begin the effort.

Asked whether the Menominee would offer to share some of the revenue from a new casino with the Potawatomi, Zeppos said: "We welcome the opportunity to talk face to face with the Potawatomi and their leaders about how we could both benefit."

The tribes "could structure a win-win" proposal, Zeppos said.

The Interior Department's Washburn said in a statement that the Menominee "demonstrated that it had an unmet need for economic development to supplement tribal government services to their members and a historical connection to the Kenosha area."

The department determined that gaming on the site was "in the best interest of the tribe and its members," Interior spokeswoman Nedra Darling said, adding the department also decided that allowing a casino was "not detrimental to the surrounding community."

The Menominee's casino bid was rejected by President George W. Bush's administration in January 2009. The tribe sued, and the government agreed to reopen the application process.

The initial rejection was the result of a rule that made it virtually impossible to open an off-reservation casino unless it was near the tribe's reservation. President Barack Obama's administration overturned the rule.

Washburn's statement noted that the proposed casino site is 162 miles from the tribe's reservation near Keshena. The Potawatomi casino in Milwaukee is more than 200 miles from the tribe's reservation near Crandon.

The Interior Department allowed the Potawatomi tribe to open the nation's first off-reservation Indian casino in 1990.