Menominee Tribe will try again to build Kenosha casino
A California company is preparing to infuse cash and development expertise into the Menominee tribe's quest to open a casino in Kenosha, tribal officials confirmed.

The tribe and KMD Consulting Services are finalizing an agreement for the company to take over the developer role for the proposed off-reservation casino, according to Rory Dilweg, the tribe's attorney. KMD, which has worked on several casino and hotel projects in the United States, will take over the role that had been held by the Mohegan tribe's gaming authority.

Terms of the deal were not disclosed. The Mohegan's developer contract called for the Connecticut tribe to receive about 13% of the casino's net revenue if the facility opened. The Mohegan, who own and operate the Mohegan Sun Casino in Connecticut, remain slated to manage the Kenosha casino if the $800 million casino complex becomes a reality.

As the developer, KMD will assume many of the costs associated with planning the casino complex and winning needed approvals from various government bodies. KMD will also pay the option for the proposed site at the now-defunct Dairyland Greyhound Park as well as a host of other costs associated with developing a casino.

"The tribe doesn't have much money, so it's important to get someone who has the resources and the ability to assist the tribe involved," Dilweg said.

The Mohegan tribe spent more than $12 million on the casino project before it turned off its financial spigot on the project, which was rejected by the U.S. Department of the Interior in 2009 - a rejection the Menominee are attempting to reverse. The Menominee tribe has been trying, with the help of various partners, to open a Kenosha casino since the mid-1990s.

Kevin Dwyer, the majority owner of KMD, could not be reached for comment.

Materials the company gave to tribal officials say the firm can provide a variety of services including working as a tribal liaison to governments and that it has expertise in tribal administration, regulation and planning for gaming and nongaming projects. The firm has worked on numerous projects in Las Vegas, including the City Center as well as deals involving numerous casinos, including MGM Grand, Planet Hollywood and Bellagio.

The literature states that the company provides budgeting, purchasing and other predevelopment services.

Though the Kenosha casino project was killed by the Bush administration in 2009, it got a new lease on life last year from the Obama administration. Rules imposed by Bush's team made it virtually impossible for a tribe to open an off-reservation casino unless it was close to the tribe's main reservation. The Obama administration rejected those rules. The Kenosha site is about 200 miles from the Menominee reservation in Shawano County.

Since overturning the Bush rule, the federal government has approved three proposals for off reservation casinos - two in California and one in Michigan. Those proposals are awaiting action from the governors of the states. Governors have veto power over any federal approval to open a casino in their states.

Dilweg said the Menominee are updating the rejected application and hope to submit it in the next few weeks.