Fed index ranks Wisconsin 49th in economic outlook
SHARE Click image to enlarge.

By of the

In the latest economic indicator that casts Wisconsin in a negative light, the Badger State ranks 49th in the nation in the most recent index from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

"Wisconsin clearly is not leading the recovery," said William Delwiche, an economist in Milwaukee at Robert W. Baird & Co.

The Philadelphia Fed data is from its monthly state-by-state index of leading economic growth indicators, and is meant to predict how the state's economy will grow in the next six months.

The 50-state Leading Index report for April showed only five states with contraction, assigning Wisconsin an index rank of -0.74%. Wyoming, with a rank of -1.29%, is the only state with a lower index.

Economists cautioned against reading too much into a single month's data.

And the Philadelphia Fed's report is imperfect. Among the multiple variables used to compile the leading index, a significant component is the monthly state employment report, which is prone to heavy revisions. That's because the government bases its monthly findings on a survey of only about 3% of the state's employers. That creates a wide margin of error when they are extrapolated statewide.

The Philadelphia Fed tries to compensate by factoring other data into its index, including average hours worked in manufacturing; the state unemployment rate; wage and salary trends; housing permits; and state initial unemployment insurance claims.

Regardless, the Leading Index is also the most recent report that suggests that Wisconsin is struggling in comparison with other states.

The most accurate reading of the state's employment trends show Wisconsin ranks at No. 44 in private-sector job creation in the most recent 12-month period. In the same time frame, also using accurate data, Wisconsin ranks as the nation's fifth worst in terms of the erosion in private-sector wages, in which the state's 2.2% decline is twice the rate of the national 1.1% average.

Even in a slow recovery, Wisconsin has been on the caboose. Few if any economists appear to have pinpointed the exact reasons, which has opened the issue to political posturing over economic policy from both sides.

Most economists point to the state's preponderance of manufacturing industries, which face strong foreign competition and have been slow to reinvent themselves.

"The details that you need on a state level to pinpoint those factors is not available in any real time analysis," said Delwiche at Baird.