Wisconsin leaps to 20th in key economic growth index
Wisconsin leapt forward in May on an index designed to predict states' economic growth over the next six months, a new report said Tuesday.

Wisconsin placed 20th in the latest ranking by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia — up from 40th in April.

Originally, Wisconsin appeared to fare even worse in April. The Philadelphia Fed had ranked the state at No. 49. Revisions also released Tuesday improved Wisconsin's position by nine places, and the state now ranks 40th in the April index.

The Philadelphia Fed bases its predictions of state-by-state economic growth on such variables as building permits, initial unemployment insurance claims and data from a survey of manufacturers. But economists have cautioned against reading too much into a single month's data.

A review of how Wisconsin has fared in the index since early 2012 shows Wisconsin's May showing was its strongest since February 2012. For that month, the state ranked 18th.

From March 2012 through this past April, however, Wisconsin has been stuck in the bottom half of the states, and usually has ranked 37th or lower.

"We're headed in the right direction, and we're moving Wisconsin forward," Gov. Scott Walker said in a statement.

The governor's office said other indicators of the economy are looking strong, with Wisconsin's initial unemployment insurance claims at pre-recession levels and building permits up 22.6% in a year's time.

But on several measures, Wisconsin's economy continues to lag the nation.

Despite its big move up to rank 20th, the economic outlook for Wisconsin, based on the Philadelphia Fed's index, is for slower growth than the nation as a whole.

Tuesday's report came less than a week after the latest and most comprehensive data on job growth found Wisconsin accelerated its pace of job creation in 2012 but trailed the national rate.

That report found Wisconsin created 62,082 jobs in 2011 and 2012, the first two years of Walker's term. That amounts to roughly one-fourth of the 250,000-jobs campaign pledge Walker repeated often during his 2010 election campaign against Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett, a Democrat.

The Philadelphia Fed said that, based on the May data, its six-month outlook indexes "suggest economic expansion in 41 states into the fourth quarter."

The May index found Wisconsin's economic outlook is in the middle of the pack, virtually tied with No. 21 Michigan, in a comparison with nearby Midwest states. The index ranked Indiana and Illinois in the top 10 nationally, but Wisconsin fared better than Minnesota, ranked 31st.

Tied to manufacturing

Wisconsin's economic performance is tied in part to its manufacturing sector, with a recent report on the state's economic future highlighting the importance of factories, and advanced manufacturing, to the state's economy.

The recovery in the manufacturing sector has been stronger in Wisconsin than the nation as a whole: From 2010 to 2012, Wisconsin manufacturers added more jobs than those nationwide, with 5.7% growth vs. a national average of 3.6%.

In a notice on its website, the Philadelphia Federal Reserve said that it had corrected errors in its data that resulted from a programming error. But it was unclear whether those errors resulted in the change in Wisconsin's April ranking.

A representative of the Philadelphia Fed wasn't available for comment.