State adds construction jobs, but manufacturing lags
Wisconsin added 23,968 private-sector jobs — none of them in the crucial manufacturing sector — in the 12 months that ended in June, the state reported Thursday, while a separate report showed the state's unemployment rate improved to its best level since 2008.

"I'm really surprised by the lack of job growth in manufacturing," said Abdur Chowdhury, economics professor at Marquette University. "That is a key factor for Wisconsin's recovery. The manufacturing sector generally provides good pay, especially for the three-quarters of state workers without four-year college degrees."

Thursday's job-creation figures, reported by the state Department of Workforce Development, were taken from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. They are based on a census of 96% of the state's employers in both the public and private sectors, making them the most comprehensive data available. The census tracks the economy in rolling 12-month increments, measured every three months.

The state agency, however, released quarterly census data only for Wisconsin on Thursday, meaning the state's job growth cannot be compared with that of other states over the same period, nor to the rest of the nation as a whole. The full national report using quarterly census data is not due out until Dec. 18.

The latest private-sector job gains are on a par for Wisconsin: They nearly match those in the previous report, which showed the state added 24,305 private-sector jobs in the 12 months through March 2013. Compared against other states, Wisconsin has lagged the national rate of job creation for over two years, previous reports show.

Thursday's figures do reveal trends within the Wisconsin economy. Economists said the slowdown in manufacturing hiring was significant because the state's manufacturing sector is the biggest single employer. Wisconsin has vied with Indiana for years in leading the nation as the state with the largest share of its workforce employed in manufacturing. In the first half of 2013, Wisconsin's share of manufacturing employment (16.4%) narrowly trailed Indiana's (16.7%).

According to the agency's report Thursday, manufacturing lost 119 jobs in the 12-month period. Statistically, that comes out to a 0% change in employment in the sector.

"The slowing growth clearly is troubling," said Dale Knapp, head of research at the Wisconsin Taxpayers Alliance, a Madison research group.

Knapp said the stall-out in manufacturing hiring is not an entirely new phenomenon. It represents the continuation of a slowdown in employment in the sector that began over a year ago. Earlier in the recovery, in 2010 and 2011, Wisconsin outpaced the nation in hiring in manufacturing.

But the pace began to slow markedly late in 2012, according to the Taxpayer Alliance, which this week released a major long-term examination of job creation in Wisconsin. That report, which studied the state's economy over a 13-year period from 2000-'12, showed that Wisconsin's sluggish pace of job creation is hardly a new phenomenon; rather, it has characterized the state since the start of the millennium.

In Thursday's quarterly census figures, Wisconsin's biggest percentage gains were in construction. That reflects a rebound in the housing market, which suffered some of the most painful contractions in the recession. "The net job gain from June 2012 to June 2013 includes an increase of almost 5,300 construction jobs, a 5.3% jump," the agency said.

The government sector shed jobs in the period: Agencies at the federal, state and local level lost a combined 8,173 positions, which amounts to a 2.1% decline.

In a separate report, the agency said the state's unemployment rate notched downward to 6.5% in October from 6.6% in September. The rate is at its lowest level since December 2008.

The unemployment rate is part of a monthly report that also contains estimates of job creation in the state, which are subject to major revision. According to that report, the state added 12,400 private-sector jobs from September to October.

The statistical signals can confuse anyone who isn't familiar with the multiple variations of job statistics in Wisconsin. No one disputes that the quarterly census figures are the most reliable — economists call them the gold standard for employment data — but they take so long to compile that they are often overlooked by the time they are released.

Economists as well as the agency itself downplay the importance of the monthly job-creation estimates because they come with an unusually wide margin of error that can fluctuate by as much as 9,000 in either direction in any given month.

What's notable about the October figure, however, is that it exceeds the margin of error, making it likely that the state did show meaningful job growth in the latest month. The extent of those jobs gains won't be evident until the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics does its final revision of the figures — it uses quarterly census data to make those revisions — but those aren't due until next year.