Oscar Mayer will close plant and move 1,000 jobs out of Madison
Kraft Heinz Co. said Wednesday it will close its Oscar Mayer plant in Madison, eliminating more than 1,000 jobs. Credit: Mark Was / for the Journal Sentinel

By of the

Kraft Heinz Co. said Wednesday it will eliminate more than 1,000 jobs in Madison when it closes its Oscar Mayer plant there and moves its corporate U.S. meat business to Chicago.

The decision will end a nearly 100-year presence in Wisconsin for Oscar Mayer, a company whose Wienermobile and bologna and hot dog advertising jingles became ingrained in American popular culture.

About 700 Oscar Mayer production jobs and 300 corporate positions in Madison will be eliminated. Of the corporate positions, about 250 "will have the opportunity to move with the (U.S. meat) business to Chicago," the company said.

The announcement comes in the wake of other large layoffs announced in recent weeks in Wisconsin as the state grapples with a global downturn in manufacturing and a wave of consolidation in the nation's food production sector, both of which are huge pieces of the Badger State's economy.

"If you grew up in Dane County, you grew up with Oscar Mayer," said Dane County Executive Joe Parisi. "Both my grandmother and grandfather worked there. This one cuts deep."

Madison Mayor Paul Soglin said he was informed of the decision in person by Kraft Heinz officials on Tuesday evening.

Soglin said the decision will have a ripple effect across the region.

"The impact on Madison and the metro area has got to be in hundreds of millions of dollars," Soglin said during a news conference Wednesday.

"When you take the payroll, the production, the packaging materials, and then extend it to the dry cleaners, the retailers, the neighborhood grocers, the local dining spots, it is very significant," Soglin said. "How you make a good situation out of this is difficult. You can't."

However, Soglin and other officials said, the closing and layoffs are coming when Madison's economy is fairly healthy. The unemployment rate in Dane County is 2.7%, the lowest among the state's metro areas.

"The positive news is that we are not in the depths of a recession right now," Parisi said.

"We have manufacturers in Madison and Dane County looking for skilled workers," Soglin said.

At least one manufacturing company in nearby Jefferson County said it will seek to match some of its job openings with laid-off workers.

"As they start downsizing, we certainly will enter that arena," said Scott Seljan, president of Seljan Co. Inc., a diversified manufacturing company in Lake Mills, about 25 minutes east of Madison. "We'll definitely be there."

With employment that once topped 4,000 people, Oscar Mayer has been downsizing in Madison for a number of years.

"This was not a surprise," said Pat Schramm, chief executive of the Workforce Development Board of South Central Wisconsin. The move was foreshadowed in August when Kraft Heinz said it was cutting about 165 white-collar jobs at the Oscar Mayer plant in Madison.

Kraft Heinz was created this year through the combination of Pittsburgh-based Heinz and suburban Chicago-based Kraft, which was engineered by Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway and Brazilian investment firm 3G Capital, which has become known for its tight cost controls.

Kraft Heinz is planning a new Oscar Mayer manufacturing facility near Davenport, Iowa, where production from the Madison plant is expected to be moved. Officials with the Iowa Economic Development Authority and City of Davenport will be considering incentive packages within the next two days that include millions of dollars' worth of property and sales tax exemptions as well as tax incremental financing.

The incentive package is worth more than $10 million.

Iowa isn't the only place that has offered incentives to Kraft Heinz. In Missouri, Kraft Heinz recently sought and received an offer of tax breaks on upgrades to a hot dog plant where it plans not to add jobs but to cut them.

Kraft Heinz is the third-largest food and beverage company in North America and the fifth-largest food and beverage company in the world. Its brands include Capri Sun, Classico, Jell-O, Kool-Aid, Lunchables, Maxwell House, Ore-Ida, Oscar Mayer, Philadelphia, Planters, Plasmon, Quero, Weight Watchers Smart Ones and Velveeta.

Schramm said her organization will immediately begin preparations to match available Oscar Mayer workers with jobs that are open in the region. Advanced manufacturers and biotechnology companies are continually seeking employees, she added.

The challenge will be to match skills with the needs of employers, Schramm said. The Oscar Mayer jobs being eliminated are considered family-supporting jobs that paid good wages, she added.

Democrats quickly moved to blame the plant closing on Republican policies. At least three Democratic legislators issued statements within an hour of confirmation that Kraft Heinz would shutter the 96-year-old operation.

"The corporate tax breaks pushed by Republicans are not working, and WEDC (the Wisconsin Economic Development Corp.) is failing to keep jobs in our state," Rep. Lisa Subeck (D-Madison) said. "Today, we feel the results of Republican failures as we suffer major job losses in manufacturing in Wisconsin."

Asked about the Democrats' assertions, Laurel Patrick, the press secretary for Republican Gov. Scott Walker, said in an email, "Wisconsin's economy is growing and moving in the right direction. Our unemployment rate is 4.3%, the lowest it's been since April 2001, and our labor force participation rate is 5 points higher than the national level."

Kraft Heinz said the decision to close the Madison facilities was part of a restructuring plan announced Wednesday that calls for closing seven plants in North America and eliminating 2,600 jobs.

"Our decision to consolidate manufacturing across the Kraft Heinz North American network is a critical step in our plan to eliminate excess capacity and reduce operational redundancies for the new combined company," according to a statement.

Besides Madison, the other plants that are being closed are in Fullerton and San Leandro, Calif.; Federalsburg, Md.; St. Marys, Ontario; Campbell, N.Y.; and Lehigh Valley, Pa.

The facilities will be closed in stages during the next 12 to 24 months, and production in those locations will shift to other factories in North America.

The cuts were seen by food industry insiders as a foregone conclusion.

"It was just a question of where," said Rick Shea, co-owner of Shea Marketing Inc., a supermarket and retail marketing consulting company in Minneapolis.

Look for consolidation to continue in the food business, said Jim Hertel, managing partner of retail consultancy Willard Bishop in suburban Chicago.

"There's going to be radical cost-cutting across the industry," Hertel said. "I think we have four or five more years of this."