Wisconsin posts job gains, still lags behind national average
By of the

In what has become a wearisomely familiar story, Wisconsin lagged the nation in the pace of job creation in 2013, new government figures show, with the state adding private-sector jobs at a 1.2% rate last year compared with a rate of 2.1% for the nation as a whole.

The sluggish job-creation pace is hardly a new phenomenon, according to a Journal Sentinel analysis of Thursday's data. The Badger State has consistently trailed the U.S. average by wide margins for most of the last 10 years — a period that encompasses the tenures of both Republican Gov. Scott Walker, who took office in January 2011, and his Democratic predecessor, Jim Doyle, who held the office from 2003 through 2010.

According to the latest and most comprehensive figures from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Wisconsin gained 28,141 private-sector jobs in all of 2013 — a 1.2% growth rate that ranks it 37th among the 50 states.

Measured from the end of December 2010 through December 2013 — the period coinciding with the first three years of Walker's term — Wisconsin ranked 35th of the 50 states in private-sector job growth.

During those three years, Wisconsin fell behind all its Midwestern peer states, which share similar economies of factory cities and farm towns. Most of those states, however, had suffered greater percentage job losses during the recession, and thus rebounded from deeper troughs.

Michigan, which is bouncing back from a searing downturn in the auto industry, ranked sixth out of the 50 states during the three-year period with an 8.7% gain in jobs. Indiana was next at 15th, with 6.9% growth, followed by Minnesota (20th, with 6.3% growth), Ohio (25th, with 5.6%), Iowa (28th, with 5.2%), and Illinois (33rd, with 4.2%).

With its rank of 35th, Wisconsin posted a 4.0% gain in jobs during the three years.

Economists said the long-term trends suggest that Wisconsin's slow pace is a chronic condition based more on its industrial composition than whatever party controls the Statehouse and governor's mansion.

Tax and infrastructure policies can contribute to a long-term economic environment, but it is "notoriously difficult" to reinvent a state's industries, said University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee labor economist John Heywood. "There is a role for government," Heywood said, "but it is an incremental one."

The nonpartisan Wisconsin Taxpayers Alliance also has done research showing that Wisconsin's weakness has nonpolitical roots.

Even so, Thursday's employment numbers were released in the middle of an election year and immediately became a political football.

Democratic gubernatorial candidate Mary Burke lashed out at Wisconsin's last-place status among its Midwestern peers. "Dead last in the Midwest," Burke charged in a statement from her campaign. "Simply unacceptable."

Touting her own private-sector experience as an executive at her family's business, Trek Bicycle Corp., Burke said she has a plan to harness Wisconsin's economic energy: "Wisconsin has everything we need to be a thriving, top ten economy, but under Walker we're falling behind."

For his part, Walker argued that Wisconsin has fared better in his three years than it did from 2005 to 2007, when Burke worked for Doyle as state secretary of commerce.

"The number of jobs created in the last three years under my administration is almost twice as many as when Mary Burke worked for Jim Doyle," Walker said at an appearance in Milwaukee, where he spoke at the city's annual Water Summit. Separately, his administration issued a statement saying that private-sector job gains in 2011-'13 "were the best three-year consecutive gains under any single governor since 2000."

Wisconsin added 91,813 private-sector jobs in the first three years of Walker's first term. That means the state is 37% of the way toward meeting Walker's campaign pledge to add 250,000 new private-sector jobs in his four-year term.

The promise was central to Walker's election, but Wisconsin's chances of achieving Walker's goal now appear mathematically out of reach.

"We're going to continue to stay focused on job creation and growth going forward," Walker said.

Most credible data

Economists consider Thursday's job-creation figures, known as the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, to be the most credible and comprehensive available. The report breaks out data for the nation as a whole as well as each of the 50 states. It tracks the economy in rolling 12-month increments, measured every three months.

The quarterly data are based on a census of 96% of the nation's employers in the public and private sectors. That makes the figures far more reliable than monthly jobs data, which are based on a sample of only about 3% of employers, leaving monthly estimates prone to large margins of error.

Because the quarterly data are comprehensive and time-consuming to compile, they are released with a half-year time lag. In the past, the lagging schedule meant the quarterly data got less attention than monthly numbers.

However, employment has emerged as a politically potent issue in Wisconsin, particularly ahead of the election. And ever since the special gubernatorial recall election in June 2012, when economic management emerged as a central issue, the quarterly report has been closely watched by the state's politicians and economic policy strategists.

Beyond political rhetoric, however, the state's politicians on Thursday said little about the causes of the state's chronic weakness.

Aging industries

Business leaders and economists, on the other hand, note that the state is slow to change because Wisconsin is saddled with aging industries such as paper mills, printing plants and metal foundries that often date back more than a century. What's more, neither entrepreneurship nor venture capital funding is as abundant in Wisconsin as in many other states. Also, Wisconsin's schools don't generate as many college-educated residents as other states.

An analysis of Thursday's data show that several of Wisconsin's core industries have hemorrhaged jobs over the last 10 years.

Manufacturing, the largest single employment sector in the state, lost 12.3% of its jobs from 2003 to 2013. Construction fell even harder, losing 21%.

The information category, which includes a range of industries such as data processing, online and traditional publishing and broadcasting, shed 7.4% of its jobs in Wisconsin in the 10-year period. Financial services lost 3%. The leisure and hospitality sector, which includes low-pay hotel and restaurant work, gained almost 8%.

"What government can do is foster an environment that will create additional jobs on top of what's already there," said Russell Kashian, a professor at the University of Wisconsin-Whitewater with a background in economic development. "But I don't think that the vast majority of jobs are created through government action."

Rick Romell, Craig Gilbert, Kevin Crowe and Bill Glauber of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.