Supreme Court upholds heart of federal health care reform law
Do you agree with the Supreme Court's decision upholding the health care reform law?

The Supreme Court on Thursday upheld key provisions of President Barack Obama's health care overhaul , most notably the requirement that people have health insurance after 2014.

The Obama administration's bid to ensure that nearly every American has access to affordable health insurance has cleared a significant hurdle with the Supreme Court's decision Thursday upholding virtually all key provisions of the controversial law.

But many more hurdles remain, starting with the presidential election in November - GOP candidate Mitt Romney is vowing to repeal the law if elected. And even if President Barack Obama wins a second term, implementing the massive and complex law will be a challenge, particularly its most fundamental element: the expansion of health care coverage to tens of millions of people scheduled to begin in 18 months.

For now, the Supreme Court's decision could benefit people with low- to middle-class incomes who do not get health benefits through an employer, as well as people with pre-existing health conditions.

By upholding the provision that requires everyone to either obtain health insurance or pay a penalty, the court retained an important component for expanding coverage and helping to pay for it.

That so-called mandate was considered most vulnerable to the legal challenges brought by more than two dozen states, including Wisconsin. It also became a focal point for opponents of the law - a tangible and understandable example of the law's scope and reach.

While polls have shown generally weak support for the law, they also indicate broad backing for many of its key elements. They include:

Discounts on branded drugs for people who hit a gap in coverage for the Medicare prescription drug benefit.

Allowing children to remain on a parent's health plan until age 26.

Putting more emphasis on primary care.

Providing yearly wellness exams with no co-pays or deductibles for people covered by Medicare.

Eliminating lifetime caps on health insurance benefits.

Requiring health insurers to clearly explain a health plan's benefits.

The court's four liberal justices - Stephen Breyer, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor - joined Chief Justice John Roberts in upholding the law, known as the Affordable Care Act.

"The Affordable Care Act's requirement that certain individuals pay a financial penalty for not obtaining health insurance may reasonably be characterized as a tax," Roberts wrote in the majority opinion. "Because the Constitution permits such a tax, it is not our role to forbid it, or to pass upon its wisdom or fairness."

At the same time, the court rejected the argument that the administration had pressed most vigorously in support of the law, that its individual mandate was justified by Congress' power to regulate interstate commerce. The vote was again 5-4, but in this instance Roberts and the court's four more conservative members were in agreement.

In a joint statement, dissenting justices Samuel Alito, Anthony Kennedy, Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas said the law "exceeds federal power both in mandating the purchase of health insurance and in denying non-consenting states all Medicaid funding."

President Barack Obama called the decision a "victory for people all over the country" that upholds the principle that in the wealthiest nation on earth, no one should fall into financial ruin because of an illness.

However, Republicans quickly indicated they will try to use the decision to rally their supporters against what they call "Obamacare." Among their criticisms are that the law will boost the size of government, increase employers' costs and add greatly to the nation's budget problems.

"If there is no political remedy from Washington and the law moves forward, it would require the majority of people in Wisconsin to pay more money for less health care," Gov. Scott Walker said in a statement. "Additionally, it would increase the size and cost of government, decrease the quality of health care and, in our state, reduce access for those truly in need of assistance."

Shortly after Walker took office last year, Wisconsin joined other states that had filed lawsuits challenging the law. Former Gov. Jim Doyle had previously blocked Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen from joining the legal challenges.

The Supreme Court's decision removes some of the uncertainty surrounding the law - the most sweeping attempt to remake the U.S. health care system in nearly half a century.

"A little bit of certainty is a welcomed relief in terms of planning," said Terry Bolz, president and chief executive of Unity Health, a health insurer affiliated with University of Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics.

Bolz, among the law's supporters, believes that the law will make the health care system more efficient and improve quality.

"This is going to transform health care in America in a positive way," he said.

The law is projected to increase the number of people with health insurance nationally by roughly 30 million by 2019. The Congressional Budget Office had estimated that without the hotly debated mandate, 16 million fewer people would gain coverage.

In Wisconsin, an additional 340,000 people were projected to be insured by 2016 because of the law, based on a study done for the state. If the law had stood without the mandate, that number would have dropped to 62,000.

The court's ruling "provides some clarity for us moving forward," said Julie Swiderski, vice president of government relations for Wheaton Franciscan Healthcare. The health system supports the provisions in the law that would increase access to health insurance.

"We continue to believe that's the right direction for health care to be moving," she said.

Other health systems in southeastern Wisconsin also generally have been supportive of the law.

William Petasnick, in his final week as chief executive of Froedtert Health, said the Supreme Court's decision helps accelerate changes that were already taking place in health care.

"I don't view this as a win for Republicans or Democrats," he said. "I view this as an opportunity to build on something and make it better."

Petasnick has been a strong supporter of the law, contending the current system is unsustainable, while acknowledging that the law isn't perfect.

"There are many elements that need to be refined," he said. "But it's an important first chapter."

In a statement, Nick Turkal, a physician and chief executive of Aurora Health Care, the state's largest health system, noted that the rule "is not the final chapter in the debate over how to reform health care.

"The majority of policy-makers and citizens agree that continued reform is needed in the areas of access, insurance coverage, what we spend on care and how we as providers are paid to deliver it," Turkal said.

Provisions take time

The court's decision is unlikely to lessen the strong divisions over the most controversial law in recent history. Nor does it change the challenge of slowing the rise in health care spending

The law contains an array of initiatives to make the health care system more efficient, from putting more emphasis on primary care to experimenting with new ways to pay hospitals and doctors. But all will take time.

Opponents question the projected cost, contending that Congress over time will not follow through on the provisions to pay for the law, resulting in larger deficits.

Under the law, the costs of health reform would be paid for primarily through smaller increases in Medicare spending in the future and through an array of taxes.

There also is the challenge of implementing the law.

"There are pieces that just plain aren't going to work," J.P. Wieske, a spokesman for the state's Office of the Commissioner of Insurance, said last week.

These include practical challenges that go into developing online marketplaces, or exchanges, where individuals and small businesses could buy health insurance.

"There's a lot that has to be done, and there's still more we are discovering that has to be done." Phil Dougherty of the Wisconsin Association of Health Plans, said this month.

Those exchanges need to be up and running in less than a year and a half.

Walker halted work on the exchanges late last year and later returned a $38 million federal grant to help cover the cost of setting them up. He has said Wisconsin will not move forward on implementing the law until after the November elections.

States must show by early next year that they are making progress on the exchanges, or the federal government will set up the exchanges for them.

The Walker administration's position frustrated advocates.

"The law has been passed. The court has ruled. Wisconsin should get going on implementing this," said David Riemer, a senior fellow at Community Advocates Public Policy Institute.

Medicaid affected

In its rulings, the Supreme Court found problems with the law's expansion of Medicaid, but even there said the expansion could proceed as long as the federal government does not threaten to withhold states' entire Medicaid allotment if they don't take part in the law's expansion of coverage.

People with household incomes below 133% of the federal poverty level - about $15,000 for an individual - would be eligible for Medicaid under the law, with the federal government initially paying the full cost, and 90% of the cost after 2016.

Of the 30 million people nationally who are projected to gain coverage under the law's provisions by 2019, about half would be covered by Medicaid. The rest would buy insurance on their own, and most would be eligible for subsidies tied to their income.

The loud responses to Thursday's decision made clear it will do little in the short term to reduce the partisan divide over the law.

It also is not the end of legal challenges, such as those filed by religious institutions over rules involving birth control coverage and other issues.

The New York Times, The Associated Press and Joe Taschler of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.