U.S. hiring plans strengthen, China's weaken in Manpower survey
SHARE

By of the

U.S. employers are predicting they will end 2015 with their strongest hiring in eight years, according to the latest quarterly survey of employer confidence by ManpowerGroup Inc.

At the same time, Chinese companies' hiring plans, while still positive, dipped to their weakest level in more than six years, according to global staffing company's research and analysis of its poll of hiring expectations.

"The report for China is consistent with the fears that surfaced in stock markets around the world in the last few weeks about a significant economic slowdown there," said Clare Zempel, principal at Zempel Strategic in Fox Point and former chief economist at Robert W. Baird & Co. (Zempel was not involved in the Manpower survey.)

Manpower queried 59,000 employers in 42 countries and territories between July 7 and 17, several weeks before the markets began reacting in mid-August to perceived problems in the Chinese economy.

Of the more than 11,000 U.S. employers surveyed, 21% expect to hire new staff in the fourth quarter, while 6% expect workforce reductions, resulting in what the survey calls a "net employment outlook" of 18%, after adjusting for recurring seasonal factors.

"The U.S. labor market continues to show broad-based, stable growth," said Jonas Prising, Manpower's chief executive officer.

Significant milestones bolstering that idea included a 5.3% unemployment rate — it dropped even further to 5.1% in August — that puts hiring prospects at a seven-year high, and weekly jobless claims at a 40-year low, Prising noted. However, good news for job seekers is translating into a tighter labor market.

"Employers are increasingly telling us they are having difficulty finding skilled candidates — a situation not helped by the low labor participation rate," Prising said.

In Wisconsin, employers said they expect to hire at a healthy pace in the last three months of the year, although not as vigorously as they predicted for last quarter, or for a year ago. Among state employers surveyed, 22% predicted they will increase staff levels, while 7% said they expected to decrease staff levels, resulting in a net employment outlook of 15%.

Wisconsin employers' net employment outlook was 25% for the third quarter, and 19% for the fourth quarter of 2014, according to the survey.

Wisconsin ranked 25th among all states and the Milwaukee area ranked 25th among the country's 100 biggest metro areas in terms of their net employment outlooks, the survey said.

While hiring plans are strong across the U.S., estimates in other parts of the world remain patchy, the survey showed. That's no surprise, said one Milwaukee money manager, given the renewed downturn in energy and other commodities, driven partly by continued strong production from domestic hydraulic fracturing, or "fracking," activities that are used to extract oil and natural gas.

"It's difficult to untangle what's happening on the demand side in China vs. what's happening on the supply side in places like Texas and North Dakota," said Alan Purintun, a principal at Oarsman Capital Inc. in Milwaukee.

Employers in India, Taiwan and Japan all report more optimistic plans for adding to payrolls than U.S. employers. But Brazil, which has been an economic force in the last decade, had the weakest fourth quarter forecast across the globe.

Job prospects are mostly positive in Europe, but employer projections have turned negative in Greece, and remain negative in Italy for the 19th consecutive quarter, the survey said.

Recent stock market gyrations reflect the mixed messages, but Purintun said market swings may be overstating the magnitude of the problems.

It has been widely known that China, for example, is likely to have its worst year since 1994, he said. But while manufacturing and construction there have weakened, bulls say the Chinese government appears to be making progress toward its goal of building a consumer- and services-driven economy. So while the Chinese economy hasn't changed in the last several weeks, the market's perception of it has, Purintun said.

"The whole deal here is how weak is the global economy," he said. "And we don't think it's that much weaker today than it was six to eight weeks ago."