Wisconsin's sand mining industry poised for growth
Wisconsin's burgeoning sand mining industry is poised for more growth, with environmental organizations saying Thursday the controversial practice could expand to two dozen additional counties.

Mines and other sand facilities are located in about 20 counties in western Wisconsin.

Sand mines could also pop up in other states outside the hotbeds of Wisconsin, Minnesota and Iowa, as oil industry demand for sand continues to grow, the groups said.

Wisconsin is the leading supplier of industrial sand in the United States, according to the U.S. Geological Survey.

The specter of more mines raised alarm bells with the groups, which worry about unforeseen problems with sand mining. They want more air and water regulations to protect people living near mines and processing plants.

The organizations — the Civil Society Institute's Boston Action Research, the Environmental Working Group and Madison-based Midwest Environmental Advocates — raised the concerns in a new study of the sand mining industry.

In the study, the Environmental Working Group used census data to show that nearly 59,000 people in Wisconsin, Minnesota and Iowa live within a half-mile of a sand facility.

The study said counties outside western Wisconsin could feed demand for sand, citing data from the Wisconsin Geological and Natural History Survey showing deposits also are found in south-central, central and northeastern Wisconsin.

The groups are concerned about the effect of mines on aquifers and worry that acrylamide, an ingredient in a chemical used to process sand, will taint surface and groundwater.

Silica dust is another concern.

In a teleconference with reporters, Crispin Pierce, an associate professor of environmental health at the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire, who has conducted air monitoring at sand mines, recommended mandatory air monitoring at sand mines, paid for by the companies.

In some of his air monitoring work, Pierce has found elevated levels of microscopic particles that can cause lung damage.

A spokesman for the Wisconsin Industrial Sand Association was unavailable for comment.

But whether sand mining will move elsewhere in the state is doubtful. Deposits outside existing areas aren't as robust and may be harder to tap, according to a hydrogeologist for the natural history survey.

"If you look at the depth of sand stone deposits and the accessibility, it just isn't there," Michael Parsen, a hydrogeologist, said in an interview.

The Wall Street Journal reported in August that sand prices have been rising as demand for oil from hydraulic fracturing has grown. Drillers are not only moving to new locations, but using more sand at each well. In fracking, drillers use water, chemical and sand to push oil and natural gas to the surface.

Deb Dix, the Department of Natural Resources' point person on industrial sand mining, agreed that demand is growing. Her latest tally: 140 mines, processing plants and rail sites can be found across the state. In 2010, there were five sand mines and five processing plants, according to the DNR.

Dix said there has been no discovery of acrylamide, a carcinogen, in surface or groundwater at sand mine sites.

As for air monitoring, she noted that Winona, Minn.'s, monitoring has not found a negative effect on air quality, although it's still early. The DNR in 2012 decided it would not issue separate regulations for crystalline silica and said existing regulations to control fugitive dust would be sufficient.