Pussy Riot voices support for Wisconsin's Capitol singalong protesters
A petition effort to get charges dropped against Madison's singing protesters has lined up support from protesters with an international pedigree: Pussy Riot.

The Voice Project released a new video Tuesday as part of a campaign to urge Wisconsin Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen to drop the prosecution of the protest singers arrested in the state Capitol during "Solidarity Sing Alongs" last summer; the group puts the number of those charged at more than 400.

#SolidarityWisconsin from The Voice Project on Vimeo.

The six-minute-plus video includes clips of several of the arrests and features comments from a number of those who were arrested. Near the end of the video, Nadya Tolonnikova and Masha Alyokhina of the Russian art-punk group Pussy Riot add their comments, starting with: "Solidarity with Wisconsin!

"Use music to change the world in the direction you want it to change," the pair say. "Because music touches people and makes them act."

As much performance art troupe as a music group, Pussy Riot made headlines in 2012 when its members were arrested after they shot a video for their song "Punk Prayer — Mother of God, Chase Putin Away!" in a Moscow church.

Tolokonnikova, Alyokhina and fellow group member Yekaterina Samutsevich were convicted of "hooliganism motivated by religious hatred" and sentenced to two years in prison (Samutsevich was freed with probation after an appeal).

Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina became a cause celebre in music and free-speech circles, and were released 21 months later. They've continued their activism since then — most memorably performing in Sochi during the Winter Olympics, where they were whipped and hit with pepper spray by security.

In an emailed statement, Dana Brueck, communications officer for Van Hollen's office, challenged the video's attempt to connect the case of Madison's singing protesters and Pussy Riot. In the video, Erik Lohr of The Voice Project, describing Pussy Riot's ordeal, says: "That was in Russia. You think that can't happen here? It's happening. It's happening right here."

"Unlike Russia, no one has been arrested for the content of his or her speech," Brueck said.

"Unlike Russia, any person could have gathered peaceably and espoused whatever message he or she wished without fear of a citation if he or she obtained a permit, or under the current rules, a reservation.

"Unlike Russia, anyone cited enjoys the protections of the federal and state constitutions and the presumption of innocence.

"The notion that Wisconsin is like Russia, that it prevents protests and punishes dissenters based on their speech is without factual basis and cavalierly discounts the true repression of people who live in un-free societies."