Wisconsin's private-sector job growth ranks 33rd in U.S., quarterly report shows
SHARE Click to enlarge Click to enlarge

By of the

In the final quarterly jobs report before November's election, Wisconsin continued to lag the nation and most of the Midwest in its rate of job creation, although it leapfrogged two neighboring states — providing new ammunition for both sides in the heated gubernatorial race.

Wisconsin gained 28,712 private-sector jobs in the 12-month period from March 2013 to March 2014, a 1.26% growth rate that ranks the state 33rd among the 50 states for the period, Thursday's report showed.

The state's job-creation pace was virtually unchanged from the previous quarter, when Wisconsin added jobs at a rate of 1.27%. Its rate during the latest period surpassed neighboring Illinois and Minnesota, however, because job creation in those two states slowed.

The same data, however, also show that Wisconsin continues to trail the rest of its Midwest peers: Michigan, Iowa, Ohio and Indiana.

The campaigns of Republican Gov. Scott Walker and his Democratic challenger, Mary Burke, a former executive at her family's Wisconsin-based Trek Bicycle Corp., quickly seized on the new job-creation numbers as well as related reports.

"Our ongoing efforts to grow Wisconsin's economy and develop the workforce helped the private sector create jobs at a faster rate than two of our Midwest neighbors," said Reggie Newson, Walker's secretary of the state Department of Workforce Development.

Alleigh Marre, a spokeswoman for Walker's campaign, pointed to a separate economic report released earlier Thursday that showed the state's "lowest unemployment rate in six years." The state's preliminary jobless rate dipped from 5.8% in July to 5.6% in August, its lowest since October 2008, shadowing a parallel decline in the U.S. unemployment rate, which ticked down to 6.1% in August.

Burke, however, noted that Wisconsin was "dead last" in the Midwest in job creation during the first three years of Walker's term, which is the refrain of one of her most prominent television ads. According to revised data released Thursday, Wisconsin added 93,395 private-sector jobs from 2011 through 2013, a 4.1% increase that ranked the state 34th in the nation and last among its peer group of Midwestern states.

"Based on the gold standard numbers released today, Wisconsin continues to lag behind on job creation under Gov. Walker," said Burke campaign spokesman Joe Zepecki. "His top-down approach puts the special interests and those at the top ahead of Wisconsin's middle class," Zepecki said.

While management of the economy and job creation are politically charged issues even in non-election years, Wisconsin's subpar performance is hardly a new phenomenon. A previous Journal Sentinel analysis of quarterly census data shows that Wisconsin lagged the U.S. for most of the past 10 years — a period that encompassed the tenures of both Walker, who took office in January 2011, and his Democratic predecessor, Jim Doyle, who held the office from 2003 through 2010. Burke was state commerce secretary for two years under Doyle.

Economists consider Thursday's job-creation figures, known as the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, to be the most credible and comprehensive available. The report breaks out data for the nation as a whole as well as each of the 50 states.

It tracks the economy in rolling 12-month increments, measured every three months.

Employment and the economy rank among the most critical issues in the November race, said Charles Franklin, a social scientist and data specialist at Marquette University. Jobs and the political ads that shape perceptions on employment have the ability to sway undecided voters, and those who are less ideologically inclined, said Franklin, who analyzes Wisconsin's long-term employment and demographic data to complement the statewide public opinion polls that he conducts for the Marquette Law School.

"In a state with strong polarization, the issue of jobs does show some responsiveness," Franklin said. "We see something close to half (of voters surveyed) who think the state is keeping up with other states or creating jobs faster than other states, while another group in the mid- to upper 40s thinks the state is lagging."

Thursday's political debate centered on Wisconsin's rank among its peer group of Midwestern states, echoing a central theme of recent television ads by both parties. That Midwest comparison is "intuitive," Franklin said, given how Wisconsin and its neighbors share a similar economic profile of factory cities and farm towns.

One thing that's not in dispute is the accuracy of the data. The 12-month data set means each quarter's data includes full-year comparisons — without the seasonal adjustments and other forms of data massaging that commonly add distortions to the monthly data.

Also, the quarterly data are based on a census of 96% of the nation's employers in the public and private sectors. That makes the figures far more reliable than monthly jobs data, which are based on a sample of only about 3% of employers, leaving monthly estimates prone to large margins of error.

One monthly state jobs report remains to be released prior to November's election. That report, due Oct. 16, will provide preliminary job-creation estimates for September.

Because the quarterly data are comprehensive and time-consuming to compile, they are released with a half-year time lag. In the past, the lagging schedule meant the quarterly data got less attention than monthly numbers.

Job gains were broad enough to include high-wage and low-wage sectors.

Among the employment sectors, the fastest growing part of the Wisconsin economy was its retailers, which added nearly 5,000 jobs in the latest period, although average weekly wages in the sector are low ($470 at the end of 2013).

The second fastest-growing sector is called health care and social services — covering everything from surgeons to home health nurses and day care centers — which added nearly 4,000 jobs. That sector has slightly higher average weekly pay ($890).

Construction (3,809 jobs added, $1,131 average wage), manufacturing (2,697 jobs added, $1,086) and management positions (3,280 jobs added, $1,855) all showed job gains in the low thousands.

Jason Stein and Craig Gilbert of the Journal Sentinel contributed to this story.