2013 Milwaukee data show violent crime up, overall crime down
Violent crime ticked up in Milwaukee in 2013 compared with 2012, due in large part to increases in homicides and robberies, but overall crime has fallen, the Milwaukee Police Department announced Wednesday.

The department released its annual crime statistics for 2013 on Wednesday, touting an overall crime reduction of 8.7% compared with 2012 that was driven by decreases in property crime.

Increases in homicides, robberies and forcible rape pushed violent crime up 1.1% from 2012 to 2013. Officials said overall violent crime is down 11.4% since 2007, but last year was the second year in a row that violent crime increased.

"We were as frustrated as the rest of the community was with the increase in violent crime in 2013 over 2012," Police Chief Edward Flynn said in a statement released with the annual report.

"Although we were gratified by the impact our data-driven strategies had during the last few months of the year, they could not undo the harm that had already been done."

Robberies

Robberies continued to plague the city but declined in the latter part of the year. At the six-month mark in 2013, police reported a nearly 20% jump in robberies compared with the same period in 2012 using incident-based numbers.

Officials credited strategic robbery-reduction initiatives for limiting the rash of robberies, bringing the yearly increase to 6%.

Each district was tasked with developing an anti-robbery response, which ranged from targeting "hot spots," or micro-areas where robberies were occurring, to checking in on ex-offenders on probation and parole, Flynn said.

The department also unveiled a "Follow the Gun" program, recognizing the role firearms play in many robberies.

"We've been tracking the guns, staying on top of the guns," the chief said.

Those efforts, he said, paid off.

"During the second half of 2013, these initiatives reduced robbery by 2% in the second six months, and we had the lowest fourth-quarter total of robberies in seven years," he said. He added that the fourth quarter included "peak robbery season" between Thanksgiving and Christmas.

Shootings

In 2013, there were 532 victims of nonfatal shootings, up nearly 5% from 2012. It is the highest number of nonfatal shooting victims since 2006, which had 621 victims and was the first year such records were kept.

Nonfatal shootings are not broken out in a separate category in the FBI Uniform Crime Reporting Program, but they are included in the aggravated assaults, which generally are defined as assaults with the use of a weapon or other means that severely injure an individual.

In 2013, aggravated assaults in Milwaukee dropped 2.6% compared with 2012, while homicides were up 15% year-to-year after a particularly violent August and September. More than three-fourths of the city's homicide victims were killed with a firearm.

The anti-robbery initiatives likely played some role in the drop-off of nonfatal shootings and homicides after September, Flynn said. Shootings, robberies and homicides tend to cluster in the "same ZIP codes with the same problems," he added.

"When we do an anti-gun program trying to get guns off of the street, we're engaged in an anti-homicide program," he said.

Reporting crime

It's the second year in a row that violent crime has trended up. In 2012, violent crime was up 9.4% from 2011 — attributed to a 33% spike in aggravated assaults — and it was the first year an increase in violent crime was reported since Flynn took command in 2008.

The increase in violent crimes followed a Milwaukee Journal Sentinel investigation in 2012 that found Milwaukee police had misreported thousands of violent assaults, rapes, robberies and burglaries as less serious offenses and failed to correct the problems or publicly disclose them, even though department officials, including a top data analyst, raised red flags for years.

Flynn said at the time that the inaccuracies were the result of human errors and a failing computer system.

The city has solicited bids for a new police records management system and is expected to purchase a system this year, though it might not be implemented until 2015, Flynn said Wednesday. The new system should alleviate the reporting problems, he added.

The FBI Uniform Crime Reporting program does not include justifiable self-defense homicides.

The Milwaukee Police Department, like every other agency in the state, is required to turn over monthly FBI summary-based numbers to the state Office of Justice Assistance, which then sends the information to the FBI.

The numbers released Wednesday were reviewed multiple times by the department and also reviewed by the state, Flynn said.

"We're doing the best we can," he said. "I think we've got a much more robust report review function than we used to have. We do an audit function of our data. We really pay attention to it, but there is no perfect system. Hopefully going forward, we will get a better system once the bid process is over."

Twitter: twitter.com/aluthern