Mayor Barrett says Milwaukee tackling violence 'on every single front'
Player to use for any embedding in JSonline stories

A day after two men were killed in a triple shooting, Milwaukee city and neighborhood leaders called for collective action to address violence in the city.

"There's no single solution to this," Mayor Tom Barrett said.

Barrett, reacting Monday to a spate of shootings in the past week — including a triple shooting Sunday that left two men dead — said city leaders were "hitting this issue on every single front."

Barrett outlined multiple strategies the city is using to combat the violence: adding police officers, working with the faith community and advocating changes to state laws to "make sure there is certainty in sentencing for people who have criminal records who commit crimes with guns."

The latest outbreak of violence came at the close of the city's Ceasefire Week, which featured a forum on gun violence, a four-hour gun buyback Saturday and the Ceasefire Sabbath on Sunday.

"Ceasefire Week provided an opportunity to discuss the realities of firearm violence in Milwaukee and serves to activate the entire community to stand up, declare gun violence intolerable, and take action beyond hoping it goes away," Milwaukee Police Chief Edward Flynn said in a statement. "Hope is important but hope is not a strategy."

The fatal shooting occurred Sunday afternoon on the city's north side, near 11th and Atkinson Ave., and the victims were identified on Monday as Marvin Smith, 49, and Wilbert C. Lewis, 31. No arrests have been made, a police spokesman said.

The victim of a homicide on Saturday in the 1800 block of N. 29th St. was identified as Tycer J. Lee, 34. Milwaukee police have arrested a suspect in that case.

As of Monday afternoon, the city had recorded 23 homicides in 2014, compared with 28 at this time last year. In the same time frame, 134 nonfatal shooting incidents were recorded, which is the same number recorded at this time last year.

Later Sunday, a man was wounded in another shooting, and three other people were hurt by gunfire in separate incidents overnight Saturday. Five people, including an 11-year-old girl, were wounded earlier last week in four separate shootings in Milwaukee.

A meeting on Monday of the city's Black Male Achievement Advisory Committee at Garden Homes Square Park turned into a de facto town hall about recent violence in the city and drew more than 100 people. The committee consists of representatives from federal, state county and city government levels, and members from community organizations, nonprofits and the faith community.

"We all have a role to play in the condition of the city," Ald. Ashanti Hamilton said, adding: "Ninety percent of the work doesn't cost money. It's a change in the mind-set of the people who live right here."

Other factors contributing to the violence are a lack of educational and employment opportunities, high rates of minority incarceration and segregation, officials and crowd members said.

"I know a big part of the problem is people do not have jobs," said Barrett, who also noted that about 2,800 teens will be hired this summer through the city's internship program, while 100 adults from the central city will be hired to help fill potholes.

The mayor also referenced the foreclosure crisis by pointing out boarded-up homes near the park, prompting others in the crowd, including Catina Carter of the Garden Homes Neighborhood Association, to implore the committee to hire local men to work in the neighborhood on the foreclosed properties.

Shawn Moore, of Project Make a Change, called on city leaders to be a regular presence in the neighborhood in addition to talking about problems and proposed solutions.

"Those are just words in the air, and we're tired of words in the air," he said. "...We need real life assistance. We're a Third World country, too, and we're living like it."

Nothing will change, Valentino Gray said, until young people have pride and are empowered.

"I had no hope based on my surroundings, based on my experience, based on what I went through, that was my world," said Gray, who was shot when he was 15 years old. "... In my world if you came on my block, you were getting popped. That was my reality. So when we talk about changing things, making these better, we've got to go to the root."