Budget cuts might limit student jobs on UW campuses
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee student Collin DeNamur, a senior from Appleton, works as a custodial lead worker on campus. Credit: Mike De Sisti

SHARE University of Wisconsin Milwaukee students Jenna Galske (left), a sophomore from Oshkosh, and Tyler Hamelink, a junior from Marshfield, hand wraps to customers at Pacific Wraps at the UWM Student Union. Mike De Sisti

By of the

With state budget cuts hitting University of Wisconsin campuses, many students who rely on campus jobs may have to look elsewhere for employment.

The number of students working on UW System campuses ballooned by 25% over the past three years — in part because of new residence halls opening and dining marketplaces expanding and changing their focus to made-to-order entrées.

But the number of student employees could drop significantly this academic year as tough decisions are made on a campus-by-campus basis to cope with funding cuts.

In the fiscal year that ended June 30, about 17% of all undergrads had campus jobs across the system. A total of 3,685 more undergrads were employed than the previous year, including Collin DeNamur of Appleton, a biochemistry major at UW-Milwaukee who earns $9.25 an hour sweeping floors and emptying garbage cans in the Student Union for 22 hours a week while juggling a full load of classes.

"It's a job. I can't complain," said DeNamur, who added that he's content with the job he started last fall. "If I didn't have this job, I'd probably be looking for anything I could find — anything with a paycheck to pay the rent."

A total of 25,773 students across the UW System had campus jobs in the fiscal year that ended June 30, according to data requested by the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.

Some campuses this fall cut undergrad work positions in addition to academic staff and other employees to juggle their share of a $250 million cut to the UW System budget over the next two years.

At UWM, all undergrad hourly employees were cut July 1 in the College of Letters & Science — the largest of the colleges on campus — for a saving of $217,186. Each college within the university was given an amount to cut with latitude of what to trim.

A year ago, UWM had a total of 2,992 undergrad employees — roughly 13% of the total undergrad enrollment, according to data the university reports to the National Center for Education Statistics.

On the flip side, UW-Stevens Point designated $500,000 in restored state funding to save student jobs on its campus, according to Al Thompson, vice chancellor for student affairs.

Roughly a third of all undergrads at UW-Stevens Point — 3,069 students — have campus jobs.

"The reinvestment of $500,000 in student employment goes a long way in putting us back to pre-budget-cut levels," Thompson said.

Campuses received some budget relief this summer when the Legislature restored $25 million each of the next two years to the UW System's base budget to be divided among campuses. The UW System also divvied up $20 million from its own cash balances among campuses that officials determined were least able to cope with cuts.

While state budget cuts will account for some undergrad job losses on UW System campuses this year, a major renovation of a beloved building on the UW-Madison campus will eliminate some jobs in the short-term, as well.

Fewer student positions are available this academic year due to renovations at the Memorial Union, according to Stephanie Webendorfer, marketing specialist for the Wisconsin Union.

The renovation effectively shut down two-thirds of the Memorial Union, which means fewer restaurants, fewer events that need catering, and less space that needs cleaning. Staffing levels are expected to return to normal when the project is mostly finished next fall.

At UW-Madison, 1,509 students were employed between the two student unions at the start of classes this month, filling around 2,000 positions ranging from custodial work to restaurant work, office staff and outdoor equipment rental staff. Often, students in the catering department have a second position because of the sporadic nature of catering work, which explains why there are more positions than students employed.

While experts say students working 10 hours a week helps them better organize their time, a campus job also helps them learn skills that may apply to life after college, such as interacting with co-workers and customers. UW-Madison has a WIGROW program that reinforces the idea of transferable skills for student employees.

Students are able to climb the ranks to gain additional responsibilities and ultimately become student supervisors, Webendorfer said.

One trend Brendon Dybdahl has noticed in recent years is students requesting to work fewer hours in the housing division at UW — the division that employs the largest number of students on campus.

In the past, there were more students interested in working 10 to 15 hours a week; today, more want to work about seven hours, said Dybdahl, director of marketing and communications for the housing division. That means the Housing Division has to hire more students to cover the jobs.

Dybdahl said 2,217 students are employed in the housing division this academic year, an increase of about 300 positions since 2011-'12. The division this year added about 25 more housing fellows to residence halls to assist younger students.

Pay ranges from $8.80 an hour to about $11 within the housing division, Dybdahl said. "We are one of the highest-paying divisions on campus."

Dybdahl attributed the growth in student employment in the housing division to higher staffing needs for two updated dining marketplaces that opened in fall 2012 and one updated dining marketplace that opened in fall 2013. Two new residence halls — Dejope and Leopold — also opened in 2012 and 2013, he said.

DeNamur, the building operations employee at the UWM Student Union, said he was eligible for work study his freshman year, but couldn't find a campus job that year or the next. He said he likes his job because "it's really laid-back" and he can fit his second shift around classes.

One of the most visible jobs on campuses — the first point of contact for parents and prospective students — is campus tour guides from the office of Undergraduate Admissions who walk backward during tours so they can be better heard.

"You become good at (walking backward)," said Zach Ziemba, a UWM senior from suburban Chicago majoring in architecture.

Ziemba was staffing the Visitor Center Kiosk in the Klotsche Center, handing out parking passes to families arriving for campus tours.

"I do this for a little spending money," he said, in his third year on the job.