UW-Milwaukee faculty unanimously backs protest vote
Nearly 300 UW-Milwaukee faculty members unanimously passed a vote of no confidence in UW System President Ray Cross and the Board of Regents during a meeting at UWM on Tuesday.

By of the

Nearly 300 University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee faculty members packed a classroom to overflowing Tuesday, and quickly and unanimously passed a symbolic vote of no confidence in UW System leaders when the chancellor suggested moving to a larger room because they were violating fire safety codes.

The 17-point resolution was read by faculty members spread across the room that was designed to hold 175 people. The atmosphere was charged. It was considered a historic gathering; the first time a quorum of faculty had met to take action in decades.

Chancellor Mark Mone said after the meeting that in his nearly 27 years as a faculty member on campus, he had never seen anything like it. "There has not been anything so important and heartfelt in that long," the chancellor said.

Mone said he supported the faculty's move to protect shared governance but said he was concerned the action of the UWM vote and votes already taken on campuses in Madison, La Crosse and River Falls could have a chilling effect on working relationships with UW System leaders and lawmakers.

Eau Claire's University Senate declined to take a vote on a similar measure Tuesday, as some faculty members cautioned they were moving too quickly on the issue.

Gov. Scott Walker issued a statement — titled "University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee faculty fuss leaves out important facts" — less than two hours before the UWM gathering.

"Before the faculty at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee issues their collective groan today about budgeting and 'job for life' tenure, it is important to highlight the facts," Walker said.

Among the facts the governor offered: Full professor salaries averaged $101,700 in the 2013-'14 academic year, while average annual pay for all workers in Milwaukee County was $49,539 in 2014. Student enrollment has dropped nearly four times more than faculty from 2010 to 2014. And faculty's average time spent in classrooms has dropped 20% from 2000 to 2013.

"The facts speak for themselves," Walker said. "We want to preserve the world-renowned quality of the UW System while protecting students and taxpayers."

During the brief gathering at UWM, faculty lined the classroom walls and stood outside, yelling "no" and "call the vote" when Mone announced they needed to move to a larger room to safely accommodate everyone. The turnout represented more than a third of the faculty.

Classes don't end for the semester until Wednesday, so room options for the full faculty meeting were limited.

Without discussion of the lengthy no-confidence resolution against UW System President Ray Cross and the Board of Regents, faculty members inside and outside the room passed it unanimously on a voice vote.

They gave the action a sustained standing ovation.

"We must not let fear of reprisal prevent us from bringing our concerns to light," said Nick Fleisher, assistant professor of linguistics.

"By voting no confidence, we protest the intentional destruction of our internationally recognized university system," associate professor of history Rachel Ida Buff said.

Buff described a "legislative assault" on shared governance and academic freedom.

"The political assault has been accompanied by unprecedented fiscal cuts, impairing our ability to educate and serve our students," she said.

Faculty Senates at UW-Madison, UW-La Crosse and UW-River Falls last week passed similar no-confidence resolutions.

Faculty members at UWM said they passed the symbolic vote of no confidence because the course charted by Cross and the Board of Regents appears to carry out the agenda of Republican state lawmakers and the governor, who cut funding to the UW System by $250 million in the current biennium, and directed the regents to write new faculty tenure protections after removing them from state law.

"Some faculty bodies, including faculty at UWM today, appear more interested in protecting outdated 'job for life' tenure than about helping students get the best education possible," the governor said. "The university should not be about protecting the interests of the faculty, but about delivering value and excellence to Wisconsin."

Republican lawmakers also have characterized tenure as a "job for life," while faculty members counter that tenure's purpose is to protect freedom of speech and the right to pursue truth — no matter how unpopular — without having to worry about being fired.

Faculty members dismiss lawmakers' "job for life" characterization as a "legislative sound bite."

At the same time, tenured faculty members are unhappy that they could potentially lose their jobs if an academic program is discontinued — something that before new tenure rules were adopted by the regents in March could not have led to layoffs.

Faculty members say they worry that budget cuts, rather than what's best for students, will dictate academic program arrays.

UW-Eau Claire's University Senate also took up a no-confidence vote in UW System leaders on Tuesday, but the measure didn't make it to the floor for a vote, with some members saying the issue was moving too fast.

"I respect the right of faculty and staff to make their voices heard through the shared governance process," Chancellor James Schmidt said in a statement issued after the meeting.

"In these coming months, I will continue to work closely with UW System leadership and the Board of Regents as I focus my efforts on helping our partners in the business community and economic development community, legislators, alumni, students, parents and others understand the huge impact these past budget cuts have had on UW-Eau Claire.."

That meeting came a day after the student body president at UW-Eau Claire urged the University Senate not to pass the resolution, saying it would alienate those "who fight for you" and give state lawmakers "ammunition for their next assault on the system."

"Though perhaps well intentioned, this motion and the bill text put forward by the authors is embarrassingly naive and represents a massive misunderstanding of politics in the state of Wisconsin," said a five-page letter from student body president Jake Wrasse to the University Senate.