Protesting teachers force some schools to cancel class
By of the

With teachers heeding the call of their union leaders to travel to Madison and protest Gov. Scott Walker's plan to all but eliminate their collective bargaining abilities, schools around the state closed their doors Thursday and braced for more upheaval Friday.

Districts from Beaver Dam to Watertown also closed Thursday, although the area hardest hit appeared to be around Madison, where a dozen districts were unable to open. Thursday night, the Madison Metropolitan School District said it is canceling classes on Friday because of a third consecutive day of protests.

Other school districts that announced they would be closed on Friday included Wausau, Wisconsin Dells, Mauston, Middleton-Cross Plains, Belleville, Kimberly and Pardeeville.

In southeastern Wisconsin, Port Washington High School and the Glendale-River Hills and Racine Unified school districts were forced to cancel classes Thursday when large numbers of teachers did not report to work.

The state Department of Public Instruction is not waiving its minimum day or hour requirements for districts that close for the teacher protests, according to an agency spokesman, meaning any district forced to cancel school might have to make up the time off by summer.

The Thursday protests in Madison attracted the largest crowd so far, many of them teachers, opposing the governor's proposal to allow public-sector workers to negotiate only on salary issues. Walker's plan, which legislators were scheduled to debate on Thursday, also would require workers to pay about 5.8% of their pay toward their pensions and at least 12% of their health care costs.

Walker has said the changes are necessary to help cover a projected $137 million shortfall through the end of the current fiscal year and balance the 2011-'13 budget, which is projected to have a $3.6 billion deficit.

The unions contend the changes to Wisconsin's collective bargaining laws are political payback that have nothing to do with balancing the budget. Unions representing police and firefighters, a portion of which supported Walker in the recent election, are exempted from the changes.

High absenteeism

Even those schools that did not close Thursday because of the protests were tested to find enough available staff and substitutes to handle high rates of absenteeism.

Milwaukee Public Schools had 420 teachers call in sick by Thursday morning, about 20% more than usual this time of year, when flu reports already run high, district spokeswoman Roseann St. Aubin said. MPS was forced to send district officials into some schools to cover for the absent teachers, a situation aggravated when some substitutes declined to cover for them, she said.

"We did make note of those who turned down an assignment," St. Aubin said of the substitute teachers. Classroom teacher absences will be reviewed case by case, with the possibility of reduced pay and suspensions as disciplinary measures, she said.

Other school districts, however, were forced to close their doors when they weren't able to find enough substitutes or staff members to carry out the school day.

The Glendale-River Hills School District canceled classes at its three Milwaukee County schools after about 40% of its teachers called in sick and district officials could not find enough substitute teachers in time, Superintendent Larry Smalley said.

Smalley said he was taken by surprise by the apparent sickout, but that the schools would be open Friday now that he had time to prepare.

In the Port Washington-Saukville School District, students were already on school buses on the way to the high school by the time the district found out that it would not have enough staff to hold classes, Superintendent Michael Weber said.

District administrators had mapped out a plan the night before based on calls from teachers, he said. When eight more high school teachers called in absences on Thursday morning, however, he said the district took in the high school students off the buses, divided them by grade, and waited until the buses had finished taking the elementary students to their schools before driving the high school students back home.

"The high school students' behavior was impeccable," Weber said. "They were so cooperative and helpful and, for a group of young men and young women, they understood what was going on."

Both Smalley and Weber said teachers who called in sick or absent without an appropriate excuse will be disciplined, although neither specified what sort of punishment would be in order.

"Obviously, as we teach our kids, there's consequences for behavior, and there will be consequences for the teachers who didn't come to school today," Smalley said Thursday.

In Racine, district spokeswoman Stacy Tapp also said that any of the 400 teachers absent on Thursday who called in sick inappropriately or took an unannounced personal day would be disciplined.

Student demonstrations

In addition to the teacher actions, students also participated in spontaneous shows of support for the teachers and against Walker's plan throughout the day.

About 200 students from Milwaukee High School of the Arts protested in front of the school during their lunch hour. Outsiders also reported that a large group from Rufus King High School marched to the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee to join a campus event.

President and CEO of Messmer Catholic Schools Brother Bob Smith said Thursday that a group of about 100 King students marched to Messmer High School at 12:30 p.m. He couldn't discern what they were saying, but he said some of the students had signs and that they continued to march toward Shorewood High School.

"I was a little befuddled by why they would want to come here," said Smith, whose school is private and not affected by the pending state legislation that affects public workers' rights.

Back at King, student journalists who produce the high school's paper, The King's Page, changed a forum they were going to hold at 3 p.m. into a letter-writing campaign for students to send letters to the editor or their legislators.