Seniority system cuts fresh MPS teachers amid budget crunch
About 200 teachers and others protest the layoff of 482 teachers during a rally Monday at Milwaukee Public Schools Central Office on W. Vliet St. The layoffs constituted more than 12% of the full-time teachers in the district. Credit: Rick Wood

SHARE

By of the

Megan Sampson was named outstanding first-year teacher by the Wisconsin Council of Teachers of English last week.

Second-year social studies teacher Kevin Condon, also at Bradley Tech High School, has four licenses and can command the attention of 40 students in an open-concept classroom.

Both are among 482 educators - more than 12% of the full-time teachers in the district - who have received layoff notices from Milwaukee Public Schools.

On Monday - the last day of the year for schools in MPS and the first day teachers reunited after hearing the news of the layoffs - some teachers expressed frustration at losing their jobs because of experience, not performance. Others said they were disappointed the teachers union had not solicited input from those with the least amount of seniority.

Meanwhile, the Milwaukee School Board president and the Milwaukee Teachers' Education Association leadership continued to disagree on how to handle the tightened $1.3 billion district budget, and whether teachers should accept a lower-cost health-care plan to avoid layoffs.

Outside the city, the layoff scene is much different. Some other large districts are predicting far fewer cuts, and officials with the Racine and Kenosha public school districts said they expect to be able to make budget adjustments that will avoid laying off teachers.

Milwaukee School Board President Michael Bonds said the situation in Milwaukee reflects economic reality and has nothing to do with teacher performance. The district has to lay off teachers based on seniority, he said.

According to the district, some of the laid-off MPS teachers may be recalled after the number of vacancies, retirements and voluntary layoffs is finalized.

"The reality is we cannot sustain the current system without major structural change," Bonds said. "We could literally save hundreds of jobs with the stroke of a pen if teachers switched to the lower-cost health-care plan."

The teachers union has countered that the board is bargaining in public by offering jobs in exchange for health-care concessions.

Union leaders have said the district has not brought up the option of switching health-care plans during formal negotiations. Bonds said it's come up in multiple meetings since last year.

MPS offers two health-care plans, both thought to be generous. The plans are covered in full by the district, meaning teachers have no financial incentive to switch from the high-cost Aetna plan to a lower-cost option offered through United Health Care.

Bonds said if all teachers switched to the lower-cost plan, about $48 million could be saved, enough to pay for 480 educators.

"I'm not aware of any place in the nation that pays 100% of teachers' health-care benefits and doesn't require a contribution from those who choose to take a more expensive plan," Bonds said.

Pat O'Mahar, the interim executive director for the MTEA, said it was unfortunate the district believed the solution to budget pressures was to lay off hundreds of educators.

"The problem must be addressed with a national solution - a federal stimulus package that will restore educator positions and allow MPS children to keep their teachers," O'Mahar said in a statement.

"Long term, we must reform the way Wisconsin funds public schools," he added. "We call on the School Board and the administration to join us as we fight for federal legislation that will save educator jobs."

At Bradley Tech, Sampson, 24, is one of nine layoffs. She said the union never solicited views from her about switching plans.

"Given the opportunity, of course I would switch to a different plan to save my job, or the jobs of 10 other teachers," Sampson said.

Sampson and her laid-off colleagues, all who have less than three years of teaching experience, also expressed frustration that their jobs would be filled by more veteran, but not necessarily better, educators.

Sampson and Emily Kaphaem, a world geography and citizenship teacher at Tech, said they have received exemplary performance reviews.

"I feel kind of let down by my city today," said Kaphaem, 25, as she lost the fight to hold back tears in Principal Ed Kupka's office.

Kupka is equally frustrated. He hand-selected the new teachers because of their talent and enthusiasm for turning around Tech, recently designated as one of the worst-performing high schools in the state.

"Based on the pressures we're under as a low-performing school, I absolutely would have chosen a different nine (for layoffs)," Kupka said. "Not everyone is on board with the cultural shift, or has the skills to implement it. The people that are leaving are among the most transformation-minded people on staff."

Teachers at Alliance School, known as a safe haven for bullied children and those who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender, also have concerns. Four of the small charter school's 10 educators received layoff notices. Earlier this year, Lead Teacher Tina Owen trimmed the staff from 13 to meet the district's budget.

Owen said it's impossible to know whether new educators assigned to Alliance will embrace the school's culture.

"Just because you have a great teacher doesn't mean you have the right teacher for the school," Owen said.

She added that everyone needs to fight for a change in the way schools are funded.

About 200 people protesting the layoffs marched Monday afternoon outside MPS district headquarters at 5225 W. Vliet St. Educators, parents and school staff gave speeches, carrying signs such as one by a student that said, "Cut the crap. Not the teachers."

Attendee Kathy Xiong, 29, a third-grade teacher at Burbank Elementary School, said she was one of six laid off in her building.

Kat Trago, a parent, said it was a huge tragedy for Burbank.

"As a taxpayer, I would like my money to go to my child's education," Trago said. "I understand layoffs, and I understand tenure, too, but I think there should be some sort of merit system."

Districts outside Milwaukee also are reducing teaching staff. But those school officials say they've been able to handle most of those reductions through attrition.

In the Madison Metropolitan School District, spokesman Ken Syke said the district issued layoff notices to the full-time equivalent of 1.21 teachers.

John Wilson, assistant to the superintendent for human resources at the Green Bay School District, said his school system had given final layoff notices to five full-time teachers and already had recalled one of those teachers.

In contrast, the district has laid off six administrators, including associate principals and central office staff.

Although MPS has reduced staff in previous years, the fact that the school system has not resorted to layoffs amid continued enrollment drops could indicate pent-up pressures that finally caught up in the 2010-'11 school year, said Todd Berry, president of the Wisconsin Taxpayers Alliance.

Other districts, particularly smaller school districts in the northern part of the state, have been reducing teacher positions and programs for years, he said.

"A very large share of school budgets is salaries and benefits and, in MPS' case, benefits are unusually high relative to salary," Berry said. "So, if you have to squeeze money out of a budget due to declining enrollments, sooner or later you're going to have to go to where the money is."

Mary Bell, president of the Wisconsin Education Association Council, the state's largest teachers union, said the teacher layoffs in Milwaukee are of a different scale, but she denied the district's situation was unusual amid a tightening financial picture for schools statewide.

"Any group of my members that I talk to, there are more notices being issued than there are normally," she said. "There's less of a chance that retirements and people leaving the districts will help deal with that."