Suspect in double homicide kills himself as police close in
Milwaukee Police Chief Edward Flynn speaks to reporters Thursday about developments into the investigation of Saturday's double homicide. video by Mark Hoffman

By of the

The Milwaukee man suspected of gunning down a motorist who accidentally drove into his nephew, and killing another nephew in the spray of bullets, committed suicide Thursday as authorities were closing in on him at a Chicago area hotel.

Law enforcement surrounded the Presidential Inn in the suburb of Lyons where Ricky Ricardo Chiles III was holed up with his girlfriend, Milwaukee Police Chief Edward Flynn said. Chiles, 27, turned a gun on himself after officers made contact and were entering the room.

Milwaukee police obtained a warrant for Chiles' arrest Wednesday evening and shared information with the U.S. Marshals Fugitive Task Force about his possible whereabouts, Flynn said. The task force tracked Chiles to Chicago, according to U.S. Marshal Kevin Carr.

Chiles' girlfriend, who was not identified, was not injured, Flynn said. It was not immediately clear what, if any, consequences she might face. Whether she is charged with a crime depends on how much she knew about the situation and how much assistance she gave Chiles as he fled from Milwaukee to suburban Chicago, the chief said.

The suicide punctuates a series of deaths unfolding from Sunday's fatal van accident and highlights a subculture in the city that approves of violence as a way to solve problems, Flynn said.

"In that set of circumstances there are going to be not only tragedies, there are going to be dreadful mistakes," he said. "And this sad example is what we get when we have folks who decided that it's their responsibility to use their guns to redress their grievances."

Authorities say Chiles killed Archie Brown Jr., 40, after Chiles' nephew, 2-year-old Damani Terry, darted into the street Sunday evening and was hit by Brown's van.

Police say Brown was standing over the child's body, grieving and upset, when Chiles shot him with a gun retrieved from a nearby home.

In the ensuing gunfire, 15-year-old Rasheed Chiles — Damani's brother and Ricky Chiles' nephew — was shot. He died later at a hospital during surgery.

Upon hearing of Chiles' suicide, Brown's father, Archie Brown Sr., said, "He cheated himself out of being judged by man's system, where he would be incarcerated, but he took a way out that put him in a worse situation, because now he went to meet his maker to answer for his crimes."

The deaths have drawn attention to a dramatic escalation of deadly violence in Milwaukee, with seven homicides in a short span bringing the city's total to 43 for the year, far surpassing last year's homicide tally for the same period.

Still on extended supervision

Chiles had been released from prison in August 2013 after serving two years on a conviction for a 2011 Brown Deer bank robbery in which he was the getaway driver, court records show. He was on extended supervision and was prohibited from possessing firearms at the time of the double killing Sunday.

Chiles was sentenced to far less than the maximum penalty of 10 years after the judge was told about his cooperation in an unrelated homicide case, which stemmed from an argument during a dice game.

Chiles testified for the state at the trial of "a more dangerous offender" who was convicted of first-degree reckless homicide, said Milwaukee County Chief Deputy District Attorney Kent Lovern.

In addition to the bank robbery, Chiles also had 2011 convictions for disorderly conduct and resisting an officer. In January of that year, he was charged with domestic violence battery and theft, but both charges were dismissed.

In 2004, when he was 17, Chiles was charged with fourth-degree sexual assault, pleaded guilty and was sentenced to two years' probation.

Chiles' family has at least some connection to the Chicago area, according to records. His now-deceased father listed an address there and was indicted in federal court in the Northern District of Illinois about 15 years ago.

Grieving family

Brown spoke with the family friend who was a passenger during the crash and unharmed in the aftermath. The friend told Brown his son had gotten out of the car to help when the gunman approached.

"He heard Junior say 'Man, don't kill me, man, it was an accident,'" Brown Sr. said.

A vigil Wednesday night was attended by relatives and friends of both families. The oldest brother of Archie Brown Jr. articulated the heartbreak the families were feeling.

"This is gutting us from the inside out," Jerrey Hill told the large crowd gathered across from Wahl Park. "Their family's suffering, too."

Brown Sr., a street preacher who goes by the name Prophet Brown, was preparing his son's eulogy when he learned of the Chiles' suicide from reporters.

Brown will preach on Monday at his son's funeral, which will begin at 11 a.m. Monday at Christian Faith Fellowship, 8603 W. Good Hope Road. Visitation will be held from 3 to 7 p.m. at New Pitts Mortuary, 2031 W. Capitol Drive.

"When something like this happens, God does more than one thing," he said. "My son's death has put me on this platform that I'm going to be on Monday."

As for Chiles, Brown said, "he didn't escape justice for real."

Journal Sentinel reporter Bruce Vielmetti contributed to this report.