Bill sponsored by Wisconsin Democrats would ease student loan debt
Saul Newton, a student at the University of Wisconsin-Waukesha and a veteran, talked about his struggles to pay his student loan debt during a news conference Wednesday at MATC about a Democratic bill aimed at providing some relief. Credit: Rick Wood

SHARE Click image to enlarge.

By of the

Citing crippling student loan debt that prevents young adults from buying cars and homes, three state Democratic lawmakers on Wednesday pushed for creation of a new state authority to refinance student loans through bond sales and a state tax deduction for those paying off student loans.

The proposed bill is called the Higher Ed, Lower Debt Act. It would create a state Student Loan Refinancing Authority allowing student loan borrowers to refinance those loans at "much lower" interest rates, just as homeowners do with mortgages, the bill's authors, Rep. Cory Mason (D-Racine), Sen. Dave Hansen (D-Green Bay) and Sen. Chris Larson (D-Milwaukee), said at a news conference.

The authors said that, in some cases, student loan borrowers are being charged interest rates of 12%.

"Instead of sending dollars out of this state off to Wall Street to pay down loans because we've made it impossible for students to refinance, let's refinance those loans right here in Wisconsin and put those dollars back into Wisconsin's economy," Mason said.

A borrower with an interest rate of 6.8% and an average University of Wisconsin graduate's debt of $27,000 who could get a state-refinanced lower interest rate of 4% could save more than $40 a month — close to $500 over the course of a year, the bill's advocates said.

Mason said that while other state programs already offer refinancing services, such as the Wisconsin Housing and Economic Development Agency, which helps homeowners looking to refinance, no other state has an institution that refinances student debt. With this bill, Wisconsin could become a model for other states.

The proposed authority would not use tax dollars to refinance the loans, but rather sell bonds to accomplish the refinancing in a "pay-as-you-go" fashion. In other words, the authority would refinance as money is raised, Hansen said.

While there would always be some risk to taxpayers in the event of defaults, most of that risk would already be factored into interest rates, meaning that the bulk of the risk is shouldered by borrowers, according to Mason.

While the Democratic lawmakers haven't yet won support from Republican colleagues, Mason said, they are in talks and the bill is designed for bipartisan support because it includes tax breaks.

Mason and Hansen plan to formally introduce the bill this month.

Tax deduction included

Under the bill, Wisconsin student loan borrowers also could deduct student loan payments from their income tax.

A new analysis from the state's Legislative Fiscal Bureau estimated a maximum tax benefit of up to $531 a year for single filers in top tax brackets, and $1,062 for married couples.

The bill also would provide students and parents with detailed information about student loans and the best and worst private lenders. Students would receive loan counseling so they understand the full financial implications of loans and can make informed decisions. The authority would have all powers available under existing law to collect payments from borrowers, including payments from borrowers who default.

Under the consumer protection part of the bill, private student loan debt data in Wisconsin would be required to be collected and tracked by the Department of Financial Institutions and the Higher Education Aid Board to help policy-makers and the public better understand the depth and breadth of student loan debt.

The data would include a ranking system based on private loan interest rates, loan terms and consumer protections.

A recent study ranks Wisconsin No. 10 in the nation for number of college students with debt, with 67% of graduates from four-year schools having loans to repay.

College tuition costs have doubled over the last 12 years and Wisconsin's student loan borrowers have an average debt of $22,400, and monthly student loan payments of $338 over 18.7 years for those repaying money borrowed to earn a bachelor's degree, according to the lawmakers.

Student loan debt is the only type of household debt that continued to rise through the Great Recession.

The U.S. Federal Reserve System estimates that 753,000 Wisconsin residents have federal student loan debt.

Nationally, nearly 40 million Americans hold more than $1.2 trillion in student loan debt, the second largest consumer debt in the country — more than credit cards or auto loans.

November marks the end of the six-month grace period for May college graduates, which means it soon will be time for the grads to begin repaying their student loans.

One-third of students graduate without student loan debt.

According to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, about one-quarter of borrowers owe more than $28,000; 10% of borrowers owe more than $54,000; 3% owe more than $100,000; and less than 1% owe more than $200,000.

Tips for graduates

Student loan giant Sallie Mae offers this advice for recent college grads to take control of their loan repayment:

■ Review the terms of outstanding loans: This means taking everything — interest rates, payment schedules and more — into account to fully understand the tasks ahead.

■ Get organized: Keep loan materials in one place and set up calendar reminders around your payment due dates.

■ Take advantage of loan provider resources: Your loan servicer can help you talk through your repayment and offer other options to keep you on track.

■ Set goals: It is easier to see the light at the end of the tunnel when smaller milestones are set and achieved along the way.