2 years after outcry, UW System much clearer about reserves
SHARE Click to enlarge Ray Cross

By of the

Two years after a public outcry over high cash balances kept by the University of Wisconsin System and its campuses, a report released Monday indicates they are carrying about the same amount of money — just being much clearer about its purpose.

An unprecedented 250-page report, which the UW regents will discuss at a meeting in Stevens Point later this week, details how nearly $1 billion is set aside to cover specific expenses, make up unexpected shortfalls, pay for emergencies, and be used at the discretion of chancellors. The money is spread over thousands of accounts in departments and offices throughout the UW System's 13 four-year campuses, 13 two-year colleges, and UW Extension.

The report, produced in response to concerns raised by legislators and the public, breaks out individual fund balances by campus, and by level of commitment toward specific expenses, as defined by the Legislative Audit Bureau.

The UW System and its campuses had $973 million in total unrestricted program revenue balances as of June 30 — money drawn from such sources as tuition, student fees, room and board, parking fees and federal reimbursement for indirect costs tied to research.

State funding is not included.

UW System President Ray Cross said it's important to note all of the program revenue balances were generated on campuses for use by those campuses.

"Not a penny of it is state money, and there is no single pot of money," he said.

At the same time, Cross said lawmakers and taxpayers were right to demand more transparency in the UW System's accounting.

"We're confident that we know where our money is, where it came from, why it's there and where it's spent or planned to be spent," Cross said.

The $973 million is $17 million less than the $990 million the UW System and its campuses had on hand at the end of fiscal 2012, as reported by a state audit, and $28 million less than the $1.01 billion on hand at the end of fiscal 2013.

Of the $973 million, about $798 million is set aside for particular expenses — kind of like a family setting aside money to pay for a car or build up a college fund.

Of the remaining $175 million, $111 million is available for emergency use — like a family replacing a furnace or dealing with damage from a storm. The remaining $64 million is available for chancellors to use at their discretion, less than half what it was in 2012.

The report noted that the emergency fund accounts for less than 3% of the total $6 billion operating budget for the UW System and its campuses this fiscal year.

Much of the uproar two years ago was because the UW System raised tuition by 5.5% six years in a row, while accumulating and holding unspent tuition money without the public's knowledge. In fiscal 2013, that fund balance of unspent tuition money was $551 million. At the end of June this year, the UW System and its campuses collectively had $395 million in unspent tuition money.

Cash flow problems

Breaking out the numbers by campus reveals a mixed financial picture.

The highest amount held in unrestricted fund balances was $386.6 million at UW-Madison; however, it reduced its tuition balances by 41% between 2013 and 2014, according to Chancellor Rebecca Blank, who released a statement Monday explaining that campus' balances.

The lowest amount was a negative balance of $1.9 million at UW-Superior, which is paying off a loan from the UW System.

The system report indicates four campuses are struggling with cash flow issues: UW-Milwaukee, UW-Parkside, UW-Superior and UW-Stout.

"We are working with them diligently and they have good plans in place," Cross said.

UW-Milwaukee had $84.2 million in unrestricted funds left on the books in June, but only about $1 million of that was true reserve or discretionary money not earmarked for something specific.

UW-Milwaukee brought in $9 million less in tuition last fiscal year, and $2.9 million less in general operations funding, according to the report. Its total program revenue balances were down $12 million — a 12.5% loss from the previous year.

"Milwaukee has a cash flow challenge," Cross said. "They're spending more than they're bringing in."

Cross noted that the UW System administration has $8.6 million in its undocumented discretionary spending account — a majority of it coming from federal indirect support of research. Much of that money is set aside for a major software purchase, he said.

Of the $41 million in an undocumented systemwide account, which Cross likened to an escrow account, $20 million is for veteran remission that will be distributed once veteran enrollment numbers are finalized at each campus.

Asked whether he was comfortable with less than 3% of the total operating budget being available for emergencies or unexpected shortfalls on campuses, Cross said: "The state handles our debt service, so I don't need to have as much in reserve. I think those numbers should be closer to 10%, but that's always up for debate."

When more than $1 billion in program revenue balances were revealed in a state audit as of the end of the 2012 fiscal year, it set off a firestorm in the Capitol. Legislators enacted a two-year freeze on tax support and tuition, cutting by $210 million what the UW System had hoped for, and forcing the system to spend down some of its reserves.

Gov. Scott Walker has proposed another two-year freeze on tuition in the next biennium.