Most Wisconsin schools get good marks under new report card system
SHARE Click to enlarge

By of the

Many call Carmen High School of Science and Technology a model for serving low-income students in Milwaukee.

The south-side school is 98% Hispanic and 90% low-income, yet 92% of last year's graduating class went to college - half on academic scholarships.

But the state's new school accountability system launched Monday calls Carmen something else: failing.

Earning a total of 46 points out of a possible 100 in a new accountability score, Carmen fell into the lowest of five new rating bands, "fails to meet expectations," a distinction that irked its supporters and illuminated how the new system for judging schools in Wisconsin may have some kinks to work out.

"In Milwaukee, we really need to understand where the points of light are, and this compresses the data so much that it makes it hard to see where something good is going on," said Patricia Hoben, principal of Carmen, a nonunion charter school in the Milwaukee Public Schools family that served 233 students last year.

Hoben and other district administrators praised the state for taking the first step toward a more nuanced system that gives parents more accurate information about schools. She said the next round of report cards would have to better reflect nuances of small schools, especially at smaller schools serving a predominant minority population.

A raised bar for what's considered proficient in reading and math and the new report cards released Monday that showcase different aspects of school performance are all part of a major shift away from the mandates of an unpopular federal education law, known as No Child Left Behind.

In exchange, Wisconsin had to roll out its own system of measuring schools. That system is based on giving each school an accountability score on a scale of 0 to 100 that places schools in one of five categories, from significantly exceeds expectations to fails to meet expectations.

The initial results:

Out of 1,877 schools in Wisconsin that received a public report card with a rating Monday, 86% met or exceeded the state's expectations for performance. About 14% of the schools rated - 266 - fell below the state's expectations for performance.

In the city of Milwaukee, only 24% of schools met or exceeded the state's new performance expectations - 29 out of 138 Milwaukee Public Schools and seven of 14 independent charters that operate outside of MPS.

Under the No Child Left Behind law, accountability each year focused predominantly on what percentage of students in third through eighth and 10th grade were proficient or advanced in reading and math on the state test each year.

The new school report cards still rely heavily on that data, but they are designed to take into account the past three years of test results from the Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Examination standardized test. They also assign importance to categories such as growth over time, closing the achievement gaps between white students and minority student subgroups, and measures that indicate students are on track to graduate with the appropriate skills.

Another set of report cards that reflect new data from the November 2012 round of WKCE testing will be released in the spring.

By 2014-'15, the state will be using a new state test altogether that will align better with the new report cards. And the DPI has requested state funding to support a new suite of college readiness tests at the high school level that will provide richer data about student progress.

Carmen wasn't the only high school surprised by its new score.

In affluent Hartland 25 miles away, leaders at the traditionally high-achieving Arrowhead High School expected to cruise into the "significantly exceeds expectations" category.

The school has high ACT scores and an increasing number of students taking the college entrance exam. The same holds true for Advanced Placement classes and exams. Its graduation rate is nearly 97% and 85.5% of its students go to four-year colleges.

But the first score the school got internally was 75.2, barely above the cutoff for "exceeding expectations."

Arrowhead's response was to dive deeply into its own data to identify the narrative behind every student who was causing a hiccup in their scores.

The issue: some gaps in achievement and graduation rates between the school's population of students with disabilities and students who qualify as low-income. Part of that disparity is because Arrowhead awards equivalency diplomas to students who meet the minimum state requirements, which are separate from its diplomas for other students that require more credits. The state didn't count equivalency diplomas as graduates.

Arrowhead's administration also discovered that the school lost points one year because a subgroup of students outperformed traditional students, then fell back to normal scoring.

When the DPI adjusted some scoring earlier this month, Arrowhead's overall score jumped five points to 80.2.

.

In Menomonee Falls, the school district's five schools all exceeded expectations.

Superintendent Pat Greco believes it's also important to look at the new growth score presented on the report cards, which takes into account how much progress students made on the state Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Examination over time.

The school in Menomonee Falls with the highest poverty rate - Riverside Elementary, with about 30% of children qualifying as low-income - scored lower in overall achievement than the district's three other higher-income elementary schools.

But Riverside's score for growth - 82.6 compared with the state average in elementary schools of 67.4 out of 100 - was the highest of the district's elementary schools, indicating those students are making greater gains in proficiency from year to year.

The growth score doesn't exist at the high school level because high school students only take the WKCE once, in 10th grade.

And it's why everyone from Carmen's Hoben to state officials at the DPI to other school leaders around the state are pushing for funding from Gov. Scott Walker in the next budget for high schools to administer a suite of ACT college readiness exams at the high school level.

The tests are benchmarked nationally, and could give high schools much better data about how students are progressing from ninth grade to the end of their junior year.

At Carmen, the school didn't receive a score for closing gaps, either, because it had no other student population to compare with beyond its majority-minority group of Hispanic students. Without those measures, the school's score was based mostly on the WKCE 10th-grade score. And though the school's 10th-graders beat the state average in math last year, its WKCE's from three years ago when the school was brand new were very low, so averaging three years of data for Carmen painted a worse picture for the school than its current scores.

In the Whitnall School District, Tony Brazouski, executive director of academic achievement, said he thought the report cards are a good first step and constitute a practice run. Another round of report cards will come out in the spring of 2013 when fall 2012 state test scores are released.

"We're saying it's about time that something is counted for each school beyond this (Wisconsin Knowledge & Concepts Examination) point-in-time test score," Brazouski said.