Closing of voucher school spurs Democrats' call for accountability
SHARE

By of the

The closing of another Milwaukee voucher school prompted Democratic lawmakers on Tuesday to renew their calls for greater accountability for private schools that receive state funding through the parental choice programs in Milwaukee and statewide.

Democrats say they have been unable to secure a hearing for a bill that would hold private voucher schools to some of the same standards as their public school counterparts, and have seen little progress on a Republican alternative.

"Speaker (Robin) Vos said he wouldn't deal with any expansion of the voucher system until we had an accountability bill. And they broke that promise in the budget," said Tony Palese, spokesman for Senate Minority Leader Jennifer Shilling (D-La Crosse).

"You promise accountability. But it's been nine months, and we haven't seen any action," he said.

Vos (R-Rochester) did not return calls for comment Tuesday.

Democrats called for greater accountability for voucher schools in response to the closing last week of Daughters of the Father Christian Academy at 5126 N. 38th St.

The school closed Thursday, pending an appeal of an Aug. 4 order by the state Department of Public Instruction barring it from taking part in the Parental Choice Program. It served about 153 students last year. A second location, at 5806 W. Burleigh St., had already closed.

State officials ruled that the school, which had received about $5.4 million in public money since the 2007-'08 academic year, had failed to comply with statutory and administrative rules governing participation. According to the DPI's filing, the academy failed to properly appoint a qualified administrator to run the school after a previous leader resigned.

The school's executive director, Doris Pinkney, could not be reached for comment. James Harris, its board chairman, said it closed to allow students who transferred to nearby Ceria M. Travis Academy stability while it appealed the state ban. Travis Academy faces its own troubles with the state, and signed a legal agreement last year to meet reporting requirements.

If the ban stands, Pinkney's school would be the 57th terminated from the voucher program by the Department of Public Instruction since the 2003-'04 academic year. Those schools had been paid a total of $176 million.

Before opening the school, Pinkney had operated a day care center since 2002. Her state license was revoked in 2010 by the Department of Children and Families for numerous violations. Pinkney filed for bankruptcy three times since 1995, most recently in April.

Gov. Scott Walker's 2015-'17 biennial budget expanded the school choice program statewide.

Education advocates and a bipartisan array of lawmakers have supported some type of accountability measures for voucher schools, but a handful of bills have languished this legislative session.

The Democrats' bills would impose on voucher schools many of the same criteria required of public schools, including licensing for teachers, background checks for teachers and administrators, and comparable graduation requirements.

Two Republican bills — in the Senate and Assembly — received hearings in January but have not come up for a vote.