Latest Wisconsin test performance: 51% proficient in reading, 44% in math
By of the

More than half of Wisconsin's public school students in grades three through eight, 51.2%, were proficient or advanced in English language arts last year, but only 43.7% did as well in math, according to results released Wednesday of the state's standardized tests.

Both scores, which reflect results of the newly implemented Badger Exam, suggest improvements over the 2013-'14 school year, but Department of Public Instruction officials cautioned against making comparisons because they result from different exams and scoring mechanisms.

As in past years, the statewide assessment shows stubborn achievement gaps between white and minority students, and similar gaps for English language learners, disabled students and those living in poverty when compared with their peers.

"These achievement gaps are most troubling," state Superintendent Tony Evers said in a statement accompanying the limited release of the results, five months behind schedule.

Evers said the state is using the test data and other resources to identify schools and strategies that have been shown to narrow the gaps, and is sharing those practices across the state to "ensure every student graduates college and career ready."

Wednesday's release marks the first — and final — look at statewide results from the Badger Exam, which had replaced the long-running Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Exam for the 2014-'15 school year.

The Badger Exam, devised to align with the Common Core standards the state adopted in 2010, suffered a rocky rollout and was widely criticized. It was discontinued under Gov. Scott Walker's 2015-'17 budget and will be replaced by the Wisconsin Forward Exam this spring — the state's third assessment in as many years.

The DPI results also include ACT scores taken by juniors and those of the Dynamic Learning Maps Performance exam taken by students with significant cognitive disabilities.

They do not include individual district- and school-level data for public schools or the scores for private schools participating in the state-funded voucher programs.

Among the highlights:

■The composite score for juniors who took the ACT was 20 on a scale of 36. That's below the 22.2 reported in August. Again, DPI said any comparisons would be "flawed" because of significant changes in the pool of test-takers. Until this year, the ACT scores reflected those taken during senior year, in many cases by students who had taken it multiple times. The drop was expected because of a new mandate that requires all juniors to take the exam.

■Overall, 45.7% of students scored proficient or advanced on the combined ACT/Dynamic Learning Maps exams; 35.9% did as well in math. The ACT/DLM scores also show significant achievement gaps along racial, socioeconomic and other lines.

■In the elementary grades, third- and fourth-graders performed significantly better in math than their older counterparts on the Badger Exam. DPI spokesman John Johnson said that may be attributed to the state's adoption of the Common Core standards.

"What we think is going on is that those students ... had been taught pretty much with the new standards from the time they went into school, as opposed to students in the older grades who transitioned to the new standards," Johnson said.

Milwaukee Public Schools, the state's largest district, which has a disproportionate percentage of students in poverty, performed well below the state average, district officials said Wednesday.

In grades three through eight, 27% of MPS students scored proficient or advanced in language arts and 17% did so in math on the Badger Exam/DLM. On ACT scores, 22% of juniors were sufficient or advanced in language arts, with a score 20 or higher, and 10% did as well in math, a score of 22 or higher.

The district said it saw an "upward trend in proficiency" in language arts among middle-schoolers, with progressively higher scores from sixth to eighth grades. MPS officials said it may be the result of several initiatives, including a new focus on literacy, an expansion of online supports for high schoolers and implementation of the Common Core standards.

"While it is a step in a positive direction, we still have significant work to do at all grade levels," MPS Superintendent Darienne Driver said in a statement announcing the results.

DPI had been expected to release the annual test results in August. It attributed the delay — and the inability to provide district- and school-level data — to the logistics of working with three new vendors for the 2014-'15 tests and preparing for the upcoming Wisconsin Forward Exam.

Johnson stressed that students, parents, teachers and schools had received student-level data over the summer. DPI provided districts with their systemwide data in recent weeks and left it to them to make that public no earlier than 9:30 a.m. Wednesday.

He said the district and voucher schools data would eventually appear on the DPI website, but he could not say when.

It was not clear how many districts released their data on Wednesday. A handful of districts responded to an email from the Journal Sentinel seeking comment on their scores.

One administrator of a rural district said he had tried looking at his data "and to be honest could not make heads or tails of it."

Most of the districts that responded, including West Bend, Kettle Moraine and Whitnall, touted their districts' scores in comparison to the state averages.

"We're 10-plus points above the state average ... and we have one elementary school that is 24 points above," said Ted Neitzke, superintendent of the West Bend School District, which planned to release its data Wednesday.

"We've invested pretty heavily in our elementary levels. ... We're pretty excited about those results," he said.

On the Badger/DLM exam, Kettle Moraine students were 70.4% proficient or advanced English language arts and 65.8% in math. Whitnall had 60% proficient or advanced in language arts and 54.8% in math.

Their juniors also scored above the state averages for math and language arts on the ACT/DLM test.

Anthony Brazouski, executive director of academic achievement for the Whitnall School District, called the results "a starting point for future improvement."

"We are hopeful that this year will serve as a baseline for future data analyses," he said.

At least one small district reported a puzzling anomaly in its data. John Engstrom of the Friess Lake School District in Washington County said his students outperformed the state at all levels in reading and scored at or well above state levels in math.

However, Engstrom said several students who scored high on internal math assessments and are enrolled in advanced math courses scored only a basic on the Badger Exam.

"I'm still trying to discern how that happened," he said.