Voucher students post gain in math, reading; still lag public schools
By of the

Reading and math proficiency for students attending private, mostly religious schools in Milwaukee with the help of taxpayer-funded vouchers ticked up in 2013 from 2012, according to the latest state standardized test score results.

On average, students in Milwaukee's private-school voucher program still performed lower than students in the city's traditional public school system.

The Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction released fall test score data for the taxpayer-funded private voucher schools on Tuesday, one day after allowing media to review the fall 2013 state test score results for public schools.

In all, reading and math achievement on the Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Examination for both the public and private voucher schools, especially in Milwaukee, continued to be low. That's due in part to the state raising the bar for what's considered a proficient score on the state test.

The WKCE will be replaced next year by a new, computer-based assessment in reading and math that is aligned to national standards and will allow for better comparisons of achievement between states.

Another issue that has cropped up is an increasing number of voucher-school families opting their children out of taking the state exams altogether — a legal option, but one seemingly at odds with the statewide push toward more transparency for schools.

Gov. Scott Walker signed two bills into law Tuesday that will bring more accountability to the private schools receiving taxpayer money.

Meanwhile, the latest state test results showed:

About 16% of Milwaukee voucher students who took the state test met or exceeded the bar for proficiency in math, and about 12% did the same in reading.

That's up from 2012, when about 13% of students in Milwaukee's private voucher schools scored proficient or advanced in math, and 11% scored proficient or advanced in reading.

On average in Milwaukee Public Schools, 19% of students were proficient or advanced in math, and about 15% scored the same in reading.

If you compare just the scores of voucher students who took the state test with only the scores of low-income children in Milwaukee Public Schools, voucher school students scored slightly ahead of the district.

Because the state has raised the bar for what's considered a proficient score on the state test — a move made in preparation for the more rigorous and nationally aligned test coming down the pike — far more students are now falling under the marker for proficiency in the core subjects.

More opt out of exams

A growing number of taxpayer-funded private schools posted little to no data at all — either because parents chose or were encouraged to opt their children out of taking the state tests.

In the state's three voucher programs, 368 students did not take the exams because of parent opt-outs: that's 2.7% of the 13,601 students in tested grades at voucher schools.

Four private schools saw 100% of their taxpayer-funded voucher students opt out of the tests: Hillel Academy in Milwaukee, Sheboygan Area Lutheran and Sheboygan Christian, and St. Joseph Catholic School in Kenosha.

At Pius XI High School in Milwaukee, 102 of 107 voucher students opted out of the exams.

Only about 0.1% of public school students opted out of the exams, or 578 students statewide out of 432,594 students in tested grades.

Voucher leaders respond

Leaders of some of Milwaukee's largest voucher-school networks were reluctant to discuss specifics of the new test-score results.

Jamie Leuhring, executive director of the Hope Christian Schools network of voucher schools, said he was hesitant to make judgments about schools based on the WKCE, which is more of a snapshot of kids who were in schools the day that tests were given.

He and other school leaders prefer to gauge student progress on a different in-house assessment administered three times a year — which gives quick feedback and shows student growth from the beginning to the end of the school year.

"Half of our students have been with us for less than two years," he said.

Still, the average scores for Hope students were below the average for all voucher schools. At Hope elementary schools, between 4% and 11% of students were proficient in reading, and between 4% and 15% were proficient in math.

At Hope High School, 10% of 10th-graders tested proficient in reading and 7% of students were considered proficient in math.

Those scores are at odds with other data Leuhring provided.

He said that 100% of the Hope High School senior class has been accepted to college, and that ACT scores are on the rise.

Jim Bender, president of the voucher-advocacy organization School Choice Wisconsin, said the WKCE has long been a poor judge of student performance, and that the state laws signed Tuesday will move voucher-school performance forward.

"We're at a critical point to get the right data and the right tools, so we can improve achievement," he said.

The accountability legislation signed by Walker would fold all taxpayer-funded schools — traditional public, public charter and for the first time, taxpayer-funded voucher schools — into the state's existing school report card system by the 2015-'16 school year.

The legislation does not address the second step of accountability for schools: determining the consequences for ones that don't score well on the report cards.

Zeus Rodriguez, president of St. Anthony School of Milwaukee, the state's largest private school receiving taxpayer-funded vouchers, said Tuesday the measure signed by Walker is a good first step. It would help the state move toward the goal of penalizing low-performing schools — both public and private — and rewarding schools like St. Anthony.

According to the latest state test score results, 12% of St. Anthony students were proficient in reading and 19% were proficient in math.

The other bill signed into law by Walker subjects start-up private schools to more rigorous financial reviews and more oversight before they can become qualified to receive taxpayer money through the Milwaukee and Racine voucher programs.

Jason Stein of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this story from Madison.