Wisconsin hearing repeats debate over Common Core school standards
Madison — While more rigorous academic standards are applied at public schools in Wisconsin this year, lawmakers and citizens debated the guidelines at a standing-room-only hearing Thursday, with some continuing to question if the rules were a federal intrusion into local schools.

Tony Evers, state superintendent, and Emilie Amundson, director of the Common Core State Standards Team, once again defended the grade- and subject-specific goals in reading and math as being superior to Wisconsin's previously weak and scatter-shot standards.

"Let me say clearly that I was not coerced by the federal government to adopt the Common Core, and I didn't adopt the Common Core in order to qualify for a (federal) Race to the Top grant," Evers said to members of the select legislative committees formed last month on the heels of a national pushback to the standards.

But critics, including citizens with views aligned with the tea party, appeared unconvinced.

One woman from Wisconsin Family Action testified that the "slickly marketed" standards would drive textbook publishers to "indoctrinate students with liberal, un-American teaching."

"These were developed by people whose best interest was not Wisconsin's children," said Julaine K. Appling, president of the Madison-based conservative group.

The debate over Common Core in Wisconsin follows similar debates in states such as Michigan, Louisiana and Florida. The standards, developed jointly by state and local education leaders and state governors, were adopted by Wisconsin in 2010 with little objection. They will be aligned with a new state standardized test that will roll out next year.

The hearing Thursday on the Common Core was the first of several meetings planned by Republican leaders of the Senate and Assembly to review and potentially modify the standards.

Notably absent from the proceedings: the state's highest-ranking lawmakers on education. State Senate Education Chair Luther Olsen (R-Ripon) and Assembly Education Chair Steve Kestell (R-Elkhart Lake) both declined to participate, calling the legitimacy of the hearings into question.

About 45 states have signed onto the Common Core, so the recent challenges are a point of frustration for many teachers, superintendents and state education department administrators who have been working on revising curriculum for three years and see the Common Core as better preparing students for college and careers.

In an interview, Evers voiced what many Common Core supporters have said behind closed doors: that the recent pushback is driven by a political, not an educational, agenda.

"This is all about what's going on in Washington," Evers said. "It's all about controlling the message and the next (presidential) election."

More than 15 Wisconsin educators, all former state Teacher of the Year award winners, distributed a joint letter Thursday trying to push past the politics.

Tim Schell, director of curriculum and instruction for the Waunakee Community School District, told the committee members Thursday the Common Core's emphasis on strengthening literacy is helping boost the district's achievement scores. Like other school leaders who testified, Schell said the new standards required students to engage in more complex and deeper thinking in both of the core subjects.

Underscoring that is the fact that many parochial schools also have adopted the shared goals, he said.

If the standards were thrown out and the district had to start over, Schell said, teachers and principals would have a lot of questions.

"What would be Plan B?" he asked. "Is Plan B going back to (old) academic standards and (old) state tests? Our recommendation would be to stay the course with Common Core until we had something better."

Jeff Horn, a parent from DeForest whose online activity shows he's critical of the DeForest Area School District and attended a libertarian group meeting at least once in 2011, said he was glad the select committees were taking a closer look at the standards.

Horn said the standards were adopted with too little oversight from the Legislature, and the public comment period on the standards was not sufficient.

State Sen. Leah Vukmir (R-Wauwatosa), who sits on the committee, said in a statement that many questions still needed to be answered regarding Common Core.

"Throughout today's testimony, it is clear there continues to be many questions regarding Common Core implementation in Wisconsin," Vukmir said. "Specifically, the federal government's role in the testing process raises serious constitutional and local control concerns."

More hearings set

Three more hearings will be held offering testimony on Common Core State Standards:

■ 2 to 8 p.m. Oct. 16 at the Fond du Lac City/County Building.

■ 2 to 8 p.m. Oct. 23 at Chippewa Valley Technical College in Eau Claire.

■ 2 to 8 p.m. Oct. 30 at Northcentral Technical College in Wausau.