Wisconsin ties for second nationally in ACT test scores
SHARE

By of the

Wisconsin graduates in the Class of 2013 who took the ACT college admission test posted an average score of 22.1, according to results released by the state Wednesday.

That average score for Wisconsin held steady from 2012, even though scores of students who needed extra time to take the exam were factored into the results for the first time at the state and national level.

Wisconsin tied with Iowa for the second-highest composite ACT score, among states where more than half the students take the ACT. Among those states, Minnesota has the No. 1 average ACT score: 23.

In many states, the SAT is the predominant college entrance exam.

The latest ACT results by school and by district in Wisconsin can be searched on the Department of Public Instruction's data website.

The nationwide average score was 20.9 on the ACT, a 36-point test that consists of tests in English, reading, mathematics and science.

Since 2011, 71% of Wisconsin's graduates each year have taken the exam, but that participation rate is poised to increase once the ACT becomes part of a statewide testing program for 11th-graders in the 2014-'15 school year.

Gov. Scott Walker's 2013-'15 budget included funding to administer the ACT suite of tests in all high schools.

Overall, 74% of Wisconsin public and private school graduates in the Class of 2013 took the ACT-recommended core curriculum of four years of English and three years each of math, science and social studies, according to the DPI.

Wisconsin students taking that recommended core curriculum had subject-level scores that averaged 2.4 points higher than state students who didn't take that recommended course load, the agency reported in a news release.

The percentage of Wisconsin graduates who took the recommended core curriculum varied by racial group: only 54% of the state's black graduates who took the ACT followed the core curriculum, compared with 67% of Latino graduates and 78% of white graduates.

Average composite ACT scores change little from year to year.

But over the past six years of results in Wisconsin, average ACT scores have risen slightly for white and Asian high school graduates, and decreased slightly for black, Latino and mixed-race graduates, according to DPI data.