State moves to bar Milwaukee school from voucher program
SHARE About voucher schools Voucher schools are private schools that receive taxpayer money in the form of tuition payments for qualifying students. All voucher schools are private schools, and most teach religion. As of the 2014-’15 school year, 26,930 students in Milwaukee were using vouchers to attend one of 113 private schools.



The Milwaukee voucher program, officially known as the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program, was started in 1990 and is the longest-running urban school voucher program in the country. Students have to come from low-income or moderate-income families to qualify for a voucher. Once enrolled, they bring the participating school a voucher payment of between $7,000 and $8,000 annually.



The state Legislature created a Racine voucher program in 2011 and a statewide voucher program in 2013.

By of the

The Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction has moved to bar a Milwaukee Christian school from the taxpayer-funded school voucher program this year for not following the rules on administrator credentials.

According to a notice from the DPI released this week, Daughters of the Father Christian Academy failed to properly appoint a qualified administrator to run the school after a previous leader resigned.

The notice also suggests the school's executive director, Doris Pinkney, lied to DPI officials about her staff's credentials.

Representatives from the school could not be reached for comment.

Daughters of the Father opened in 2007 and received more than $1 million in taxpayer funding for about 154 students last year, according to state records.

The notice from the DPI says Pinkney failed to appoint a new principal who had completed mandatory administrative training by the state's deadline of June 30.

The school's former principal, Chrystal Lester, resigned June 2. Rules that govern the program specify that once an administrator leaves, the school must update a specific form with the new administrator.

One June 1, the DPI sent a memo to all participating private schools reminding them of the June 30 deadline to complete and update all their necessary forms. One form has to be submitted using the DPI's online application system, and the only way to retrieve the login information is to attend a half-day training session in Madison at the DPI office. The training sessions are held once a month, according to the DPI.

The notice says Lester called the DPI June 15 to notify it of her resignation. As is the state's policy, a staffer locked Lester's login information.

On June 26, according to the DPI, Pinkney called and said Lester lost her password for the online system and needed her password reset. When the staffer asked Pinkney if Lester still worked at the school, Pinkney said Lester did not.

That same day, the school registered two people, Ultra Brown and Demetri Beekman, to attend the training session June 29. But neither attended it, according to the DPI.

Pinkney then told the DPI they hired a new administrator, Shalita Williams, and that she had already attended a training session. But Williams had not, according to the DPI.

School already facing budget difficulties

Daughters of the Father, with two locations at 5126 N. 38th St. and 5806 W. Burleigh St., can appeal the ruling, which comes a few months after the school made news for other parts of its operations.

According to a Fox 6 report in May, the school stopped providing busing for students mid-year, despite receiving $31,000 in transportation money from Milwaukee Public Schools in addition to state voucher payments.

In a statement to Fox 6 in May, Pinkney acknowledged the school's financial difficulties, saying it was because she didn't enroll as many students as expected.

She stressed the school was still committed to "the highest level of academic education," and that "each and every teacher and staff member will be working for the Academy during the 2015-'16 school year."