UW System budget pares undesignated cash reserves
The University of Wisconsin System will have 3.3% of its overall budget — less than $200 million — in true cash reserves a year from now to cover any unexpected expenses or shortfalls at its 26 campuses, UW System President Ray Cross said Thursday as the Board of Regents unanimously approved the system budget.

That figure comes after obligated, planned and designated commitments are set aside, Cross said.

"Yes, that does concern me," Cross told the regents during a meeting at UW-Milwaukee.

"Let me be clear. These reductions were both strategic and necessary. However, prudent business practices require adequate reserves to address the volatility of an organization's finances.

"I am committed to working with the board and with campus leadership to find the appropriate balance," Cross said.

The UW System has been under intense pressure to spend down hundreds of millions of dollars in cash balances held in accounts across its campuses.

State lawmakers were furious when the balances were revealed in an audit a year ago because the balances were not clearly disclosed to the public.

At the same time, tuition was raised by 5.5% for several years in a row because UW System officials said the system was strapped for cash.

Lawmakers demanded that the UW System come up with new policies to guide how much campuses could hold in accounts at the end of each budget year.

Lawmakers also mandated a two-year tuition freeze for resident undergrads in the 2013-'15 state budget because the UW System had banked $551 million in unspent tuition balances across its campuses.

Tuition next year will not be raised for nonresident or graduate students, either.

Regent Margaret Farrow said she thought nonresident tuition should be increased.

"I think we are a bargain at all of our institutions for nonresidents."

Cross said that move "reflects a desire to be price competitive and grow revenues from nonresident and international student enrollments that help support resident students." Nonresident students pay higher tuition than in-state residents.

The controversial fund balances already have been trimmed by 16.5% from last year, from $1.097 billion to $917 million, according to Cross. Cash balances are projected to drop further to $804 million by next June — a 27% drop over two years.

The tuition portion of the fund balances is projected to drop from $551 million last June to $304 million next June — a 45% reduction over two years. The tuition balances will drop $75 million alone in the next year.

Of the $1.097 billion cash balances kept across all UW institutions as of last June, $151 million was held by systemwide accounts. Cross said that amount will drop to about $60 million this June. "I promised the board, the governor, the Legislature and the chancellors it would be cut in half by this June, and it will be."

The 2014-'15 budget of $6.1 billion that the regents approved Thursday freezes tuition for a second year in a row but raises student fees by an average of 3.6% ($39) and room and board by an average of 2.7% ($178) at the four-year campuses. The budget calls for a 1.7% spending increase over last year.

Financial aid boost sought

Cross called for the UW System to strongly advocate for increased financial aid for students to help make college more affordable.

Nearly one of every 10 UW students eligible for need-based state financial aid was wait-listed for the 2013-'14 academic year because there wasn't enough money available. That's 3,581 of the 36,446 eligible students, down from 5,096 the previous year.

Cross proposed that the regents seek a $14.9 million increase in state funding for financial aid in the 2015-'17 state budget so all UW students who qualify for the state grants actually receive one.

The UW System proposal also would increase the size of the average grant to UW students for the 2016-'17 academic year.

The average award is projected to remain at the 2013-'14 level of $1,776 for 2015-'16. Awards are projected to return to the 2012-'13 level of $1,837 in 2016-'17. That's less than the average award in 2009-'10 of $2,161.

Holding down costs

Cross said the UW System's biennial budget will be built on holding down costs for all students in several ways:

■ Proposing to continue the tuition freeze.

■ Helping technical college students reduce their costs to complete a four-year degree by easing transfer through a 30-credit transfer agreement officials will sign Friday.

■ Helping high school students reduce their cost of attending college by providing more dual enrollment courses in their high schools under the new Course Options program.

■ Providing more financial aid to students through the Wisconsin Higher Education Grants Program.

In its state biennial budget request, the UW System also will prioritize higher compensation for faculty and staff.

"We are committing ourselves to developing sustainable compensation solutions so that the UW System can more effectively compete in the global higher education market place," Cross said. "We won't resolve this in one year, but we cannot wait."