University of Wisconsin Regents enact budget reflecting state cuts
State budget cuts will prompt a combination of 400 layoffs and unfilled positions at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Credit: Journal Sentinel files

By

Madison — The University of Wisconsin Board of Regents approved a $6 billion budget Thursday that incorporates millions of dollars in cuts from the Legislature.

Before voting, the regents worried about the effects of deep cuts on the UW System.

"At what point do we say 'ouch'?" Regent Jose F. Vasquez asked.

UW System President Ray Cross outlined the $6.149 billion budget for 2015-'16, which includes using $180 million in fund balances to help balance the budget. Still, campuses face layoffs and voluntary early retirement buyouts as well as other ways to cope with cuts.

"There's no question this is very painful," Cross said.

Noting that Gov. Scott Walker originally proposed a $300 million two-year cut to the UW System, "our budget reduction has been significantly reduced," Cross said.

But Regent Margaret Farrow cautioned that UW's surplus is being depleted by spending $180 million from fund balances, "which is totally unconscionable," she said. During a break in the meeting Farrow told the Journal Sentinel that "if that becomes the cushion that balances our budget, what happens when we don't have a surplus?"

In January, Walker proposed cutting $150 million in the 2015-'16 budget year from the UW budget as part of his state budget. But in May, the Joint Finance Committee of the Republican-held Legislature reduced the cut to $125 million and directed the UW System to distribute the "saved" $25 million to campuses based on need. Another $20 million in existing cash balances will be distributed among campuses as one-time assistance based on how well UW System officials thought each school could absorb and manage state budget cuts.

Tuition

While the university system copes with cuts, it is somewhat hampered from boosting revenue through tuition since resident undergraduate tuition has been frozen for the last two years. The governor and Joint Finance Committee want a tuition freeze for resident undergrads to continue for the next two years. In April, the regents approved graduate and nonresident tuition increases at several campuses.

Regent Charles Pruitt voted against the budget, the first time in his 12 years on the board, which he called "a symbolic vote."

"Now for two budgets in a row, there's been a toxic blend of deep budget cuts and a tuition freeze," Pruitt said. "The short- and long-term consequences of this budget are profound."

UW-Madison cuts

UW-Madison Chancellor Rebecca Blank told the Board of Regents that some items in the budget are not reflected as cuts but will hurt the campus' bottom line, such as $3.5 million the state pledged annually as matching funds for a federal bioenergy grant in the Wisconsin Bioenergy Initiative. The budget passed Thursday will mean, as previously announced, a combination of 400 layoffs and unfilled positions on the state's largest campus.

"We've done everything we can to be responsible, from raising out-of-state tuition to cuts of just under $40 million. That's very painful, and we're still sitting at a budget deficit," Blank said.

The UW System has spent down tuition balances by roughly 20% since the 2013-'14 balances were reported, from $395 million in 2013-'14 to an estimated $316 million for 2014-'15.

Regent Janice Mueller noted that the budget does not include salary increases for UW faculty and staff while employees will pay more for health insurance costs starting Jan. 1. Schools, however, will be allowed to use funds for merit pay if they wish.

Regent Emeritus David Walsh, who retired from the board in May after a dozen years, told regents that a university system revered around the world for its research, teaching and graduates has serious financial problems. Noting that the amount of state support to the university has dropped precipitously over the last few governors, a cut in state funding combined with a tuition freeze means the system is in a crisis.

Public outreach

"We are a very low priority in certain people's minds," said Walsh, pointing out that 180,000 students attend UW schools annually with 35,000 graduating each year.

He suggested the board develop a strategy to let the public know what the cuts will mean to the university system. The board is scheduling listening sessions throughout the state with parents of UW students and the public.

"We're an asset of the state. We're not a line item on the budget," Walsh said.