Wisconsin schools chief blasts voucher expansion
Glendale — State Superintendent Tony Evers and public school district leaders spoke out Thursday against the state budget proposal to expand the voucher school system statewide in the next budget, saying the expansion is costly for children and public schools across the state.

The news conference came two days after Gov. Scott Walker told about 90 voucher school and prospective voucher school leaders he supports the expansion legislators inserted into the budget last week and believes it will strengthen the state's public school system.

Evers disputed Walker's prediction.

"Our children are caught in an ideologically driven expansion of school vouchers that is financially reckless and academically unproven," Evers said.

Evers and superintendents of districts from southeastern Wisconsin spoke before about 50 members of the community and media in the Parkway Elementary School library.

"Taxpayers across Wisconsin will be increasingly on the hook to pay for more and more privately educated students whose tuition is currently paid for by their folks," Evers said.

The state superintendent position is nonpartisan, but Evers leans Democratic and has the support of teachers unions and other public-school employees, which tend to be almost universally opposed to efforts to expand voucher schools.

Under the current proposal, a statewide voucher system would allow 500 children from lower- and middle-class families to attend a private or religious school paid for by state funding in its first year. In its second year, the program would be capped at 1,000 students.

Democratic lawmakers raised concerns that Walker would use his partial veto power to eliminate the cap for the program, a move that would greatly expand the program's reach and cost.

On Tuesday, Walker told reporters he would "stay true" to the current proposal.

But Evers predicted Thursday that the governor will look to eliminate not only the cap on participants in the program but also the income requirement necessary to qualify for a voucher in the next budget cycle.

The current legislation requires voucher recipients outside Milwaukee and Racine to have family income at 185% or less of the poverty level.

"Legislators may be proud that they require limits (through) these caps, ... but let's be clear, everyone that's in power in this state, including the governor, has indicated that their goal is to have no caps on enrollment and no caps on income requirements," he said.

Speaking after the Evers news conference, Jim Bender, the president of School Choice Wisconsin, said the expansion of the voucher program would not impact the funds that public schools receive from the state.

"Technically (the funding) does not come out of the public school education, it comes out of the entire budget," Bender said. "It's a separate (general purpose revenue) appropriation so it doesn't come out of the education funding."

Bender addressed the media in the school's library.

His comments drew a rebuke from Pat Greco, the superintendent of the Menomonee Falls School District who participated in the Evers news conference.

"We are disproportionately funding the education of children across the state of Wisconsin. Our taxpayers are paying for it. Our taxpayers are... seeing the investment (in) schools that are not accountable to the taxpayers," she said.

"It's irresponsible and it's irresponsible to advance it as if it will not have a direct impact on the funding formula of public schools across the state," she said.