Mary Burke stumbles when asked to define plagiarism
Mary Burke, the Democrat running for governor, on Thursday stumbled when explaining her definition of plagiarism. The issue has come to the forefront in her race against Republican Gov. Scott Walker after it came to light her jobs plan contained passages that had appeared in other candidates’ plans.

By of the

Madison — Democratic candidate for governor Mary Burke stumbled Thursday when asked to define plagiarism and said she had not violated her principles with a jobs plan that includes nearly word-for-word sections that also appear in other candidates' plans.

Burke, who is running against GOP Gov. Scott Walker in the Nov. 4 election, also stressed the importance of providing citations in her plan, but an aide said later no changes to the plan would be made.

Asked by reporters to define plagiarism, Burke said: "This, this probably, using words, exact words, from a source that doesn't, that isn't cited and isn't attributable."

She said she her jobs plan did not violate her principles.

"When you put together economic development plans, this is about bringing in the best ideas," she said. "And this is not anything more than bringing good ideas to Wisconsin, to the plans on how I'm going to move Wisconsin forward. And in describing some of these ideas, similar language was used by the consultant that was used in those ideas that he incorporated in other candidates' plans."

Last week, it surfaced that Burke's jobs plan included nearly identical passages from ones by three other Democrats — Delaware Gov. Jack Markell in 2008, Ward Cammack of Tennessee in 2009 and John Gregg of Indiana in 2012.

When the matter became public, Burke said the sections came from consultant Eric Schnurer of the Pennsylvania firm Public Works and he was no longer doing work for the campaign.

"Those exact words should not have been used, that were used in other plans, and that's why we cut ties," she said Thursday. "But I'll be clear about this: As governor, I'm going to welcome ideas from other places, the best ideas and best practices."

She has not modified the wording of her jobs plan, but said it was important to provide citations in her plan.

"Certainly, anything that is not directly from Eric that should be cited would be cited," she said.

But afterward, Burke campaign spokesman Joe Zepecki said the plan already included all needed citations.

"Where cites are appropriate, they have been made," Zepecki said in an email. "In other instances work product that has been identified as coming from Mr. Schnurer has been addressed by cutting ties with him."

BuzzFeed, the website that first reported last week on the wording of Burke's jobs plan, cited three more instances Wednesday of borrowed language. The latest examples represent a further step down in substance and significance from the previous cases of verbatim and nearly verbatim copying.

Asked after a Madison meeting whether he thought the revelations about Burke were a potential turning point in the campaign, Walker said he thought they were.

"Yeah, I think that the problem for her is this isn't just some campaign flier...This was the centerpiece of her campaign," Walker said. "I do think the legitimate question goes to the heart to the authenticity of the candidate."

Burke spoke to reporters Thursday at an event where she received the endorsement of the Wisconsin Professional Police Association, the state's largest police union.

In endorsing her, the union's executive director, Jim Palmer, blamed Walker for a rise in violent crime, citing FBI statistics.

"Under Scott Walker, not only has Wisconsin trailed its neighbors in creating jobs, but in combating violent crime as well. The crime data shows that Wisconsin has become less safe than it was when Scott Walker took office," Palmer said. "And we can no longer afford his brand of failed leadership."

Also Thursday, Walker received the endorsement of the Wisconsin Troopers Association.

"It is clear that public and highway safety is a top priority of this administration," the group's executive director, Ryan Zukowski, said in a statement.

Meanwhile Thursday, the Republican Governors Association announced that New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie will campaign on Monday for Walker in Hudson. That's the same day First Lady Michelle Obama is in Milwaukee for Burke.

Christie is the chairman of the Republican Governors Association and, like Walker, a potential candidate for president in 2016.

Daniel Bice and Jason Stein of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.