Holloway downplays chances
Acting County Executive Lee Holloway on Tuesday gave a downbeat assessment of his own prospects in the county executive race and said he lacked enthusiasm for public office.

But Holloway offered a withering critique of his opponents and declared himself the best-qualified candidate.

Holloway said he thought he might survive the Feb. 15 five-way primary for the final year in Gov. Scott Walker's unexpired county executive term. But his chances aren't great and were harmed by news coverage of his problems with his rental properties, Holloway said.

"I think I'm out of the loop because of that," Holloway said during a meeting with Journal Sentinel editors and reporters.

The top two vote-getters in the primary advance to the April 5 runoff election.

Holloway faces more than 100 building code violations on his central city rental properties, which Holloway has previously blamed on tenants. One of Holloway's tenants is suing him and his wife, Lynda, over a fall in one of his buildings. A security guard employed by Holloway has been charged with four misdemeanors accusing him of barging into that tenant's apartment Jan. 5 carrying a gun and ordering her to move out.

Holloway declined to discuss his properties, except to say news coverage damaged his campaign.

At one point, Holloway said he plans to retire in a year, which is when his County Board term ends. Asked if that meant if he won the county executive race that he would not try to win a full term in 2012, Holloway said he hadn't decided.

"We'll see what takes place," Holloway said. "I don't have a lot of enthusiasm about serving any more. I'm 64, and a lot of people my age are under the ground."

He also said he had been unable to raise much money in the race, putting him at a disadvantage. In reports covering a brief period ending Dec. 31, Holloway reported no donations and a campaign account balance of $8,831 - most of it from a loan from himself of $6,350.

Other candidates in the race and their fund-raising tallies included state Rep. Jeff Stone (R-Greendale), who transferred $54,000 from his state campaign and had nearly $48,000 on hand; former state Sen. Jim Sullivan (D-Wauwatosa), who raised $31,070 and spent nearly $122,000; and philanthropist Chris Abele, who reported raising almost $265,000 - including a $250,000 loan from himself.

Paralegal Ieshuh Griffin raised and spent no money.

In handicapping the race for county executive, Holloway said of his rivals: "I don't think very much of them."

Abele lacks in-depth knowledge of the area and a tough instinct a politician needs, Holloway said. "He's a nice, soft guy," who is trying to buy the race with his personal wealth, Holloway said.

Holloway pegged Stone as lacking fresh ideas of his own and trying to follow in Walker's footsteps, but Holloway said times have changed, and Stone lacks Walker's charisma.

Sullivan, who lost a state Senate re-election bid in November, "is primarily just a guy looking for a job," Holloway said.

Abele is taking a nontraditional approach of trying to bring people together rather than fight the same old battles, said Abele spokesman Brandon Lorenz. Abele plans an aggressive community fundraising effort, Lorenz said. Abele didn't respond to a request for comment.

Stone said: "Truthfully, being the person that appears to be boring in this group of candidates isn't something I have a problem with." While supportive of Walker's tenure as county executive, Stone said he would focus more on job development than Walker.

Sullivan has said he probably wouldn't be running for county executive if he'd won re-election to the Senate, but sees the executive post as a way to improve people's lives.