Walker, Barrett seek checks on unions
They didn't seem to agree on anything during the gubernatorial election, but Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett is hoping he and Governor-elect Scott Walker can find common ground on at least one issue in 2011.

Both leaders want to rein in public employee unions - just not the same ones.

Walker, who has tangled with Milwaukee County unions as county executive, is gearing up for a clash with state workers, seeking wage and benefit cuts and threatening legislation to weaken or eliminate state unions' bargaining rights if they won't agree to concessions.

Barrett, meanwhile, wants Walker's help to change another law that gives Milwaukee police unions extra bargaining leverage. The mayor also wants to block the police and firefighters' unions from winning one of their top legislative priorities: abolishing residency requirements.

While most public employee unions backed Barrett, the Democratic nominee for governor, the Milwaukee Police Association and the Milwaukee Professional Firefighters Association endorsed Walker, the Republican. Now both unions' presidents accuse Barrett of seeking retribution for those endorsements, a charge he denies.

Walker has discussed the issues with Barrett, and will consider the mayor's comments, Walker spokesman Cullen Werwie said.

For both Walker and Barrett, the issue is money. Facing potential shortfalls of more than $100 million in the current state budget and up to $3.3 billion in 2011-'13, Walker and his fellow Republicans in the Legislature are sure to cut state spending.

Barrett fears they will chop shared revenue to local governments, blowing a hole in the city budget. He says that could jeopardize public safety, because wages and benefits for police and firefighters are the city's biggest expense.

Walker and GOP legislative leaders have indicated they could change the law governing how arbitrators choose between local government and union proposals if the two sides can't agree at the bargaining table. In a Dec. 7 speech, Walker floated the idea of comparing public-sector and private-sector pay as part of the process.

Barrett says any such change also should eliminate issue-by-issue arbitration for the Milwaukee Police Association, which represents rank-and-file officers and detectives, and the Milwaukee Police Supervisors Organization, which represents sergeants, lieutenants, captains and deputy inspectors.

For other public employee unions, arbitrators must choose between each sides' "last, best offer" as a complete package. But for the Milwaukee police unions, arbitrators rule on each individual item in the contract, a process that Barrett and city labor negotiator Troy Hamblin say the unions use to draw out the process to their advantage.

Mike Crivello, president of the MPA, defended the current law, saying arbitrators need the flexibility to focus on individual issues to craft an equitable settlement.

"For them to try to take away something that has benefited the community is absolutely foul," Crivello said.

Although the firefighters don't have special arbitration rules, Barrett says their union is putting additional pressure on the city budget with its demands for a 2010-'12 contract. The union is seeking a base wage increase of 11.6% over three years, which would boost total compensation by more than 17.4% when premium pay and benefits are included, Hamblin says.

By contrast, most other city unions have agreed to a wage freeze for 2010 and 2011, in return for a no-layoff guarantee. Hamblin said the city may be headed to arbitration with all three public safety unions, although only the police supervisors unit has started the process.

Firefighters union president David Seager confirmed his union's contract demands but blasted Barrett for releasing them.

"They're trying to get public outrage through the media, saying, 'Look at those greedy firefighters,' " Seager fumed. "We're not greedy. . . . Fort Knox is not backing into any firefighter's driveway to drop off a load of cash."

Speaking on a day when two Chicago firefighters died on the job, Seager said it was unfair to compare firefighters to other city employees because most city workers don't put their lives on the line. Barrett said he was "extremely grateful" to firefighters for risking their lives, but if state aid is cut, the city may not be able to afford those wage and benefit increases.

Crivello said the mayor was "giving the jab back to the MPA . . . because we endorsed Walker." Seager agreed, saying, "It's pretty simple. It's pretty clear."

Barrett said he was just explaining the city's budget challenges, adding, "I think the taxpayers need to know what's going on here."

Both unions also have sought legislation to eliminate Milwaukee's rule that city employees live in the city. During the campaign, Journal Sentinel columnist Dan Bice reported, Crivello said Walker offered the best chance of achieving that goal, while Seager refused to say whether Walker had promised to deliver that.

Crivello and Seager now say Walker didn't promise them anything on residency, but neither could recall exactly what Walker said in endorsement interviews.

Barrett said letting city employees move to the suburbs would eliminate "a good portion of our middle-class tax base" when 73% of the region's poor live in the city.

Seager and Crivello said many of their members couldn't afford to move right away. Although many police officers and firefighters would stay in the city, they want the freedom to live in the suburbs, partly because of dissatisfaction with the Milwaukee Public Schools, the union leaders say. Some officers also want to live farther from ex-convicts they arrested, Crivello said.

As a state legislator, Walker proposed ending teacher residency rules. Werwie wouldn't comment on Walker's current stand.