Abele vetoes board vote on Estabrook Dam's repairs
SHARE

By of the

Milwaukee County Executive Chris Abele on Friday vetoed a Feb. 5 County Board action to fund up to $1.6 million in repairs of the Estabrook Dam on the Milwaukee River.

Without public notice last week, Supervisor Theodore Lipscomb successfully inserted the dam repair project into a list of 2015 major capital projects that was approved by the board's finance committee.

The full board then subsequently deleted an unfunded dam demolition project from the 2015 capital budget at the same time it approved the $53.6 million list on a 15-1 vote.

"If supervisors would like to change the county's current policy and vote to repair the dam instead of removing it, they should do so in a transparent way," Abele says in a veto message to the board. "Let's discuss that idea in public."

The County Board has scheduled a special meeting Tuesday to respond to vetoes.

Abele is asking the board to sustain the veto of the dam repair while approving a substitute resolution containing the remainder of the major capital projects, which include renovations at the War Memorial Center and highway and bridge improvements.

The total cost of renovating the 1930s-era dam with construction of a fish passage is estimated at more than $2.5 million.

Annual operating and maintenance costs over 20 years would add $2.6 million to the repair option.

The cost of removal is estimated at $1.6 million.

The Estabrook Dam has two structures: a traditional dam with floodgates north of an island in the river; and a fixed spillway south of the island. A series of ice barriers protects the gated dam.

Floodgates at this time are fully open to drain an artificial lake, or impoundment, upstream of the dam, under an order by the state Department of Natural Resources.

In July 2009, the DNR ordered the county to restore the dam or remove it by December 2014. Last month, the DNR granted the county two more years to do the work with a new deadline of December 2016.

In July 2012, a Milwaukee County judge declared the dam a nuisance and ordered the county to submit a plan on how it would eliminate the problem. The order came in a Milwaukee Riverkeeper lawsuit against the county.

A 2012 plan proposed repairs, but the work was not done.

Milwaukee County Circuit Judge Christopher Foley has scheduled a five-day hearing in July on the lawsuit and could order the county to repair or demolish the dam after the trial ends.

In a report submitted to Foley, the county's environmental consultant, AECOM of Sheboygan, concluded that removal of the dam would be the lowest-cost option and result in lower river levels in major floods.

Fish, mussels and other aquatic life also would benefit from a free-flowing river, the report says.

Lipscomb wants the county to repair the dam and refill the impoundment so that property owners can continue boating on the artificial lake.