Clarke drops plan for early prisoner releases
Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. said Wednesday he won't resort to early inmate releases or scaling back freeway patrols as ways to fill a budget hole.

He also backed off his plan to cut off all inmate programs at the House of Correction in Franklin, though they could be dropped or modified later, Clarke said.

What still remains very much alive is his "Discipline-Order-Structure" program. Many inmates come from "chaotic" family backgrounds and need to have discipline instilled before other reform efforts at education and job training can work, Clarke said.

Clarke didn't dispute the characterization of the program as a type of boot camp. He said he decided to try to develop a program to increase discipline among inmates when he first took over supervision of the House of Correction about a year ago and didn't like what he saw.

"I was astonished," he said. Many inmates stayed up very late and slept late and did little during the day except play cards and watch television, Clarke said. Under his new program, inmates will get up early and have ordered days of work and study, he said.

"There's not going to be any lying around," Clarke said. "That whole day is going to be so structured . . . with discipline instilled throughout the entire facility."

He'll start small with one dormitory of about 60 inmates and gradually expand the program, Clarke said. Work details will include cleaning the House of Correction complex and working on the grounds, he said. He'll disclose full details later when they've been finalized, Clarke said.

The sheriff initially had proposed closing two dormitories at the House of Correction and releasing about 120 inmates to home detention as one way of making up for a projected $4.7 million deficit this year. That idea was used by the state Democratic Party to criticize County Executive Scott Walker in his Republican run for governor. State Democratic Chairman Mike Tate blamed Walker's budgets and management for the inmate-release plan.

Clarke announced he was jettisoning the idea after meeting with Walker this week, but Clarke said Walker did not ask him to drop the idea.

The sheriff also has given a reprieve to inmate programs he had said earlier he was canceling. Those include inmate assessments, job skill training, a printing program, and drug and alcohol rehabilitation. Clarke said he'll keep those programs for now, at the request of county Supervisor Lynne De Bruin.

But the sheriff was critical of those programs, saying they had performed poorly.

"We're going to have something that works," he said of the new inmate discipline program. "Not the anecdotal, rhetorical crap." He noted that fewer than 300 of the thousands of inmates passing through the House of Correction last year attended job training and only 77 landed jobs.

Holly Patzer, who heads the agency that provides many of the House of Correction inmate programs, said she would like to work with Clarke on providing programming that dovetails with his discipline plan. She said accountability in following rules was a key part of her agency's training.

"We are actually quite rule-oriented," said Patzer, executive director of Wisconsin Correctional Services. Clarke said he might keep some of the WCS programs after his initiative starts.

Clarke's revised cost-reduction plan will save $2.1 million and includes transferring all inmates with special needs to the county jail, leaving a number of unfilled positions open and reducing some staff. The sheriff offered those moves as an alternative to imposing furlough days on deputies.

He'll decide on other actions to cover the rest of his $4.7 million shortfall later, Clarke said.