BMO Harris Bradley Center showing its age
BMO Harris Bradley Center General Manager Brian Dworak (left) and President and CEO Steve Costello talk about worn seating on the lower floor of the center. To see more photos, go to jsonline.com/photos. Credit: Kristyna Wentz-Graff

By of the

At the 25-year-old BMO Harris Bradley Center, rust is working its way through metal exit doors, some of the key mechanical systems are as old as the building itself, the seats are wearing out and parts of the glassy atrium roof leak.

Steve Costello, president and CEO of the BMO Harris Bradley Center, said the building, the home of the Milwaukee Bucks, Milwaukee Admirals and the men's basketball program at Marquette University, is a "senior citizen."

"It is becoming more and more difficult to maintain the building — and a stable fiscal position — amid the challenges that we face," Costello said.

Despite the facility's age, there is no consensus on what to do about the BMO Harris Bradley Center. On Friday, the 48-member Cultural and Entertainment Capital Needs Task Force will meet for the first time to discuss not only the future of the arena, but the region's other major attractions. No specific funding plan has emerged, and no decision has been made to overhaul the arena or build new.

But opposition to the notion of a regional tax to build a new arena is already in place. Already, the county boards in Racine and Ozaukee counties have gone on record in opposition to a regional tax. On Dec. 17, the Waukesha County Board is expected to take the same position.

A tour this week of the arena's innards showed wear and tear in key mechanical areas. Costello said that over the next five to 10 years, $25 million to $40 million in major capital repairs will be needed. That's on top of $1 million needed in routine annual maintenance, he said.

Costello spoke as BMO Harris Bradley Center officials released the arena's financials for the fiscal year ending June 30. The center reported operating revenues of $20.7 million, up from $12.6 million in the previous year.

Costello termed the higher operating revenue a one-time occurrence, especially given a "soft" year for concerts at the facility. That higher revenue came about because of $3.9 million from a state grant, strong support from the business community ($20 million over six years) and a full Bucks season, including playoffs.

In the previous year, the Bucks played a partial season because of the NBA lockout.

Instead, Costello pointed to a $5.2 million drop in cash in fiscal 2013, driven largely by $4.9 million in capital spending to maintain the building. Total cash available went from $9.42 million to $4.22 million.

During the tour, Costello noted much of the building's original mechanical equipment is still in place. Two 500-gallon water heaters that provide hot water to the 550,000-square-foot facility have extensive rust near the bottom.

In the chiller room, the staff is using the same equipment that came with the building in 1988. The arena's chillers use a refrigerant that is no longer permitted to be manufactured or sold in the United States. Existing supplies of the refrigerant can be recycled or reused for use in older systems like the ones at the arena.

"It's indicative of the fact we are managing old systems," Costello said.

Greg Peterson, the building's director of operations and project management, knows firsthand the challenges of keeping the Bradley Center in working condition. But, he said, replacement parts for aging equipment are scarce.

Outside, the lead-coated copper roof is surrounded by a gutter system. At each corner of the building there are rubber roofs with concrete pavers. Those pavers are breaking up in places and, in one location, the concrete more closely resembles gravel.

At some of the arena's exit doors, rust has worked its way through the metal. The deterioration could be a threat to fire safety and security, Costello said.

And that soaring atrium glass that greets visitors? It's beautiful to behold, but in some places it leaks and needs to be constantly maintained, Costello said.

Next door, the parking structure the BMO Harris Bradley Center bought is going to need $1 million in repairs in the near future. Inside the arena, a few hundred seats — at a cost of $150 to $200 a seat — must be replaced every year.

Costello said the center's main tenants — the Bucks, the Milwaukee Admirals and Marquette University's men's basketball team — rely on everything working on game days.

"We want to hit our marks," Costello said. "But you have to be ready for the unexpected."

Costello continues to market the BMO Harris Bradley Center. The arena bid for the NCAA Frozen Four, the premier event in college hockey. The arena did not get the tournament, and Costello said he was told it was because there were too many more modern facilities around the country.

Other highlights of the BMO Harris Bradley Center's financial report.

■ The Bucks received tenant revenue of $5 million in the fiscal year ending June 30.

■ As of June 30, the BMO Harris Bradley Center had $7.5 million of BMO Harris Bank debt, down from $8.1 million the previous fiscal year. The BMO Harris Bradley Center also owes the Bucks $10.6 million from previous years, down from $11.6 million in fiscal year 2012.