Council panel backs funding for streetcar project
Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett laid out his argument in support of building a downtown streetcar line Tuesday to a Common Council committee that recommended $49million in public funding for the project, after hearing nearly unanimous support from community members.

The funding package, which requires approval by the full Common Council, also includes $17.5 million in public improvements for the proposed 44-story Couture apartment tower. Couture developer Rick Barrett said the project would be a non-starter without the streetcar.

"It cannot be built without the streetcar component," Barrett the developer told members of the Zoning, Neighborhood & Development Committee.

Barrett the mayor, who is of no relation to Barrett the developer, told committee members that the enmeshed nature of development and public transportation makes proceeding with the streetcar both timely and critical.

"Let's keepbuilding on the momentum we have right now," the mayor said. He cited the explosive growth underway at Milwaukee's lakefront, including the 32-story Northwestern Mutual Tower and Commons and the 18-story 833 East, both just a stroll from the proposed Couture.

"This is about economic development," Barrett said.

"It attracts business and talent," he said. "It is part of a comprehensive transit strategy."

He said rumors that the 2.1-mile initial route is merely a starter line have been greatly under-exaggerated.

"All I want to do is get this thing in the ground," the mayor said, "and expand it."

Phase one of the streetcar line would connect downtown with the near east side. The mayor said he envisions the streetcar would eventually stretch northeast to the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, northwest to Bronzeville, west to Marquette University and south to Bay View.

The initial phase of the streetcar line, including a spur through The Couture at the Milwaukee Art Museum, costs an estimated $123.9 million.

Some $54.9 million has been set aside by the federal government for the Milwaukee streetcar project.

Barrett said he hopes to acquire another $10 million in federal funding.

Another $9.7 million would be generated by the Cathedral Square tax incremental financing district.

The committee on a 4-1 vote recommended amending the Erie St. financing district so that it would provide $18.3 million for the streetcar. Also on a 4-1 vote, it recommended creation of a financing district on the southeast edge of E. Michigan St.

This district would generate funding for public amenities for The Couture project and $31 million for the streetcar.

Members of the public, who were invited to comment, packed the committee room.

While there were no vocal naysayers to the project, Ald. Joe Davis released a statement questioning the streetcar's value for Milwaukee's poorest neighborhoods.

"How can we justify the approval of a system that does not address the areas of greatest needs with the highest negative economic indicators that give the City of Milwaukee a persistent negative image?" he asked.

Barrett, the project's developer, told the committee that more that 2,000 construction jobs would be created by The Couture project alone, as well as 150 permanent jobs.

The building may be on the lakefront, "but it creates jobs everywhere," he said.

Dan Bukiewicz, an Oak Creek alderman and president of Milwaukee Building & Construction Trades Council, AFL-CIO, called the project "a catalyst for careers" and said men and women just now learning job skills on the Northwestern Mutual tower will soon be leading construction crews.

Perhaps the most heartfelt comment came from Teresa Thomas-Boyd, a north side community organizer and pastor of Matters of the Heart Christian Ministries.

As a practical matter, the streetcar and The Couture and the other new buildings will "not only grow prosperity and help eliminate poverty," but the gleaming modern Couture is beautiful, she said. It's something all Milwaukeeans can be proud off. It's a symbol, she said.

"Hope for a sad city," she said.