Bucks announce game-changing $1 billion arena package
Rendering for the proposed Bucks arena and accompanying development in the Park East corridor unveiled by the Milwaukee Bucks. In the lower right corner is the Milwaukee River. The arena is pictured between Highland Ave. and Juneau Avenue. Credit: Courtesy of the Milwaukee Bucks

By

Envisioning an entertainment hub that would transform downtown, the Milwaukee Bucks plan to build a $500 million arena just north of the BMO Harris Bradley Center and use that as a springboard for an additional $500 million in development, much of it in the largely vacant Park East corridor.

The arena site itself is not surprising — it has been the worst-kept secret in the city for weeks — but the conceptual development plans for the Park East are striking in their breadth.

The development would include a 700,000-square-foot, 17,000-seat arena; a 60,000-square-foot public plaza, anticipated as a sort of live entertainment space on what is largely a city-owned parking ramp at the corner of N. 4th St. and W. Highland Ave.; and arena parking across the street in the Park East area. Total amount of space just for that portion of the development: 1 million square feet.

Another surprise is the Bucks' intention to build a state-of-the-art practice facility as soon as possible on Park East land just east of The Brewery development. The Bucks' practice facility is in leased space at the Archbishop Cousins Center in St. Francis; the team would have to buy out the lease.

Lastly, the Bucks' plans, still in the conceptual and preliminary phase, call for the demolition of the Bradley Center, first opened in 1988 and now the second-oldest nonrenovated arena in the National Basketball Association.

The land now occupied by the Bradley Center could become some combination of a new hotel and additional commercial or office space.

The plans, first reported Tuesday night by the Journal Sentinel, were outlined by the franchise a Wednesday morning news conference at the Bradley Center. The Bucks had declined to comment in advance on details of the announcement. A rendering obtained by the Journal Sentinel showed what potential development could look like in the years to come, and more renderings were released Wednesday morning.

The entire development — phased in over 10 to 12 years — could potentially take up 30 acres, with 3 million square feet of office, entertainment, retail, residential, hotel, commercial and parking structures.

It also comes as other parts of downtown are poised for a transformation, particularly the Northwestern Mutual tower near Lake Michigan.

'Futuristic looking'

The arena was produced by a design team led by Kansas City-based Populous, which has a worldwide practice and has designed 15 NBA or NHL arenas.

In addition to the proposed Milwaukee arena, the firm is working on arenas in Las Vegas and Quebec City, Canada.

The design team also includes HNTB, an infrastructure solutions firm with an office in Milwaukee, and Eppstein Uhen, a well-known local architectural firm that was involved in the design of Miller Park.

Together, the three were hired in February to design a sports and entertainment complex in Milwaukee.

For several weeks, the renderings of what the arena could look like have been shown to various groups, individuals and team owners. Sources said the arena design had been well-received and is "futuristic looking."

Members of the design team were not available for comment until Wednesday's news conference. But sources said in advance that the designers, working closely with Bucks' owners, worked to produce a design that evokes the state's natural beauty and Milwaukee's rich heritage of industry and craftsmen.

With a rendering now in the public domain and more details of potential development expected to be rolled out this week, the Bucks' efforts to get an arena financing plan would give elected officials both in Madison and Milwaukee more information to work with.

Various funding plans

For now the Bucks are backing Gov. Scott Walker's proposed $220 million state bonding plan, buttressed by a $150 million commitment from Bucks owners Wes Edens and Marc Lasry, and a $100 million commitment from former Sen. Herb Kohl.

Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett also has continued to back the governor's plan. Last week, he laid out a $25 million-plus commitment from the city.

The commitment included $17 million in infrastructure in and around the proposed new arena site; giving up the city-owned parking ramp at N. 4th St. and W. Highland Ave., valued at $7.4 million; and giving up a $1.1 million city-owned parcel once occupied by the Sydney Hih building in the Park East corridor.

County Executive Chris Abele has not detailed what the county has in mind but said last week his staff was working on alternative models for arena funding.

County Supervisor Patricia Jursik said Tuesday she was told the Bucks were expected to submit some of their development plans to members of the county's Economic and Community Development Committee in the weeks to come. Jursik is chair of that committee.

In the Legislature, Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) has said he is confident his $150 million bonding plan through the Board of Commissioners of Public Lands has the support of his fellow GOP senators and the commissioners of that board.

At the same time, Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) has said whatever bonding amount is approved, it will be less than Walker's initial offering of $220 million.

And Walker himself has circled back and said he's open to whatever plan can garner enough support to get the deal done.

Potential pitfalls

On Tuesday, at a meeting of the Board of Commissioners of Public Lands, executive director Tia Nelson told the three largely receptive commissioners the agency could likely help finance a Bucks arena deal, noting that she had met with Walker's staff earlier Tuesday about the possibility.

But Nelson and the commissioners remained cautious since they have yet to receive key specifics about the possible deal from lawmakers and the Walker administration.

Nelson also laid out several other potential pitfalls for the board, which would need to sell some of its existing holdings of municipal loans to get the cash needed for a Bucks deal.

Selling about $100 million in bonds from Wisconsin municipalities would flood the open market for those assets, with negative effects for the board and for local governments in the state that are looking to borrow money through the financial markets, Nelson said.

One way to avoid that would be to find a large private buyer of the bonds held by the board.

That buyer could be the State of Wisconsin Investment Board, which manages the pension funds for state employees, another large institutional investor or even the wealthy Bucks owners themselves since they manage hedge funds, Nelson said.

While much of the massive project is preliminary and conceptual, the Bucks have done their homework in preparation of a public rollout. Principal owners Edens, Lasry and Jamie Dinan have quietly visited 20 arenas around the country to see what they liked and didn't like.

At the same time, Michael Fascitelli, a well-known Manhattan real estate developer, was brought in as a part owner. Fascitelli, said one source familiar with the Bucks' plans, was asked to "quarterback" the proposed development.

Jason Stein of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.

Don Walker is on a fellowship established through Marquette University Law School's Sheldon B. Lubar Fund for Public Policy Research. The fellowship is aimed at providing support for journalism projects on issues of civic importance. All the work is done under the direction of Journal Sentinel editors.