Abele wants $400,000 for security detail, won't seek sheriff's help
County Executive Chris Abele, shown speaking at a July news conference, has requested $400,000 to establish a security detail. Credit: Michael Sears

SHARE

By of the

Milwaukee County Executive Chris Abele went without a security detail for his first two years in office, but now is reluctantly seeking protection following a personal threat, he says.

Instead of looking to the sheriff's office for such help, as some previous county executives did, Abele wants to outsource the estimated $400,000-a-year job.

He declined to discuss the threat, but his 2014 budget plan says the request was based on "increased threat activity."

Abele said he didn't want any security guards when he was first elected county executive in April 2011, filling out Scott Walker's unexpired county term when he became governor. Abele won a full four-year term a year later.

"It's hard to be informal and relaxed around people when you have guards around," Abele said. He said he had been encouraged by others to reconsider his stance on the security question.

"The (Milwaukee police) chief has protection, the mayor has protection," Abele said.

He declined to name those who recommended he get security, but noted he regularly meets with law enforcement officials through his seat on the local Community Justice Council, which includes Police Chief Edward Flynn, District Attorney John Chisholm and others.

Abele said the $400,000 amount was based on Mayor Tom Barrett's security costs. The mayor's spokesman, Jeff Fleming, declined to discuss Barrett's security, which is provided by Milwaukee police.

The Milwaukee Police Department's "executive protection unit" lists five police officers and a budget of $326,000 for this year.

Abele noted there's precedent for county executives having security guards. The last executive to have such protection was Tom Ament, who retired in 2002 in the face of a threatened recall over the county pension scandal.

Ament and his predecessors had protection provided by the sheriff, with a deputy assigned to them. Walker halted the practice during his eight years as county executive.

Abele is proposing to solicit bids for his security staff from local law enforcement or private firms.

Supervisor Theo Lipscomb Sr. said the $400,000 security detail Abele listed in his budget seemed excessive.

"I'm more than a little skeptical," Lipscomb said.

"I'm assuming there have always been threats" to county executives, he said. "Are they credible threats? Are you telling me Chris Abele gets more threats than Scott Walker did?"

Abele's office staff would drop from 10 to nine positions for 2014 under his budget, but the security plan would boost the office's total budget by 31% to $1.7 million.

Facebook: fb.com/steve.schultze3

Twitter: twitter.com/SteveSchultzeJS