Budget gives Chris Abele new authority in Park East land sales
SHARE

By of the

Milwaukee County Executive Chris Abele gained new authority over sales of county-owned Park East corridor properties and other non-park land in the two-year $72.7 billion state budget approved this week by the Legislature and now before Gov. Scott Walker.

Walker is expected to sign the budget before Monday, just days before the Milwaukee County Board's special meeting Wednesday to act on the Abele administration's request to sell 10 acres of the Park East strip to a development group affiliated with the Milwaukee Bucks.

In a memo to county supervisors, county attorney Paul Bargren confirmed the Legislature's action gives the executive power to "lease, sell or convey any non-park property regardless of board policy and without board approval."

"This provision would take effect upon enactment of the state budget," Bargren says in the memo.

The budget will take effect one day after publication, according to the Wisconsin Legislative Reference Bureau. A publication date has not been set at this time.

In June, a board committee delayed action for one month on the proposed sale of the Park East property for $1 to Head of the Herd LLC, the development group led by the Bucks' principal owners.

State legislators this week did not give Abele the final say on O'Donnell Park that he sought in his push to diminish powers of the County Board.

The County Board will retain authority to act on any sale or lease of O'Donnell Park, under provisions in the budget bill.

The board has given the Milwaukee Art Museum an opportunity to study whether it will buy or lease the park and its multilevel parking garage. A majority of the board is opposed to selling the property to a private developer.

Republican legislators did eliminate County Board oversight of sales of county-owned properties not zoned for park use.

Bargren advised county supervisors in the memo that the state constitution gives the Legislature authority to expand or restrict powers of a county board. Several supervisors this week claimed the elimination of board oversight, which they described as an Abele power grab, was unconstitutional.

Under the budget bill provision, any sale of Park East or other non-park land would require the approval of the elected county comptroller and a real estate expert appointed by elected members of the Milwaukee County Intergovernmental Cooperation Council. The council is composed of city mayors and village presidents from county suburbs.

This provision allows the county to use "experts who are elected or appointed by other elected officials" to ensure the public that decisions on land sales will maximize value, Abele said.

Though chairwoman Marina Dimitrijevic did not refer to O'Donnell Park in a statement, she said the board was grateful for the Legislature's action to limit the budget provision on Milwaukee County government. Dimitrijevic asked Bargren's opinion of the Legislature's action.

"The changes would not in my view present constitutional issues that could be challenged by the county," Bargren said in the memo.