Clarke's provocative rhetoric keeps people guessing
First, it was the radio ad calling on people to defend themselves with guns instead of calling 911.

Then he warned of a "second coming" of the American Revolution if cops have to enforce gun control measures.

There were descriptions of local officials - County Executive Chris Abele has "penis envy," Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett is "weak and disingenuous," Milwaukee County Chief Judge Jeffrey Kremers is "whiny."

And he felt the need to apologize for Milwaukee Police Chief Edward Flynn's appearance before the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee.

In between there have been multiple interviews, national cable TV appearances, even a stint hosting a local radio show.

All of which begs the question, what exactly is up with Milwaukee County Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr.?

Yes, he's always been blunt, provocative and then some. But the last few months, he's taken overheated rhetoric to a new level.

Clarke is adamant he's just doing his job in speaking out, nothing more.

"Those are my constituents, the people who are getting shot, killed, raped, robbed and burglarized," Clarke said, dismissing his critics. "I tell people the truth. That's what they don't like."

He shrugs off rumors about his intentions - that he's running for mayor or some other office. Some suggest he may be auditioning for a political commentating role.

"I still have a lot of fire in the belly for what I'm doing," Clarke said. "I'm a career cop, I love law enforcement. Does that mean I'm never going to consider something (else)? I'm never going to shut the door to stuff."

His timing, in the aftermath of the Newtown, Conn., school shootings, has raised his profile nationally. Gun rights supporters have hailed Clarke's staunch defense of gun ownership and his colorful, in-your-face conservatism. Critics say his comments about the 911 emergency call system were dangerous, and his feuds with local leaders counterproductive, even juvenile.

Clarke said he speaks out on city issues such as poverty and education because he cares, not because he wants to run for mayor.

"I live in this frickin' city, I've seen it go downhill," Clarke said. "I'm still paying property taxes in this city - a lot of them - and I feel that gives me the license to assess how some of the political leadership is doing, and people can do the same for me."

'A folk hero'

Clarke has flirted with other jobs in the past. He ran for mayor in 2004 but placed third in a crowded primary behind Barrett and Acting Mayor Marvin Pratt. He mulled over another run for mayor four years later and for county executive in 2010, but ultimately backed away. He's pretty comfortable in front of a microphone, most recently doing a fill-in stint for Mark Belling of WISN-AM (1130).

He also is enrolled in a master's program in homeland security - which he kept quiet for months. The program requires him to be in California two weeks every quarter, and he is set to complete it in September.

Clarke "is kind of the folk hero right now for a lot of the gun owners and law-abiding shooters," said Jim Fendry, founder of the Wisconsin Pro-Gun Movement. He credited Clarke with a keen understanding of gun rights and personal safety issues, honed through his 25 years as a Milwaukee police officer and a decade as sheriff.

On Tuesday, Clarke endorsed the National Rifle Association's call for arming certain school employees to protect students. Clarke called the NRA plan "a common-sense approach to better protecting kids at our nation's schools." Clarke also called for federal funding to pay for law enforcement officers to patrol schools.

"He really is a leader, that's what so many of us find so attractive," said Steve Welcenbach of Menomonee Falls, who is a tea party supporter and editor of the conservative Reality News website. "He's got convictions and he can articulate why he holds those convictions. A lot of us would like to see him in other leadership, a lot of us thought he'd make a great mayor or county executive."

But two local academics say Clarke would be a long shot for mayor or other higher office at this point.

"I don't think we need a complicated theory to explain David Clarke," said John McAdams, a Marquette University political scientist and conservative blogger. "I think he's genuinely conservative and doesn't mind conflict."

"I'm having trouble thinking of a scenario of him winning higher office," McAdams said.

Mordecai Lee, a University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee political science professor and former Democratic state legislator, said Clarke deserves credit as an able administrator but has hit the political wall.

"I think he's dead-ended politically," Lee said.

Annoying to Democrats

Clarke easily won re-election for a third term as sheriff in 2010, running - as he always has - as a Democrat, while casting himself as a conservative. That annoys local Democrats.

"His views are not welcome in the Democratic Party," said Sachin Chheda, Milwaukee County Democratic Party chairman. "He doesn't even have a respectful disagreement. It's always name calling and acting like a jerk."

The sheriff already has an announced Democratic primary opponent for his 2014 re-election campaign - Chris Moews, a lieutenant in the Milwaukee Police Department. Moews lost to Clarke for sheriff in the primary in 2010, with 47% of the vote to 53% for Clarke.

Voters he talks to say they're concerned that is Clarke playing politics rather than concentrating on his job, Moews said.

"Finally the public is getting sick of it," Moews said.

Clarke's lack of cooperation with the mayor, the county executive and the police chief hamper his effectiveness, Moews said.

His dealings with Abele, who has dealt Clarke some blows in the last two years of county budget battles, have been particularly acrimonious. Abele claimed that Clarke was spending money on things that weren't required by the state and could be dropped, such as the sheriff's boot camp-style inmate program, horseback patrol and canine unit. Abele also downplayed the sheriff's office role in law enforcement, pointing to FBI crime statistics showing the sheriff's office reported only 19 serious crimes for 2009.

A 2011 PolitiFact examination concluded Abele's claim that the department "plays only a limited role as a traditional law enforcement agency" was half true. The major crime statistic was accurate but ignored other duties of the sheriff, such as operating jails, patrolling freeways and providing courtroom security, PolitiFact found.

The sheriff's office wrote more than 37,000 traffic citations in 2011, and handles more than 42,000 jail bookings, 3,000 evictions and 5,200 restraining orders annually.

One step further

A little more than two months since his first controversial public safety announcement, Clarke now is offering an even more emphatic endorsement of citizens using guns to defend themselves.

The situation: You think there's an intruder in your home.

Don't call 911, Clarke says in a videotaped interview with Project Veritas, founded by James O'Keefe, a conservative activist. O'Keefe formed the organization after leading a group whose secretly recorded videos helped shut down the community organization ACORN.

"Here's what I would do," Clarke says in the Veritas video. "Use cover, because you don't know if that clown trying to break into your house is armed, all right?" Clarke says. "Know who and what your target is. Point that barrel center-mass and pull the trigger."

"I don't dial 911, all right? I will afterward and say, 'Come get this dead guy out of my house, he's bleeding out, he's messing up my carpet.' "

Clarke says voters appreciate his plain talk.

"They care if this guy is down there doing what he can to keep us safe and keep this county on its toes," he said. "We just need to protect this damn city and county."