Group tackles question of how to pay for Milwaukee arena, cultural needs
The BMO Harris Bradley Center is at the center of discussions by a new task force looking at funding sources for a new basketball arena as well as for various local and regional cultural institutions. Credit: Angela Peterson

SHARE

By of the

If elected officials, community leaders and stakeholders agree that the region's cultural, artistic, sports and entertainment venues need new funding, there is no shortage of options available to them.

That was the message members of the Cultural and Entertainment Capital Needs Task Force heard Tuesday at its second meeting as a group.

Is a sales tax the answer? Or a sin tax on liquor or cigarettes? Or should additional funds be raised through the property tax?

How wide a berth should a tax, if there is going to be one at all, have? Should it be just in Milwaukee County, where most of the region's major institutions reside?

Or should a tax be spread out to adjoining counties, whose residents use and support popular attractions like the Milwaukee County Zoo, the BMO Harris Bradley Center and the Wisconsin Center?

It's a thorny question for the 48-member panel, which was formed late last year to help guide the community through a decision-making process.

The county boards in Ozaukee, Racine and Waukesha counties already have expressed opposition to a regional tax for either a new arena or an expanded convention center.

On Tuesday at the Zoofari Conference Center, Rob Henken, the head of the nonpartisan Public Policy Forum, outlined the methods used by several other metropolitan areas across the country.

The communities his group studied include Oklahoma City, Pittsburgh, Denver, St. Louis and Cleveland.

The Public Policy Forum plans to release a fuller study of how those communities support major institutions and how they might work in Milwaukee. That study will be released in mid-March.

Henken told panel members there are reams of study and literature on the merits and demerits of various taxes. Sales taxes are often seen as regressive, while so-called sin taxes do not always raise enough money.

Oklahoma City elected to use a 1-cent sales tax, which was approved by voters. Proceeds from the tax were used to support a performing arts center, parks, a convention center, sports and civic centers, transit and libraries.

In Pittsburgh, the Allegheny County Regional Asset District imposes a half-cent sales tax, which was approved by a governmental body. The proceeds have tended to favor support for libraries and parks.

In Denver, the Scientific and Cultural Facilities District collects a one-tenth of a cent regional sales tax. The tax was approved by voter referendum.

In Cleveland, Cuyahoga Arts and Culture relies on a 30-cent per pack cigarette tax. That tax was approved by voters and is used for a variety of needs.

And in St. Louis, the property tax — 26.8 cents per $100 of assessed value — is used to support the zoo and museum. Voters approved creating the Metropolitan Zoological Park and Museum District.

Later, meeting in small groups, panel members seemed to agree that a property-tax model or a sin tax to generate revenue would not be workable in Milwaukee County. A sales tax of some form, either in Milwaukee County alone or among adjoining counties, generated the most discussion.

Paul Mathews, president and CEO of the Marcus Center for the Performing Arts, noted that property tax support for many institutions had declined in recent years.

As with other panel members, Mathews brought up the sales tax and said it could be implemented either locally, in Milwaukee County alone, or throughout the Milwaukee metropolitan area.

"The mill rate didn't put us in a sweet spot," Williams said of his small-group discussion's of a property tax model. He added that the Oklahoma City model, which uses a pay as you go model, seemed attractive.

Keisha Krumm, lead organizer for the community group Common Ground, said the task force's website needed to be improved to make it easier for residents to leave comments. Officials said the website would be updated.

The next meeting of the task force will be at 7:30 a.m. March 18. A site has not been determined.