Hammes hired to help determine whether arena should be replaced or renovated
The Metropolitan Milwaukee Association of Commerce has hired the sports and entertainment arm of the Hammes Co. to provide advice on whether a new, multipurpose sports arena should be built, or whether the BMO Harris Bradley Center should be renovated.

While the Brookfield-based Hammes Co. is best known for its work in the health care construction field, it also has a lucrative sports and entertainment business based in Madison.

Bringing the Hammes Co. in represents a major step toward consideration of a new arena in Milwaukee. The National Basketball Association has made it clear to the Milwaukee Bucks that a new arena is needed to meet today's league standards and has set a 2017 deadline. The Bucks' current lease with the BMO Harris Bradley Center expires in 2017.

Timothy Sheehy, MMAC's president, said Tuesday that a working group within the group had agreed on a consulting contract with the Hammes division. Sheehy declined to say how much the agreement was worth. A source knowledgeable about the contract with Hammes said the fee would be in excess of $1 million. Sheehy called that a "gross exaggeration."

"They will help us better understand the details of the process," Sheehy said. "We have a great resource in Hammes, and they are right in our backyard."

Ted Kellner, chairman of MMAC's board, said Hammes would provide financial strategy and a plan to guide future discussions. Kellner and Sheehy both said Hammes had already provided advice on the process of planning for a new arena or retrofitting the 25-year-old BMO Harris Bradley Center.

Kellner added that former Sen. Herb Kohl, the owner of the Bucks, likes Hammes' work. Kohl has pledged a significant donation toward construction of a new arena but has said there has to be public support as well.

"We're walking on a high wire after 2017," Sheehy said.

While Hammes will look into the possibility of retrofitting the BMO Harris Bradley Center, sources knowledgeable about the building say revamping the arena would be costly and would be able to extend the life of the building only another 10 to 15 years.

Hammes' sports division is well known in the sports construction field. The division, headed by Robert P. Dunn, worked on the Lambeau Field renovation project, as well as Ford Field in Detroit. The division also worked with the University of Wisconsin-Madison in connection with the construction of the Kohl Center and was named the owner's representative for the new $975 million Minnesota Vikings football stadium in Minneapolis.

Hammes' sports development division also was instrumental in the construction of the $1.6 billion MetLife Stadium in New Jersey, which will host Super Bowl XLVIII on Feb. 2.

In his pitch to get the Vikings contract, Dunn said Hammes is able to "address every facet of stadium development."

"We have built an entire operating system to support complex building projects for public clients," Dunn said.

"Hammes Co. has the most extensive background and experience serving public and private interests on NFL stadium projects over more than 15 years," Dunn said.

Jon Hammes, the founder of the company that bears his name, did not respond to a request for comment. Hammes' name has been mentioned as a potential investor in the Bucks. Last month, Kohl said he was seeking new investors as a means of keeping the Bucks in Milwaukee, and retained Allen & Co., a New York investment firm, to advise him.

Sheehy said the MMAC's working group was still in the fact-finding phase.

"This is going to be a very public discussion, and it will require a public process to reach that decision," Sheehy said. "We will advocate for a solution, but we won't make the final decision. We'll use the information we get from Hammes to influence the public to make a public decision."

The MMAC's arena working group is meeting separately from the Cultural and Entertainment Capital Needs Task Force, which was formed to study the needs of the area's cultural, artistic and entertainment facilities. The 48-member group has met once; its next meeting is scheduled for Feb. 4 at 7:30 a.m. at the Milwaukee County Zoo Zoofari Conference Center.

Sheehy said Hammes' findings would be shared at some point with the task force.