A $5 million cut to County Board budget won't go before voters
Sen. Alberta Darling (left) listens as Rep. Joe Sanfelippo talks Friday at the Hispanic Chamber of Commerce about legislation calling for a referendum to cut Milwaukee County supervisors’ pay. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

Fast-track state legislation to let voters decide in April whether to cut Milwaukee County supervisors' pay from $50,679 to $15,000 a year would also lop some $5 million from the County Board budget - without any input from voters.

Such a big cut - about 84% of the board's current budget - would severely hamper the board's ability to fulfill its role as the county's legislative branch of government, critics of the legislation said Friday.

Such a cut would leave almost nothing for County Board operations because more than $1 million of the board's budget is earmarked for retiree benefits.

"I don't know who is supposed to clerk the (board) meetings or provide any of the research," under such a deep cut, said Supervisor Theo Lipscomb Sr. Part-time supervisors envisioned by the legislation wouldn't have time to adequately research issues in the county's overall $1.3 billion budget, he said.

The board's current $6.6 million budget includes pay for the 18 supervisors and 38 staffers, including policy analysts, committee clerks and legislative assistants.

The legislation, still in draft form, would subject the supervisor pay cut to a binding referendum vote. But the provision to cut board spending to 0.4% of the county's overall property tax levy - that translates to a $5 million cut based on the current levy - would not be an issue for voters in an April referendum.

State Rep. Joe Sanfelippo (R-West Allis), one of the bill's authors, said the County Board budget cut was left off the referendum question to keep the ballot question simple. He said imposing that cut by the state wouldn't undercut the argument that the cuts preserved local control.

"The biggest and most important thing to people is are (supervisors) full time or part time," he said.

Critics said the bill would hurt diversity on the board and shift power to County Executive Chris Abele.

By having the Legislature force the issue of supervisor pay and County Board budget cuts, "it looks like people outside Milwaukee County are just dictating things," said Robert Kraig, executive director of Citizen Action Wisconsin, a left-leaning advocacy group.

But state Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills), one of the bill's authors, said the referendum provision puts the matter in the hands of local voters. "What could be more fair?" she asked, after a news conference Friday with advocates of the legislation.

The Greater Milwaukee Committee supports the legislation. GMC President Julia Taylor said the civic group hopes to work the same magic it did in getting legislative approval for an elected Milwaukee County comptroller in 2011 with its latest County Board mission.

It's a needed reform to shift the board's focus away from nitpicky administrative issues to big policy issues, Taylor said.

"We can't have 18 county executives," Taylor said, a complaint that dovetails with Abele's frustrations with the board. Taylor also said supervisors don't have enough to do to fill a full workweek.

Advocates said the measure would result in reforms the GMC and others have sought for years, including budget reforms to close the county's continuing budget gap. Sanfelippo, who served 3 ½ years on the County Board before winning an Assembly seat in November, said he made the County Board legislation his first priority in Madison after failing to persuade supervisors to cut their own pay or greatly reduce the number of supervisors.

His attempt to have the Milwaukee County Board order a countywide referendum on supervisor pay and the number of supervisors last year also was a flop, Sanfelippo said. That led to an effort by him and former Supervisor Joseph Rice to have advisory referendums scheduled by individual communities in the county. Supermajorities favored the changes in all dozen suburbs that had such votes.

The GMC's political nonprofit, Smart Government Inc., would lead the civic group's push for the County Board changes, just as it successfully lobbied for the comptroller legislation, Taylor said. Smart Government had five lobbyists pushing for that change, which was approved despite opposition by the County Board.

In a statement released Friday night, Patrick Curley, Mayor Tom Barrett's chief of staff, said the mayor was opposed to "changing the rules for currently elected County Board members in midterm."

Don Walker of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.