County Board overrides all but 2 Chris Abele budget vetoes
The Milwaukee County Board voted Wednesday to override all but two of County Executive Chris Abele's vetoes in the $1.3 billion budget for 2015. The board's action raises the levy by 1.3% for a total tax levy of $282.9 million.

By overriding the vetoes, the board added new programs to transit, increased positions in the sheriff's office and agreed to authorize $10 million in new capital funding for deferred park maintenance and for capital projects for cultural organizations.

The key item where the board sided with Abele was on the removal of the Estabrook Dam. But in an amendment, the board used $780,000 of the $1.6 million for the dam for a contingency fund for health care benefits for Behavioral Health division employees. Abele vetoed that item, too, but the board overrode that.

The other veto that was sustained involved management fees for paratransit.

The issue of what to do with the Estabrook Dam has for years been a running battle between environmentalists who want the dam taken down and nearby residents who like the 100-acre pool that the dam creates when it's operational because it's used for recreational purposes.

Supervisor Theodore Lipscomb, who has long pushed for the dam to be rebuilt, said he was disappointed with the board's action to sustain Abele's veto. But Abele said he would like the board to take a vote on the dam removal by itself without wrapping it up in other issues, as the board had done.

In issuing his vetoes, Abele had argued that, in total, his vetoes would lower taxes by $2.2 million and lower the total tax levy to $277 million from the current $279 million.

In reacting to the board's action Wednesday to override nearly all of his vetoes, Abele expressed disappointment. He said he had tried to strike a compromise with the board by restoring funding for four wading pools — at Hales Corners, Wedgewood, Vogel and Cannon parks.

He said he also restored the $1.2 million to match contributions to employees' health savings accounts, but rejected a $2.2 million tax increase to pay for employees' care premiums.

He said he only partially vetoed the transit program by leaving in $660,000 for the extension of bus service, although he suggested the transit company study which routes have the greatest service use. He maintains that free bus rides for seniors and the disabled will be too expensive and should have been studied further.

County Board officials argued they had compromised, too. The county executive's proposal to consolidate Emergency Management Services under his office was agreed to, said board spokesman Bill Zaferos.

"The board has taken a balanced approach and delivered a budget for the public that improves our parks and transit system," board Chairwoman Marina Dimitrijevic said. "People want more than the status quo for our transit system."

In other veto overrides, the board agreed to add at least 22 positions to the sheriff's office.

And it voted to override the veto of $300,000 for the Shelter Task Force for emergency shelter. It also restored some $300,000 for indigent burials.

At Wednesday's board meeting — for the first time since last spring — the board had all 18 members present to vote on the vetoes, which require two-thirds, or 12 votes.

Weddle sworn in

Before Wednesday's meeting, former board legislative aide Martin Weddle was sworn in as a supervisor to replace Russell Stamper II, who left the board for a seat on the Milwaukee Common Council.

The certification of Weddle's election took place last week, a move that allowed Weddle to be seated and vote on the budget vetoes. The certification in other races was held this week, but that timing would not have allowed the three-day waiting period between the certification and taking office.

County Clerk Joe Czarnezki said Weddle asked for the early canvass so that he could be seated.

"He represents 50,000 people and he indicated he wanted to be seated and participate," he said.