Milwaukee gun buyback brings in steady flow of firearms
When L.C. Stevenson Sr. heard police would by paying money for firearms on Saturday, he figured it was time to finally get rid of the small handgun he had inherited many years ago from his mother.

"It's a hand-me-down gun," Stevenson said. "Never used it. Never shot it. I don't need a gun in my house anyway."

Stevenson took the gun to Tabernacle Community Baptist Chuch on Milwaukee's north side, where police, who had set up a gun buyback station in the parking lot, gave him a check card worth $100.

Stevenson was among scores of people who showed up Saturday to hand over guns they didn't want — handguns of all sizes and conditions, rifles, shotguns and other firearms — in exchange for money.

The exchange rate — bank prepaid cards worth $100 for handguns, $50 for rifles and shotguns and $200 for assault-type firearms — applied no matter whether the gun was in prime condition or rusty and dusty.

Business was brisk for most of the four-hour gun buyback, which was part of an initiative called Ceasefire Week.

Cars lined up and waited for Milwaukee police officers wearing bullet-resistant vests to take the guns out of vehicle trunks, bags or cases, briefly inspect them and then hand the gun relinquisher a money card for each.

The program collected a total of 353 firearms Saturday, which included 234 handguns, 115 rifles and four assault-type guns, according to Mayor Tom Barrett.

Barrett, who visited the site, said he was pleased with how local ministers who sought the program, businesses that funded the buyback and police who administered it work together.

"It's been a pretty steady flow," Barrett said. "People from the neighborhoods. A lot of people from outside the city. But the whole point of this is to provide anonymity to people."

While there's debate about the effectiveness of gun buybacks in getting the types of weapons used in crimes off the street, Barrett said he thought Saturday's program did just that.

"Absolutely, yes," he said.

The Rev. Don Darius Butler, of Tabernacle Community, said the turnout was encouraging.

"I think it speaks to people's willingness to be part of the solution," he said, suggesting that a similar event will be held on Milwaukee's south side, too.

Phillip K. Heston, vice president at Miller Compressing Co., one of the companies that contributed to the total of more than $50,000 to fund the buyback program, said he was happy with the results.

"It was enough money to make the money giveback meaningful, but more importantly, just to drag the guns in," Heston said.

In addition to attracting people willing to trade in their guns for cash, the buyback drew private gun buyers willing to pay people cash — in some cases more than they would receive from police — to a street corner near the buyback station. They carried signs saying they would purchase guns, and approached some who came for the buyback.

One man who brought a silver handgun was offered — and accepted — $150 for the firearm, or $50 more than he would have received from police.

Barrett was aware of the private buyers outside the site.

"I support having background checks on gun sales, but certainly they have a right to be here," Barrett said.

John V. McVicker, pastor of Christ the King Baptist Church, saw the private gun buyers, too.

"Those people who are standing down there trying to buy these guns from those who are showing up today do not live in this community," said McVicker, one of the organizers of the event. "And so their lives and worlds aren't impacted by the violence and fear of the people who live here. So, in a way, their presence is unwelcomed. But they have a right to be here."