Streetcar proposal stirs debate about morality, racism
An up-to-date map of the proposed Milwaukee Streetcar was released by the city on Monday.

SHARE Poll Do you support the City of Milwaukee's downtown streetcar project? Yes No vote View Results Yes: 32% No: 68% Total Responses: 1575

By of the

Ald. Milele A. Coggs ripped into Ald. Joe Davis Tuesday after Davis during a heated Common Council debate characterized the downtown Milwaukee streetcar proposal as immoral and racist.

"As I sat here listing to the comments, I felt like I couldn't breathe," Coggs told the council, which had already voted to delay consideration of the project until January and had begun to debate whether to delay streetcar's proposed financing measures.

One of those measures would prevent opponents to the project from holding a binding referendum asking Milwaukee's residents if they support the $124 million streetcar plan.

Streetcar opponents, such as Alds. Bob Donovan and Joe Dudzik, have said a project as controversial and as costly as the streetcar all but demands a referendum.

"We are getting ready to wipe out from the public any say," Davis said, echoing their sentiments. He called the proposal "immoral."

The initial stage of the streetcar would connect downtown Milwaukee to the upper east side, with a spur extending to the lakefront.

Mayor Tom Barrett said the streetcar would create jobs, spur development and attract young and talented people to the city.

But the "millennials" the mayor hopes to attract, Davis said, are not the unemployed African-Americans that live in his north side district.

"Are they part of the 'millennials?' " he said. "Or are they just thugs."

Davis evoked the April 30th shooting of Dontre Hamilton.

"If a kid can get shot 14 times down here in Red Arrow Park downtown — and this is from young kids who have actually weighed in with me on the project — if that can happen, what will happen when they try to ride the streetcar downtown?"

Both Davis and Donovan have said they will challenge Barrett in the 2016 mayoral race.

Coggs, who spoke after Davis, bristled at the implication that those who supported the streetcar project are indifferent to the needs of Milwaukee's African-American community or to the plight of the poor and disenfranchised.

"Instead of so much posturing, instead of so much name calling, instead of so much characterization of those who choose to support and not support the streetcar, we should discuss this on the merits," she said.

"It is not that you care about the community or poverty or police brutality — or you care about the streetcar.

"It is not one or the other."

"Milwaukee has a lot of work to do in a million different areas, but just because we have that work to do doesn't mean we should miss the economic opportunity for growth that we have in front of us," Coggs said.

Ultimately, the council voted to delay until January 21st not just the streetcar proposal, but to also delay until January the measures that would fund its construction and operation.

"We fully expected the delay," Barrett said in an interview following the vote.

"No surprises at all," he said.

The mayor said he would spend the next several weeks presenting the streetcar proposal to business and community leaders.

Tom Daykin of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.