Milwaukee County Board overrides 22 of 24 Abele vetoes
The Milwaukee County Board on Wednesday overrode 22 of 24 budget vetoes County Executive Chris Abele had made a day earlier, putting the final wraps on a 2013 tax levy that will go up nearly $4 million, or 1.4%, to $279.3 million.

Wednesday's override votes mean that the board prevailed in key areas, including rejecting Abele's plan to pay the Milwaukee Police Department to patrol the lakefront and other county parks and scaling back steep increases in employee health care costs that the county executive had favored.

A beaming Marina Dimitrijevic, the board chairwoman, said the lopsided votes to quash nearly all of Abele's vetoes showed board unity on putting a priority on public safety and struck a good balance on county finances. Now county leaders should "put their tempers aside and get down to business implementing this budget," Dimitrijevic said.

Abele's glum assessment was far different. The board missed a prime opportunity to forge a major governmental cooperation deal by rejecting the park patrol plan, which would have worked well and saved taxpayers money, Abele said. Supervisors chose instead to keep sheriff's deputies on that task.

"Today, it sure wasn't the taxpayers who won," Abele said. "It's frustrating."

If the board had gone along with Abele's veto, next year's county property tax levy would have dropped $2.4 million - the biggest one-year levy reduction in the last two decades.

Abele said he was disappointed in the budget outcome but would keep trying to work on reforms.

The costliest disagreement in which the board prevailed was its addition of an employee health care stipend of up to $1,800, meant to offset increases in premiums, co-pays and deductibles. That cost $3.7 million. Abele's veto on that was overridden 15-3, with Supervisors Mark Borkowski, Joe Sanfelippo and Steve F. Taylor opposing the override.

Employee health care costs still go up next year, however. On average, county employees will pay for 25% of their health insurance costs, up from this year's 22%, according to figures from the county comptroller. Abele's proposal would have boosted employees' share of health costs to 28% in 2013.

The board's override on the park patrol plan was even more emphatic, with just one supervisor - Sanfelippo - siding with Abele. Supervisors and Abele sharply disagreed over whether city police would have done an adequate job of patrolling parks. By rejecting the shift to police, the county will retain 27 deputy jobs that otherwise would have been lost.

Supervisor Michael Mayo Sr. said that by sticking with the status quo, "it's about keeping our parks safe and keeping our deputies working."

A smaller effort at intergovernmental cooperation was backed by the board. The county budget calls for paying the city $463,000 next year to take over all emergency 911 calls placed in Milwaukee. Mayor Tom Barrett has said, however, that the city must get a three-year commitment from the county or else the city will stop handling the portion of the 911 calls it now does without any county compensation on Jan. 1.

The county budget included switching oversight of the County Correctional Facility-South in Franklin from Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. to a superintendent appointed by Abele, reversing a management change made just three years ago. Abele said he supports the change but lost a veto fight on the April 1 effective date. He wanted to remove a specific date to make sure planning for the changeover was done properly, Abele said.

The change had been sought by judges and corrections officials, who said that under Clarke jail alternatives had withered. The board also overrode Abele vetoes on expanding beer gardens in county parks and using revenue for a matching fund for park maintenance; creating a microloan program for small business; restoring 11 deputy positions at the airport; and adding $500,000 toward the county's subsidy of municipal paramedic programs.

The board also prevailed in its effort to force Abele's economic development director, Brian Taffora, to comply with the county's residency requirement by essentially abolishing his job and re-creating it. Abele's personnel director had given Taffora a permanent waiver of the rule in June, just weeks after the board had confirmed Taffora's appointment.

The board's action means Taffora, who lives in Ozaukee County, could retain his job but would have to be reappointed to the same position next year and win board confirmation. He also would again be subject to the residency rule.

The board sustained two Abele vetoes. One means a rebuilding of a full indoor pool at Moody Park won't happen, but a less costly splash pad and other park renovations will be done. The old pool building will be demolished.

Abele's veto of a revived public art program using money from county construction projects also was sustained.