Milwaukee aldermen delay action on lowering pot fines
SHARE

By of the

After heated debate, the Milwaukee Common Council voted to delay a final decision on a proposal to all but eliminate the municipal fine for possessing a small amount of marijuana.

The motion to hold was backed by five members of the council, including Ald. Terry Witkowski, chairman of the Public Safety Committee.

Earlier this year, the committee itself voted to hold a similar version of the ordinance for further consideration.

Ald. Nik Kovac, concerned that the ordinance would never make it out of committee, brought the matter to full Common Council with co-sponsorship from four other aldermen.

Witkowski said he voted for the delay so that he and other members of the council could seek the opinions of law enforcement and Municipal Court officials.

The ordinance would have dropped the maximum fine for possession of 25 grams of marijuana or less from $500 to $50.

The marijuana ordinance debate was part of a busy council session:

■ The council voted 13-1 to support removal of the Milwaukee River dam at Estabrook Park.

The Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District's policy committee has also passed an advisory resolution asking Milwaukee County to demolish the disintegrating 1930s-era dam rather than repair it, saying removing the dam was not only cheaper but would also reduce the risk of floods.

Kovac, one of the council resolution's sponsors, said removal of the dam would also improve the health of the river.

Ald. Joe Davis opposed the resolution, saying he wanted the dam repaired.

■ The council approved a settlement agreement to pay $333,500 in attorney fees and $60,000 in damages to Leo Hardy, whose federal civil rights suit contended he was illegally searched by the Milwaukee Police Department.

The city does not carry liability insurance that covers police misconduct. Settlements come out of taxpayers' pockets.

More than 60 people have filed civil rights suits against the city and the police involving improper strip and cavity searches.

"There are many more to go," Ald. Ashanti Hamilton said.

The council also approved a $100,000 settlement between the city and Jeanine Tracy, a woman who while handcuffed was punched by a police officer and dragged out of a squad car by her hair.

■ Alderman approved a resolution urging state and federal regulators to inspect railroad tracks, crossings and bridges on which Bakken crude oil is carried.

■ Aldermen approved the Rev. Fred Crouther's appointment to the Fire and Police Commission.

But it was the debate over the change in the marijuana ordinance that occupied most of the council's attention.

Supporters argued that a disproportionate number of African-Americans are cited and, unable to pay the fine, end up in jail.

"If we want to make a dent in creating a truly healthy and rehabilitated society, if we want a dent in the arc toward racial justice, this is such a step," Kovac said.

Ald. Robert Puente argued that the change went too far.

"We have 23 different bicycle violations that have a higher forfeiture," he said. "This is disproportionate."

Ald. Bob Donovan agreed, saying that lowering the fine "sends absolutely the wrong message."

The message the new ordinance would send, Hamilton said, is one of fairness.

He noted studies have shown that while the rate of marijuana use is the same across all ethnic groups and races, African-Americans are about 5.5 times more likely to be arrested in Milwaukee.

"It doesn't make sense for us to see those facts right before our face and then turn our heads away," he said.

"Here's a fact," Puente said, "If you don't posses marijuana, you will not get cited."

Ald. Willie Wade made the most impassioned speech.

"The point is," he said, "is the data, the research, the information points to a disproportionate amount of discrimination, prejudice and racism in the way this law is enforced.

"The burden is heavy on the black males in communities. Those are the facts. That's what's before us. We're looking at the numbers. The statistics. And they are telling us the reality of treating black males unfairly."