Milwaukee County to revamp how it sells properties
SHARE

By of the

Milwaukee County is getting rid of a property sales policy that did not require public notice or a listing with the MLS and switching to a more open process that will be fairer to potential buyers while delivering higher prices for non-park land or buildings, officials said.

Whether selling surplus, tax-foreclosed or properties for business developments, the county would go through a detailed, step-by-step marketing process under a proposed policy. The process ends with a compliance check by the county comptroller or an appointee of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Council of municipal officials.

The county administrative services department is requesting public comments on the proposed land disposition procedure through Sept. 25.

Administrative Services Director Teig Whaley-Smith will discuss the new policy Monday at a meeting of the County Board's Economic and Community Development Committee.

"There was no requirement for a competitive process," under the old procedure, Whaley-Smith said.

Supervisor Steve Taylor, the committee chairman, agreed that a new policy was needed, although he declined to comment on the administration's proposal before Monday's meeting.

"Our old process was screwed up," Taylor said in criticizing the lack of even a basic marketing tool like the MLS.

Comptroller Scott Manske also has committed to informing county supervisors of property sales in their districts, which Taylor said he appreciates.

One reason for Taylor's appreciation is that sales of county-owned, non-park properties can go forward without board approval, under a change in state law.

County Executive Chris Abele gained new authority over sales of county-owned land not zoned for park use in the two-year state budget approved in July by the Legislature and signed by Gov. Scott Walker.

In a subsequent memo to county supervisors, county attorney Paul Bargren confirmed that the state action gives the executive power to "lease, sell or convey any non-park property regardless of board policy and without board approval."

"The new process provides clarity for buyers," Abele said. "And I think we'll get better deals" for the properties.

For a property acquired by the county through foreclosure for unpaid taxes, the economic development division must offer the real estate to other county departments for public use. If there is no taker, the division must offer the real estate to the municipality where it is located.

Should the municipality reject it for public use, the division must go to the next step, soliciting sealed bids.

If no bids are acceptable, the division would be required to place the property on the open market by listing it on the MLS and offering a broker fee on a successful sale.

Information on county-owned properties for sale, including tax-foreclosed houses, surplus properties, lots in the Park East corridor and business development parks, is available on the county website.

GIVE YOUR THOUGHTS

The Milwaukee County administrative services department is requesting public comments on a proposed land disposition procedure.

To make a comment, email amop@milwaukeecountywi.gov before 5 p.m. Sept. 25.