Walker plan fair; offers solid footing for the state
Let me be blunt: Wisconsin is out of money. Our state faces a $137 million shortfall in the current fiscal year and a projected $3.6 billion hole in the next biennium.

The recession has left Wisconsin families hurting. We simply cannot expect the taxpayers to shoulder an even greater tax burden to close the budget gap. Inaction is also not an option. Without immediate action, our most vulnerable members of society will be put at risk as the state's coffers run dry and programs run out of money.

Labor costs account for 60% of the state general fund operational budget, and any serious budget solution must address the cost of labor. Let me be clear, state workers are good people who do outstanding work for the citizens of Wisconsin. However, we must make shared sacrifices to close the deficit and put Wisconsin back on the right track.

Gov. Scott Walker is asking state employees to lend a hand in balancing the budget.

Currently, state employees do not contribute toward their pensions. Moving forward, we will ask employees to chip in 5.8%. This change will bring Wisconsin employees' retirement contributions in line with the national average.

We also will ask state employees to contribute more toward their health insurance. On average, state employees pay about 6% of their annual health insurance payments. Nationally, that contribution is closer to 25%. The governor will ask employees to increase this share to 12.6%, which is still half of the national average.

By asking for these shared sacrifices, along with restructuring our older high-interest debts to lower interest rates, Wisconsin can move forward with a level of government our taxpayers can afford.

Under this plan, no public workers will lose their jobs or be forced to take furlough days. The budget adjustment plan will save jobs. By asking employees to make these minor contributions, we can prevent 1,500 layoffs between now and July 1. Moving forward, we will save between 5,500 and 5,600 state jobs in the next biennium. We also can save 5,000 to 6,000 teaching jobs in our local school districts.

Contrary to some reports, the budget adjustment plan will not eliminate public employee unions, and it will not weaken employee protections. Wisconsin still will have some of the strongest civil service laws in the country on our books. Wisconsin's workplace safety laws will remain second to none. Workers in other industries across Wisconsin already have made sacrifices to keep our economy moving. We are simply asking for state public employees to share in solving the budget crisis.

When it comes to being in a fiscal crisis, our state is far from alone. Yet, while we are working as hard as possible to protect our state employees and their families, other states have not followed suit. In California, Gov. Jerry Brown has proposed reducing state employee pay by 10%. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo is proposing to cut 10,000 employees from the state payroll.

In Wisconsin, we value the hard work and professionalism of our state employees. We are simply asking for a small sacrifice to help bring employee benefits in line with the national average.

Challenging times require bold leadership. Gov. Walker has offered a fair plan that will put Wisconsin back on a sustainable financial path without raising taxes, raiding segregated funds or using accounting tricks.

Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills) represents the 8th Senate District.