Legislature passes bill to cut budget of Milwaukee County Board
State lawmakers Tuesday completed action on a bill to cut the power and budget of the Milwaukee County Board and to hold a referendum next year on cutting supervisor pay.

Gov. Scott Walker, a former Milwaukee County executive, has said he supports the legislation.

The state-imposed change is necessary, according to its backers, because of ongoing problems with county finances and the County Board's unwillingness to adopt reforms that have been recommended by several studies over the past decade. The board, however, last month adopted a similar reform plan, but with lesser cuts to its budget and pay.

The bill, approved by the Senate on a 19-14 vote and ratified by the Assembly on a voice vote, would cut the board's budget by two-thirds and limit supervisors' role in contracts, labor negotiations and land sales. It also would effectively convert the job of supervisor to part time beginning in 2016, if voters approve a pay cut of 50% to about $24,000 in an April 2014 referendum.

Supervisor terms also would be reduced from four to two years, beginning in 2016, under the legislation.

An amendment approved by the Senate modifies the spending limit for the board's budget and would shift four County Board research analysts to the independently elected county comptroller's staff. It also would shift just one rather than both County Board lobbyists to the control of the county executive.

That improved the legislation, said County Board Chairwoman Marina Dimitrijevic. But she said she'll confer with lawyers about the provisions, and didn't rule out taking legal action to block the law.

"I need to have some serious conversations with our legal counsel, because I'm not sure of that," Dimitrijevic said. Supervisor John Weishan Jr. raised the issue of the reform law's legality last week, questioning whether its separate treatment for Milwaukee County on budget and other matters violated the state constitution's uniformity clause.

The Senate approved the bill late Tuesday, after a lengthy delay while lawmakers huddled just off the Senate floor. All 18 Republican senators plus one Democrat - Lena Taylor of Milwaukee - voted for the bill. A series of amendments by Democratic lawmakers all were rejected.

The bill has the backing of County Executive Chris Abele, the Greater Milwaukee Committee and local business groups. They have argued that supervisors meddle in day-to-day county operations. That would be curbed under the legislation, which restricts direct supervisor contacts with county department heads.

Opponents have said the legislation's hidden agenda is to yield control of county parks or other assets to business interests, some calling it an attempted power grab by Abele. He has countered that supervisors would retain their voice on the county budget and other official decisions.

The board's own reform plan calls for cutting its budget and staff by 50%, trimming supervisor pay by $10,000 to about $40,000 a year, and requiring supervisors to get training every other year on their proper role. Hundreds of people who attended County Board town hall meetings over the past few months said they preferred reforms done locally, not by the state, according to Dimitrijevic.

'Being picked on'

Sen. Tim Carpenter (D-Milwaukee) said the Milwaukee County Board legislation was another in a list of anti-Milwaukee measures working their way through the Legislature.

"Milwaukee County is being picked on," Carpenter said. "In Milwaukee we are really feeling under siege." Other legislation affecting the area includes budget bill provisions restricting local residency requirements and one aimed at hobbling a streetcar project for the city.

Carpenter also suggested that Abele and local business interests want the County Board restrictions in order to pave the way for use of vacant county-owned Park East Freeway parcels for a new arena for the Milwaukee Bucks.

Because of the push for curbing the Milwaukee County Board, he and other legislators will resist future efforts to win state approval for public financing if it's sought for an arena, Carpenter said.

'Out of control'

Sen. Leah Vukmir (R-Wauwatosa) said the state legislation was needed to cut county bloat.

"Milwaukee County is being targeted because it is out of control, when you compare it to the other 71 counties," she said.

The bill's prospects in the Senate improved following criticism over revelations that the board had authorized talks with a decertified union. Senate President Mike Ellis (R-Neenah) expressed disbelief over explanations from Dimitrijevic and others that the talks were not formal bargaining sessions.

For deceased troops

In other action Tuesday, the Legislature passed an income tax exemption for the estates of soldiers killed in combat.

The Senate and Assembly both unanimously passed the bill, which would help the survivors of active-duty soldiers and other military members who die as a result of wounds received in a combat zone. The proposal would give the dead soldiers a state income tax exemption for their military pay, which would lower taxes on their estates.

The tax exemption would apply to the year in which the service member died and in some cases the previous year as well.

The bill now goes to Walker.

"This bill is only eight lines . . . but it sends an important message," said Rep. Mark Born (R-Beaver Dam), the bill's author. "Nothing further is needed from soldiers who have given the ultimate sacrifice."

Patrick Marley of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report from Milwaukee.