David Clarke says undercover deputy got gun into courthouse
An undercover Milwaukee County sheriff's deputy with a gun cleared security checkpoints at all six entrances into the county courthouse complex Wednesday, Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. said.

Clarke said he ordered an "integrity check" on the complex following the Feb. 11 courthouse shooting in Wilmington, Del., that left three people dead, including the gunman.

The courthouse checkpoints are operated by the Facilities Management Division, under director James Burton, who reports to County Executive Chris Abele, Clarke said in a news release.

Abele said Wednesday that since Feb. 28 his office has been trying to arrange a meeting with Clark to discuss courthouse security that would include Facilities Management officials.

He also provided copies of email exchanges between Barb Pariseau, an official with the Milwaukee County Department of Administrative Services, and Tobie Weberg, a deputy inspector with the sheriff's office, in which the two are trying to arrange a date for such a meeting.

Abele said he was disappointed that Clarke chose to address the issue through a news release before discussing it with those involved.

"He didn't talk to any officials in the county or (Facilities Management), if that genuinely was his concern," Abele said in a telephone interview.

According to Clarke:

The deputy carried no credentials or other law enforcement identity and had a gun tucked in her waistband when she set off the magnetometer while entering the courthouse.

Security guards then used a hand-held wand to find the metal but let her go when she showed her belt buckle as the cause.

Clarke has ordered sheriff's deputies posted at each security checkpoint in the complex until "he is convinced weapons cannot get through."

He said the staffing will be paid for with overtime and that he will request supplemental funding to pay for it, because the job is not in the sheriff's office budget.

"The security check has become an exercise in going through the motions," Clarke said in the release. He blamed "complacency and a lack of a sense of urgency," as well as "inadequate supervision by Facilities Management."

Abele said all he knows about the incident is what was detailed in Clarke's news release and that he met with Facilities Management officials soon after.

"I said I want to know everything we can about this, what can we do to make it better," Abele said, adding that he still wants to meet with Clarke.