Tom Barrett blasts state lawmakers over vote to end residency rules
Speaking a day after the Legislature's budget committee moved to end residency rules, Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett said there was "incredible hypocrisy" in Thursday's vote by the Joint Finance Committee.

As he unfolded a map of the city showing where city employees live and where the city's foreclosure problem is most pronounced, Barrett said: "I want the governor and Republican leaders to understand this: Why do they want to allow employees to move out of the city of Milwaukee and not pay toward their pension?"

In Barrett's view, the Joint Finance Committee vote is at odds with Gov. Scott Walker's stated goal of having public employees pay more for their pension and health costs. That was the thrust of Act 10, which eliminated most collective bargaining for most public-sector workers, except for public safety employees.

"I'm thinking Act 10, they want us to negotiate with unions," Barrett said in a meeting with Journal Sentinel editors and reporters. "Now we are negotiating with the legislative leadership. It's insanity. Why am I negotiating with legislative leadership on an issue that is in collective bargaining?"

City officials say Milwaukee city firefighters and police officers pay nothing toward their pension or as little as 1.6%. Based on a January 2012 valuation of the city's retirement system, the total liability for city government employees is $1.138 billion. Of that amount, $505.2 million is attributable to current sworn police officers and $276.1 million is attributable to current sworn firefighters. Together, that represents 68.6% of the estimated $1.138 billion of pension obligations attributable to current city employees.

Barrett said the city's protective service unions - the Milwaukee Police Association, Local 215 of the Milwaukee Professional Firefighters and the Milwaukee Police Supervisors' Organization - and their Republican backers in the Legislature are obsessed with ending residency. The unions have said that when they brought up residency at the bargaining table, they were told to go to Madison.

"What this comes down to is their obsession to making sure these individuals who work for the city of Milwaukee who move out do not contribute any more toward their pensions," Barrett said.

Referring to a police officer or firefighter who might want to move out of the city because his property taxes are too high, Barrett said he was thinking of what to say to them.

"I'm thinking you don't pay toward your pension through the payroll, and now you don't want to pay toward your pension through property taxes? Who do you think is paying for your pension?" Barrett said.

Barrett said city employees would leave in significant numbers if given the chance. A recent Legislative Fiscal Bureau report concluded that "given that public employees, their unions, and associations want relief from the residency requirements in Milwaukee, it would seem somewhat evident that providing that relief could lead to some number of those public employees migrating out of the city."

In a statement, Walker's spokesman Tom Evenson said, "The way to keep people in a city isn't by building a wall but by improving the quality of it with great schools, safe streets, and a better economy.

"Governor Walker put the issue in the bill because it will help Milwaukee Public Schools recruit more quality teachers, and education is one of the biggest parts of the budget. The provision applies the same standard to all other public employees to have the freedom to live where they want as long as it does not interfere with the duties of their job."

Barrett said that because of the loss of valuation in the city due to the housing crisis - as much as $5 billion in the last few years - businesses in Milwaukee will have to bear an increasing proportion of the property tax levy compared with homeowners. That makes it difficult to retain and attract business, he says.

Rich Meeusen, president and CEO of Badger Meter, said Barrett was right that commercial and manufacturing interests could bear a larger burden of the property tax levy.

"We run the risk of losing more of the middle class out of the city, which could have a further negative impact on the residential value and puts it more on businesses," Meeusen said.

Streetcar in jeopardy

Barrett also said the city intended to proceed with planning for a streetcar system in Milwaukee. The Joint Finance Committee voted on Thursday not to force ratepayers to bear the cost of utility relocation for the streetcar route.

If approved by the full Legislature and Walker, the move could kill the project because of the added costs. Utilities say the cost of the relocation would be $55 million, although city officials say they don't think it would be that high.

The city has allocated $64.6 million - funded by $54.9 million in federal aid and $9.7 million from a tax incremental financing district - to pay for construction of the streetcar line from the lower east side to the Milwaukee Intermodal Station. The city hopes to begin construction next year, with the first cars running in 2016.