Veterans oppose Wisconsin asbestos bill
SHARE

By

It was disappointing to read Christian Schneider's column regarding Senate Bill 13, which would delay and deny justice for asbestos victims ("Asbestos lawsuits need transparency," Perspectives, Nov. 13).

SB 13 would add burdensome delays to veterans and other asbestos victims, and that is unacceptable. Some clarification and context are needed to many of Schneider's arguments made in support of SB 13.

In his column, Schneider fails to mention that the Wisconsin Veterans of Foreign Wars, the Military Order of the Purple Heart and the American Legion are all officially opposed to the bill. To come to a decision on whether to support or oppose a bill, these veterans' organizations have an independent and democratic process, which means the majority of their members and the leadership of each organization would have to be opposed to a bill to declare official opposition. So, a vast majority of Wisconsin veterans are opposed to SB 13 and with good reason.

Veterans oppose SB 13 because we make up 30% of all mesothelioma deaths but make up only 8% of the population. Mesothelioma is an incredibly painful and incurable cancer caused by asbestos exposure.

Naval ships were insulated with several tons of asbestos. Military barracks and vehicles were insulated with asbestos. In fact, hundreds of barracks and thousands of military vehicles that were insulated with asbestos are still being used today. So while our veterans were honorably serving our country, they were unknowingly exposed to the deadly product. Keep in mind that asbestos companies knew their product was deadly but kept it a secret for many decades.

A widow of a veteran and mesothelioma victim from Neenah recently shared the story of her husband, Mike, who worked as a machinist on World War II submarines and inhaled asbestos dust every time he worked on the pumps and engines of his submarine. His work area was literally covered with asbestos insulation. In 2007, he was diagnosed with mesothelioma and underwent a variety of treatments including tomotherapy and chemotherapy. He suffered greatly due to mesothelioma and died in 2008.

Our veterans deserve better than that. Mike and other veterans like him deserve unimpeded access to justice. The prognosis once someone is diagnosed with mesothelioma is about 18 months, and many times mesothelioma victims die much sooner. Veterans and other asbestos victims deserve to see their day in court and live their final days with dignity.

Schneider also fails to mention that SB 13 would add unnecessary delays, force disclosure of filings with federal personal injury trusts and take away choice from veterans and other asbestos victims. A substitute amendment containing language that removes the delays and burdensome discovery requirements was proposed and defeated in the Wisconsin Legislature. We support that substitute amendment because that would provide additional transparency without adding hurdles to justice.

SB 13 would only serve to prolong an excruciating and time-intensive process. We agree that more transparency is needed, but delay for even one veteran suffering from the fatal effects of mesothelioma is unacceptable — justice delayed is justice denied. Wisconsin veterans and our organizations stand together with other asbestos victims in opposition to SB 13.

Fuzz Spangler is commander of the Military Order of the Purple Heart Department of Wisconsin.