Scott Walker has spent most of life planted firmly in middle class
Gov. Scott Walker delivered remarks at Sojourner Celebration of Courage held at the Gehl Club in Miller Park last week. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

Madison— As a governor with a $147,328 salary and a mansion, vehicles and armed bodyguards — all provided by taxpayers — Scott Walker is no longer an average Joe.

But for all his childhood and most of his adult life, the Wisconsin governor was just that: successful but middle class.

In an age when most potential presidential contenders are millionaires, Walker may end up being the closest thing to a middle-class presidential candidate that voters will see in 2016.

For most of the 1990s, the son of a Baptist minister made less than $40,000 a year from his salary as a lawmaker. As recently as 2006, Walker was making about $70,000 a year and living in a two-bedroom house with an unfinished basement, in part because as Milwaukee County executive he was giving a chunk of his salary back to taxpayers.

Not all voters will swoon over the fact that the 47-year-old governor isn't a millionaire.

Democrats point to Walker's recent book deal and his wealthy donors, arguing that his policies help the rich. Some Republicans may pause on learning that Walker has been a public employee for 22 years and has qualified for two separate government pensions, one from the State of Wisconsin and the other from Milwaukee County.

But Walker's modest finances could boost a presidential bid by helping the governor reach out to ordinary voters and by ruling out some of the financial conflicts of interest that crop up for wealthy candidates.

"They're as common as an old shoe," said Betty Balsley, who got to know the Walker family while the now-governor's father was serving as a pastor in Plainfield, Iowa.

The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reviewed the governor's finances, including more than 20 years of public salary and state income tax records, more than a decade of ethics disclosures and nine years of property records.

The governor's portfolio makes news more for what isn't in it than for what is.

During most of the time he served as Milwaukee County executive, from 2002 to 2010, Walker disclosed no stocks or bonds worth more than $5,000, in short no major assets of any kind besides his house and two pensions.

The financial disclosures required of a governor under Wisconsin law aren't precise, but do show that as of Dec. 31, Walker had in addition to that home at least $20,000 in investments but no more than $200,000. His mortgage and credit card loans came to at least $115,000 and could have been substantially more.

In total, Walker's net worth including his home is less than a half-million dollars and potentially quite a bit less.

That's a far cry from Barack Obama, John Kerry, Mitt Romney, John McCain and George W. Bush, who were all multimillionaires by the time they sought and won their party's presidential nomination. The field of potential 2016 nominees also has its multimillionaires, including Hillary Rodham Clinton and Ted Cruz.

The possible GOP candidates are almost all wealthy, or at least well off, to a degree that Walker is not, from former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush to former Texas Gov. Rick Perry and U.S. Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky. One exception is U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida, but the Center for Responsive Politics still puts the possible range of his net worth above that of Walker's.

Modest background

In recent trips to key presidential states such as Iowa and South Carolina, Walker has drawn attention to this by presenting himself as in tune with ordinary workers. In New Hampshire, the governor bragged how he scored a sweater for $1 using a mix of coupons and other discounts.

It's a longtime theme for Walker, who campaigned for governor in 2010 by talking about his 1998 Saturn sedan and penny-pinching habit of packing ham sandwiches for lunch.

That can resonate with a vast swath of the electorate.

"He knows what it's like for the average guy to struggle," Bob McDonald of Myrtle Beach, S.C., said recently. "And we're watching D.C. throw our money out the window by the bucket. He knows what it is to scrimp and save."

Steffen Schmidt, a political scientist at Iowa State University, said this part of Walker's narrative could help distinguish him from a crowded GOP field for 2016.

"Anything that sets you apart from other contenders and makes you more like the people who you want to support you helps," Schmidt said.

Democrats, predictably, aren't impressed.

Scot Ross, executive director of the liberal group One Wisconsin Now, said for the past two decades Walker has gotten a public salary, some $1.75 million in all, not counting the generous pension and health benefits. He said Walker policies such as cutting tax credits for low-income families and essentially eliminating state income taxes for manufacturers have benefited the wealthy, not ordinary workers.

"It hasn't made him rich," Ross said of Walker's public salary. "So it should have given him more appreciation for the challenges middle-class families and the poor have."

Democrats also have pointed to contributions from wealthy donors — such as the $500,000 Beloit billionaire Diane Hendricks gave to Walker's 2012 recall campaign — and recent exclusive events the governor has attended at venues such as the massive Palm Beach mansion of conservative industrialist David Koch.

In the past, Walker has touted the fact that in most of his years as Milwaukee County executive he gave back nearly half his salary, which averaged around $129,000 a year. Between 2002 and 2010, Walker gave back some $375,000 to taxpayers, mostly by writing checks to the county.

As governor, Walker increased workers' contributions for state pensions and health insurance and, in doing so, lowered the take-home pay of all state employees, including himself. But in his 2010 campaign, Walker promised to start making those higher pension contributions immediately upon taking office in January 2011, before rank-and-file workers were required to do so. In fact, Walker waited to do that until August 2011, when all state workers had to do it.

Little wealth accumulated

While in the Wisconsin Assembly between 1993 and 2002, Walker was paid $35,070 to $44,233 a year and was eligible for a per-diem payment for the days he traveled from his Wauwatosa district to work at the state Capitol. The young lawmaker averaged about $4,000 a year in those payments, low enough most years to put him within the bottom 10 lawmakers for per diems in the 99-member body.

Walker's wife, Tonette, has a part-time job with the American Lung Association. But it's a different sphere altogether than former Democratic nominee Kerry, whose wife, Teresa Heinz Kerry, inherited part of the H.J. Heinz ketchup fortune, or Cruz's wife, Heidi, who works as a managing director for the investment firm Goldman Sachs.

As GOP presidential candidates, McCain drew criticism in 2008 for appearing to forget how many homes he owned and Romney was lampooned for seeking to install a car elevator in the garage of one of his exclusive residences. Democrat Hillary Clinton has faced criticism for foreign donations to her family's charitable foundation and for saying last summer that she and former president Bill Clinton initially "struggled" financially after leaving the White House in 2001.

As a presidential candidate, Walker wouldn't have those problems.

In 2007, the Walkers purchased a two-story colonial home in Wauwatosa that is assessed at $360,000. The 2,152-square-foot house is comfortable — property records list four bedrooms and two and a half bathrooms. But it's hardly palatial.

Before that, the Walkers lived in another Wauwatosa home now assessed at $206,000. That house has 1,250 square feet, two bedrooms, and one and a half bathrooms. Those are middle-class digs.

The Walkers also have to help their sons Matt and Alex, who respectively are attending Marquette University and the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Of course, being governor has its perks. Walker lives in a more than 16,000-square-foot mansion guarded by State Patrol troopers, who also drive him in state vehicles and have even traveled with him at taxpayer expense during his recent series of political trips around the country.

Walker also received a substantial advance from his publisher for his memoir, "Unintimidated." One report put it at more than $340,000, despite disappointing sales.

Walker has declined to share the advance amount and his most recent tax return, with a spokeswoman saying he would discuss the possibility if he announces his expected presidential run.

But the book advance shows up on state income tax payments released to the Journal Sentinel by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue. Those showed Walker's tax liability with the state increased to $12,379 in 2013, up 56% from his 2012 payment of $7,960. No other likely source for that extra income shows up on Walker's ethics statements, and his state salary didn't change in those years.

One other element of Walker's finances could see scrutiny under the rigors of a presidential campaign.

During a secret John Doe probe resulting in convictions for some of his former Milwaukee County aides and associates but no charges against Walker, the governor set up a defense fund that paid nearly $450,000 to law firms in Chicago, Milwaukee and Madison as well as a public relations firm in Chicago. That money came from Walker's gubernatorial campaign and, under state law, the donors who contributed it had to agree to that use for their money.

Ross, the liberal activist, argued that Walker needed to tell voters who those donors were.

A spokeswoman for Walker's presidential campaign in waiting, Our American Revival, declined to comment.

More Scott Walker coverage

For more coverage of Gov. Scott Walker and the 2016 presidential race, from news stories to videos and interactive features, go to jsonline.com/scottwalker.