WPRI study flawed, and reaches flawed conclusions on right-to-work
SHARE

By

The Wisconsin Policy Research Institute now is telling us that the key to economic improvement is cutting wages by adopting a so-called right-to-work law.

The goal of right-to-work is to weaken or eliminate private sector unions. WPRI explains that "unionization increases labor costs (and this) makes a given location a less attractive place to invest" in. Right-to-work is supposed to solve this problem by weakening unions, thereby cutting wages and luring more companies into the state.

Right-to-work succeeds in lowering wages. The premier research on the matter — whose author Heidi Shierholz is now chief economist at the U.S. Department of Labor — shows that the impact of right-to-work is to lower wages for both union and nonunion workers and make it harder for people to get health insurance or pensions.

But while right-to-work succeeds in cutting wages, it fails in attracting new companies.

Decades ago, there were companies leaving places such as Wisconsin for the South or Southwest in search of cheaper labor. But we live in a different economy since globalization. Today, a company whose choice of location is based on cheap labor is going to China or Mexico. In the annual manufacturers survey, right-to-work has never been among the top 10 factors that determine companies' location decisions. In fact, employers created more manufacturing jobs in Wisconsin last year than in 21 of the 24 states with right-to-work laws.

WPRI is part of a corporate-funded network of "think tanks" with connections to the American Legislative Exchange Council. Through ALEC, some of the country's biggest corporations pay for state legislators to meet with industry staff and write model laws that make corporations richer; Wisconsin's right-to-work bill is taken almost word-for-word from ALEC's model legislation.

Not surprisingly, the big corporations whose staff wrote ALEC's right-to-work language are trying to persuade the public that the policy will be good for everyone. WPRI last week published a report claiming that Wisconsin would be better under this law. Unfortunately, the report's calculations are fundamentally flawed.

WPRI claims to predict the future based on projections starting in 1983; but that earlier period is meaningless to understanding the global economy. The report measures total income — including the stock market and investment earnings of the wealthiest individuals — instead of employee wages; so if right-to-work makes the rich richer and others worse off, WPRI may still declare the policy a success.

The key to economic analysis is holding "all else equal" in order to identify the impact of a single policy such as right-to-work. The premier study of right-to-work — which shows right-to-work lowers wages and benefits — controls for 42 factors. WPRI controls for only seven, making its results unreliable. Finally, WPRI fails to honor the fundamental principle of transparency about either the details of how its calculations were done or how much the author was paid and who provided the money to hire him.

As a professor who has studied this issue, I have both testified and written about right-to-work and have not been paid a cent for this work. In universities, we know that the first rule of research is that you start with a question, and then follow the facts to wherever the truth leads. When you do the opposite — start with a political ideology and then hire a researcher to reach a predetermined conclusion — you end up with research that is meaningless at best and misleading at worst.

Wisconsin deserves better.

Gordon Lafer, research associate at the Economic Policy Institute, is a political economist and an associate professor at the University of Oregon's Labor Education and Research Center.