Supreme Court amendment is about good government
Chief Justice of the Wisconsin Supreme Court Shirley Abramson (right) administers the oach of office to Gov. Scott Walker during inaugural ceremonies for constitutional officers on Jan. 5, 2014 at the Capitol in Madison. Credit: Mark Hoffman

SHARE

By

Next week, Wisconsin voters will be asked to amend our constitution to allow the justices we elect to the state Supreme Court to vote for their chief justice. The current system merely anoints the most senior justice as chief. There are a few things to know.

First, Wisconsin's system of making the most senior member of the court chief justice for as long as he or she remains in office is unusual. Only four other states do it this way. (Two others rotate in order of seniority.) In 22 states, members of their supreme court elect their chief justice for a limited term. The proposed amendment would add Wisconsin to that list.

Second, there is a reason that the overwhelming majority of states do not simply elevate the most senior member. While the chief justice has important administrative and organizational duties, he or she has no actual authority over the remaining justices. Leading independent and assertive people over whom you have no control requires a unique set of skills. It would be sheer happenstance if the person who has been on the court the longest happens to be the one best able to perform this difficult function.

More fundamentally, a chief justice can only lead with the consent and confidence of her colleagues. If that is lost, the court is likely to descend into division and dysfunction. Our current method of selecting a chief provides no way for the court to correct such a situation.

Third, moving to a more rational way of choosing a chief justice does not "disenfranchise" the voters. Wisconsin's voters do not "elect" the chief justice. There are states in which this happens, but Wisconsin is not one of them. A justice runs for re-election to the court and does not specifically stand for election as chief. Voters who re-elect a chief justice presumably know that he will have or will retain that position, but this does not mean that they vote "for" him anymore than voters who re-elect John Boehner are endorsing him for speaker of the House.

Imagine a voter who believes that Chief Justice Shirley Abrahamson is an excellent jurist who should remain on the court but is a poor administrator who has lost the confidence of her colleagues causing conflict among them. That voter would be unable to vote against her "as" chief justice or for any other justice to replace her. Imagine that two years from now, the chief justice resigns. For the next eight years, the next most senior justice would be the chief, notwithstanding that no one voted for her to occupy that position. Democracy is better served by allowing the justices — all of whom were elected by the voters — to select their chief, just as we allow our elected legislators to choose their leaders.

Opponents of the amendment suggest that competition among the justices might impair the collegiality of the court. But divisions on the current court strongly suggest that the status quo does not always work. Having a chief who enjoys the confidence of a majority of the court is far more likely to heal, than to aggravate, division on the court.

Finally, opponents of the amendment dismiss it as an assault on the current chief justice. Admittedly, some observers believe that her tenure illustrates the way in which permanent anointment of the most senior justice might not work well. But support for the amendment should not — and need not — have anything to do with any current justice. Abrahamson has only four years left on her current term. She will be 85 when it expires and unlikely to run for re-election. Love her or hate her, the amendment will quickly apply to a court on which she is no longer a member.

The amendment is not about whose ox is being gored; it's about good government. It is as simple and important as that.

Rick Esenberg is the founder and current president and general counsel of the Wisconsin Institute for Law & Liberty.