Walker, preacher's son, finds politics calling
Republican gubernatorial candidate Scott Walker, the Milwaukee County executive, greets people during a lunchtime meeting Oct. 7 at Klemm Tank Lines in Howard. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Scott Walker grew up a preacher's son and Eagle Scout, imbued with faith, surrounded by family, shouldering the expectations of others.

"Friends of mine, when they would swear in front of me, would apologize," he says.

When he was 2, he gave his first speech at the church in Colorado Springs, Colo., where his father worked, telling the parishioners: "May God bless you this Christmas with joy that never ends."

When he was in grade school in Plainfield, Iowa, he went around town with an old mayonnaise jar to collect donations to purchase a state flag to fly above City Hall.

And in Delavan, where he ran track and played drums in the high school marching band, he and friends were driven to practices and events in his mom's big white station wagon that was dubbed "the prayer wagon."

"You live in a fishbowl," he says.

The scrutiny prepared him for this, a life in public, a life in politics.

Step by step, Walker has carved out a unique political career, from state legislator to Milwaukee County executive. But his sights have long been set on being Wisconsin governor.

"Having looked at this, there might be more excitement in the (U.S.) Senate and the House, but to me, governor, you can get more things done," he says.

Those who know him best, his family, say he has been goal-oriented throughout his life.

"Scott is pretty steady," says his wife, Tonette. "Scott really had a plan and was hoping to be governor one day. He had a role model in (former governor) Tommy Thompson. He saw that as somewhere he wanted to go. It wasn't like, 'I have to be governor or I'm not going to be fulfilled in life.' "

"He was able to go through ups and downs," says his mother, Patricia Walker. "He has a gift for listening to people. I want him to be where God wants him. He is open to the Lord's leading."

Walker is of medium height and build, friendly and approachable. In interviews, he's unflappable.

Parental influences

He learned the knack of working a crowd by standing next to his father at the end of church services, offering a friendly handshake and asking about the family.

His mom gave him persistence. His dad gave him a moral worldview and an appetite for politics. A younger brother, David, became a constant companion, at home and in church.

Llewellyn Walker is a retired Baptist preacher and remains a formidable force. A fiscal conservative, the father often talked up local politics and politicians at the dinner table. He also served on the city board in Plainfield.

"My parents talked about people they liked, but they didn't talk about party," Walker says. "Later in life as I got older I realized they were Republicans."

During the 1976 presidential race between Jimmy Carter and Gerald Ford, Walker hung in his window a "Ford for President" sign.

He helped out in his dad's churches, and as he grew older, he began preaching, reporting back about youth camps he attended, even discussed Scripture. He loved the outdoors, especially canoeing, and became an Eagle Scout.

In 1985, he attended Badger Boys State and was selected to go to Boys Nation in Washington, where young people learn about government.

He was hooked on politics and ready to come to the big city, Milwaukee, to attend Marquette University. He was in school for three years but didn't get a degree. Instead, he left school to work for the American Red Cross.

While at Marquette, Walker lost a heated race for student president. He says now that the defeat was "probably the best thing for me."

"I had gotten a little bit too caught up in the office and not in the reason why you run," he says. "So it was a great, humbling moment for me."

After the race for student president, Walker says he put his energies into school and work. He landed a job with IBM. Then he got the full-time job in marketing with the Red Cross, and "gradually weaned off the (college) credits after that," he says.

Family, political life

He threw himself into work and then politics.

In 1990, he entered his first race and wore out three pairs of shoes while campaigning for a seat in the Assembly from Milwaukee. But he never had a chance, losing to Gwen Moore. Three years later, he won a special election for an Assembly seat from Wauwatosa.

In that same year, 1993, he married Tonette Schleker, a widow 12 years his senior. They had met at karaoke night, exchanging glances across the room at Saz's in Wauwatosa. It was a whirlwind courtship. On the first date, Walker told his future wife's roommate that he had found his bride.

"He told me in the beginning that he was getting ready to run for the state Assembly," Tonette Walker says. "Did I have reservations? My parents were Democrats and they were union workers."

Tonette Walker was taken by her husband's maturity, commitment and stability. She found someone she could count on.

"He was a good guy, then and now," Tonette Walker says.

Walker launched his political career, commuting from Wauwatosa to Madison. And he and his wife started their family. Their two sons are now in high school. Tonette Walker says that if her husband becomes governor, the family is likely to live in Madison.

"Our life is an open book," she says.

The family is active in school and church. They are members of the nondenominational Meadowbrook Church and hold twice-a-month Bible study in their home with other families.

Risky move

In 2002, Walker made his big political move. Milwaukee County was embroiled in a pension scandal. Thousands of voters signed petitions demanding a recall of Milwaukee County Executive F. Thomas Ament, who eventually quit.

Walker joined the fray and entered the county executive race.

"I remember, universally, people said I had lost my mind," Walker says. "One, you can't win. Two, if you do win, it's a political dead end."

Walker won the special election with 55% of the vote and has been re-elected twice. His performance drew attention within the Republican Party.

"I think his finest hour until now was when he stepped into this county executive race when nobody thought a Republican could win that," says U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan of Janesville. "It was just considered a suicide mission. He stepped into it and took it on and really performed admirably."

Ryan adds, "He has been tested over and over again as county executive. All the inertia and pressure against him has been 'grow government and raise taxes,' and he has fought it at every stage of the process."

But Walker has suffered bumps along the way with constant battles with the County Board over taxes, privatization of public services, quality of parks and public buildings, and delivery of social services.

"If I say it's red, they say it's black or it's blue," Walker says. "If I say it's right, they say it's wrong. Unlike the legislative branch, you can do things right away, you can make things happen, you can drive the agenda."

The job that was supposed to be a dead end has become a springboard. He made a brief run for the Republican nomination for governor in 2006 but dropped out in favor of former U.S. Rep. Mark Green, who had the party leadership's backing.

Walker learned from the experience. He began to travel to all parts of the state, attending Lincoln Day dinners, meeting with local businesspeople, picking up support among the Republican Party faithful and gaining favor as one of the state's more popular Republican politicians.

In September, he easily defeated former U.S. Rep. Mark Neumann to win the party's nomination. Now, he is trying to claim the job he has wanted all these years.

But he takes nothing for granted. The preacher's son is on the road, working the crowds, shaking hands, trying to secure a place at the state Capitol, Wisconsin's biggest political fishbowl.