Walker tells MMAC he supports repealing corporate income tax
Election 2010

Madison — Scott Walker, the Republican candidate for governor, has told the Metropolitan Milwaukee Association of Commerce that he favors repealing the corporate income tax - the state's third largest source of revenue.

State figures show ending the tax would free up $1.63 billion more over two years for businesses working through a difficult economy and make Wisconsin one of just five states with no corporate tax. Walker's position, which came to light in an MMAC survey, would also further stretch state finances at a time when the state budget is already facing a projected shortfall of some $3 billion over two years.

Walker, the Milwaukee County executive, said in a statement, "I believe taxes on all Wisconsin families and businesses are too high, and by lowering the tax burden we can jumpstart our economy and bring 250,000 jobs to Wisconsin."

Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett, Walker's Democratic opponent in the Nov. 2 election, said at a Madison news conference that ending the corporate tax would transfer the tax burden to other state residents.

"That means there's going to be a tax shift," Barrett said. "And the tax shift is going to go toward middle-class families, toward working families, people who are already stretched right now."

Raising $834.5 million last year, the state's corporate income tax is bigger than the cigarette tax - the next largest tax going to the state's main account - but is considerably smaller than the state's personal income and sales taxes. The Tax Foundation ranks Wisconsin's per capita corporate tax in 2007 as 23rd in the nation.

Walker has said he favors boosting the economy through a range of sizable cuts to the income tax, capital gains tax, hospital tax and others, though he has also said that some of those cuts might need to be phased in over time. Walker previously said he supports changes that would reduce corporate taxes for multistate companies and would lift the corporate tax for new companies for two years but stopped short of calling for an outright repeal of the corporate tax.

Barrett declines to answer

In his response to the MMAC survey, Barrett declined to say whether he supported a repeal of the corporate income tax but did say it was important to lay out how tax cuts would be covered with spending cuts. Walker spokeswoman Jill Bader criticized Barrett for fully answering only 13 of the 20 questions on the survey.

Steve Baas, the head of lobbying for MMAC, said the group hasn't had any more discussions with Walker or Barrett about their survey results and would let members decide which candidate they support. The MMAC didn't endorse candidates in state races, but the group has contributed $381,000 this year to the Republican Governors Association, which has run ads against Barrett.

Baas said that the group was merely passing on money on behalf of its member businesses and that the group has also passed along money to Democratic groups. So far no public disclosures of MMAC contributions to Democratic groups have come to light.

Scot Ross, executive director of the liberal group One Wisconsin Now, criticized Walker's stance on the corporate tax, saying it would result in spending cuts in other state priorities.

"This is just another one-and-a-half-billion-dollar corporate special interest tax break that Walker's promising that's going to result in massive cuts to health care, schools, police and firefighters," Ross said.

Reduction vs. elimination

Economist David Ward of NorthStar Economics in Madison said that the next governor should look at decreasing taxes to help the economy but should also be careful not to drive up the state's budget deficit by cutting them too much.

"You could get a lot of bang for the buck by reducing the corporate tax rate as much as you could by eliminating it," Ward said.

Barrett declined to say in the survey whether he favored requiring public employees to contribute more for their health insurance as private sector employees do. Walker said he supports such changes.

Also in the survey, Walker said he supported raising the payments for publicly funded voucher schools from $6,442 per pupil to more than $10,600 per pupil - 80% of the per-pupil rate in state, local and all other aid that goes to Milwaukee Public Schools.

Barrett said that in a time of budget shortfalls he would not support shifting money from public schools to fund such an increase and that Walker needed to explain where he would find the money to do that.