Feingold targeting Ron Johnson
By of the

The Republican primary for U.S. Senate isn't until Sept. 14, but U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold (D-Wis.) has already decided which candidate he's targeting.

Ron Johnson of Oshkosh.

Speaking at the Milwaukee Press Club "Newsmaker Luncheon" in Milwaukee, Feingold on Monday took shots at Johnson's comments on climate change, the mortgage interest deduction, free trade agreements and Feingold's political career.

Johnson is considered to be the leading Republican challenger to Feingold, largely because he has had more visibility and is better financed than his primary opponents, David Westlake and Stephen Finn.

After Johnson made comments about oil drilling and the Great Lakes, Feingold quickly aired a television ad criticizing Johnson.

Feingold said Johnson's recent comments about sunspots playing a role in global warming, as well as Johnson's more recent comment that Greenland was actually green at one time, convinced him that, "I'm not going to be taking a science course from Mr. Johnson anytime soon."

Feingold said nearly every legitimate scientist who had studied climate change and global warming is convinced there is a problem.

"What has happened is the mocking of the problem of the climate has weakened the public will through distortions and unscientific claims to try to solve the problem," Feingold said.

In an interview with WKOW-TV in Madison, Johnson reiterated his belief that climate change can be explained by sunspots.

"There's a reason Greenland was called Greenland," he said. "It was actually green at one point in time. . . . It's a whole lot whiter now."

Said Feingold: "This makes pop science embarrassed."

Johnson's campaign said late Tuesday afternoon that Johnson does not believe that man-made climate change is a proven theory, and that he is opposed to "a damaging piece of legislation like cap and trade that will raise taxes and could put 60,000 Wisconsinites out of work."

Feingold also challenged Johnson's comments in the same WKOW interview about the deduction taxpayers take with interest paid on their home mortgage.

In the interview, Johnson said that he wanted to lower taxes and simplify the tax code, adding that he hasn't been able to do his own taxes since 1979. He added that he wouldn't rule out doing away with certain deductions, and wanted to look at options, though he did not specifically say he would target the mortgage deduction.

Johnson added later that he supported the mortgage deduction. Feingold said the deduction was crucial to many Wisconsin taxpayers and said he would never vote to eliminate it.

Free trade debate

In a recent interview with Wisconsin Public Radio, Johnson expressed support for major free trade policies, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement, which he said had helped the economy. Johnson made reference to its effect on Wisconsin businesses, saying that it created winners and losers. "It's creative destruction," Johnson said.

Feingold said such trade policies, which he opposed, would not go down well with workers. Johnson's campaign added Monday that Johnson "has confidence in the workers and businesses in Wisconsin. He believes that Wisconsin has the ability to remain competitive in an international market."

Johnson's television ads have criticized Feingold for spending nearly his entire adult life in politics, both as a member of the state Legislature and as a senator. Feingold said he had chosen public service and was proud of it.

"I make no apologies for it," he said.

Feingold said the ad neglected to mention that U.S. Reps. Paul Ryan, Jim Sensenbrenner and Tom Petri, all Republican congressmen, could be considered career politicians.

"It's not a fair basis for a campaign," he said.

Earlier Monday, Republicans criticized Feingold for a recent television ad in which at least one person appearing is a paid lobbyist for the AFL-CIO. The ad features several people who praise Feingold for his stand against big corporations and banks. GOP officials said the ad showed Feingold sided with special interests and lobbyists.

John Kraus, a Feingold spokesman, said at least one of the people in the ad is a lobbyist for the AFL-CIO, but said the charge was a way for Johnson to avoid talking about the issues.