As Doyle's polls plunge, state Democrats try to stand clear
Election 2010

Madison — As Gov. Jim Doyle's poll numbers have sagged, running against the outgoing Democrat has become a reflex for Republicans.

But this year, vulnerable incumbent Sen. Jim Sullivan (D-Wauwatosa) has made it part of his strategy, as well.

"Only one told Gov. Jim Doyle to stop wasteful spending," reads a recent mailer to voters from the freshman senator touting himself as the "only Democrat to say no to Governor Doyle's billions in higher spending and taxes."

The mailer, which Sullivan's opponent Rep. Leah Vukmir (R-Wauwatosa) calls misleading, shows how some Democrats in tough races are trying to distance themselves from the head of their party and politics as usual.

"I don't think anyone could accuse us of being too close to Jim Doyle," Kory Kozloski, executive director of the State Senate Democratic Committee, said at a recent round-table discussion in Madison hosted by the website Wispolitics.

Except, of course, Republicans such as Vukmir, who are sharply criticizing votes that Sullivan and other Democrats did take with Doyle to raise taxes. This year, pocketbook issues such as jobs, taxes and spending are capturing the most attention in state legislative races. But the contests will have another less noticed impact - determining which political party gets the power to reshape legislative districts that will influence the outcomes of races for Congress and the Legislature for the next decade.

The Democrats control the Senate 18-15, meaning that Republicans would have to take two seats to win control there. Democrats controlled the Assembly 51-46 with two independents before two lawmakers stepped down, meaning that Republicans essentially need four new seats there for control.

The close margins for control of the Legislature have drawn national attention for legislative races here, with fund raising by candidates topping $5 million so far, slightly above the last nonpresidential election in 2006, according to the Wisconsin Democracy Campaign. Observers are predicting that independent spending by liberal and conservative groups will add up to millions of dollars more.

The struggle over Sullivan's seat will likely help determine whether Republicans will retake control of the Senate after four years out of power or whether Democrats will keep hold of at least one center of power in state government.

Sullivan was the only Senate Democrat who voted against the 2009-'11 budget, as did two Assembly Democrats. The budget included tax increases of nearly $2 billion and was passed by Democrats on largely party line votes and signed by Doyle. Sullivan said the vote showed he had the "common sense and independence" to protect his constituents and the state.

But Vukmir, a nurse by training, points out that Sullivan voted for the 2007-'09 budget bill and a 2009 budget repair bill that contained tax increases and an unsuccessful Senate version of the 2007-'09 budget bill that would have went further than even what Doyle favored by creating a $15 billion universal health-care system in Wisconsin.

"One vote does not make him independent," Vukmir said of Sullivan. "I believe in a smaller, more efficient government, and he believes in taxation and spending."

In legislative races overall, Democrats tout the fact that they handled a more than $6 billion 2009-'11 budget deficit by making reasonable cuts to programs such as aid to schools and by increasing taxes on smokers, individuals making more than $250,000 a year, and on multistate corporations. But Republicans have said the taxes on the wealthy and multistate corporations have harmed businesses and job creation and must be repealed.

In other competitive Senate races, Sen. John Lehman (D-Racine) is facing a spirited challenge from former police officer and Racine County Supervisor Van Wanggaard. Sen. Pat Kreitlow (D-Chippewa Falls), a former television journalist, faces former state Rep. Terry Moulton.

Monk Elmer, a physician and Democrat, is running against former GOP Rep. Frank Lasee in the Senate's open 1st District. Even Senate Majority Leader Russ Decker (D-Wausau) has found himself in a fight for his post against Republican Pam Galloway, a physician, as an independent GOP group has booked major ad spending against Decker.

Republicans could have even more potential to take back the Assembly, with possible competitive races in areas such as the Fox Valley and western Wisconsin for Democrats who were elected in the wave years of 2006 and 2008.

One bellwether race will be for the seat held by Assembly Majority Leader Tom Nelson (D-Kaukauna), who is giving up his seat to run for lieutenant governor. Republican Jim Steineke is running against Democrat Mert Summers there.

Among other potentially competitive races:

• Freshman Rep. Ted Zigmunt (D-Francis Creek) faces Republican Andre Jacque;

• Freshman Rep. Penny Bernard Schaber (D-Appleton) faces Republican Chris Hanson;

• Freshman Rep. Kristen Dexter (D-Eau Claire) is challenged by Republican Kathy Bernier;

• Two-term Rep. Ann Hraychuck (D-Balsam Lake) faces Republican Erik Severson;

• Two-term Rep. Phil Garthwaite (D-Dickeyville) is running against Republican Travis Tranel.

One race where Democrats could pick up an Assembly seat is in the 80th District, where Rep. Brett Davis (R-Oregon) gave up his post to run unsuccessfully for lieutenant governor in the GOP primary. Democrat Janis Ringhand is running against Republican Dan Henke.