Senate vote on photo ID bill delayed until Thursday
Madison — Senate Republicans gave initial approval early Wednesday to a bill requiring voters to show photo ID at the polls, but Democrats blocked a final vote on the measure until Thursday.

Senators signaled their approval of the bill on a voice vote, with Republicans who control the house voting for it and Democrats opposed. That vote came at 12:30 a.m., after more than 10 hours of debate, but Democrats used Senate rules to prevent the final vote.

Senators will reconvene at 9 a.m. Thursday on the bill.

“We should have it to the governor by the end of the week,” said Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau).

Despite the delays, the Senate action Wednesday all but guaranteed the bill would be signed into law to give Republicans a victory they have sought for nearly a decade.

The Legislature approved the measure three times from 2003 to 2005, but Democratic then-Gov. Jim Doyle vetoed it. Now, it will soon be on its way to Gov. Scott Walker, a Republican who wrote a photo ID bill when he was in the Assembly.

The measure passed the Assembly 60-35 last week, with two Democrats joining all Republicans.

Republicans said the requirement was needed to prevent voter fraud and boost confidence in election results. Democrats said there is no evidence of widespread voter fraud and predicted the bill would disenfranchise poor, elderly, minority and rural residents.

"What you really want to do is suppress the vote of people who don't think like you or look like you," Sen. Lena Taylor (D-Milwaukee) told Republicans.

But Sen. Joe Leibham (R-Sheboygan), author of the bill, said the requirement is reasonable because most people have a driver's license or other ID. Those who don't can get a free ID from the state.

Many people "have truly lost their confidence in the election system" because of reports of voter fraud, he said.

"They believe their vote is disenfranchised or zeroed out," he said.

The debate was punctuated by occasional small protests. At 11:40 p.m. Tuesday, a man charged onto the floor of the Senate bellowing “No!” repeatedly. Senate Democrats escorted him out of the chamber.

To vote, people would have to show Wisconsin driver's licenses, state-issued ID cards, certain student IDs, military IDs, passports, naturalization certificates or IDs issued by a tribe based in Wisconsin.

Those living in retirement homes, nursing homes and institutions would be exempt from the law, as would victims of stalking and those who opposed having their photos taken for religious reasons.

A voter who did not show a photo ID would be allowed to cast a provisional ballot that would be counted if the voter showed photo ID to an election clerk by the Friday after the election.

That could mean a sharp increase in the number of provisional ballots cast in the state, said Kevin Kennedy, director of the state Government Accountability Board, which runs state elections.

About 200 provisional ballots were cast in 2008 and 2010, when 2 million to 3 million total votes were cast, he said. About half those casting provisional ballots returned to clear up questions; the other provisional ballots were not counted.

Photo IDs from accredited, Wisconsin-based colleges and universities could be used to vote if they had signatures on them and expired within two years of being issued. University of Wisconsin System schools do not now meet those criteria, but Republicans said they and other institutions could change their IDs by the time the photo ID requirement takes effect next spring. Those showing college IDs would have to establish they are current students. Those living in student housing could do that because they appear on a list schools provide to election clerks; other students would have to present fee payment receipts in conjunction with their college IDs.

Limiting fraud

The measure could prevent people from voting in another's name, but not the most common form of voter fraud - felons voting while on state supervision.

The state Department of Justice and Milwaukee County district attorney's office have prosecuted 20 cases of voter fraud from the November 2008 election. None involves people voting in someone else's name at the polls.

A legal challenge is expected once the bill is signed into law. The U.S. Supreme Court upheld Indiana's photo ID law in 2008, but the measure in Wisconsin differs from Indiana's in some ways.

Implementing the bill would cost more than $7 million over the next two years, according to the nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau.

Much of the cost - almost $4 million - can be attributed to a provision of the bill that would require the Department of Transportation to provide free IDs to those who ask for them. The IDs are being provided to ensure the law does not include an unconstitutional poll tax; people would still have to pay for driver's licenses.

Voters would also be required to sign poll books when they vote, which supporters say would make it easier to prove cases of voter fraud. The bill also ends straight-party voting for everyone but military and overseas voters.

In another change, people could vote from their polling place only if they had lived in that voting ward for at least 28 days before an election. Now, voters have to live in their wards for 10 days before an election.

People would be able to vote by absentee ballot in clerks' offices for the two weeks before the election, less than half the time they can do so now. Voting in clerks' offices would end on the Friday before the election, instead of the day before the election, as it does now.

Eight states ask voters for photo ID, and Kansas has a new photo ID law that will go into effect in January, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures. Another 18 require voters to show an ID, but not necessarily one with a photo. That number will rise to 19 in July, when Oklahoma's law takes effect.

From now to next spring, a handful of local elections are expected, including likely recall elections for nine state senators. Six Republicans and three Democrats are targeted, and some of the recall elections could be held as early as July 12.

For those elections, voters would be asked to show photo ID but would not be required to do so. If they didn't show ID, they would be told the law was changing and they would have to do so starting in 2012. In other legislative action Tuesday:

The Senate approved a bill 21-11 to overturn regulations by the Department of Natural Resources that would have required communities to disinfect their water systems by Dec. 1, 2013.

Democrats said the regulations are necessary to protect public health, noting that Wisconsin-based research has shown that public water systems contain viruses from leaking sanitary systems that make people sick. But Republicans said the regulations could be a hardship on cash-strapped communities and local officials should be responsible for decisions on disinfecting water.

The bill now goes to Walker, who supports it.

The Legislature took the first step toward adopting a constitutional amendment that would prevent money from being diverted from the state transportation fund for other purposes. The proposal is a response to a decision to tap $1.3 billion in the transportation fund in recent years to pay for schools.

The Assembly voted 82-11 to amend the constitution, and the Senate voted 26-6 to do the same. To take effect, the proposal would need approval from lawmakers again in 2013 or 2014 and by voters in a referendum.

The Senate approved a bill Tuesday to ban the use and sale of synthetic marijuana and certain bath salts that have been abused as drugs.

Tom Tolan and Jason Stein of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.