Planned Parenthood funding facing cuts
Madison - The state would end more than $1 million a year in family planning funding to Planned Parenthood, under a proposal passed Wednesday by the Legislature's budget committee.

The Joint Finance Committee voted 12-4 to keep state family planning grants funded with state and federal money from going to groups like Planned Parenthood that separately provide abortions for women or make referrals for abortions. State law already prohibits such funds from being used to pay for abortions.

The move mirrors a trend by social conservatives across the country in states like Indiana, Kansas, Texas and Oklahoma, where state officials have either approved or are considering legislation to eliminate public funding for Planned Parenthood. A similar effort failed last month in Congress.

In Wisconsin, the funds could still go to other providers, though overall funding in the program would be cut by about $193,600, or 10%, to $1.7million a year in state money. Services provided through the grants include contraceptive supplies, pregnancy testing, screening for cervical cancer and work to prevent sexually transmitted diseases.

The committee also voted to prohibit men from receiving family planning services through a state program; require parents to be notified about teenage minors receiving family planning services; and to cut anti-tobacco grants by $850,000 a year.

Dropping men from the family planning services would require the approval of the federal government, and Democrats said they were concerned that making the change without that approval would jeopardize federal funding.

In a separate unanimous vote, the committee also froze a state farmland preservation program but did not end it. The Legislature must still approve the proposals as part of the overall state budget bill.

Committee Co-Chairwoman Alberta Darling (R-River Hills) said that separate state family planning funding would remain for women and that Planned Parenthood could still receive some federal funds. Gov. Scott Walker had sought to eliminate the family planning grants in his 2011-'13 budget bill.

"I see this as a very positive effort to retain critical health care services for women," said Darling, a former Planned Parenthood board member in the early 1990s who voted for the change.

Sen. Lena Taylor (D-Milwaukee) expressed concern that funds could be cut for organizations that provide abortions for victims of rape or incest.

"We're going back centuries to a time when women were more like a child and you could not make your own choices," Taylor said.

Sen. Glenn Grothman (R-West Bend) blasted Planned Parenthood, saying he believed the group sought to promote abortions and could still receive other state and federal funds through separate family planning efforts under the Medicaid program.

"There's a very ugly side to this organization, and I regret that they're going to take such a tiny cut in this budget," Grothman said.

Sen. Bob Jauch (D-Poplar) said he was concerned that the cuts to Planned Parenthood could prevent low-income women in rural districts like his from receiving other forms of vital health care that they couldn't receive anywhere else. He said Republicans were "narrow-minded zealots willing to sacrifice the health care of thousands of women and poor people because they don't agree with" abortion.

Amanda Harrington, a spokeswoman for Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin, said she couldn't immediately say what services or offices might be cut if the proposal passed but would do "everything we can to preserve this program." She said she didn't have total figures on state and federal funding for the group across different programs.

Farmland preservation. The committee also voted to allow $5.2 million in state borrowing to help preserve farmland in Wisconsin, down from the $12 million authorized under current law. Under the proposal, the money to pay down the debt would come not from general tax dollars but instead from a state stewardship program typically used to buy land for conservation.

The borrowing approved by the committee would allow the state to proceed with grants which had already received preliminary approval the farmland program's approval in 2009. The proposal approved by the committee must still be approved by the full Legislature.

Walker had proposed dropping the borrowing and the farmland program, which seeks to provide grants and incentives to keep in production farmland that is facing pressure from development.

The committee also voted to drop fees on certain farmlands being shifted out of agriculture and to require state agriculture officials to come up with a cheaper alternative to the farmland preservation program by June 30, 2012.