Walker signs wetlands bill
Madison — Gov. Scott Walker signed a bill Friday that would allow a developer to construct a retail center favored by the Green Bay Packers on a wetland near Lambeau Field.

Walker introduced the legislation in January at the request of the developer after planning had slowed for a Bass Pro Shops, or another retailer, for a store at Highway 41 and Lombardi Ave. in Ashwaubenon, a suburb of Green Bay.

The legislation would allow developer John F. Bergstrom of Neenah to develop a property at the site by specifying that wetlands of 3 acres or smaller in Ashwaubenon would be exempt from water quality review by the Department of Natural Resources.

The measure drew objections from environmentalists but was applauded by the business community.

Walker and his supporters said the bill was necessary after the Wisconsin Wetlands Association challenged the DNR's approval of the project, forcing it to undergo a judicial-like process known as a contested case hearing, which can be lengthy.

Staff of the DNR in the Green Bay office said the design would have unduly harmed an important wetland, but officials at the headquarters in Madison said Bergstrom was willing to make changes limiting any damage to landscape.

Rep. Brett Hulsey (D-Madison.) said Walker signed the bill will little fanfare, arguing "he realized how bad a bill it was."

"You are taking away citizens' rights to challenge projects like these," he said.

On Tuesday, Walker signed a measure that will allow businesses to claim state tax deductions of up to $4,000 for each job they create.

Walker said the bill - approved in a special legislative session last week - was one change that would help spark the economy.

"A fair amount of the business world is dependent on trends and our trend in Wisconsin is we are making it easier for business to hire people to do business here," Walker said just before signing the bill at the offices of Saris Cycling Group.

The measure will save businesses $33.5 million a year and cost the state that much in revenue as it tries to dig out of a two-year deficit that is expected to top more than $3 billion.

The new law will allow businesses with sales of up to $5 million a year to deduct $4,000 from their state income taxes for each job they create. Businesses with sales of more than $5 million a year would receive a deduction of $2,000 for each job they create.

For individual businesses, that would translate into savings per job of between $92 and $316, depending on how businesses file taxes and what tax rate applies to them, according to the nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau.

The Legislature is controlled by Walker's fellow Republicans, but the measure drew bipartisan support. It passed 25-8 in the Senate and 60-33 in the Assembly.

Some Democrats raised concerns about the bill, saying it added to the state's budget problems but would do little to create jobs.

Patrick Marley reported for this story in Madison and Lee Bergquist in Milwaukee.