Ryan's 2012 re-election not a given in tense climate
By of the

As the fiscal voice of the GOP and the architect of its plan to scale back Medicare, Paul Ryan is the Republican many Democrats would most like to defeat next year.

A Ryan loss would cost his party a lot more than a seat in Congress. It would deprive it of one of its most influential figures. And it would be a huge blow to its policy agenda, which Ryan has played a central role in crafting.

Could Ryan, often touted as a candidate for Senate or even president, lose a re-election bid for his own U.S. House seat?

That would be a shock. By any conventional calculus, the odds are substantially against it.

At the same time, Democrats are correct in saying this contest won't be a nonevent like Ryan's past campaigns. Wisconsin has been turned upside down politically since the last time Ryan was on a ballot.

"It will definitely be a race he's not used to running," says his likely Democratic opponent, Kenosha County Supervisor Rob Zerban.

Here's a closer look at the forces shaping Ryan's re-election campaign in Wisconsin's 1st Congressional District:

The Ryan budget. By persuading House Republicans to adopt his budget ideas in April, Ryan accomplished some broad political goals: He made the lines between the two parties sharper instead of fuzzier; he pressured his own party's presidential hopefuls to take a stand on entitlements; and he made it more likely that his issues - spending, deficits, Medicare - would dominate the 2012 campaign.

"Part of my thinking in doing the budget and doing what we're doing in 2011 is to raise the bar and standards (for) whoever our nominee is going to be . . . so we don't just give it to the next guy in the line . . . so that 2012 is a very clear election," Ryan said in a recent interview. "All these past elections have been muddled elections, sort of muddled differences, personality contests. . . . We need a clear referendum election, so that when we win, we have the moral obligation, the moral authority, to fix this problem. It forces not only Republican candidates to get specific and be clear, it forces us to give the country the choice, so the country can choose in 2012 what direction it wants to take."

You can argue about whether 2004 and 2008 were "muddled elections." But it's fair to say Ryan has defined the differences between the parties more starkly than before. By doing so, he has also increased the risks for his party and helped nationalize his own race.

A House race goes national. The Ryan budget has made its author into a more polarizing figure, a bigger hero to conservatives, a bigger target for Democrats.

Whether this hurts his re-election campaign, helps it or does a little of both remains to be seen. The right has everything to lose and the left everything to gain by a Ryan defeat. The race will attract far more outside money and interest than Ryan's past races.

How could this hurt Ryan at home? It could if he loses some Democratic and independent voters because his partisan profile and budget ideas trump his personal appeal.

"Seniors who are on Medicare - they're Republicans as well as Democrats," Zerban says. "They know how well it works for them and they don't want that to change for their kids or their grandkids."

Ryan expresses a lot of confidence in his ability to sell his ideas and emerge from this debate politically intact. He cites his history in the district. He's won seven times, easily clearing 60% in the past six elections. He says new technology, such as mass conference calls with constituents, has allowed him to make his case directly on the budget and Medicare to huge numbers of voters.

"I'm going to have to communicate more because nationally, I've become a target," he says, but adds, "I am getting more organic support from constituents than I've ever gotten."

He also contends the recent move by Wisconsin Republicans to eliminate straight-ticket voting (the option that allows voters to make a single choice for all the candidates in one party without picking them individually) gives him a better shot at keeping crossover voters. In one county in Ryan's district, Kenosha, almost half the voters used the straight-ticket option in 2010.

"I've been through a lot of nationalized elections. I've always been able to cross the current. . . . Now that we don't have straight-ticket voting, it's even easier," he says.

Zerban points to polls suggesting Ryan has become more polarizing here and nationally.

"We've seen his negatives climb a lot," he says.

In an independent Wisconsin survey in May by a Democratic firm, Public Policy Polling, Ryan had huge name recognition for a congressman but inspired sharp partisan divisions. Overall, 41% of voters viewed him favorably, 46% unfavorably. His approval among Democrats was 10% and among Republicans 77%. Independents were split (43% favorable, 42% unfavorable).

Those were numbers for the state as a whole, of course, not his district. In a national Bloomberg poll in June, 23% of Americans viewed him favorably and 26% unfavorably.

Ryan contends that his emergence as a Democratic target has actually helped him politically in some ways.

"It just electrifies the (GOP) grass roots," Ryan says, citing the growth in his donor base this year. He took in $900,000 in the second quarter of 2011. "When they see you getting shot at, they like you even more."

The Walker factor. Democrats believe that Ryan will also be hurt next year by the deep divide over Gov. Scott Walker, the political energy that has been unleashed among Democrats and the general level of activism and awareness it has fueled among the broader electorate.

"Those who might have considered themselves independents or moderates are not happy with what Republicans have done in the state (and) they're seeing what Paul Ryan has proposed with his budget," says Zerban, an Illinois native who has worked most of life in the cruise ship and food businesses. "Wisconsin has been so hurt by what the Walker administration has proposed that people here are hyper-alert to what's going on."

Ryan's view?

"A lot of people are mad at Madison, but I think they put me in a different" category, he says.

As much political risk as he's assumed with his budget, Ryan has more or less taken a pass on the divisive fight over collective bargaining in Wisconsin.

"I just say I'm a federal guy . . . Why would I get involved in that fight when I've got my own?" Ryan says. "I'm supportive of what (Republicans in Madison) are trying to do (but) I haven't weighed in on that stuff."

The district. The 1st District has voted Republican for president only once in the past six elections. Ryan likes to cite that history as proof of his crossover appeal. Democrats like to cite it as evidence that the district is winnable for them.

But it's a fairly misleading statistic.

The truth is that population trends and redistricting have combined over time to shift the Ryan seat from 50-50 to Republican-leaning. Much of the district's recent population growth has come in the more conservative communities west of I-94 in Racine and Kenosha counties. Ryan also shed Democratic Beloit in redistricting 10 years ago. That map made his district a few points more Republican. Much less of a factor is the new redistricting plan passed this month by Wisconsin Republicans. It gives Ryan more of Waukesha County, but its net effect on the district's partisan makeup is pretty marginal.

Conservative Supreme Court Justice David Prosser got 56% in Ryan's district on April 5 (six points better than he did statewide). Walker topped 58% in the district last fall (six points better than he did statewide). George W. Bush got 53.5% in 2004 (about four points better than he did statewide).

Yes, Democrat Barack Obama won the 1st District in 2008, but his share of the vote (51.3%) was below his national percentage (52.9%) and almost five points below his statewide number (56.2%).

"I think it's more of a swing district . . . I think it's winnable," says Zerban.

"Certainly, there are areas that are more Republican," he says, but he says a fired-up Democratic base will be critical, "which we can thank Scott Walker for doing."

Ryan says Prosser's performance in April shows "our district is pretty solid. I think that shocks people. . . . What that shows you is this district has become more reliably right of center than it has been. . . . Progressives are not the majority of Democrats in this area."

A volatile political climate. Ryan will enjoy obvious advantages next year (money, the makeup of the district, his own political skills, his electoral history). But there are major wild cards: the political fallout from his Medicare plan, the impact of having Obama on the ballot (and possibly even Walker if there's a successful recall drive next year), and the mad intensity of Wisconsin politics these days.

"This place is going to be a political tinderbox for 18 months," Ryan says.