Tighter voting laws urged
By of the

Nearly three years after police began a probe into 2004 voting flaws in Milwaukee, investigators issued a report Tuesday that says eliminating same-day registration and requiring voters to show photo IDs would minimize the problems found.

Those recommendations immediately became fodder for advocates of both changes - and swiftly condemned by critics.

That included Gov. Jim Doyle, who told reporters in Madison: "I'm not sure why the Milwaukee Police Department should be the one deciding what the voting policy is of the State of Wisconsin."

The report blames shoddy recordkeeping by city election officials and error-prone poll workers for flaws that allowed illegal and improper voting in 2004.

The 67-page report comes long after state and federal authorities ended their investigation of the system, prompted by a series of Journal Sentinel reports in 2005 that detailed problems in Milwaukee and elsewhere.

The report underlines cases where investigators pushed for more aggressive prosecution of election fraud, particularly in cases involving out-of-state campaign workers who voted in Wisconsin while here.

But it mostly reads as a detailed analysis of a deeply flawed election in the city.

Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett said the city has already implemented many changes to address the problems cited in the report.

"We will continue to make the necessary improvements so that citizens of Milwaukee can be confident in their elections," Barrett said.

He noted that last week's presidential primary, with about a 50% turnout in the city, was executed with no major problems, and the "reconciliation between voters and ballots is complete and without error."

The Election Commission office is now headed by Sue Edman, a retired Milwaukee police captain. She replaced Barrett's initial appointee, Lisa Artison, who stepped down as evidence of the problems mounted.

In a statement, Police Chief Edward Flynn said the report's findings are the views of the investigators, and the department would not take a stand on the policy issues.

The report cites a litany of specific problems, from absentee ballots never counted to poll workers allowing people clearly from outside the city to vote in Milwaukee. But much reaction focused on the photo ID and same-day registration recommendations.

Both have been advocated in the Legislature, with most of the support coming from Republicans, citing the integrity of the system, and strong opposition from Democrats, expressing concerns about disenfranchising voters.

A measure to allow a constitutional amendment on a photo ID requirement stalled in the Democrat-controlled Senate. A bill from Rep. Sue Jeskewitz (R-Menomonee Falls) to end same-day registration has not received an Assembly vote, with Jeskewitz saying Tuesday she knows it won't go anywhere in the Senate.

"But I want the public to know: We're not giving up," she said.

GOP leaders said, however, that same-day registration is not a priority, instead stressing the photo ID requirement, something Doyle has repeatedly vetoed.

"In my mind you wouldn't have to necessarily change the openness of our elections," said Sen. Joe Leibham (R-Sheboygan). "We'd simply be asking people to prove who they are."

State Democratic Party chairman Joe Wineke said the report's recommendations "would do nothing but disenfranchise thousands of voters across the state."

One irony: While the state Republican Party touted the report, investigators found almost no evidence supporting the GOP's claims of double voting and invalid addresses in the election.

Mark Jefferson, executive director of the party, said the GOP complaints were still important because they "opened the door to the more wide-ranging investigation."

He raised concerns that many of the problems identified in the report, including with absentee voters and votes from out-of-state campaign workers, will be repeated.

"I'm not sure they can guarantee we'll have a clean election in 2008," Jefferson said.

The joint federal-state investigation in 2005 began after a series of reports in the Journal Sentinel detailed a host of problems with the election in the city and state.

The 2004 election in Wisconsin was decided by about 11,400 votes. Had a larger state, such as Ohio, gone to Democrats, Wisconsin could have faced the sort of scrutiny aimed at Florida in 2000.

In the end, U.S. Attorney Steve Biskupic said there had been no findings of widespread fraud. About a dozen cases were pursued, to mixed results.

One problem Biskupic cited was the flawed Election Commission records.

That was echoed in Tuesday's report, which at one point states: "The Milwaukee Election Commission, through their ineptitude, raised enough reasonable doubt to prevent any further criminal prosecution."

The report suggests the biggest difference between prosecutors and investigators centered on cases where out-of-state campaign workers voted here without any intent of becoming residents.

It cited at least 16 cases in which workers from outside the state voted while employed here by an outside group attempting to influence the election.

The report does not indicate the name of the group, or the campaign (or campaigns) the out-of-state workers were part of. But those voters, the report says, had to "commit multiple criminal acts" in the process of voting.

The report suggest prosecutors decided not to pursue such cases, because state laws allow those who have been state residents for "10 days or more" to vote.

The report raises concerns about creation of a new "10-day resident" class of voters and cites a different line in statutes that says the voter should be "without any present intent to move."

Among other areas covered in the report:

Vote gap: The Journal Sentinel first estimated the discrepancy between the ballot count and the number of people listed as having voted at about 7,000, though prosecutors said previous efforts to resolve the gap narrowed that number to about 4,600. The gap remains, though no final number was given.

One footnote: The report indicates the Election Commission did three separate counts of votes. Each resulted in a different total, none of which matched the official totals reported to the state.

On-site registrations: As the newspaper reported, some 1,300 on-site registrations could not be processed for a variety of reasons, including missing addresses and missing names. Indeed, 141 were from addresses outside the city.

In an example of the cases detailed by investigators, a voter from Greenfield registered in the city, listing his Greenfield address on the card. He was allowed to vote, but when questioned by authorities said he was simply confused about where he was supposed to vote.

The report notes such votes would unlikely change the outcome of a statewide election but could sway local elections.

Felons: The newspaper identified at least 278 cases statewide where felons may have improperly voted, with many of those in the city. The actual number is likely higher because the newspaper's review included a partial database of voters.

Prosecutions were minimal, with the report noting that investigators wanted more charged, but the "poor quality of the records" made the cases difficult to pursue.

Election inspectors: The investigators found that five of the city's election inspectors were convicted felons, and thus ineligible to fulfill the role, plus two who had pleaded guilty to 2003 charges of misdemeanor election fraud.

Student voting: After noting many discrepancies in wards near Marquette University and the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, investigators looked deeper at student voting.

The report cites a detailed review of Ward 39, which consists almost entirely of UWM's Sandberg Hall.

It found 2,101 ballots cast at the ward but only 1,887 people recorded as voting, part of the unexplained voting gap.

A further review found 31 people voting there who were not residents of the ward, including some UWM students who lived elsewhere.

Homeless voters: The report notes homeless residents are eligible to vote, but found cases where some are registered in multiple locations.

Patrick Marley, Stacy Forster and Steven Walters of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.