Wisconsin has a budget
SHARE

By of the

The Legislature passed a long-overdue budget late Tuesday, even as lawmakers discovered new provisions - including one allowing grocery stores to serve customers free samples of hard liquor.

The little-noticed tidbit in the budget would allow grocers and liquor stores to serve up to 1 1/2 ounces of whiskey, gin and other liquors to customers each visit.

The budget, 115 days overdue, was the second-latest spending plan the Legislature ever adopted.

The Republican-controlled Assembly passed it, 60-39, with 23 Republicans joining 37 Democrats in favor. The Senate then quickly passed it 18-15, with all Democrats in favor and all Republicans opposed.

The $57.2 billion budget now goes to Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle, who can strike out any part of it - but he has said he would use his veto sparingly.

Doyle aide Matt Canter would not say whether the governor plans to veto the measure on liquor sampling.

It's a controversial budget for several reasons:

• It boosts the cigarette tax by $1 a pack, costing smokers $378.5 million more by mid-2009.

• It includes a one-time $200 million transfer from the state fund that pays medical malpractice claims.

• It raises transportation-related fees by about $274 million.

But Republicans got Doyle to drop tax increases on hospitals and oil companies and a fee boost for those who sell property.

Doyle praised the budget, saying it continues two-thirds state funding of public schools, funds the University of Wisconsin System and extends health care to most families whose children are uninsured.

"After a long process, Democrats and Republicans have come together to hold the line on taxes, streamline government and create real opportunity for Wisconsin families and businesses," Doyle said in a statement.

Doyle could sign the budget into law as early as this week. If the budget compromise had not passed the Legislature soon, he had promised to order the first-ever shutdown of some non-emergency state services.

The debate in the Assembly reflected the months of haggling that led to the final budget compromise, with many members saying they didn't like everything in it but would vote for it anyway.

"This budget doesn't solve all of Wisconsin's problems," said Assembly Speaker Mike Huebsch (R-West Salem). "If there is a budget that comes to this floor and both sides are not happy, we've probably done our job."

Rep. Phil Garthwaite (D-Dickeyville) said all members can identify some good things in the budget, and "I'm going to go to work on the bad things in this budget a soon as we walk out the door tonight, and I expect you to do the same thing."

Tax increases had been a critical issue in the Assembly, where 27 members - mostly Republicans - had signed pledges not to raise taxes, complicating negotiations. Republicans claimed victory because many tax increases didn't make it in to the final package.

Huebsch touted the budget as one that keeps government spending in line with taxpayers' ability to pay, but Rep. Leah Vukmir (R-Wauwatosa), a no-tax-increase pledge signer, disagreed.

"This is not a Republican budget, it is a Democratic budget; and it's riddled with earmarks and favors and new spending that we simply cannot afford," she said.

Senate Majority Leader Judy Robson (D-Beloit) called it a budget that "protects the priorities of the people of Wisconsin."

Senate Republican leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) said GOP pressure "whittled down" the tax increases Doyle proposed. "Republicans won on many different fronts," Fitzgerald said.

As soon as Doyle signs the budget into law, it will end up in court. The Medical Society of Wisconsin has vowed to sue to void the $200 million transfer from the Wisconsin Injured Patients and Families Compensation Fund.

Many who voted against the budget in the Assembly spoke out about the transfer, which they condemned as an irresponsible use of funds that are paid by doctors to cover malpractice awards. Rep. Sheldon Wasserman (D-Milwaukee), a physician, said the transfer was against the law and bad fiscal policy.

"It makes no sense to use one-time funds to pay for ongoing services" and leave a hole to fill in the next budget, he said.

Cheers!

One budget item that came as a surprise to some would allow grocers and liquor stores to serve liquor samples between 11 a.m. and 7 p.m. The stores could serve one-half ounce samples at a time, with customers receiving up to three samples, or 1 ½ ounces of liquor.

"What an interesting thing, and it all comes through a bill that has seen no light of day," said Rep. Samantha Kerkman (R-Randall).

Kerkman wrote a bill earlier this year that would have allowed liquor sampling at wineries, grocery stores and liquor stores. She said her focus was on a winery in her district, and she was upset the budget provision did not allow wineries to distribute such samples.

No lawmaker would admit to sponsoring the sampling provision.

"The message we're sending is it's OK to go ahead and consume alcohol and go out and get in a car," said Kari Kinnard, Wisconsin executive director of Mothers Against Drunk Driving.

But Dale Szyndrowski of the Distilled Spirits Council of the U.S. said the measure puts hard liquor on the same footing as beer and wine, which already can be offered as samples. He said about half the states allow liquor sampling.

Legislative leaders approved the budget Monday with no changes, sending it to the full houses.

The compromise budget the Legislature passed raises taxes and fees by $763.2 million through mid-2009, according to new summary.

The Legislative Fiscal Bureau said the biggest increase - $410.9 million - would come from raising the 77-cent tax on a pack of cigarettes by $1 and also raising taxes on other tobacco items.

The second-largest amount - $273.93 million - would result from raising transportation-related fees. Under the budget, the $55 annual vehicle registration fee would go to $75; registration fees would be raised by 30% on heavy trucks; and there would be a new $10 driver's license surcharge and identification verification fee.

In addition, the base cost of titling a car would go from $28.50 to $45. With other fees already tacked onto titling, car buyers would pay a total of $69.50 for new titles.

The budget would allow resident undergraduate tuition on four-year University of Wisconsin System campuses to rise by about 2% next year, although the final percentage will depend on pay raises given system employees. The tuition increase will cost students $52.2 million over the two years covered by the budget, the Fiscal Bureau reported.

By passing the budget Tuesday, the Legislature avoided delivering the latest budget in Wisconsin history by four days. The latest budget was passed Oct. 27, 1971.