Legislature didn't linger over painful budget process
Following is the latest coverage of the 2009-'11 state budget process.

Here are details on some key points from the budget agreement, which was approved by the Legislature on Friday.

Madison — The 68 state lawmakers - 67 Democrats and one independent - whose Friday votes put the next state budget on Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle's desk said it was the best they could do, given the worst fiscal crisis in Wisconsin history.

They said the budget protects public safety, education and health care and invests in job creation. But to do it, they voted to raise taxes; cut state services and aid to local governments; and lay off state workers.

And they had to endure the taunts of out-of-power Republicans, who warned them their votes will be unpopular with voters back home. All 58 Republicans and three Democrats voted against the budget; three other Republicans were absent.

Yet for the first time in years, the Legislature delivered a budget to a governor on time - days before the Wednesday start of the new two-year spending cycle.

Doyle now has just hours before the deadline to sign it into law. About $88 million in federal funds are on the line; if the budget is not signed by midnight Tuesday, Wisconsin will lose the money.

Doyle has not commented on the Legislature's spending plan, when he plans to sign it, or how and if he will use his powerful veto pen to rewrite sections of the budget.

A Doyle aide said Saturday the governor could announce his budget decisions Monday.

There are several reasons the $62.2 billion two-year spending plan got through the Legislature on time.

Democratic control: For the first time in 23 years, Democrats controlled the process. Democrats took control of the Assembly in January with a margin of 52-46, plus independent Rep. Jeff Wood of Chippewa Falls. In the Senate, Democrats outnumber Republicans, 18-15.

It was the first time Doyle had to deal only with leaders of his own party in the Legislature, and everyone wanted to avoid a prolonged family fight. So, Democratic leaders, their aides and Doyle aides did all their negotiating in secret. It cut out Republicans - and the public - but it was efficient.

No good news: With state tax collections falling 7% this year - a loss of about $1 billion - it became clear there wasn't money to spread around. Taxes would have to be raised, and public and private special-interest groups would be disappointed.

Democratic leaders effectively said: If that's the case, let's push the budget through early, and not make our members repeatedly cast "yes" votes that could haunt them when they stand for re-election in November 2010.

That's why each of the 67 Democrats cast only two votes for the 2010-'11 budget - one when it first passed their chamber and a second one Friday to accept the final deal negotiated by their leaders.

Decker's experience: Senate Majority Leader Russ Decker (D-Weston) has been part of final budget negotiations for most of his more than 18 years in the Senate, but this was his first turn as chief Senate negotiator.

Decker knew what each Senate Democrat needed in order to vote for the toughest budget of their political careers, but Assembly Democrats also brought their bottom-line issues to the bargaining table.

By Wednesday evening, a six-member conference committee with representatives from both houses had convened. But it took 12 hours of closed-door negotiations to reach agreements on more than 180 items and pull together a deal that could garner enough votes.

Both sides ended up with wins on issues that were most important to their caucus members.

Closes record deficit

The budget closed a historic $6.6 billion deficit but required $2.1 billion in tax and fee increases over the next two years. It also spent $2.1 billion in one-time federal stimulus aid.

Assembly Majority Leader Thomas Nelson (D-Kaukauna) said his party deserved credit:

"From the beginning, Assembly Democrats committed to passing a budget that made deep spending cuts, protected our most critical priorities and held the line on taxes for Wisconsin families. This budget fulfills those promises."

Republicans found nothing in the deal to be praised.

"During the worst recession in generations, the Democrats' budget increases spending and taxes while hiding dozens of pork projects and special-interest policy items," state Rep. Jeff Fitzgerald (R-Horicon) said in a statement. "They have put a higher priority on the state budget than the family budget."

Charles Franklin, a political science professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, said the final budget could hurt Democrats.

Republicans can position themselves easily for the 2010 campaign season, he said, because "no" votes let them be against unpopular budget items.

Democrats face greater peril, Franklin said.

"I think the patchwork nature of the budget makes it hard to claim a broad path forward even in hard times," he said.

Although Democrats can legitimately claim they did the best they could with the horrible hand they were dealt, Franklin said: "The tax and revenue enhancements give Republicans easy targets. . . . If unemployment continues to rise, that helps them."