Ben Carson stresses family, faith in Milwaukee visit
SHARE Ben Carson

By of the

Ben Carson, a retired brain surgeon who seems on the verge of running for the Republican nomination for president, shared a message of family and faith in Milwaukee on Wednesday.

Carson's speech was only tangentially political, given that he was keynoting a fundraising event for the Summit Educational Association at the Wisconsin Center downtown. Summit provides one-on-one tutoring to inner-city children.

But as he told his life story — from poverty in Detroit to pediatric neurosurgeon at Johns Hopkins University — Carson, speaking in soft and sometimes whispery tones, touched on themes that would appeal to the conservative base.

Of his mother, who had a third-grade education, worked two or more jobs and mostly shunned aid, Carson said: "She didn't want to be a victim, and she didn't want to be dependent on people."

Later, he told the audience of several hundred that his critics are wrong when they say he doesn't want to do away with the social safety net. "What I want to do is get rid of programs that create dependency in people who could very well be independent," he said.

Less known than Gov. Scott Walker and other GOP politicians who are, or are likely to, run for president, Carson is competitive in the early polls, according to Real Clear Politics data. The 63-year-old author and winner of the Presidential Medal of Freedom formed an exploratory committee last month and has said he would announce his intentions on May 4. The Des Moines Register reported this week that Carson plans to come straight to Iowa after the announcement.

Some of Carson's stances have been controversial. The day after announcing his exploratory committee, he was asked on CNN if gayness is a choice. He said: "Absolutely. Because a lot of people who go into prison go into prison straight, and when they come out, they're gay." PolitiFact rated that statement False.

Carson hadn't finished his remarks before the press deadline, but he did make at least one reference to President Barack Obama. He said to applause: "You know, our president has said that we are not a Judeo-Christian nation. But fortunately he doesn't get to decide that. We get to decide what kind of a nation we are."