Bill to end 48-hour wait for gun purchases gets hearing
No, the 48-hour wait should be kept in place

No, the 48-hour wait should be kept in place: 53%

People would no longer have to wait 48 hours before they could buy handguns under a bill moving through the Legislature that Gov. Scott Walker has signaled he backs.

Madison — People would no longer have to wait 48 hours before they could buy handguns under a bill moving through the Legislature that Gov. Scott Walker has signaled he backs.

Under current law, those who want to buy handguns can't take possession of them until 48 hours after a background check is started. The state Department of Justice can extend the waiting period for three days beyond that if it needs additional time to complete a background check.

Under a bill, by Sen. Van Wanggaard (R-Racine), handgun purchasers could take possession of them as soon as they cleared the background checks — nearly instantaneously in some cases, and often within a matter of hours. In a Wednesday hearing, Wanggaard and Rep. Mary Czaja (R-Irma) told the Senate Judiciary and Public Safety Committee that the measure made sense because there is no waiting period for rifles and many states don't have them for handguns.

"I feel it's a penalty to me to have to wait," said Czaja, noting that people in rural areas might have to drive an hour or more to get to a gun store.

Time for background checks

But Sen. Fred Risser (D-Madison) said he was troubled by the prospect of a couple getting in an argument and then running out to buy guns before they had a chance to cool off.

"Is that the way you want to run society?" Risser asked Czaja.

"I believe they have a right to protect themselves," Czaja said of women in abusive relationships, adding that a restraining order is "not worth the paper it is written on."

Wanggaard said the 48-hour waiting period, adopted in 1976, amounts to a "time tax."On average, the background checks are completed in about four hours, according to the state Department of Justice.

Wanggaard said he would amend the bill to give the Department of Justice up to five days to complete its background checks, keeping the maximum amount of time for the checks in line with current law.

Walker signals support

Walker, who is expanding his political operation for a likely presidential run, indicated he supported the measure last month while he was at the Conservative Political Action Conference in National Harbor, Md.

In a Feb. 27 interview with the National Rifle Association at CPAC, Walker said he wants Wisconsin "to be a leader" when it comes to eliminating the waiting period.

"That's one of those where with new technology it's real easy to make sure the bad guys don't get firearms and the good guys do," Walker said.

The committee is scheduled to vote on the bill Thursday, which would make it available for a vote in the Senate.

The Department of Justice conducted about 100,000 background checks last year, said Brian O'Keefe, the agency's law enforcement services administrator.

Wisconsin is one of eight states that have waiting periods for handguns at the point of sale, according to the NRA. Some other states have other waiting periods; for instance, Iowa has a waiting period to acquire a license to purchase a gun, according to the NRA.