Wisconsin Assembly passes measure that changes what doctors must tell patients for diagnoses
Madison - The Assembly approved a bill Wednesday changing the standard for what doctors must tell patients when they diagnose them, which Republicans said was necessary in light of a state Supreme Court decision that they see as creating too many problems.

Also, the Assembly passed a bill that would delay trials in cases where people are exposed to asbestos. Both measures now go to the Senate, which like the Assembly is controlled by Republicans.

The bill on medical liability, approved 65-31, was in response to the case of Thomas Jandre, who had symptoms associated with a mini-stroke but was diagnosed as having Bell's palsy, a viral inflammation that causes facial paralysis. Eleven days later, he had a massive stroke that left him partially paralyzed.

A jury awarded Jandre $2 million and found that the doctor was not negligent in her diagnosis of Bell's palsy, but was negligent in not telling Jandre an ultrasound would determine whether he was having a mini-stroke. The state Supreme Court last year upheld the decision and said doctors must inform patients of what a reasonable patient would want to know.

The medical community contends the decision created uncertainty and unreasonably required health care providers to tell patients about an array of possible diagnoses.

The bill, sponsored by Rep. Jim Ott (R-Mequon), would change the standard to what a reasonable physician would tell a patient. It also would require physicians to tell patients only about alternative treatments for a diagnosis and their risks and benefits.

Opponents said the bill went too far in changing the rules.

"It allows a subjective standard" for doctors, said Rep. Gary Hebl (D-Sun Prairie). "We need to have a standard which is reasonable."

But Ott said it would put the law in line with what most people would want.

"There's a lot of concern doctors are going to be second-guessed (that) their diagnoses are wrong," he said. "This still holds physicians to a high standard."

The other measure, approved on a party-line 58-39 vote, would delay trials for those exposed to asbestos.

Long used for fireproofing and insulation, asbestos can cause cancer and other illnesses.

Many of the companies that manufactured products with asbestos have gone bankrupt and set up trust funds to pay victims.

Victims can file claims against those businesses, as well as lawsuits against companies that are still in businesses. Backers of the bill say some plaintiffs don't tell courts they are also seeking money from the bankrupt businesses' trust funds and that judges don't have the ability to properly assign liability.

The bill would require plaintiffs to disclose any claims against trusts they have filed. Once they did that, their trials could not start for six months.

Budget negotiations: Also Wednesday, Rep. John Nygren (R-Marinette), co-chairman of the Joint Finance Committee, said Assembly Republicans were prepared to give more money to public schools than what Gov. Scott Walker recommended.

Walker wanted all the new state money for schools to offset property taxes, meaning they couldn't put the new money into the classroom. Nygren and Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said they were willing to allow schools to spend the new state aid, but wanted to keep a lid on property taxes.

They said they were also committed to expanding state voucher programs that allow students to attend religious schools and other private schools at taxpayer expense.

Nygren did not specify how much more money the Legislature would be able to give to schools, saying it would depend on new estimates - to be released as early as Thursday - that are expected to show the state will take in more revenue than originally projected.

Senate President Mike Ellis (R-Neenah) welcomed the news. He would like to provide $200 more per student per year, which he said would cost the state $408 million over two years.

"We owe it to the future generation not to shortchange their education and we have a constitutional responsibility to invest in schools," Ellis said in a statement.