Scott Walker raises $3.5 million this year in re-election bid
Madison — Gov. Scott Walker scooped up $3.5 million in campaign donations in the first half of the year for his 2014 re-election bid.

After expenses, the Republican governor had about $2.2 million on hand as of June 30, according to a campaign finance report released Monday by his campaign.

No Democrat has announced plans to run against Walker next year, but Winnebago County Executive Mark Harris and former state Commerce Secretary Mary Burke are considering running. The two did not have to file a report because they have not declared their candidacy.

The $2.2 million Walker had at the ready is in line with the $2 million Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle had on hand as of mid-2009. Walker is raising money at a much faster clip than Doyle — $3.5 million over six months, compared with Doyle's $900,000 — but he's also spending his money more than seven times as fast.

Democratic fundraiser Patrick Guarasci said the latest report showed Walker and his eventual Democratic opponent will be on closer financial footing than they were in Walker's last two races.

"While I think he'll have an advantage, I think we'll all find his advantage isn't amplified to the degree it was in previous elections," Guarasci said.

But Republican strategist Mark Graul said it was remarkable Walker could raise $3.5 million in six months during a non-election year.

"Gov. Walker has built a very large, loyal following that I'm sure is the envy of elected officials everywhere," Graul said.

One key to Walker's success is that, in addition to receiving large checks from wealthy donors, he consistently raises small amounts from a large number of steady givers around the country, Graul said.

"I think it continues to show Gov. Walker has incredible grass-roots support both in Wisconsin and nationally," he said.

Walker has proved himself to be an ardent fundraiser. In the 2010 race, Walker raised and spent $11 million, far above the $6.9 million spent by his Democratic opponent, Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett.

Walker pulled in an unprecedented $37.3 million during last year's attempt to recall him from office. For much of that campaign, Walker did not have to abide by donation limits that Democrats did because of a quirk of Wisconsin's recall law.

"Now that the rules are all the same and Scott Walker has to live under the same limits, I think that we will find he will not enjoy the same kind of fundraising advantage he's had in the past," said Guarasci, the Democratic fundraiser.

In a statement, Walker campaign manager Stephan Thompson said more than 80% of his latest donations came from those giving $50 or less.

"Gov. Walker has Wisconsin moving forward, and the overwhelming support from the grassroots proves that they want to help him continue to fight for lower taxes, bold reforms and more jobs," his statement said.

Responded Mike Tate, chairman of the state Democratic Party: "Walker's latest haul is surely buoyed by his frequent trips out of state to campaign for president, but unfortunately for Walker, the people of Wisconsin won't judge him based on his ability to raise money from large corporations and wealthy donors from places like Texas and Iowa. Wisconsin voters will judge Scott Walker on his failure to create jobs and his pursuit of divisive social issues and an extreme tea party agenda at the expense of the economic security of the middle class."

Also Monday, reports showed Assembly Republicans raised significantly more money than their Democratic counterparts in the first half of the year.

The Republican Assembly Campaign Committee took in nearly $223,000 from January to June, giving it a balance as of more than $270,000.

The Assembly Democratic Campaign Committee received about $119,000 during that period, but spent nearly 70% of that amount. It had about $73,000 on hand as of June 30.

The Republican Assembly Campaign Committee took in nearly $142,000 from political action committees in the first half of the year.

Seventeen PACs gave the maximum $6,000 to Assembly Republicans — AT&T; Walmart; drug maker Pfizer; car part company LKQ Corp.; Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance; the Wisconsin Insurance Alliance; health insurer WellPoint; Alliant Energy; Wisconsin Energy Corp.; credit unions; Realtors; dentists; tavernkeepers; the Wisconsin Institute of Certified Public Accountants; the union representing heavy equipment operators; the union representing plumbers; and the union representing Milwaukee firefighters.

The Democratic committee received more than $59,000 from political committees. About half its money — $27,500 — came from unions. Included in that was $6,000 from the operating engineers, $4,500 from the United Transportation Union and $3,000 from the Wisconsin Education Association Council.

The donations were made while legislators debated the state budget. Republicans control both houses of the Legislature.

The Committee to Elect a Republican Senate received about $153,500. It had about $124,000 on hand as of June 30, according to its report. About two-thirds of the money it raised came from political committees.

The State Senate Democratic Campaign has not yet filed its report.

Marklein raises $94,000

In one closely watched potential primary race, Rep. Howard Marklein (R-Spring Green) raised more than $94,000 in his bid to join the Senate. That dwarfs the meager $684 raised by the incumbent, Sen. Dale Schultz (R-Richland Center).

Schultz, who upset some Republicans by voting against mining legislation and limits on collective bargaining for public workers, has not said if he will run for re-election. Schultz was traveling Monday and could not be reached.