Attorney general candidates say they wouldn't defend some laws
SHARE Election 2014

Visit our election section for complete coverage of the 2014 spring and fall elections.

By of the

Madison — The four candidates running for state attorney general say they would not defend some of the state's most controversial laws — while criticizing their opponents for taking similar stances on different measures.

Their refusal to defend certain state laws could saddle taxpayers with higher costs because private attorneys could be brought in to do that work.

The three Democrats say they won't defend or appeal rulings on the state's ban on gay marriage, its voter ID law or recent abortion regulations.

The one Republican in the race says he would defend those measures but would not defend Wisconsin's domestic partnership law for same-sex couples.

The three Democrats running for the job being vacated by Republican Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen are Jefferson County District Attorney Susan Happ, Dane County District Attorney Ismael Ozanne and state Rep. Jon Richards of Milwaukee.

The winner of the Aug. 12 Democratic primary will face Waukesha County District Attorney Brad Schimel, who has no GOP opponent. The general election is Nov. 4.

Madison attorney Lester Pines criticized all the candidates for their stances, saying the attorney general must defend state laws in almost every situation. A prominent Democrat who has sued the state over Republican-backed laws, Pines said both party's candidates were adopting the wrong approach.

"I think all of them — Brad Schimel and the three Democrats running — are confused about the obligations of the attorney general with regard to this issue," said Pines, who supports Ozanne.

"On this point, I think all these candidates are wrong."

Wisconsin's attorney general has a legal and professional duty to defend every state law unless the only arguments that can be made on its behalf are frivolous, Pines said. Disliking a law or even believing a law is unconstitutional is not enough to abandon the duty to defend it, he said.

At least seven state attorneys general have refused to defend their states' bans on gay marriage. In a February opinion piece for The Washington Post, Colorado Attorney General John Suthers, a Republican, labeled the refusal by some to defend gay marriage bans or other state laws a "litigation veto" that could "ultimately weaken the legal and moral authority that attorneys general have earned and depend on."

Declining to defend laws also adds costs for taxpayers. Generally in Wisconsin, if an attorney general refuses to defend a law, the state has to hire private attorneys to do that work. In complex litigation, that can mean legal bills that top $1 million.

Schimel blasted the Democrats for refusing to defend certain laws.

"That's your job as AG," he said. "You're not a super legislator. That's substituting your opinion for the will of the people as expressed through their elected representatives."

But Schimel said he would not defend the state's domestic partnership law, which was approved in 2009 to give same-sex couples some but not all of the rights of married couples.

Social conservatives sued over the law in 2010, arguing it violated the state constitution's ban on gay marriage and similar arrangements. Van Hollen refused to defend the measure, and Pines, the Madison attorney, was hired to do that work. GOP Gov. Scott Walker later fired Pines, and defending the registry was left up to Fair Wisconsin, a gay rights group that intervened in the case.

Schimel said he agreed with Van Hollen's move. The attorney general is required to defend state laws generally but "the trump card is the constitution," he said — arguing the state's top lawyer doesn't have to defend laws if he or she believes they violate the state or U.S. constitutions.

That's the same argument the Democratic candidates are using to say they would not defend the laws they oppose. They nonetheless criticized Schimel and Van Hollen for their positions on the domestic partnership law.

Van Hollen "clearly made a choice on which law he was going to defend and not defend," Richards said. "It was very disappointing to see even with the domestic partnership registry, where you have only a few of rights of marriage granted to same-sex couples, he wouldn't even defend that. I just think that was a real mistake and I think that we should interpret the constitution to make sure people's rights are maintained."

The domestic partnership law has survived its legal tests so far.

A Dane County judge and the state Court of Appeals have upheld the law. The state Supreme Court is now considering the case and is expected to rule this summer.

Meanwhile, the state's ban on gay marriage was ruled unconstitutional this month by a federal judge — further undercutting the chances of the challenge to the domestic partnership law.

On gay marriage, the Democrats praised the decision striking down the ban. They have called on Van Hollen to drop his appeal, saying they believe the ban violates the U.S. Constitution's guarantee of equal protection under the law.

They also say they would not defend the state's voter ID law, which has been deemed unconstitutional in separate cases by a federal judge and Dane County judge. The requirement that voters show photo ID at the polls has been blocked for now, and appeals continue.

And they also would not defend a 2013 law requiring doctors who perform abortions to have admitting privileges at a hospital within 30 miles of where an abortion is given. A federal judge has put that law on hold while he decides the case.

Twitter: twitter.com/patrickdmarley