Lawmakers approve bill ending John Doe probes of political crimes
By

Madison— Assembly and Senate Republicans approved a bill Tuesday ending the ability of prosecutors to use John Doe probes to investigate misconduct in public office, with the measure headed to Gov. Scott Walker soon.

The proposal, which would reshape how cases of bribery of public officials and other political crimes are often investigated, was largely prompted by a probe into the Republican governor's campaign and conservative groups that supported him.

The state Supreme Court this summer shut down the investigation, which Walker and other Republicans have described as a political witch hunt. Prosecutors deny that, saying they had to pursue evidence they obtained.

Walker spokeswoman Laurel Patrick said the governor would evaluate the legislation when it reaches his desk but added he supports "common-sense reforms that protect free speech and ensure transparency and accountability" for John Doe investigations.

The legislation will likely be before Walker soon. The Assembly passed it 60-36, with all Republicans backing it and all Democrats opposing it.

Senate Democrats blocked a final vote on the measure Tuesday afternoon, but GOP leaders scheduled a vote for 12:01 a.m. Wednesday, returning to pass it on an 18-14 party line vote. Because of the procedural hurdles, the Assembly may have to return to approve the measure for a second time on Wednesday afternoon, but that will be a mere formality.

Republicans said the changes would prevent prosecutorial overreach and protect people's constitutional rights. Democrats argued politicians were protecting themselves from prosecution and said the measure would lead to corruption, especially when coupled with measures also before lawmakers that would loosen campaign finance laws and overhaul the state's ethics and elections board.

"Wisconsin is being opened for corruption," said Assembly Minority Leader Peter Barca (D-Kenosha). "These bills mark the end of clean, open and transparent government in Wisconsin. It is an abuse of power."

Rep. David Craig (R-Big Bend) said the bill he co-sponsored overhauling the John Doe law would protect civil liberties for state residents.

"Today's a win for the First Amendment," he said.

Debate over the issue was often heated. Rep. Joe Sanfelippo (R-New Berlin) compared law enforcement raids on the homes of Walker's allies to the way Germans behaved in World War II.

"We're talking about terrorizing people in their homes," he said.

Democrats called the comparison of sheriff's deputies to Nazis offensive.

"Our Wisconsin law enforcement are not Nazis," said Rep. Jonathan Brostoff (D-Milwaukee). "I really hope if you had family who was genocided and murdered, I would hope no one else would ever speak about your family that way."

The bill was inspired by the probe into coordination between Walker's campaign and the Wisconsin Club for Growth and other conservative groups. In July, the state Supreme Court ended the probe in a 4-2 ruling that found candidates and issue groups can work closely together, saying that the conduct being alleged by prosecutors wasn't a crime.

The legislation would allow prosecutors to use the John Doe law for the most serious felonies, as well as lesser crimes of a violent nature. That means they could not use it to look into allegations of bribing public officials, using elected office for personal gain and corruptly influencing legislation.

In addition, authorities could not use it to look into crimes such as identity theft, mortgage fraud, dealing small amounts of heroin and cocaine, and theft reaching into the millions of dollars.

For crimes that could be investigated, judges could no longer issue secrecy orders applying to targets and witnesses. Prosecutors could still be ordered to remain quiet about the probes, however.

It would lift past secrecy orders that have been issued for targets and witnesses. That would free up Walker and conservative activists to speak freely about the investigation of them, but prosecutors would be constrained from countering their comments unless a judge released the prosecutors from the secrecy order.

The probe into Walker's campaign was conducted by Milwaukee County District Attorney John Chisholm and special prosecutor Francis Schmitz. Chisholm is a Democrat and Schmitz has described himself as a Republican.

The secrecy order in the probe of Walker's campaign would also remain in place for members of the Government Accountability Board, which oversees campaign finance laws. The board's chairman, Gerald Nichol, said he disagrees with the provision that would lift the secrecy order for witnesses and targets and held open the possibility he would ask a judge to lift the secrecy order that applies to him.

Craig said the legislation prevents gag orders on witnesses and targets to ensure their free speech rights are protected. He noted U.S. Appeals Judge Frank Easterbrook last year said secrecy orders issued under the John Doe law appeared "screamingly unconstitutional."

"The whole purpose of this bill is to make sure we're protecting constitutional liberties," he said.

Prosecutors could use grand juries to investigate political crimes, as they do in other states, Craig said. Wisconsin's grand jury law is rarely used and Democrats said it would be costly and inefficient to use for political crimes.

The bill also would require prosecutors to make available the cost of conducting John Doe investigations. The cost of the investigation into Walker's campaign has never been detailed despite requests under the open records law from the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel and others.

Under the bill, John Doe investigations could not last more than six months unless prosecutors got the approval of a majority of the 10 circuit judges who serve as chiefs of the state's judicial administrative districts. Those judges would also have to sign off on any expansion of a probe if prosecutors discovered crimes that were not part of their initial investigation.

Sen. Tom Tiffany (R-Hazelhurst), a co-sponsor of the bill, said the John Doe process used in Wisconsin is highly unusual and needs changes, adding that in the future elected officials could still be charged through other means.

"We are going to make the John Doe procedure more accountable to the public," Tiffany said. "We are not shielding elected officials."

Senate Minority Leader Jennifer Shilling (D-La Crosse) disagreed, telling Republican senators that they had strayed from the concerns of the ordinary voters whom she meets.

"No one ever told me, 'Jennifer, I really want you to pass legislation to shield politicians from criminal investigations,'" Shilling said. "You are out of touch (with) this overreach."