Tax deduction of up to $10,000 per child in private school added to budget
The Joint Finance Committee voted 12-4 along party lines early Wednesday to approve sweeping motions on taxes and education. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Madison — The state would provide a deduction of up to $10,000 per child to parents of tens of thousands of private school students and cut income taxes by $651 million over two years, under votes taken early Wednesday by Republicans on the Legislature's budget committee.

As the sun sank and rose again, the yawning lawmakers on the Joint Finance Committee voted 12-4 along party lines to approve sweeping motions on taxes and education and then advance Gov. Scott Walker's 2013-'15 budget bill. The legislation must now be passed by the Assembly and Senate and signed by Walker.

Under the $30 million a year tuition provision, parents of the nearly 100,000 private school students in Wisconsin could receive an income tax deduction of up to $4,000 for tuition paid for each kindergarten through eighth-grade student and up to $10,000 per high school student.

Sen. Glenn Grothman (R-West Bend), a member of the budget panel who pushed for the change, praised the vote.

"I'm not sure this is enough to change (parents') behavior but it's something we can build on in future budgets," Grothman said. "It's high time we help parents who want a different sort of curriculum than they get in public schools."

The move came after lawmakers approved a separate statewide expansion of taxpayer-funded voucher schools, an increase in funding for such schools and a $300 per pupil increase in the revenue limits for public schools over the next two years.

Democrats, teachers unions and public school advocates denounced the votes.

"Wisconsin lawmakers...have advanced a plan that offers a pittance to the majority of children in an attempt to distract citizens from the fact that they are opening the floodgates for taxpayer funding of private school tuition. To make this budget even worse for public school children, legislators added a double-dip provision to benefit private schools by providing tax deductions for private school tuition," said Mary Bell, president of the Wisconsin Education Association Council.

The private school tax deduction would amount to an income tax cut for the typical family of up to roughly $240 for each kindergarten through eighth-grade student and $600 for each high school student, according to a rough calculation by the Legislature's nonpartisan budget office. The office expected an annual loss of tax revenue of about $30 million for the provision, which would affect 79,000 K-8 students in private schools and 18,000 high school students.

The proposal appeared to apply to students in private voucher schools that receive taxpayer funds. But in the cases of those schools, students would typically have fewer and potentially no tuition costs that could qualify for the deduction.

The separate and larger income tax cut would also flatten and simplify the tax code, cutting a number of tax credits and collapsing the current five income brackets to four.

GOP lawmakers nearly doubled Walker's proposed income tax cut but stopped short of a larger tax cut favored by some Assembly Republicans. The tax cuts under the Joint Finance plan would be $651 million over two years.

Starting in 2013 under the proposal, taxpayers making up to $14,330 in taxable income would have an income tax rate of 4.4%, down from 4.6% currently. Taxpayers with additional income up to $28,650 would have a rate of 5.84% on that income, down from 6.15% currently.

Those with additional income up to $315,460 would have a tax rate of 6.27% on that income, down from 6.5% and 6.75% in two existing brackets that would be collapsed into one. Taxpayers making more than $315,460 would have a 7.65% tax cut on that additional income, down from the current 7.75%.

To simplify the tax code, the proposal would also eliminate a number of tax credits and would cut state fees by an additional $16 million.

The motion would also reduce income taxes further by using any new tax money that might result from federal legislation currently before Congress allowing states to require out-of-state Internet retailers to collect state sales taxes.

Lawmakers also want to expand school voucher programs beyond the borders of Milwaukee and eastern Racine County. The programs allow parents who meet income thresholds to send their children to religious schools and other private schools at taxpayer expense.

Under the motion approved 12-4 along party lines by Republicans on the budget panel:

■ Public schools would receive $150 more per student in general aid this fall and another $150 increase the following year. The plan would cost $289 million over two years, with $231.5 million funded with state taxes and the rest with an additional $52 million in higher local property taxes and an increase in expected revenues from the state lottery.

Under the budget committee's proposal, total property taxes would increase by less than 1% per year, with school levies going up somewhat more than that.

■ A new voucher program would become available to all students outside Milwaukee and Racine. It would be limited to 500 students the first year and 1,000 students every year thereafter.

If there are more students seeking slots in the program than allowed, the proposal would allocate the available slots by lottery. The slots would go to the 25 schools with the most applications, with each school getting at least 10 seats.

■ Voucher schools in all parts of the state would receive $7,210 per kindergarten through eighth-grade student and $7,856 per high school student — up from $6,442 currently.