Civil service overhaul would centralize employee discipline
By of the

Madison— Gov. Scott Walker's administration would put in place a single employee discipline system across nearly all state agencies, under a proposed overhaul of a century-old civil service system that was released Monday.

The draft bill, first announced last week, would apply to some 30,000 workers from across state government, excepting only political appointees and employees at the University of Wisconsin System and the Wisconsin National Guard.

First passed in 1905, the civil service system has traditionally been seen as a way to ensure clean government, place qualified workers in taxpayer-funded jobs and weed out partisan hacks. But Walker and the bill's GOP sponsors say the system needs reworking to become more efficient and help keep up with the crush of retiring baby boomers.

The proposal released Monday by Sen. Roger Roth (R-Appleton) and Assembly Majority Leader Jim Steineke (R-Kaukauna) would establish uniform standards and gradually steeper penalties for employees who aren't performing.

Speaking about the proposal Friday, Walker said the rewrite would stick to the spirit of the civil service system.

"What we keep intact is the good. We keep intact the merit (hiring). We keep intact the just cause. What we get rid of is the silliness and the ridiculous stuff," Walker said.

Unions and Democrats have responded that what's ridiculous to them is changing the long-standing system.

"This is yet another politically motivated attack on hardworking state employees. It is especially concerning that this attack on our civil service system opens the door for corruption and cronyism during an administration rife with scandals and charges of unethical conduct," Assembly Minority Leader Peter Barca (D-Kenosha) said.

The proposal would centralize human resources work in the state Department of Administration and would:

■ Drop the exams that job candidates for state government are often required to take in favor of a résumé system.

■ Define "just cause" for firing employees to make it clear that the state could immediately dismiss employees for showing up to work drunk, being physically violent, engaging in sexual harassment, stealing taxpayer goods or not showing up to work for three days in a year with no notification.

In other cases, the state agency could fire, demote or reduce the pay of workers who aren't performing if the agency uses a system of gradually ratcheting up discipline.

■ Shorten the appeals process by more than half for employees being disciplined or fired. Currently appeals can last up to a year and a half. Under the bill, there would be three stages of an appeal.

In the first, the worker would have 14 days to appeal a punishment to his agency and officials would have 15 days to respond; in the second, the worker would have 14 days to appeal to the Division of Personnel Management and officials there would have 30 days to respond.

Finally, the worker would have 14 days to file with the Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission and that agency would have 120 days to decide on the appeal. If the employee missed any deadlines, he or she would forfeit the right to fight the discipline.

■ Allow state agencies to reward employees with one-time bonuses for exceeding expectations. The state already has an existing program for merit-based raises and bonuses, but it has been suspended because of tight finances.

■ In most cases bar the removal of disciplinary records from employees' personnel files and require the files of existing employees to be reviewed before they are hired for another state job.

■ Allow the state to terminate employees who don't show up or contact their agency for three work days in a calendar year. Now, workers can't be fired unless they miss five days in a row without giving a reason.

■ Lengthen probationary periods for new employees from six months to two years. Management could choose to waive the probationary periods after one year in some cases.