Bill would limit John Doe probes into political crimes
SHARE About John Doe Separate but related criminal investigations initiated by Milwaukee County prosecutors have examined events and activities during Scott Walker's time as Milwaukee County executive and as governor. Prosecutors have conducted the probes under the state's "John Doe" statutes that grant extraordinary powers to investigators to compel testimony and maintain secrecy. The first John Doe investigation, begun in 2010, led to convictions of six Walker aides, associates or appointees on charges ranging from theft from a veteran's group to misconduct in office. The second Doe probe, launched in 2012, looked into coordination between conservative political organizations and Walker and other candidates during recall elections. The second probe was halted in May 2014 by a federal judge who agreed that the investigation denied one of the conservative groups' its free-speech rights. No charges have been filed in the second investigation. Walker has denied wrongdoing. See full coverage in John Doe special section

By of the

Madison — Republicans unveiled a bill Thursday that would sharply limit how and when prosecutors can conduct John Doe investigations, such as the ones aimed at Gov. Scott Walker's campaign, his aides and his allies.

Rep. David Craig (R-Big Bend) said if his bill is approved, John Doe investigations could not be conducted for most political crimes. Prosecutors should use standard investigations or launch grand jury probes to look into those types of allegations, he said.

"A grand jury would be ideal to avoid political misprosecution," Craig told reporters. "A jury of your peers should be the ones determining whether probable cause exists."

Wisconsin law allows prosecutors to convene grand juries, but they rarely do so because they prefer to use the John Doe law.

"I think the bill is basically crafted to protect politicians," said Rep. Gary Hebl (D-Sun Prairie). "It's clearly an effort to avoid what happend to Walker when he was (Milwaukee) county executive. Clearly, that investigation turned out some bad actors."

The John Doe law dates to before Wisconsin's statehood, when it was still a territory. It gives prosecutors the ability to compel people to produce documents and give testimony. The investigations are often conducted in secret, with targets and witnesses barred from telling anyone but their attorneys about the probes.

The investigative tool has come under scrutiny because of a pair of sprawling probes launched by Milwaukee County District Attorney John Chisholm, a Democrat.

The bill by Craig and Sen. Tom Tiffany (R-Hazelhurst) would allow John Doe investigations to be conducted for only the most serious felonies, as well as lesser crimes of a violent nature. The investigations could not last more than six months unless prosecutors got the approval of a majority of the 10 circuit judges who serve as chiefs of the state's judicial administrative districts.

Those judges would also have to sign off on any expansion of the probe if prosecutors discovered crimes that were not part of their initial investigation.

Secrecy orders could be placed on judges and prosecutors, but they could not be extended to witnesses and targets, as they are now. Craig said that change was being made to protect people's free speech rights, noting that U.S. Appeals Judge Frank Easterbrook last year said Wisconsin's John Doe secrecy law appeared "screamingly unconstitutional."

John Doe investigations are overseen by judges, but the bill would prevent reserve judges from being in charge of them. Reserve judges are former judges who handle overflow work for courts; both of the probes of Walker associates were monitored by reserve judges.

The bill would also allow special prosecutors to be used only in limited circumstances for John Doe investigations. Chisholm used a special prosecutor for one of his probes.

Chisholm's first investigation netted convictions of six aides and associates of Walker going back to his time as county executive. The crimes included performing campaign work in county offices, stealing from a veterans fund and skirting limits on political donations.

The second probe looked into whether Walker's campaign illegally worked with conservative groups supporting him. Chisholm was assisted in that probe by two Republican and two Democratic district attorneys from other counties and the state Government Accountability Board, which oversees campaign finance laws.

That investigation was effectively halted a year ago, when the judge overseeing it found the activities in question were not illegal. The state Supreme Court is expected to rule this summer whether to end the investigation for good or allow prosecutors to revive it.

No one has been charged in the second probe. Walker, his campaign and the conservative groups have said they did nothing wrong. Republicans have derided the investigation as a political witch hunt, prompting them to call for overhauling the John Doe law.

Chisholm did not respond to a request for comment to the bill.