UW-Madison chancellor fears cuts will hurt competitiveness
UW-Madison Chancellor Rebecca Blank spoke about Gov. Scott Walker's proposed budget cuts for the UW System at a meeting Thursday of the Board of Regents. Video provided by UW.

By of the

Madison— The chancellor of the state's flagship university warned Thursday that top faculty and the best students would go elsewhere if proposed state budget cuts go through because they would erode the quality of education and lead to layoffs and program cuts.

"We are at a wonderful moment of opportunity" at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Chancellor Rebecca Blank said. But, she said, "I can promise you our competitors are not standing still."

Blank started a previously scheduled speech to the UW System Board of Regents by ticking off a long list of accomplishments this year, including faculty "searching for the truth, dare I say."

She was referring tongue-in-cheek to an uproar Wednesday and Thursday over language changes to the UW System's mission contained in Gov. Scott Walker's proposed budget bill this week. Walker's budget removes "search for the truth" from the mission, along with the essence of the Wisconsin Idea, which has guided the UW System for more than a century.

The governor has since said the language will be changed to leave the Wisconsin Idea intact.

The tone of Blank's speech, which received a standing ovation, changed after she touted all the university's accomplishments.

Saying she was going off script, Blank reported that UW-Madison had "its first casualty."

"A really top researcher," who was a finalist for a position in the UW-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, withdrew his application unexpectedly this week after hearing news reports about proposed cuts to the UW System, Blank said.

Blank told reporters that she also had just heard from the dean of the School of Nursing about another offer for a top position that fell through unexpectedly, after the dean thought it had been accepted. That candidate also mentioned following the state budget news in Wisconsin.

The top-tier research university now has "two casualties," Blank said. "I'm very worried about this."

'This is a marathon'

Walker has proposed cutting $300 million in state funding over the next two years from the UW System budget, or $150 million each year of the biennium. That's a cut of roughly 13%. The UW System's total budget is about $6 billion, and state funding represents 19% of the total.

"I understand it is a tough budget year in the state," Blank told reporters Thursday. "This is not a sprint. This is a marathon."

UW-Madison's share of the proposed state cut would be $86 million "at a minimum," which she said she would have to trim from the flagship's budget by July 1. She said it would likely be a $91 million "hole to fill."

Blank said that a 4.2% budget cut in 2013-'15, coupled with a tuition freeze, forced her to spend down the school's reserves. UW-Madison now has $54 million left in discretionary money in a budget of almost $3 billion, the chancellor said.

UW-Madison's resident undergraduate tuition is $10,410, which places it in the middle of the pack in the Big Ten, Blank said. She predicted it would fall closer to the bottom by the end of the current two-year tuition freeze. Walker has proposed extending the resident undergraduate tuition freeze another two years.

UW-Madison's nonresident undergraduate tuition is $26,660, ahead of only Ohio State, Nebraska and Minnesota in the Big Ten.

Blank promised the regents that she would be back soon to lobby for a tuition increase for nonresident students and those in professional schools, such as pharmacy and veterinary science. The tuition for those students has not been frozen.

As for faculty hiring and retention, Blank said that during 2013-'14, 143 offers were extended, with 101 accepted. A little more than half the offers required start-up costs of $100,000 or greater for such things as setting up labs in physical and biological sciences, Blank said.

Wisconsin also faces stiff competition to retain faculty, she said. Between 2007 and 2014, 165 faculty were recruited away from Wisconsin.

"All of my competitors are moving in a different direction," Blank said. "I'm going to be falling behind."

Bill Glauber of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report in Milwaukee.