Bill would put restrictions on asbestos suits
SHARE

By ,

Madison - Asbestos-exposure lawsuits would be slowed until plaintiffs reveal how many businesses their attorneys plan to go after under a bill introduced Thursday by a Republican lawmaker, who said the measure would prevent lawyers from hiding multiple claims in hopes of maximizing awards.

Rep. Andre Jacque of De Pere told the Assembly Judiciary Committee during a public hearing that his bill would inject transparency into asbestos claims. The bill would help judges and jurors see how many defendants may be at fault for one person's illness, ensuring they divvy up damages fairly, he said.

"This is simply, again, helping better understand the totality of the circumstances," Jacque said.

Trial attorneys contend the measure is designed to slow cases down in the hopes plaintiffs will die and protect corporations from making payouts.

Asbestos is a fibrous, heat-resistant mineral that's been used for centuries for insulation, fireproofing and building. Dry asbestos can crumble into a powder, which can release fibers into the air and cause health problems, including cancer.

Many of the companies that manufactured asbestos products have filed for bankruptcy and established trusts to cover damage claims. People who contend still-solvent companies contributed to their health problems can file civil lawsuits.

But business advocates contend attorneys who file lawsuits often don't disclose they've filed claims against the bankrupt companies as well, preventing judges and juries from properly divvying up liability and shrinking payouts.

Under Jacque's bill, judges would have to order a plaintiff in a civil suit to disclose all trust claims he or she has filed or plans to file within a month of filing the suit. Once the plaintiff makes the disclosures, the judge could not schedule a trial any sooner than six months out.

If a plaintiff announces he or she plans to file a claim, the judge would have to stay the proceedings until the filing happens.