Budget panel votes to reduce construction borrowing by $250 million
State officials say the Hill Farms State Transportation Building on Madison's west side is aging and needs replacement. Credit: Joe Koshollek/For the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

SHARE

By of the

Madison — The borrowing for buildings in Gov. Scott Walker's budget would be reduced by $250 million, forcing cuts to the administration's plans to expand or renovate properties around the state, under action by the Legislature's budget committee Thursday.

The Joint Finance Committee voted 12-4, with Republicans voting in favor and Democrats against, to lower the amount of new borrowing for state buildings to $887.6 million from the $1.14 billion proposed by Walker in February.

As part of the larger motion, the committee also approved a nearly $200 million replacement to its aging Transportation Department headquarters on Madison's west side, though the project could face a new hurdle because of the panel's decision to cut the state's overall spending on its buildings.

Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills), the co-chairwoman of the committee, said that the state's debt payments are rising too quickly and that to hold them down, the Walker administration would need to decide which building projects to nix, scale back or postpone.

"The debt service comes at us every year," Darling said. "Just like families, there are some things that we really want to do but we have to pare back."

Rep. Cory Mason (D-Racine) said that Republicans were cutting "vertical projects" such as buildings while leaving in place all of Walker's nearly $1 billion in additional proposed borrowing for "horizontal projects" such as roads and bridges.

"It's inconsistent at best to do that," Mason said.

Mason echoed previous arguments by the Walker administration that it could be potentially cheaper in the long run to do such projects now while both interest rates and construction costs are historically low.

The action came on top of votes in previous sessions by the budget panel to reduce borrowing by $118 million from Walker's proposal in areas such as the state's stewardship program to make land purchases. The changes by the Joint Finance Committee to the budget bill so far would allow a total of $1.75 billion in new borrowing for the state.

Stephanie Marquis, a spokeswoman for Walker's Department of Administration, said that the agency would have to evaluate the proposal.

More than half of the Walker's proposed budget for state buildings would go to University of Wisconsin-System projects. Rep. Dale Kooyenga (R-Brookfield) said that the universities could look at using recently revealed reserve funds for those projects if state funds are cut.

The other major project is the DOT's Hill Farms headquarters, which is located on a hill in Madison on a choice real estate site near the Hilldale Mall.

The replacement for the 56-year-old building would cost as much as some of the highway projects being overseen out of it. It has drawn the attention of some GOP lawmakers who are looking for ways to cut down on the borrowing in Walker's budget bill.

The new DOT headquarters would cost $196.6 million and measure 600,000 square feet with a separate 1,500-stall parking garage. The building would be much larger than the existing 368,000-square-foot structure.

That would allow the new building to house the 1,500 employees working in the current building as well as 388 employees from the Department of Employee Trust Funds, who currently work in a different aging building on the south side of Madison.

The current DOT building could require tens of millions of dollars in maintenance over the coming years if not replaced, according to the Department of Administration.

The state would need to spend at minimum $8.8 million in the 2013-'15 budget for heating and cooling and fire safety work. In the 2015-'17 budget, an additional $25.2 million would be needed for projects dealing with heating and cooling, electrical and exterior work.

Renovating it rather than building a new structure would cost $142 million and would not provide the added space or parking structure.

The Walker administration is hoping that if the new DOT building and parking structure are built it could sell for development the rest of the property, which is currently taken up by a large surface parking lot. Over the past decade, there's been a number of retail and other development projects within a short distance of the headquarters.

In other action Thursday, the Joint Finance Committee:

■ Voted unanimously to increase payment rates to foster parents, including relatives of the child, by 2.5% in each of the next two years. That would cost roughly $2 million in state and federal money.

■ Voted 12-4 to allow the confidential exchange of child welfare records between the state Department of Children and Families, Department of Corrections, county agencies, a licensed child welfare agency and health care providers. The motion would also allow for health records to be released to foster parents.

Rep. Jon Richards (D-Milwaukee) said he agreed with the spirit of allowing better communication to allow for the medical treatment of foster children and the investigation of cases of abuse but wanted more scrutiny of the proposal outside the budget process.