Bite from state road borrowing nearly triples since 1999
The state’s debt load for highway construction projects has grown dramatically in recent years. In this photo from October, construction crews work on a closed 84th St. just south of Honey Creek Parkway in West Allis as part of the Zoo Interchange project. Credit: Mike De Sisti

By of the

Madison — Gov. Scott Walker has helped slow the growth in Wisconsin's overall debt, but state borrowing for road building has continued to rise — a trend that would intensify under his latest budget proposal.

In 1999, only 7 cents of every dollar in state money taken in by Wisconsin's road fund went to repaying debt for infrastructure. But this year almost 20 cents of every state buck in that account will go to paying off highway loans, with the numbers expected to climb even higher if Walker's $1.3 billion in proposed transportation borrowing is approved.

The trend has even the state road builders association questioning whether projects may have to be cut to hold down debt.

"Compared to past history, this is a really big number," said Dale Knapp, research director of the Wisconsin Taxpayers Alliance. "Unless you address the underlying problem, this is something that feeds on itself."

Nothing two years from now appears likely to rescue Wisconsin from its financial roadblocks. Federal aid for highways is uncertain at best, and state gas tax collections have stagnated in recent years as drivers purchase less fuel.

There's a catch to cutting borrowing, however. To do it, Wisconsin will need to drop road projects or find more money by raising gas taxes and vehicle fees or taking it from other priorities such as schools and health care.

Walker and his administration say the borrowing makes sense because of low interest rates and a need to replace or renovate key sections of the state's infrastructure, such as the Zoo Interchange, I-94 north-south and the Hoan Bridge. For that reason, the state's need to borrow for roads will be higher over the next decade, said state Administration Secretary Mike Huebsch.

"You don't borrow for groceries," Huebsch said at a luncheon sponsored earlier this week by WisPolitics.com. "You don't borrow to put things in the house, but you do borrow to build the house."

Gas tax option

In November, Walker's transportation secretary, Mark Gottlieb, recommended raising taxes and fees in a variety of ways to pay for roads. That included a 5-cent-per-gallon increase in the state gasoline tax, which is above the national average though not by as much as it was just a few years ago.

Governing Magazine reported this week that at least a dozen states with Republican and Democratic governors also are considering gas tax increases to address the common problem of aging infrastructure.

Walker, who is both a longtime opponent of gas tax increases and a potential GOP candidate for president, opted for borrowing instead. To try to limit overall debt levels, his budget would stop signing off on new bonds for state buildings but would include $220 million in bonds to help build a new arena for the Milwaukee Bucks basketball team, or $1.6 billion in total over the next two years.

In the case of the arena, the debt would be repaid by the projected growth in taxes paid by Bucks players and staff and visiting NBA players.

Slowing debt's growth

Walker has campaigned on cutting state debt and so far has slowed its growth. Since Walker took office in 2011, the state has made progress in slowing decades of growth in its bulging debt of $13.8 billion. That amounts to $2,400 for each person in the state, or almost as much as the state takes in each year in its main account through sources like the income tax and sales tax.

Overall state debt peaked in 2012 and has since dipped slightly to a level that is modestly higher than when Walker took office.

In 2014, the state was using a nickel out of every dollar in its main account to pay off loans rather than using the money for education, prisons or nursing homes for needy seniors. That was above a long-standing target in state government of keeping loan payments to 4 cents on the dollar for the money coming from sources such as the income and sale tax.

By 2017, Walker's budget proposal would drop loan payments back down to 3.7 cents out of every dollar going into the state's main fund, bringing them back in line with the state's own unofficial target, according to his administration's budget office.

In the state's separate fund for building bridges and roads, the trend is moving in the opposite direction.

Kevin Traas, the policy director for the state road builders association, estimated that by 2017 under Walker's proposal Wisconsin would end up spending a quarter out of every dollar in its transportation fund for paying off loans.

Finding good comparison figures for other states isn't easy. But a 2012 report by a Wisconsin transportation task force found that some other states such as Minnesota, Ohio and Missouri had adopted policies limiting their debt payments to 20% of the revenue taken in by their highway programs.

Road builders concerned

Pat Goss, executive director of the Wisconsin Transportation Builders Association, said his group believes it's unacceptable to keep issuing highway bonds without a sustainable stream of money to repay them. His group prefers to raise taxes or fees but, if pressed, would rather see some cuts in the state contracts going to road builders than see borrowing get out of control, he said.

"If it is the will of the Legislature to not provide more funding, then our preference would be to cut," Goss said. "It is a dangerous proposition (for our members) but it's the responsible thing and it's the right thing."

Cutting or delaying projects isn't necessarily the sole solution to the state's struggling road fund. Not surprisingly, it can be difficult to persuade lawmakers to vote for a budget in Madison that halts or could halt a project supported by their voters back home.

In addition, a huge chunk of the spending needed in the coming years will go to large projects in southeastern Wisconsin that have had bipartisan support.

Sen. Luther Olsen (R-Ripon), a member of the Legislature's budget committee, said lawmakers are looking hard at the few options they have, even if none is appetizing.

"You've got to man up here," Olsen said.

For his part, Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said the state needs to look to long-term solutions, such as a fee for miles driven by vehicles. Approving all of the new borrowing would get the state by for two years but leave the financial challenge even harder to solve in the long run, he said.

"Seven hundred and thirty days from now we're going to have the same problem," Vos said.