Clinton calls for stronger gun control measures in Milwaukee event
Democrat presidential candidate Hillary Clinton (center) speaks Tuesday at a community forum on gun violence at Tabernacle Community Baptist Church in Milwaukee. Mothers who have lost children to gun violence on her left is Geneva Reed-Veal and Annette Holt is on her right. Credit: Angela Peterson

By of the

Former Secretary of State and Democratic presidential frontrunner Hillary Clinton Tuesday called for tighter gun laws, enhanced police training and more support for young African-American men who are most at risk to become victims or perpetrators of violence.

"The epidemic of gun violence spares no one but it is concentrated in areas that are short on hope and where we still face the effects of systemic racism," Clinton said.

The Rev. Don Darius Butler, Congresswoman Gwen Moore, Geneva Reed-Veal and Annette Nance-Holt joined Clinton at Tabernacle Community Baptist Church in Milwaukee on Tuesday morning for a forum about gun violence prevention.

Reed-Veal is the mother of Sandra Bland, who was found hanging in her jail cell three days after being pulled over for a traffic stop in Texas, and Nance-Holt is a battalion chief for the Chicago Fire Department whose 16-year-old son, Blair, was shot and killed while riding a bus in 2007.

Nance-Holt said she appreciated Clinton reaching out to her and other mothers, saying Clinton's primary opponent Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders had not done so.

"I think if you want my vote you better work for it," she said. "I'm not going to give it to you just because you say you'll do free college, because if my child is dead he can't go to college."

At one point during the forum, Milwaukee mother Freda Bogan cried out in grief. Her eldest son was shot and killed in Mississippi in 2000, just weeks after Bogan had returned to her home state from Wisconsin to take care of her mother who had cancer.

Clinton asked to speak with Bogan after the event and the two chatted for several minutes.

"That's pain that's never going away," Bogan said after the meeting. "Stop letting people sell guns over the internet, stop letting them sell guns out of houses, stores, whatever, if you don't have the credentials to buy a gun, you shouldn't be able to get one."

During the forum, Clinton called for universal background checks, including for online and gun show sales, and for ending what she described as the "Charleston loophole."

Dylan Roof, who is charged with killing nine parishioners in a historically black church in Charleston, went to buy a gun two months before the shooting. As the FBI examiner sought more information about Roof's criminal history, the three-day window for the check ended and Roof could legally buy the gun. Supporters of gun rights have said the problem was with the FBI and incorrect paperwork, not the law.

Kim Sherrod, a lifelong member of Tabernacle Community Baptist Church, said she supported Clinton and her positions on gun laws after seeing firsthand the "evolution of the city over the years with so many young people losing their lives to gun violence or other tragedies."

For her and members of Tabernacle Baptist Church, gun violence is not an abstract issue but a daily reality.

In 2014, not too far from the church, 10-year-old Sierra Guyton was caught in the crossfire of a shooting on a playground. She died months later and her funeral was held at Tabernacle. At the end of that year, the church also hosted the city's annual vigil for homicide victims.

"Every day there's something riddling this neighborhood in the form of crime – ridiculous shootings, death – and I would love for her to address how we could turn this gun law around," said Barbara Ford, a congregation member since 1959.

Ford said she specifically did not support Wisconsin's concealed carry law, which she described as a policy out of the "wild, wild west."

Janetha Johnson, another congregant, said it was notable Clinton came to the 53206 ZIP code, a challenged part of the city marked by high levels of poverty, unemployment and incarceration.

"This is an experience because we don't have Washington coming to Milwaukee and because it's 53206," Johnson said.

"That's where people seem to think it's the worst, but I'm always proud to say that I'm from here," she said. "There are educated people here working to make things better."

Clinton's appearance at the historically black church comes as she continues to seek key African-American votes in Milwaukee. On Friday, she released a new television ad highlighting her concern about shootings by police and referencing the high-profile Dontre Hamilton case in Milwaukee.

The support of black voters has been crucial to Clinton in her race against Sanders.