Employment debate requires closer look
Scott Walker has it all figured out. Tom Barrett does too.

The rest of us can only duck and cover as the gubernatorial candidates lay down a cross-fire of conflicting economic data and carpet bomb the state with political rhetoric.

But at its heart, the Great War of the Jobs Numbers is essentially about this: Has Wisconsin's recent employment performance been abysmal, or merely mediocre?

Barrett, the Milwaukee mayor seeking to toss Walker out of the governor's mansion in the upcoming recall election, waves survey data suggesting that Wisconsin trails every state in job growth. Walker touts another data set that shows Wisconsin gaining jobs since he took office.

Unless you're a hard-shell political partisan who sees everything in black and white, it's difficult to say why the two sets of jobs numbers are at such great odds with each other, and where the truth lies. But at a time when jobs and economic development are so critical in the recall election, it's worth another, deeper look.

The data that shows Wisconsin dead last and actually losing jobs - the data Barrett points to - comes from the Current Employment Statistics survey. The survey is done every month and is widely reported. It's rough but important data, one of the major economic indicators on the national level and, although less reliable, traditionally a bellwether at the state level. In this case, Barrett used monthly survey data from March 2011 to March 2012.

The data that shows Wisconsin gaining jobs - the data Walker points to - comes from unemployment insurance reports by employers that ultimately become part of the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. Compared with the monthly survey, the quarterly census seldom gets attention. The figures typically are six months old by the time they're released.

In this case, Walker is using census data - released early, before the last three months were vetted by federal officials - from December 2010 to December 2011.

While it is less timely, the census is more precise - it's essentially a nose count of jobs. In fact, statisticians use the census to correct the survey numbers months after the monthly figures have been released.

But even when measured by the census, the instrument Walker favors, Wisconsin's recent economic performance, while better, is far from stellar. For September 2010 through September 2011 - the most recent year-over-year census data comparison available with all 50 states - Wisconsin ranks 26th, in the middle of the country as a whole and lagging behind its Midwestern neighbors.

For the period, which includes the last four months of former Gov. Jim Doyle's administration, the figures show Wisconsin added 36,561 jobs. During the same 12 months, Minnesota, with a labor force similar in size to Wisconsin, added more than 64,000.

In relative terms, Wisconsin employment grew by not quite 1.4%. Nationwide jobs, meanwhile, grew by 1.6%. Minnesota and Michigan added 2.5% and 2.4% respectively. Indiana, Illinois, Iowa and Ohio also outstripped Wisconsin.

"Even using his numbers," Barrett said of Walker, "we're at the bottom of the Big Ten."

Walker campaign spokeswoman Ciara Matthews, meanwhile, said, "Governor Walker in just 15 short months has helped create an economic climate which allowed for the creation of more than 35,000 new jobs since he has taken office and Wisconsin's unemployment rate to fall to 6.7%, the lowest it has been in since 2008."

Data usually in sync

The question of why there is such a large variance between the monthly survey and quarterly census job numbers, meanwhile, may remain unanswered until both sets of data are fully vetted and adjusted.

Since at least 2008, the year-over-year changes in the monthly survey typically have moved in sync with the year-over-year changes in the quarterly census. The average monthly difference has been about 10,000 jobs. But the census and survey drifted apart in the last half of 2011 - by 57,000 jobs as of December - even though the survey numbers had gone through an annual revision using the census numbers in a process the Bureau of Labor Statistics calls benchmarking.

One possible factor in the recent dramatic deviation of the monthly jobs survey from the quarterly census: The federal bureau took over the responsibility from the states of putting out the monthly numbers, beginning with the March 2011 figures.

"That was the last of our opportunity to have any real say in these estimates," said Steve Hine, Minnesota's director of the Labor Market Information.

Like officials in Wisconsin and some other states, Hine questions whether the loss of local responsibility for the jobs figures has harmed their accuracy. The monthly employment numbers, he said, show Minnesota roughly 40,000 jobs behind where he knows the state actually is because of the more accurate unemployment-insurance counts.

In a statement, federal officials have said that the consolidation of the data collection has saved money and that it should improve accuracy. They said that state agencies can still provide federal officials with information about local events such as plant closings, but also acknowledged that part of reason for the change was to rely "less on individual analyst judgment and more on the use of standard statistical" models.

John Koskinen, chief economist for the Wisconsin Department of Revenue, said it appears that northern states like Minnesota and Wisconsin have been the most affected by the problems in the jobs data, but said he couldn't explain why. Neither could Hine.

Koskinen acknowledged that Wisconsin lagged behind its neighbors for the September 2010 to September 2011 period, but said that was in part because Wisconsin didn't lose as many jobs in prior years as other states like Illinois and Indiana did.

Missing 'turning points'

Generally speaking, revisions to the survey tend to show a pattern, Jesse Rothstein, an economics professor at the University of California, Berkeley and former chief economist at the U.S. Department of Labor, said via email. Because the survey can only account for the births and deaths of companies by using a model, he said, it tends to miss changes in the pattern of business start-ups and closures.

"That means that it tends to miss turning points - it overstates employment going into a recession (when deaths rise) and understates employment coming out (when births rise)," Rothstein said.

The revisions also point out how difficult it is to compare jobs data when it is most current - and of greatest interest.

Ultimately, the numbers in the survey - in Wisconsin it includes about 5% of employers and has a margin of error of 9,300 jobs in either direction - are revised at least twice, and in some cases three times, as the bureau incorporates firmer data.

In addition, the unemployment insurance job counts for the end of 2011, which Walker's administration released last week to support the case that Wisconsin has been gaining jobs, also are likely to change to some degree before they get the bureau's stamp of approval and become the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages.

In other words, even in the smoothest of circumstances, there are multiple versions of "the jobs numbers," based on both the collection process and the time frame.

With so many iterations, it's not hard for politicians to find versions that glorify themselves or vilify their opponents.