Walker forced to admit UW objected to Wisconsin Idea changes
Students use a pedestrian bridge to cross N. Park St. on Tuesday on the UW-Madison campus. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Madison — Gov. Scott Walker and aides scrambled Thursday to respond to revelations that his administration had insisted to University of Wisconsin officials on scrapping the Wisconsin Idea, the guiding principle for the state's universities for more than a century.

In a rapid revision to his own comments on Wednesday, the Republican governor acknowledged that UW System officials had raised objections about the proposal.

They had been told the changes were not open to debate.

While backtracking on earlier comments to reporters, Walker continued to insist in a statement that he hadn't known what his own administration was doing until after the proposal became public and caused a firestorm of criticism.

He said no one would be disciplined.

Update: PolitiFact Wsiconsin rates Gov. Scott Walker's claim of a "drafting error" a "Pants on Fire"

First articulated in 1904, the Wisconsin Idea states that the mission of the UW System is to solve problems and improve people's lives beyond the classroom. That mission encompasses teaching, research, outreach and public service.

The governor's budget, released Tuesday evening, proposed spinning off the UW System as a separate entity, cutting its state funding by $300 million over two years and making its mission to "meet the state's workforce needs." It proposed striking UW principles in state law about proving public service, improving the human condition, and searching for truth. It also eliminated the venerated concept that the boundaries of the university extend to the boundaries of the state.

On Jan. 29 — five days before Walker introduced his budget — the UW System's John Yingling sent an email to the state budget office flagging concerns about the proposed changes and then followed up by phone. Yingling is a special assistant to Ray Cross, the system's president.

"We strongly urge that stricken language is unique to depicting the character, mission, and vision of the UW System," Yingling wrote, according to an email released Thursday under the state's open records law.

On Wednesday, Walker initially expressed no concerns when questioned by a reporter about the proposed changes to the system's mission statements.

"Learning's important, but ultimately it's most important for people to get the chance to get the education they need to succeed in the workforce and in life," Walker said during a stop in De Pere, according to Wisconsin Radio Network.

But later that day, hebacked away from the changes by saying they had been included because of a drafting error or oversight in his budget. He further implied that UW System officials saw the changes and "somehow overlooked" them.

On Thursday he acknowledged that, in fact, UW System officials had thrown up red flags and been rebuffed.

"To me, in the end it was a confusion out there," Walker said of the proposed changes. "It was a mistake that someone made. Someone assumed one thing when the idea was we weren't going to add anything more (to the budget), they assumed that that meant we were going to keep a blank, simple mission statement. That's why I immediately said yesterday in a tweet, 'It's no big deal.' "

Walker made his comments soon after the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported Thursday that the drafting file for the budget bill showed two instances — one in December and another in January — in which the Walker administration's budget shop requested the specific changes to the mission statement.

Later, he released the long statement attempting a further explanation.

In a separate statement, Walker's budget director, Michael Heifetz, said he was to blame for the proposed changes and the language would be removed in a routine budget follow-up that is always sent by administration officials to the Legislature to clean up the bill's language. Heifetz declined an interview request through an agency spokesman.

"In this specific case, there was clearly a misunderstanding and I take responsibility for this drafting error," Heifetz's statement said.

UW officials rebuffed

Yingling, the special assistant to the UW System president, sent his Jan. 29 email objecting to the changes to Nathan Schwanz, an analyst in the state budget office within the Department of Administration. Yingling said he gave Schwanz time to read it and to consult with others in his office before the two talked by phone.

Over two phone conversations, Yingling said Schwanz made it clear that he understood the email but would be sticking with the proposed changes to the Wisconsin Idea in state law.

"The response was, 'No, we're not going to make any changes (to Walker's budget proposal). If you want to re-create this in (Board of Regents) policy, you're free to do that,' " Yingling said Thursday.

Walker's legal counsel, Brian Hagedorn, said Thursday that Yingling's email had never been shared with anyone in the governor's office.

UW System spokesman Alex Hummel said in a terse statement that university officials are "glad the changes are not being sought."

"Our primary focus is on the impact of the ($300 million) budget cut and the public authority proposals the governor has made for the UW System and its institutions," Hummel said.

Detailed instructions

For every piece of legislation — especially the massive state budget — drafting is a painstaking process in which a number of parties share successive versions of the specific language. The drafting file is essentially a history of those rewrites — all of them full of minute changes and revisions — made to the budget proposal as it wound its way toward the final version.

In the file, a Dec. 30 email from Schwanz to the Wisconsin Legislative Reference Bureau's Mark Kunkel, a nonpartisan bill drafter, directed a number of changes to the UW mission statement in state statutes.

The changes were part of a larger section in the budget that would transform the university from a state agency into a quasi-public authority with greater flexibility from the state and its rules.

An attachment to that Dec. 30 email proposed the changes such as deleting the phrase, "Basic to every purpose of the system is the search for truth." That electronic file, released through an open records request, showed that it was created by Schwanz about four hours before he emailed it to Kunkel.

On Jan. 12, Schwanz sent another email to Kunkel with more detailed instructions.

"To extend knowledge and its application beyond the boundaries of its campuses should be removed," Schwanz wrote.

Previously, Schwanz worked as a congressional staffer and campaign worker for U.S. Rep. Sean Duffy, a Republican from Weston. Schwanz didn't return a phone message Thursday seeking comment.

'There's no integrity'

The high-profile controversy comes as the governor rides a wave of positive press nationally for his all-but-certain presidential run.

Democrats called on Walker to take responsibility for what was in his budget.

"He blamed somebody else. To me, there's no integrity there. I'll leave it to somebody else to decide if there's a lie in there," Sen. Janet Bewley (D-Ashland) said of Walker.

Sen. Jon Erpenbach (D-Middleton) said he couldn't believe that the governor would not have known of changes to the Wisconsin Idea, which Erpenbach described as being "written in stone" on the university's foundation.

"This isn't something that would be an oversight. This is the governor directly aiming his arrow at the heart of the UW and what it's all about," Erpenbach said.

In Watertown Thursday, the governor said he thought the public debate should be focused on whether to give the university more flexibility and cut its state aid, not the flap over the proposed changes to the Wisconsin Idea.

Asked if there were other things in his budget he didn't know about, Walker said: "No, we knew about things overall. But I'm saying this was not a question of something we put in. This was the way that unfortunately somebody interpreted the direction of keeping it simple. We wanted to keep it simple and not making changes other than add the item we talked about in terms of workforce development."

Daniel Bice and James B. Nelson of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.