Trump walks back comments on punishing women who get abortions
Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump answers questions from the audience as he speaks to a full house in Janesville during a rally Tuesday. Credit: Rick Wood

By of the

Appleton — Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump says women who get abortions should receive "some form of punishment" if the procedure is banned.

"There has to be some form of punishment," Trump said Wednesday in an interview with MSNBC's Chris Matthews.

The comments from the real estate mogul came during a heated exchange over the issue during the taping of a town hall in Wisconsin.

When pressed on what that punishment should be, Trump repeated, "I don't know. That I don't know."

He added, "I do take positions on everything else. It's a very complicated position."

Trump, who said he supports an abortion ban, described his position on the issue as "pro-life with three exceptions," but didn't provide details.

But Trump's campaign promptly issued a statement trying to clarify Trump's stance, saying someone who performs an illegal abortion — not the woman having the procedure — should be punished.

"If Congress were to pass legislation making abortion illegal and the federal courts upheld this legislation, or any state were permitted to ban abortion under state and federal law, the doctor or any other person performing this illegal act upon a woman would be held legally responsible, not the woman," the statement posted on Trump's campaign website reads. "The woman is a victim in this case as is the life in her womb. My position has not changed — like Ronald Reagan, I am pro-life with exceptions."

Trump's comments came as he and other presidential candidates traveled across the state of Wisconsin in advance of the state's April 5 primary.

He also held a Wednesday morning town hall event in De Pere and an afternoon rally in Appleton, where he continued taking aim at the GOP establishment.

During a rally at Appleton's Radisson Paper Valley Hotel, Trump stressed the importance of winning in Wisconsin, saying it would "cement" his victory in the 2016 GOP presidential contest.

"The establishment is trying to take it away from us," Trump told the crowd.

His comments came as a Marquette University Law School poll released Wednesday showed he was trailing Texas Sen. Ted Cruz in the lead-up to the state's April 5 primary.

On Wednesday, he again attacked Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, who endorsed Cruz Tuesday.

His speech swung between a broad range of topics, including illegal immigration, military spending, ISIS, terror attacks.

Trump repeatedly stressed the importance of Wisconsin's primary.

"This is such an important state. I would love to win it. A win would cement us," Trump said.

He repeatedly urged people in the crowd to go out and vote — if they were going to vote for him. If they weren't backing him, he urged them to skip voting on Tuesday.

He added, "You're going to say the vote you took on April 5 was the single greatest vote you ever took."

On Tuesday and against Wednesday, Trump hacked away at Gov. Scott Walker's record in Wisconsin, using a list of impressive statistics from "the big book."

But it turns out the billionaire presidential candidate's big book has some numbers that are misleading or just wrong.

Trump recited his list in Janesville Tuesday afternoon as he lambasted Walker.

"It's like devastating. By the summer of 2015 Wisconsin was facing a $2.2 billion two-year budget deficit. That's terrible. By the way these are from books — this isn't Trump — this is out of books," Trump said. "Total state debt is $45 billion, now maybe somebody is going to tell me that's wrong but again — $45 billion is very high, one of the higher ones."

That would be a crushingly high state debt — if it were true.

The Wisconsin Legislature's nonpartisan budget office recently put out numbers on Wisconsin's total debt from all loans — from general obligation bonds and road bonds to short-term loans known as commercial paper. The Legislative Fiscal Bureau, Wisconsin's equivalent of the Congressional Budget Office, puts the state debt as of December at $14.1 billion, or less than one-third of what Trump said.

That's up about $860 million, or 6.5%, from the $13.2 billion where it stood in December 2010 just before Walker took office.

Trump's campaign had no immediate comment on who publishes his "big book," but it appears that the billionaire was referring to all state and local debt in Wisconsin. The U.S. Census Bureau had total state and local debt in 2013 at $44.4 billion, a figure which includes everything from cities and counties to schools districts and other entities with their own elected officials who are not under Walker's direct control.

Trump is almost right on the $2.2 billion — the state did face a such a shortfall in the fall of 2014 and spring of 2015. But that wasn't a deficit — Wisconsin's constitution doesn't allow the state to spend more than it takes in.

The state was in danger of doing that a year ago, because state revenue at one point was projected to fall $2.2 billion short of what state agencies wanted to spend over the 2015-'17 budget. But since the state can't actually run such a deficit, Walker and GOP lawmakers did what they are required to do and avoided a deficit through spending cuts such as a $250 million hit to the University of Wisconsin System.

With the crowd in Janesville cheering him on, Trump gave more numbers Tuesday:

"20,000 fewer in the labor force in Wisconsin than seven years ago even though the population has grown by 100,000...Unemployment rate well they say — that can't be possible ... 20%, that can't be possible," Trump said, turning to the crowd. "What? Is it at 20%? Effective or regular? I mean just — effective unemployment rate at 20%, hey this is out of the big book."

The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel is checking on these numbers, but the state's ordinary unemployment rate was at 4.6% as of February, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. There can be ways of figuring unemployment, such as adding in people who have given up looking for jobs, that can result in it being higher. But four times higher would be a lot.

Lastly, Trump said that Wisconsin has "800,000 food stamp recipients." There, he's in the ballpark.

The state had 741,000 FoodShare recipients as of January, according to the state Department of Health Services. The state hit a high of 862,000 people in May 2013.

Mary Spicuzza reported for this story in Appleton and Jason Stein reported from Madison.