Federal court ruling removes limits on donations to political parties
Madison — A recent federal court decision allows individuals to give unlimited amounts of money to political parties — funds that can immediately be turned over to candidates.

That Sept. 5 ruling by U.S. District Judge Rudolph Randa creates an easy way for donors to sidestep the limits they normally face when giving to candidates.

His decision also allows candidates to accept more special interest money.

Donors are limited to giving candidates for governor $10,000 each election cycle, and that restriction remains in place.

But under Randa's decision, wealthy donors can now give millions of dollars to political parties, which in turn can give the full amount to candidates.

An anti-earmarking law remains in place, so the donors cannot direct the parties to give the money to a specific candidate.

But donors can generally be confident their donations to political parties will flow to efforts to help candidates at the top of the ticket and in the most crucial legislative races.

"What's being done here is empowering a tiny fraction of one percent of the population to have vastly more influence over elections and our government than they used to have," said Mike McCabe, executive director of the Wisconsin Democracy Campaign, a group that lobbies for limits on political fundraising.

Wealthy donors' "influence has been magnified, and I think that comes at the expense of everyone else," he said.

Rick Esenberg, the lawyer who brought the case, said Randa's ruling is the latest indication Wisconsin's campaign finance laws have not kept up with major free speech rulings in recent decades.

"Wisconsin campaign finance law is stuck in the 1970s and fails to take into account and comply with modern First Amendment law," Esenberg said in a statement.

He said he hopes lawmakers will overhaul the state's campaign finance laws when they reconvene in January.

Esenberg is the president and general counsel of the Wisconsin Institute for Law & Liberty, the law firm that represented CRG Network in the case.

CRG Network, often known as Citizens for Responsible Government, is a group that backs conservative candidates and was instrumental in recall efforts a dozen years ago over Milwaukee County's pension scandal.

CRG Network recently tried to make small donations to three candidates but had some or all of its money returned because the candidates had already received the maximum amount they could accept from political action committees.

CRG Network sued in federal court in Milwaukee in June, arguing it was unconstitutional to prevent the group from giving to particular candidates just because other political action committees had already given to those candidates.

Wisconsin law limits the total amount of PAC money candidates can accept: about $7,700 for Assembly candidates, about $15,500 for state Senate candidates and about $700,000 for candidates for governor.

Randa sided with CRG Network in his Sept. 5 ruling, issuing a preliminary injunction that bars the state from enforcing the limits while he continues to consider the case.

That means candidates face no limits on the total amount they can accept from political action committees, which are generally run by special interests and grass-roots groups.

(The candidates can accept only set amounts from any given political action committee, however.)

The ruling came months after two other key decisions striking down campaign finance restrictions.

In April, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled as unconstitutional a federal law that limited the total amount a donor could give to a mix of candidates for Congress.

Soon afterward, U.S. District Judge Lynn Adelman in Milwaukee struck down similar limits in Wisconsin law for state candidates in a case brought by Esenberg on behalf of Racine millionaire Fred Young Jr.

As a result of Adelman's decision, 38 donors have given more than $680,000 to state candidates this year, some $300,000 more than they would have been able to give when the limits were in place, a recent Milwaukee Journal Sentinel analysis found.

Randa's decision, together with Adelman's from earlier this year, also affects limits on political parties.

Now, donors can give any amount to political parties and political parties can give any amount to candidates.

The rulings also allow individuals to give as much as they want to political action committees, but those committees still face limits on what they can give to candidates.

Republican Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen and state election officials have not said whether they will appeal Randa's decision.