Assembly passes Scott Walker's $505 million tax cut plan
Madison — Gov. Scott Walker's $505 million tax cut proposal swung through the Assembly on Tuesday on its way to a showdown in the Senate, while the governor's Democratic challenger touted her own tax plan just across the Capitol square.

The Assembly voted 62-37 to use a projected $1 billion state surplus through June 2015 to cut taxesfor the third time since June and plunk $117 million into the state's rainy-day fund. The vote broke largely along party lines, with only two Democrats, Reps. Stephen Smith of Shell Lake and Amy Sue Vruwink of Milladore, joining all Republicans to vote for the bill.

Shortly after, a separate bill from Walker to spend $35 million more on training workers for high-demand fields drew a strongly bipartisan vote of 77-22, with 17 Democrats joining all Republicans in support.

Later Tuesday, the Assembly voted unanimously to approve a third Walker billto use a separate surplus in the state's road fund to boost spending on highway projects this year by $43 million.

All three bills now go to the Senate.

Walker's plan for the surplus prioritizes the tax cuts and a roughly $320 million overhaul of income tax withholding in the state over calls from Democrats to pay down debt, strengthen the state budget and offset past cuts to schools.

"As I travel our state, people aren't telling me they pay too little in taxes. In fact, most people I talk to think the tax burden is too high, which is why our plan returns the vast majority of the budget surplus to its rightful owners: the hardworking taxpayers of Wisconsin," Walker said in a statement.

The future of Walker's bill, however, rests on the state Senate, where the governor is close to resolving the concerns of GOP moderates focused on keeping the state's finances sound. Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) said Tuesday he expected the Senate to pass a bill cutting taxes in late February or early March after Republicans in his house send the bill to the Legislature's budget committee.

GOP senators and the Legislature's nonpartisan budget office still need to work through the full impact of Walker's proposals and other bills seeking to spend more money on the state budget, he said.

"I'm not sure what they're passing today (in the Assembly) is even balanced," Fitzgerald said.

On Tuesday, Democrats pushed their own approaches to using the unexpected tax money that the state is projected to take in over the next year and a half.

Mary Burke, the former state commerce secretary and bicycle company executive running against Walker, said the state should use about half of the surplusto set aside more money in the rainy-day fund and reduce the state's $2 billion in new borrowing through June 2015. She would use the remainder for property tax relief and worker training programs.

"We have to start paying down our debt before we put more on the credit card," she said.

Under Walker's bill, the average income tax filer would receive a tax cut of $46 in April 2015 and the typical homeowner would save $131 over the existing law on this December's bills, according to the fiscal bureau.

Also, the governor has already had his administration alter income tax withholding rates so workers have less taken out of each paycheck — about $520 a year for a married couple making a total of $80,000 a year — starting in April.

The bill would also lower income taxes for factory and farm owners by $36.8 million over the current two-year budget and $91.3 million over the following two years.

Burke's plan for property tax relief and a separate plan put forward by Assembly Democrats on Tuesday would both funnel more money toward a state credit for parcels with a home or business on them. That would ensure low- and middle-incomehomeowners see bigger tax cuts than they would under Walker's plan, even if the overall size of her tax cut would be smaller, Burke said.

Assembly Democrats said their plan would save $231 for the owner of the median-valued home, or about $100 more than Walker's proposal. Because the Democrats want to increase an essentially flat credit going to each home and business in the state rather than cut the property tax rate, their proposal would deliver the same dollar savings to the owner of a modest house as it would to the owners of a mansion or big box retail store.

But Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said this existing tax credit provides no relief to those who own undeveloped land, such as farmers and timber companies. That runs counter to the provision of equal property taxation within the state constitution and could draw a legal challenge to the credit if it's increased again, he said.

Burke said she would also leave the state's long-term finances in better shape than Walker would. Her plan would lower the shortfall being projected for the next state budget under one method of calculating it known as the structural deficit, though Burke could not say how much it would go down under her approach.

Also Tuesday, Assembly Republicans scaled back a sales tax cut they added to Walker's bill last week to benefit companies doing construction work for local governments and nonprofits. Under this second rewrite of the bill, the sales tax exemption wouldn't benefit construction companies doing work for state government. That would reduce the impact of the tax exemption to $7.5 million a year from an unexpectedly high projection of $20 million that was released on Monday.

The sales tax exemption would now apply to contractors that purchase materials for projects for local governments, schools and certain nonprofits. Under current law, these municipalities and schools aren't charged the sales tax for their own purchases, but contractors doing work for them are charged the sales tax on materials for these local governments.

Asked about the sales tax exemption for contractors, Walker told reporters Tuesday he wanted the final bill to be as close as possible to his original proposal.

"The simpler it is, the better," he told reporters.

The final bill from the governor passedby the Assembly would boost state roads spending in this fiscal year by moving up the starting dates of 11 maintenance and rehabilitation projects on roads and bridges.

The additional proposed spending would mean that the roads fund would end the budget on June 30, 2015, with $41.6 million instead of an unexpected surplusrecently estimated at $84.6 million. The nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau, however, has warned that the roads fund faces a projected $336.2 million shortfall in the next two-year budget.

The Assembly on Tuesday also approved proposals to change the state constitution to drop the state's elected treasurer position and to require a two-thirds vote by lawmakers to raise the state sales or income tax.

To do that, the proposed amendments would have to be approved by both houses of the Legislature in this session and the following one and then also approved by voters in a referendum. That means neither proposal could take effect until 2015 at the earliest and the chances for both to pass are uncertain.

The first proposal, which passed the Assembly 67-32, would eliminate the state treasurer and his office, a move advocated for unsuccessfully by the current officeholder, Kurt Schuller, a Republican who is stepping down after only one term to fulfill a campaign promise.

Contrary to the title, Wisconsin's state treasurer no longer has any real role in overseeing the state's budget or finances. Schuller is paid $68,600 a year to run the treasurer's office even though it has been stripped of nearly all of its previous responsibilities, such as overseeing unclaimed property, which is now in the hands of the state Department of Revenue.

The proposed constitutional amendment would have also dropped the position of Secretary of State Doug La Follette, a Democrat, but that provision was removed in committee.

The second proposed constitutional amendment passed the Assembly 60-39, with all Republicans voting in favor and all Democrats against. It would require increases in state income and sales taxes to be approved by a two-thirds vote of the Legislature. Lawmakers would be bound by this requirement unless the proposed tax increase received approval by voters first in a statewide advisory referendum.

This provision wouldn't apply to tax cuts. It would, however, make it more difficult to carry out tax shifts, such as an idea floated by Walker in December that would involve eliminating the state income tax in part by increasing the state sales tax.