GOP lawmakers advance prevailing wage repeal
By

Madison— As Assembly Republicans moved a bill repealing Wisconsin's prevailing wage law out of committee Wednesday, Gov. Scott Walker made clear he supports ending or overhauling the 84-year-old policy that sets a minimum wage for construction workers building publicly funded projects.

"Governor Walker has been working with members of the Legislature for weeks on a way to repeal or reform prevailing wage laws," Walker spokeswoman Laurel Patrick said in a statement Wednesday.

"Governor Walker would sign a full repeal. This is one of a number of important issues that he is working with legislators on for the (state) budget."

Walker's public support for ending the prevailing wage law came as the Assembly Labor Committee approved the bill 5-4 after an all-day hearing and Green Bay radio host Jerry Bader called Walker an "invisible man" in the debate.

The hearing and column by Bader are part of a broad push by conservatives to gain traction with legislative leaders and Walker, who plans to announce a run for the presidency this summer.

"Pains me as it does to say this, in this term he appears to be, well, leading from behind," Bader wrote of Walker in a column posted on RightWisconsin.com.

Hours after Bader's column appeared, Walker's spokeswoman issued the statement saying he had been working for weeks on the issue.

Walker's position contrasts with the one he took a month ago. In April, he said he would "look at" the issue if it were included in the budget, but he was focused on other issues, such as keeping property taxes in check.

The prevailing wage law sets pay for laborers on public works jobs such as bridges, highways and school buildings. Opponents of the law say it artificially inflates wages and needlessly raises costs to taxpayers. Supporters argue it guarantees workers get fair pay and ensures quality work.

Conservatives hope to follow up on success they had in March, when lawmakers and Walker approved making Wisconsin the 25th right-to-work state. Right-to-work laws bar labor contracts from including provisions that require workers to pay union fees.

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) and Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) have said they don't have the votes to repeal the prevailing wage law. They have said they want to rewrite the law instead.

Republicans control the Senate 19-14 and the Assembly 63-36.

This month, Sen. Steve Nass (R-Whitewater) tried to push the repeal through the Senate Labor Committee that he chairs. Sen. Howard Marklein (R-Spring Green) joined two Democrats in opposing the measure, and it failed 2-3.

Rep. André Jacque (R-De Pere), chairman of the Assembly Labor Committee, took a similar approach and his committee voted Wednesday to end the 84-year-old law.

Rep. John Spiros (R-Marshfield) was the only Republican to vote against the bill. He said he wanted to reform the prevailing wage law and that businesses in his district asked him to vote against repealing it.

After the vote, Vos said he would not schedule the bill for a floor vote.

"Some folks would rather have nothing rather than reform," Vos said. "A realist says take the most you can get and call it a win."

Sen. Leah Vukmir (R-Wauwatosa) co-authored the bill and told the committee it would save the state money in a time of fiscal need.

"Prevailing wage is an enormous unfunded mandate from the state government," Vukmir said. "What possible justification is there for artificially increasing the price of a project?"

Ken Greening of Plumbers Union Local 75 testified against the measure.

"Prevailing wage works for Wisconsin and makes sure Wisconsin construction projects are top quality," Greening said.

Supporters are looking at passing the repeal as stand-alone legislation or inserting it into the state budget.

"I have had conversations with my colleagues in both the Assembly and the Senate," Jacque said. "Obviously, I do believe there is support for this or I wouldn't have brought it forward."

Jason Stein of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.