GOP lawmakers in late-night session could adopt tax cut, voucher changes
By of the

Madison — In a late-night push Tuesday, Republican lawmakers were sculpting the final contours of a budget plan that would cut income taxes by more than a half-billion dollars over two years, expand taxpayer-funded private voucher schools across the state and increase state aid to public schools by $300 per student over two years.

At deadline, the Legislature's powerful Joint Finance Committee was still finishing its version of the 2014-'15 budget bill, with GOP lawmakers meeting behind closed doors Tuesday afternoon and evening on the final details. After votes earlier in the day rejecting a federally funded expansion of state health programs, the panel was expected to reconvene for a session going into early Wednesday.

If approved by the panel, the budget bill still will have to be passed by both the Assembly and Senate and then signed by Gov. Scott Walker, who could remove some items with his partial veto power. But many of the key details assembled in the final hours likely will become part of the final legislation.

The greatest controversy has centered on the proposal to expand private schools paid for with state tax dollars. State schools Superintendent Tony Evers said that he believed the proposal would lead to a sharp increase in public spending on private schools without adequate accountability.

"It's going to be hurtful to public schools. We're going to be creating a separate system of public schools and funding them with public money," said Evers, a voucher opponent.

Republican lawmakers were in meetings and unavailable for comment, but they have maintained that the voucher system provides a choice for parents of students in poorly performing public schools.

The committee also may include a provision in the budget that would allow a private bail bond system in at least some counties, the leaders of the committee and Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said Tuesday. Allowing bail bonds faces near universal opposition from Wisconsin's legal system.

The final night of votes in the Joint Finance Committee is a time when in the past lawmakers of both parties have chosen to slip unexpected, and at times even unpopular, legislation into the budget bill, where it can be difficult to remove.

Tax cut plan

Walker in February proposed in his budget bill cutting income taxes by $343 million over two years. Since then, revenue projections for the state have risen, leading Republican lawmakers to push for deeper tax cuts.

The latest plan, advanced by Rep. Dale Kooyenga (R-Brookfield), would total $600 million a year when fully implemented in calendar year 2015. The average income tax cut would be $150 next year and $290 in 2015, though most families would see less than that, according to the Legislature's nonpartisan budget office.

A married couple with adjusted gross income of between $50,000 and $60,000 a year under the Kooyenga plan would receive a tax cut of $90 in 2014 and $150 in 2015. Married taxpayers making more than $300,000 a year would receive an average cut of $1,627 in 2014 and $2,584 in 2015.

Just over one-fifth of tax filers have more than $100,000 a year in adjusted gross income. They would receive 63.4% of the total income tax cut as proposed, just slightly above their existing share of overall income taxes paid.

At deadline, legislative leaders were considering undisclosed changes to the plan by Kooyenga, who sits on the Joint Finance Committee. But Kooyenga's plan has won support from key lawmakers, including Senate President Mike Ellis (R-Neenah) and Sen. Luther Olsen (R-Ripon), another Joint Finance Committee member.

Voucher expansion

Lawmakers also plan to expand school voucher programs beyond the borders of Milwaukee and eastern Racine County. The programs allow parents who meet income thresholds to send their children to religious schools and other private schools at taxpayer expense.

There may be some changes to the proposal being debated behind closed doors, but under the latest version of the plan revealed Thursday:

■ Public schools would receive $150 more per student in general aid this fall and another $150 increase the following year. The plan would cost $289 million over two years, with perhaps $173 million funded with state taxes and the rest with local property taxes.

School districts would have the authority to spend that money. Walker wanted to give schools $129 million in state aid but require them to put all of it toward property tax relief, rather than using it for new expenses.

■ A new voucher program would become available to students outside Milwaukee and Racine. It would be limited to 500 students the first year and 1,000 students every year thereafter. Walker wanted no limits on the number of students in the program after the second year.

■ The new program would be available to students in any school district. Walker wanted to make it available in districts with 4,000 or more students that were identified as struggling on school report cards issued by the state.

■ No more than 1% of the students of any given school district could participate in the new program.

■ The new program would be available to students of families making 185% of the federal poverty level or less — well below the income thresholds for Milwaukee and Racine. Those programs are available to families making up to 300% of the federal poverty level, with a higher threshold for married couples.

■ Voucher schools in all parts of the state would receive $7,000 per student — up from $6,442. The plan would keep the amount the same for all voucher students; Walker wanted to provide $7,050 for students in kindergarten through eighth grade and $7,856 for students in high school because it costs more to educate them.

■ Starting in the fall of 2016, per-pupil increases for public schools and voucher schools would be linked. Thus, if one received a $100-per-student increase, the other would as well.

■ Private schools would have to operate for two years before they could accept voucher students. That provision is meant as a way to prevent fly-by-night operations from enrolling students at public expense.

■ Walker's plan for creating a new way to authorize charter schools would be taken up as legislation outside the budget so it could be modified.

Walker also wanted to create a statewide program for special-needs students, but lawmakers would abandon that idea as part of the proposal.