Johnson hits Feingold for dropping past fundraising pledge
SHARE Russ Feingold

By of the

Washington — Democratic U.S. Senate candidate Russ Feingold said Thursday he will not operate in this campaign by the pledge he made in past races to raise the majority of his money from Wisconsinites.

"It makes no sense now," Feingold said in an interview, arguing court rulings in recent years have transformed the political system, producing an "insanity" of huge, undisclosed contributions that are swamping elections.

Republicans accuse Feingold of abandoning his principles, including the promise he first made in 1992 to raise more than half his contributions from within the state.

The National Journal reported Thursday that during the first six weeks of his campaign, Feingold raised a majority of his funds from outside Wisconsin. Like Feingold, GOP incumbent Ron Johnson has also raised most of his money so far from outside the state.

But the Johnson campaign said Feingold had broken his own promises to Wisconsin voters by doing so.

Feingold got into the race in mid-May. A little more than 40% of the more than $2 million he raised in May and June came from in-state donors, according to campaign reports and the Feingold campaign.

"Senator Feingold built his whole career on his campaign finance promises. Now, he's breaking his promises," Johnson campaign spokesman Brian Reisinger said in a statement.

In Feingold's first race in 1992, one of the promises he posted on his garage door was to "rely on Wisconsin citizens for most of my contributions." At a Democratic primary debate that year, he said of that commitment, "I'm promising it for the future. ... I'm saying that's a pledge I am going to keep."

The Democrat imposed the same limitation on himself in his next three contests, including the 2010 race, when he aired an ad reminding voters of his 1992 garage-door promises. He lost that race to Johnson.

Feingold said Thursday that his in-state fundraising rule was not a pledge in perpetuity but a series of election-by-election commitments.

"Every single election is different based on the reality of the campaign finance law at the time," he said. "What I did in the past is to offer a pledge or a series of proposals for a six-year term."

Feingold said it made no sense to impose the same limitation on himself in the aftermath of the 2010 Citizens United case and other court decisions deregulating money in politics. He said it would mean "people like the Koch brothers from out of state (are) spending billions, and then people on our side are supposed to not get some small checks from people around the country?"

Republicans have sought in this race to portray Feingold as a onetime political crusader who was "changed" by his 18 years in Washington.

"If Senator Feingold will violate his own principles on the issue most important to him, we know he will violate any principle on the issues important to Wisconsinites. He's becoming an example of exactly what's wrong in politics," said Reisinger of the Johnson campaign.

Feingold said his past pledges "preceded this insanity of allowing corporations to have unlimited contributions...that is the context in which that promise was made. It makes no sense now in light of the fact that you have dark money coming in, in unlimited amounts that isn't even disclosed. ...There is no hypocrisy or dishonesty when a certain set of facts that existed in 1992 simply do not exist anymore."

Feingold said he will work to change the system, but "Ron Johnson likes this system. He has never criticized Citizens United."

Feingold said he is still imposing one fundraising limitation on himself, which is not to accept individual donations from registered lobbyists. Feingold has also proposed that both candidates enter into a mutual agreement to discourage TV spending in their race by outside groups, a deal Johnson has so far not accepted.