Lawmakers clash on campaign finance law, dismantling GAB
Gov. Scott Walker talks to reporters about bills the legislature is considering. Video by Mark Hoffman

By

Madison— Lawmakers on two committees clashed Tuesday over bills to overhaul the Government Accountability Board and rewrite campaign finance laws, with the head of the board accusing one state senator of McCarthyism in his line of questioning.

One of the bills on a fast track in the GOP-controlled Legislature would eliminate the accountability board — the state's elections and ethics agency — replacing it with a pair of commissions made up equally of Republicans and Democrats. Another would double the amount donors can give candidates. A third would allow people to use the Internet to register to vote, while keeping in place the requirement that people cast ballots in person or by mail.

As the committees at a joint hearing debated the bill on the accountability board, Sen. Chris Kapenga (R-Delafield) asked the board's director, Kevin Kennedy, about his professional relationship with Lois Lerner, the former IRS official who was involved in targeting tea party groups for reviews of their tax-exempt status.

"Seriously?" Kennedy responded. "Have you no decency? That is like right out the McCarthy era to ask that."

Kennedy went on to say he had known Lerner for 20 years, going back to her time as an attorney with the Federal Election Commission.

Afterward, he told reporters the exchange showed some legislators have a "shallow, petty attitude" and are focused on "inane" issues.

"They don't look at the substance of issues," he said. "They want to look at the splash."

But Sen. Leah Vukmir (R-Wauwatosa), one of the bill's sponsors, said the accountability board should be overhauled because of its handling of recall elections, its implementation of a voter ID law and its participation in what she called a "witch hunt" of conservatives. The six former judges who sit on the accountability board are "inattentive at best," she said.

"The GAB has proven to be a failure," she said. "We must confront and correct the problem."

Rep. Joe Sanfelippo (R-New Berlin) concurred.

"You have an agency that's in chaos and disarray, quite frankly," Sanfelippo told Kennedy. "It sounds like a very disheveled organization there."

The Assembly is planning to vote Oct. 20 on the three bills, as well as one that would limit the ability of prosecutors to conduct John Doe investigations like the one into Gov. Scott Walker's campaign that the state Supreme Court shut down this summer.

Republicans in recent years have said they believe the board has unfairly helped Democrats, in particular because of the probe into cooperation between Walker's campaign and conservative groups in recall elections.

The board members say they are guided by the law, not partisanship, and deny they have favored Democrats.

The bill would do away with the accountability board and create an Elections Commission and Ethics Commission. Those would include six members each, split evenly between both parties, backers say.

The commissions would be similar to the old Elections Board and Ethics Board. With overwhelming bipartisan support, lawmakers in 2007 voted to create the accountability board and get rid of the Elections Board and Ethics Board because they viewed them as ineffective in dealing with the caucus scandal that resulted in convictions of five lawmakers from both parties related to campaigning using state resources.

By creating the commissions, the state could see a rise of similar scandals, said Rep. JoCasta Zamarripa (D-Milwaukee).

"You're turning our nationally lauded political watchdog into a partisan lap dog," Zamarripa said.

Rep. Dean Knudson (R-Hudson), a bill sponsor, disputed that because of the even makeup of the commissions.

"We're talking about something that will be balanced," he said.

Other critics said the new commissions were bound to deadlock on key issues if they were made up of partisans and questioned whether there is enough time to get the commissions in place for the November 2016 election.

The accountability board has been able to spend whatever it deems necessary on investigations in the past, but the new commissions would need to seek approval from lawmakers for any probe that exceeded $25,000. Backers of the accountability board said officials should have whatever is needed to look into potential wrongdoing.

Campaign finance. The campaign finance bill would double how much donors can give to candidates, boosting from $10,000 to $20,000 the amount someone can give a candidate for governor or other statewide office. The amounts would be adjusted for inflation every five years.

But the legislation would keep in place a provision from a court ruling last year that allows donors to effectively get around the limits by giving as much as they want to political parties and campaign committees controlled by legislative leaders. The parties and committees could then pass all of that money on to candidates.

The bill also would rewrite laws that are out of step with court rulings that have loosened campaign finance restrictions. In one change, it would codify the state Supreme Court ruling from this summer that said issue groups and candidates can work together.

Speaking to reporters during a visit to the Veterans Affairs hospital in Madison, the governor said he favored giving more leeway to political parties over outside spending groups.

"One of the best things they can do is put attention on the political parties as opposed to special interests. People can see a difference between a Republican or Democrat or other political party participant. Those are out in the open," Walker said.

Officials differed over one provision, with the accountability board's Kennedy initially saying candidates who end their political careers could use their campaign money for any purpose, even buying luxury cars or building homes. But Joe Kreye, an attorney with the nonpartisan Legislative Reference Bureau, disputed that, saying restrictions remained in place that would prevent candidates from using their funds for personal gain at any stage.

Kennedy allowed his staff "may have misunderstood" the provision. Jon Becker, the board's ethics director, said the measure was ambiguous.

Online voter registration. The bill on voter registration would allow people with Wisconsin identification cards and driver's licenses to sign up online to vote. Those who are already registered to vote would likewise be able to change their name and address online, instead of by mail, in clerks' offices or at the polls.

The state's registration system would be connected with Department of Transportation databases to ensure the information was accurate. Those who registered to vote online would be sent postcards by clerks to verify their addresses.

The proposal would end the ability of special registration deputies to get people on voter rolls. Those deputies are used by advocacy groups and partisan operations to stop people on the street and knock on their doors in efforts to boost voter turnout.

Jason Stein of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.