Federal judge extends hold on Wisconsin's abortion law
SHARE

By of the

Madison — A federal judge extended his hold Wednesday on a new law requiring doctors who perform abortions to have hospital admitting privileges.

It marked the second time U.S. District Judge William Conley blocked the law and the second time he expressed skepticism of it in open court. He said he would decide within two weeks whether to issue a preliminary injunction that would block the law for months.

"I think the toughest burden the state has to meet is that this is a legitimate state interest," Conley said.

He scheduled a Nov. 25 trial on whether the law is constitutional. If he issues an injunction later this month, the law would be blocked until he renders a decision on its constitutionality.

Republican lawmakers introduced and quickly passed the abortion regulation last month, and Gov. Scott Walker signed it into law July 5. Within hours, Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin and Affiliated Medical Services — the two groups that run abortion clinics in the state — sued in federal court in Madison, contending the law violates the constitution's due process guarantee, puts an undue burden on the right to abortion and unconstitutionally treats doctors who perform abortions differently than doctors who perform other procedures.

Conley issued a temporary restraining order blocking the law July 8, the day the law was to take effect.

The new law also requires women seeking abortions to get ultrasounds. That provision has not been challenged in court and remains in effect.

Democratic lawmakers plan a news conference Thursday announcing a bill to repeal the ultrasound requirement. Such a bill would have little chance of approval in a Republican-controlled Legislature that passed the requirement just a month ago.

Conley said the case comes down to whether the state has a legitimate interest in requiring admitting privileges for doctors who provide abortion. To do that, the state needs to show doctors providing other procedures are treated similarly.

Carrie Flaxman, an attorney for Planned Parenthood, noted doctors providing dilation and curettage — a scraping of the uterine lining done to remove tissue or treat and diagnose abnormal bleeding — do not need to have admitting privileges. Doctors who provide riskier outpatient services also do not need them.

Flaxman said most of Planned Parenthood's doctors have hospital admitting privileges, but not always at facilities within 30 miles of the clinics where they provide abortions, as required under the new law.

The judge noted that hospitalizations from abortion are rare. When they do occur, they often happen after women return to their homes, which in some cases are hundreds of miles from the clinic where a surgical abortion was provided or an abortion pill was given. The benefit of having admitting privileges at a hospital 30 miles from the clinic would do little if any good in those situations, he said.

"We're certainly at the margins on what's necessary," Conley said.

Conley ordered the state and the clinics to file briefs by Friday saying whether they supported the appointment of an independent medical expert to assist the court. The expert would help the judge determine whether the state has a legitimate interest in requiring admitting privileges.

Assistant Attorney General Daniel Lennington said the law is a reasonable response to a public health risk and does not put an undue burden on women seeking abortions.

"The law is rational and I think we've met that test," Lennington said.

He opened his arguments by saying the case was a "slam dunk" — a position Conley immediately shot down. "I don't see how you can start out saying this is a slam dunk," he said, noting the state had the burden of proof for some aspects of the case.

Conley also expressed skepticism about some of the clinics' arguments. The clinics contended securing admitting privileges can be a long process, but Conley said the clinics have the burden of showing they cannot acquire those privileges.

Walker told reporters Wednesday he was not concerned about the law remaining blocked for now.

"This is common practice," the Republican governor said. "I don't know what the exact number is but it seems like one out of every 10 laws gets temporarily held up in a court. ... Eventually it will work its way through the court system and I'm confident just like every other bill ultimately the law will be upheld."

Planned Parenthood has abortion clinics in Milwaukee, Madison and Appleton; Affiliated has one in Milwaukee. A fifth Wisconsin clinic that provides abortions, in Green Bay, plans to stop offering them on Aug. 1 because it is being sold to a new owner.

If the law takes full effect, Planned Parenthood would have to close its Appleton abortion clinic and Affiliated would have to close its Milwaukee clinic because their doctors don't have admitting privileges at hospitals within 30 miles of the clinics. Planned Parenthood's Milwaukee clinic would be able to offer half the abortions it does currently, according to the group.

That would mean abortions in Wisconsin would not be available north of Madison, and after the 19th week of pregnancy would not be available anywhere in the state, according to the suit. Affiliated is the only clinic that provides abortions after the 19th week.

Wisconsin is the eighth state to have a hospital admitting requirement, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a group that supports abortion rights and tracks abortion laws.

Judges have blocked the requirements in Alabama and Mississippi, as well as for some clinics in Kansas. The laws were not challenged in Utah and Tennessee and remain in effect there. A judge has not ruled in a North Dakota case, and Arizona's law has yet to be implemented.

Abortion opponents have noted that Missouri's abortion law has been upheld by the 8th Circuit Court of Appeals. Missouri's law is not included in Guttmacher's count of states with admitting privileges laws because Missouri allows exceptions for clinics if hospitals have agreed to accept their patients for any emergencies.

Lennington's filing this week said abortions in Wisconsin lead to hospitalizations about once every 16 days, usually because of infection or profuse bleeding. About 7,600 abortions are performed in Wisconsin a year, and hospitalization is required about 0.3% of the time, according to court filings.

Bill Glauber of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report from Milwaukee.

Twitter: twitter.com/patrickmarley4