Lawmakers OK additional highway borrowing
The Legislature’s Joint Finance Committee on Wednesday is to vote on additional borrowing to get several major highway projects back on schedule, including the roadwork along Madison's Beltline, Highway 12-18, at the Verona Road interchange. Credit: Andy Manis

By of the

Madison— To limit delays on road projects, unlikely bipartisan allies on the Legislature's budget committee Wednesday approved $350 million in borrowing over the next two years.

GOP lawmakers split their votes, with Senate Republicans opposing the borrowing and Assembly Republicans backing Gov. Scott Walker's plan along with all Democrats on the committee. The measure passed 10-6.

The Democrats who proved crucial Wednesday argued that it was irresponsible for Walker and Republicans to insist on using borrowed money for roads rather than finding a long-term solution, such as increasing the 32.9-cent-per-gallon gas tax.

Republicans sat largely silently Wednesday while Democrats sharply criticized the proposal they ended up approving.

"Scott Walker doesn't have the guts to do the right thing," Sen. Jon Erpenbach (D-Middleton) said. "We are doing an injustice to the people of our state who drive on the roads every single day."

At stake is how work will proceed on five major projects and dozens of smaller-scale ones that have been delayed because of a funding crunch.

Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills), co-chairwoman of the Joint Finance Committee, said Senate Republicans were unwilling to back more borrowing.

"What we're saying right now is this is a very tough budget for us but we're not going to kick the can down the road," Darling said.

Rep. John Nygren (R-Marinette), the other co-chairman, said that GOP officials have made progress in some other areas of Wisconsin's budget and that other states are grappling with how to upgrade their aging infrastructure.

"We've made some very difficult decisions and things that have put us in the right spot. We admit this is one that we still have to tackle. (But) this is not a unique situation we are facing in Wisconsin," Nygren said.

Walker in the spring sought to borrow a record $1.3 billion over two years for transportation to avoid raising gas taxes or vehicle registration fees.

As part of the state budget approved in July, GOP lawmakers Republicans reduced that amount to an initial $500 million in borrowing.

Lawmakers gave Walker's administration the ability to ask for an extra $350 million in borrowing — $200 million this fiscal year and $150 million for the fiscal year that begins July 1. The Joint Finance Committee can release or withhold those funds.

Walker's Department of Transportation last month asked for $200 million in bonding to help put the five major projects back on schedule. Nygren put forward a motion making all $350 million available over the two years.

The vote prevents a repeat of another internal squabble on the issue in 2016 — an election year.

The plan is to pay back $175 million, or half of the bonds, out of the transportation fund, decreasing the future cash available for road building and repairs.

The other half of the loans is to be repaid out of the state's main account, decreasing the future money available for other priorities such as schools and health care.

The five major projects that are being delayed are:

■ I-39/90 from the Illinois state line to Madison;

■ Highway 151/Verona Road in Madison;

■ Highway 10/441 in the Fox Valley;

■ Highway 23 between Fond du Lac and Plymouth;

■ Highway 15 near New London in Outagamie County.

Those projects' completion dates have been put off by two years. Many of the projects have already started, and work will continue, just at a slower pace than originally envisioned.

The bonding approval means the five projects will face delays of one year instead of two.

Dozens of other projects — from simple resurfacing jobs to top-to-bottom reconstructions — are facing delays over the next six years.

The budget committee's plans also will help those stay on or close to schedule.

The budget panel also voted to:

■Release $147,000 this year and $220,000 next year to put two additional state prosecutors to work pursuing gun violence cases in Milwaukee. The panel approved these measures 16-0.

The money was set aside as part of the budget approved by Walker and Republican lawmakers in July, and lawmakers from Milwaukee have continued to push for the money to help respond to a decade-high homicide total in the state's largest city.

The prosecutors are a key part of a state, local and federal initiative to aggressively target and prosecute gun offenders.

Democratic Rep. Chris Taylor of Madison and Sen. Lena Taylor of Milwaukee said they supported the measure but added that more needs to be done to stem gun violence, such as addressing racial achievement and criminal justice disparities and requiring criminal background checks for all gun sales.

Rep. Dean Knudson (R-Hudson) said that Milwaukee had unique urban problems and is seeing an increase in violence that other parts of the state, such as Madison and Green Bay, are not.

■Overhaul the state's century-old system for keeping politics out of employee hiring, firing and discipline. The bill passed 12-4 on a party-line vote.

Walker has strongly backed the proposal, which he took up as a major cause just days after he dropped out of the race for president in September. He has said the civil service rules for 30,000 state workers need reworking to become more efficient and help hiring keep up with the crush of retiring baby boomers.

Democrats say the proposal could open the way for hiring political hacks. The bill has gotten a mixed reception from others who formerly worked within the state's system of merit hiring and firing.

■ Expand a state long-term care initiative into Rock County, replacing a legacy program there and serving an additional estimated 900 seniors and people with physical or mental disabilities. Family Care provides services for the elderly and disabled outside of nursing homes.