Odd coalition opposes Wisconsin bill limiting junk food purchases for food stamp users
Dave Spiegelhoff is concerned about the cost and difficulty of implementing a state proposal requiring two-thirds of FoodShare money to be spent on nutritious foods. Spiegelhoff is the owner of Gooseberries Fresh Food Market in Burlington and Spiegelhoff Super Valu in Kenosha and chair of the Wisconsin Grocers Association. Credit: Mark Hoffman

SHARE Poll Should food stamps be used on junk food? Yes No vote View Results Yes: 14% No: 86% Total Responses: 2597

By of the

Madison - An odd coalition of advocates for the needy, local retailers and big corporations is opposing a fast-moving bill limiting junk food for food stamp recipients.

The bill on Wisconsin's FoodShare program comes before the state on Tuesday in the Assembly, where it is expected to pass despite the unusual opposition.

The proposal's lead sponsor, former potato chip salesman and state Rep. Dean Kaufert (R-Neenah), wants to require FoodShare recipients to use their taxpayer-funded benefits to buy more nutritious food. Kaufert said his bill makes sense as a response to the stories he hears from retail clerks and others about FoodShare benefits being used for large junk food purchases.

But Kaufert acknowledges he hasn't seen any figures on what portion of FoodShare goes for unhealthy purchases and that he can't be sure his proposal as written would increase the amount of nutritious food purchased. The proposal also would likely be rejected by the federal government, which pays for the great majority of the costs in the more than $1 billion a year program.

"It's wildly popular," Kaufert said of the bill. "It's one of those street or sidewalk issues where everyone has a story (about FoodShare problems)."

The bill reverses politicians' usual positions on the government deciding food purchases. Democrats, who often back government efforts to cut down on junk food purchases, oppose requiring FoodShare recipients to do so. Republicans like Kaufert, who usually oppose such restrictions as "social engineering" or a "nanny state," support putting them on those who receive taxpayer money.

Kaufert's bill was amended in an Assembly committee last week and would require FoodShare recipients to spend at least two-thirds of their benefits on a list of foods that state officials have judged healthy.

No studies have looked at the spending on different kinds of groceries within Wisconsin's FoodShare program, said Stephanie Smiley, spokeswoman for the state Department of Health Services, which administers the program. The state agency doesn't have a position on the bill.

Because of the lack of solid figures, Kaufert said he isn't sure that the current level of FoodShare spending on nutritious foods isn't already higher than the level set in his bill.

"Nobody knows anything except anecdotally," Kaufert said of current FoodShare spending. "That's part of the problem."

Sherrie Tussler, executive director of Hunger Task Force in Milwaukee, said there isn't enough justification for the substantial costs and other impacts that the bill would likely bring for taxpayers, businesses and food producers.

"AB-110 does not explain how it would improve the healthy food choices of FoodShare recipients," Tussler said. "Although well-intended, AB-110 is outside of the budget of the Wisconsin taxpayer. We just can't afford all of the grocery store nannies this would take to implement."

The costs of implementing the program have been a concern for grocery stores. That includes Dave Spiegelhoff, a third-generation grocer and owner of Gooseberries Fresh Food Market in Burlington and Spiegelhoff Super Valu in Kenosha.

"We as grocers will do whatever we can to make this work but the cost has to weigh heavy on what our grocers are going to do," said Spiegelhoff, chairman of the Wisconsin Grocers Association. "This one certainly has potential to be problematic at store level."

Today's FoodShare recipients simply swipe an electronic card similar to a debit card to spend their benefits. Kaufert's proposal would need to be integrated into that system.

Brandon Scholz, president of the Wisconsin Grocers Association, said both the state and grocery stores would need to make significant computer system changes to do that. Grocers would also need to code new food products by hand to fit into that system, he said.

The association moved from opposing the bill to being neutral on it after the proposal was amended to require a state study of the costs for groceries and warehouses before implementing it. Scholz said he appreciated the changes to the bill but won't make any "forward-looking statements" on it until he has more details on how the proposal would be carried out.

Other business groups aren't waiting. Opponents of Kaufert's bill include Kraft Food Group - the food giant whose holdings include Oscar Mayer Co. in Madison - PepsiCo Inc. and state associations representing food processors, convenience stores and retailers.

Ultimately, however, none of the bill's opponents may have anything to worry about. To implement the bill, Wisconsin officials would have to persuade President Barack Obama's administration to waive existing rules in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, the federal program that goes by FoodShare in Wisconsin.

A Chicago spokesman for the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which oversees FoodShare and SNAP, didn't return a phone message seeking comment. But Kaufert said federal officials have rejected similar proposals when put forward by other states.