Protests over Racine vote point to statewide confusion
Visit our election section for complete coverage of the 2012 spring, fall and recall elections.

Madison - State Rep. Robin Vos (R-Burlington) has joined a chorus of Republicans continuing to raise questions over Racine County's election practices in Democrat John Lehman's narrow defeat of GOP Sen. Van Wanggaard in the June 5 recall.

Their concerns come as reports have accumulated of confusion - among voters and poll workers - over residency requirements statewide, especially with student voters.

Vos, powerful co-chairman of the Joint Finance Committee, focused on problems with the 28-day residency requirement, among other election issues, Sunday on "UpFront with Mike Gousha" on WISN-TV (Channel 12).

The issue is not unique to Racine. Poll watchers statewide reported confusion over the residency requirement implemented this year.

Under the law passed last summer, voters are required to live at their voting address for 28 consecutive days before the election, up from the previous 10-day residency requirement. To register to vote, voters must prove residency using a limited list of identification sources, including state-issued ID cards and driver's licenses as well as an employer-issued ID, a paycheck, a bank statement, a residential lease, a utility bill and other valid documents bearing the resident's name.

But according to preliminary findings from Wisconsin's League of Women Voters, many election officials applied those standards inconsistently.

In one Waukesha County district, a poll worker accepted a receipt from Jiffy Lube as proof of residency, according to the league's Carolyn Castore. In Racine, local Republican Party poll watcher Lou D'Abbraccio reported multiple instances of clerks accepting water bills addressed only to "occupant" as proof of residency.

"Our biggest concern is that there was a lack of uniformity in how to apply (the residency requirement)," Castore said. "This has got to get under control one way or another."

The 28-day residency requirement is one of the only elements left standing from a voter ID law passed in May 2011. In a suit brought by the league, a Dane County judge found that the law's requirement of showing photo ID at the polls violated the state constitution. The ruling is being appealed.

Castore said the new residency requirement proved especially difficult for student voters who moved out of university dorms and campus apartments just before the recall election. Those students would have to vote absentee from their campus address, unless their most recent voting location was their summer address.

The situation was compounded by new clerks who were unfamiliar with the required documents and specifics of the 28-day requirement, Castore said.

Although the Government Accountability Board, which runs state elections, has been hearing "a number of concerns" about student voting, spokesman Reid Magney disputed the notion that election officials were to blame for the registration confusion.

"The proof of residence has been the same regardless of 10 days or 28 days," Magney said. "At some point, students have to be responsible for being sure where they can and can't vote."

In the run-up to the Aug. 14 state primary elections, Magney said, the accountability board anticipates further issues for students who might not have the documents to prove residency at their summer address, particularly those living with their parents.

Magney said the board will continue its normal training process for county and municipal clerks, and anticipates sending out news releases with information for voters, including students, before the next election.

Also Monday, the board formally ordered a recount for the Racine County recall election at the request of Wanggaard, who lost to Lehman by 834 votes, according to official results. If Lehman's lead holds, Democrats will take control of the Senate from Republicans.

Vos blamed Wanggaard's loss on what he called fraud at the polls.

"Unfortunately, a portion of (the vote) was fraud," Vos said on Gousha's program Sunday, adding that photo ID requirements were necessary to eliminate that potential.

Assembly Minority Leader Peter Barca (D-Kenosha) said local clerks are competent and Republicans are unfairly calling their work into question by demanding a recount and raising the "specter" of voter fraud. He noted that Republican state Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen had investigators watching the polls in the area, and they haven't reported any major problems.

Magney said the GAB had not received reports of fraudulent activity but noted that the Racine County sheriff's office is investigating at least two cases of alleged impropriety.

The recount is set to begin Wednesday and must conclude by July 2.

Patrick Marley of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.