Assembly OKs budget with income tax cuts, sweeping changes
Madison — In a surprise, lightning vote, the Assembly on Wednesday approved a state budget that cuts income taxes, holds down property taxes and university tuition, rejects federal aid to expand health care programs and allows taxpayer funding for private schools across Wisconsin.

The $68 billion, two-year tax and spending planpassed 55-42, with all Democrats voting against the bill along with three Republicans — Reps. Steve Nass of Whitewater, Steve Kestell of Elkhart Lake and Howard Marklein of Spring Green. The bill now goes to the Republican-controlled Senate, which plans to take it up Thursday.

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) noted from the floor that the budget would cut income taxes by more than $650 million over two years; keep property tax increases to about 1% per year for the typical home; and freeze tuition at University of Wisconsin System schools.

"This amendment makes a budget that is definitely on the side of taxpayers even better," Vos said of changes to the budget Republican Gov. Scott Walker introduced in February.

The budget would sweep through many parts of Wisconsin life by legalizing bounty hunters; loosening residency rules for city and school workers; giving the governor's administration the power to sell most state assets; requiring the able-bodied to work for food stamps; and collecting DNA from felony suspects at arrest rather than conviction.

After a day and a half of delays while Republicans privately brokered deals on the budget, the Assembly debate suddenly shot forward Wednesday with bewildering speed.

On a mostly party-line vote, lawmakers approved two dozen changes to the bill as passed two weeks ago out of the Legislature's budget committee, including the removal of a proposed cap on a property tax credit for disabled veterans. But then Republicans were caught off guard when Democrats shifted abruptly to bring a final vote on the budget instead of offering any of the more than 200 budget amendments they had prepared.

In the Democrats' lone floor speech Wednesday against the budget, Assembly Minority Leader Peter Barca (D-Kenosha) said that the budget provided too much in tax cuts to the wealthy; too much in taxpayer money to private schools; and too little help for schools, the uninsured and the unemployed.

Afterward, Barca and Rep. Andy Jorgensen (D-Fort Atkinson) said Democrats abandoned their amendments because Vos told them that Republicans would not accept any and because Republicans had rejected the many Democratic amendments during a passionate debate on abortion bills last week.

"You can't put lipstick on a pig. There was no fixing this," Jorgensen said of the GOP budget. "We're going to take that to the people of Wisconsin."

Republicans were stunned by the quick vote, just 11/2 hours into the debate and five hours before its scheduled end. Democrats often draw out debate on legislation they oppose, including the more than 61 hours of debate in 2011 over Walker's legislation to end most collective bargaining for most public employees.

"They decided to retreat and go home," Assembly Majority Leader Scott Suder (R-Abbotsford) said.

Rep. Sandy Pasch (D-Shorewood) rejected that, saying minority lawmakers are just fighting the Republican budget in a different way.

"This is incredibly serious. This isn't a stunt. This isn't a joke," Pasch said. "The joke is on the people of Wisconsin."

One of the three Republican no votes, Kestell said the policy provisions stuck in the budget were the main factor in him voting against the budget. Kestell, the chairman of the Assembly Education Committee, expressed concerns about a previous form of expanded taxpayer-funded private voucher schools.

"There are 90 some policy items in the budget. In my view, it would be hard to justify any of those being necessarily in the budget," said Kestell.

Marklein's no vote is significant because the conservative lawmaker has committed to a primary challenge next year against moderate Republican Sen. Dale Schultz of Richland Center. Marklein didn't immediately respond to repeated requests for comment on his vote but in a statement said the budget wasn't fiscally responsible enough.

"While the income tax cut was positive for Wisconsin families, an increase in already high property taxes will be harmful and might negate the positive impact of the income tax cut," Marklein said of the $29-per-year increase for the typical homeowner.

Before the vote, Nass announced he would vote against the budget because he opposes bail bonds and does not believe the budget does enough to expand school vouchers. Vos spokeswoman Kit Beyer said no Republicans were given a pass by GOP leaders to vote against the budget.

Assembly Republicans put forward a plan late Tuesday that would have put an additional 750 students and $5.3 million in state taxpayer money into the program that allows students to attend religious and other private schools at taxpayer expense in eastern Racine County. But by Wednesday morning, they had abandoned that plan amid claims they had never meant to pursue it.

The program is based in the home county of Vos, a longtime voucher proponent who was instrumental in establishing the Racine program two years ago.

But in an amendment that the Assembly did adopt Wednesday, schools participating in the Milwaukee and Racine voucher programs would be able to accept students from elsewhere in the state without it counting toward the caps on the number of students in a new, statewide voucher school program. That change would cost taxpayers $4.2 million over two years.

Also, the Assembly backpedaled, deciding against a budget provision letting the Department of Natural Resources set rules aimed at keeping protesters away from the site of a controversial proposed mine in northern Wisconsin. The idea was in response to a recent protest at the mine site that caused an estimated $2,000 in damage to equipment and that the company has described as "eco-terrorism."

The nearly 1,400-page Joint Finance budget bill would:

Tax cuts. Cut income taxes by $651 million over two years and provide $30 million a year in income tax savings for the parents of the nearly 100,000 private school students in Wisconsin. Families could receive an income tax deduction of up to $4,000 for private school tuition paid for each kindergarten through eighth-grade student and up to $10,000 per high school student.

School funding. Provide public schools with $150 more per student in state aid and local property taxes this fall and another $150 increase in 2014-'15, for a total of $289 million over two years. However, because of the $50 one-time per-pupil bump to many districts in this past school year, the proposed $150 per pupil funding increase in 2013-'14 would represent a $100 per-pupil increase this fall over current spending.

Voucher schools. Expand voucher programs — currently available in Milwaukee and eastern Racine County — across the state. In its first year, 500 children of families with income of up to 185% of the federal poverty level could attend a religious or private school with taxpayer money. The following year, the cap would be raised to 1,000 students permanently, but Democrats fear it will go up again soon after that.

Under the income guidelines, a family of four would be eligible for the statewide program if the family made up to $50,567 a year. Once part of the program, the family could remain in it no matter how high their income rose.

Health care. Shift nearly 90,000 people from the BadgerCare Plus program into a new online insurance marketplace, where the participants are supposed to find replacement health coverage.

In doing so, Republicans are passing up a federal offer to cover 84,700 more people in Medicaid than their plan and receive enough additional federal tax money over the next two years to pad the state budget by $119 million even after covering the cost of those additional people, according to the Fiscal Bureau.

Walker has said he wants fewer people on government coverage and is concerned that the federal government won't keep its commitment to the higher Medicaid funds over the long term.

Residency. Repeal all residency rules for teachers and other workers for local units of government with one exception: Local officials could still require police, fire or emergency personnel to live within 15 miles of the boundaries of their jurisdictions.

Bail bonds. Allow for-profit bail bondsmen in Wisconsin for the first time since 1979 with judges able to opt out of the system. The program would be limited for the first five years to Milwaukee, Waukesha, Kenosha, Racine and Dane counties.

State property. Allow the Walker administration to sell state assets including parking garages, university dormitories and roads.

The Senate will take up the budget at 10 a.m. Thursday. Debate could last as long as 12 hours, Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) said.

Republicans control the Senate 18-15 and Fitzgerald said he was confident he had the votes to pass the budget. Schultz is widely considered to vote against the budget, and Republicans would not be able to spare any other votes because all Democrats are expected to vote against the budget. Sen. Rob Cowles of Allouez, a Republican who had publicly criticized parts of the budget, said Wednesday that he would vote for it.

Fitzgerald said he did not expect Senate Republicans to make any changes to the Assembly version of the budget, which would clear the way for it to next go to Walker.

Walker has broad veto powers and can reshape the budget by striking provisions and even individual words.

"We have no veto assurances from the governor," Fitzgerald said.

Walker is expected to sign the budget by the end of the month because the next budget cycle begins July 1.

Michael Phillis of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.

Health care

Rejects federally funded expansion of state health programs. Nearly 90,000 people would be shifted from the BadgerCare Plus program into a new online insurance marketplace.

Other

■ Repeals local residency requirements on public workers except for those requiring police and firefighters to live within 15 miles of a locality.

■ Legalizes bounty hunters.

■ Allows the sale of state property such as parking garages, university dormitories and roads.

■ Collects DNA from those arrested for felonies.

Two-year budget highlights

Education

■ Provides public schools with $289 million more.

■ Expands taxpayer-funded private voucher schools statewide.

■ Freezes UW System tuition.

What's next

■ Senate takes up the Assembly budget bill on Thursday at 10 a.m.

■ If the Senate passes the Assembly bill with no changes, it goes to Gov. Scott Walker.

■ If the Senate makes changes, the bill goes back to the Assembly.

■ Walker could then make final changes to the bill with his expansive partial veto powers.

Two-year budget highlights