Special Report - Legacy of Wisconsin's polarization: No consensus, little common ground
Video: Voters discuss political dividing lines Voters across the Milwaukee metropolitan area discuss how difficult it is to make contact – and maintain relationships – with people who have opposing political points of view. Video by Mike De Sisti

There are more than a million and a half people in metropolitan Milwaukee, yet few can expect to cast a truly meaningful vote in a congressional election in the fall.

They likely won't cast a meaningful vote in a state Senate election this fall either.

Or a state Assembly election.

That's because there are practically no competitive seats in the most populous part of this competitive swing state, thanks to redistricting and the ultra-polarized geography of southeastern Wisconsin.

"The last thing we need is less political competition in our general elections," says James Gimpel, a political scientist at the University of Maryland. "That can't be but a bad thing."

Our polarized politics have left a jarring legacy. We have more partisan conflict but less partisan competition. We have a deeply engaged but fiercely divided public. We have two parties that appeal to different kinds of voters, represent different kinds of communities and win different kinds of elections. And we have a major metropolis where there are huge obstacles to achieving consensus and common ground.

Dividing Lines The growing political chasm that has turned metro Milwaukee into the most polarized place in swing-state America.

Last of four parts Part 1: Living on different planets

There may be no more polarized place in swing-state America as national trends are amplified by fierce campaigns, an impassioned electorate, and a deep urban-suburban divide.

Living on different planets There may be no more polarized place in swing-state America as national trends are amplified by fierce campaigns, an impassioned electorate, and a deep urban-suburban divide. Part 2 : A perfect brew for party line voting

With entire communities locked in their voting patterns, candidates have little incentive to reach across party lines.

: A perfect brew for party line voting With entire communities locked in their voting patterns, candidates have little incentive to reach across party lines. Part 3: More polarized, more energized

One of the most polarized places in America also is one of the most politically active, engaged and mobilized places in America. Journal Sentinel Washington Bureau Chief Craig Gilbert produced this special report through a six-month fellowship established by the Law School

"You've got a metro area that is not only fragmented ... but is in such a politically divided region," says Marquette University political scientist Amber Wichowsky. "It makes it very difficult to tackle big problems (in ways) that could actually benefit the whole region."

Two modern-day trends have converged here in dramatic fashion: the growing divide between Democratic and Republican voters, which is more pronounced in Wisconsin than most other states; and the rise of politically one-sided communities, which is more extreme in Milwaukee than most other metropolitan areas.

For metro Milwaukee, it means that urban-suburban divisions — which have a long history here — correspond more closely now to partisan fault lines.

"We don't operate like a metro area. We operate like Milwaukee and the surrounding suburbs," says Republican consultant Brian Nemoir.

Your experiences

As metropolitan Milwaukee grows more politically segregated, its voters and the communities they live in grow more politically distant from each other.

"The concern is that if you live in Milwaukee, you're more unlikely to hear Republican voices. You are more likely to be surrounded by Democrats in your social network and not have lot of contact with Republicans. And that could make you more extreme and less likely to hear opposing viewpoints," says Katherine Levine Einstein, a Boston University political scientist who grew up in Milwaukee and studies political segregation. "If you live out in Brookfield, you're pretty likely to be surrounded by Republicans in your social network, and you can imagine that could make you more extreme and less likely to hear opposing viewpoints."

Einstein's research suggests that politically segregated places, not surprisingly, have a harder time finding common ground on local issues.

"The places that probably most need regional policies are the least able to implement them because they're so heavily racially and politically segregated," she says.

Advertisement

Key Throughout this series, click on for more information. A footnote will appear. Click the highlighted text again to close the footnote.

Einstein acknowledges that is a depressing conclusion for people who believe in regional approaches to economic development, jobs, transportation or housing.

Regionalism itself is a source of political disagreement and division. Debates about metropolitan issues echo the rhetoric of partisan debates, with one side preaching public investment and burden-sharing and the other side warning against new taxes and government overreach.

"It depends on how regional cooperation is defined. If it's defined as a way of unloading Milwaukee costs on the collar counties, you'll see a great deal of pushback on that," says Republican U.S. Rep. James Sensenbrenner of Menomonee Falls. He traces that skepticism back to the so-called "sewer wars," the bitter fight over how suburban communities would help pay for their connection to the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District network.

Over the years, issues such as light rail, water, housing and stadium taxes have regularly reopened fundamental questions about the relationship of city to suburbs and the centrality of a city to the economy and culture of a metropolitan area.

"This Balkanization — it really goes beyond Democrat-Republican. It's really a difference in world view," says Robert Bauman, a Milwaukee alderman whose district includes the downtown area.

Bauman thinks opposition in surrounding counties to sharing the cost of cultural institutions and sports facilities in Milwaukee ignores the value a city's attractions bring to a region. But Republican Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, from neighboring Racine County, suggests that asking nearby counties to help pay for a new downtown Milwaukee arena is a little like asking Milwaukee County to help pay for one in "Delafield in a farm field" to spur development in Waukesha County.

There are big partisan perception gaps over whether Milwaukee is a mismanaged drain on state taxpayers or the target of anti-urban, anti-minority or anti-Democrat state policies. When Republicans in Madison were preparing to vote on banning residency requirements for city employees and on other items affecting Milwaukee this year, city officials dubbed it "Screw Milwaukee Day."

"The Republicans have this idea that somehow Milwaukee is a parasite on the state," says former Milwaukee Mayor John Norquist, who has long argued that cities like Milwaukee not only contribute more than they receive, but are done more harm than good by state policies.

"Increasingly, you've had Milwaukee leaders wanting to have help from surrounding suburban areas, like light rail, street cars," says Gov. Scott Walker, who portrayed the city as problem-plagued and badly governed during his two gubernatorial races against Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett. "I think those types of things in particular get people in Waukesha, Ozaukee and Washington counties worked up, because they don't feel like they directly benefit, but they feel like they're being asked."

The political gap between the blue and red parts of metro Milwaukee is a huge obstacle to finding common ground on regional issues, says University of Minnesota law professor Myron Orfield, who studies metropolitan trends.

"It makes it impossible when it is so polarized," says Orfield.

Motivating, persuading, pushing

Competition is hard to find Only 12% of metro Milwaukee voters lived in a ward decided by single digits in the 2012 presidential race. Almost 60% lived in a ward decided by 30 points or more. Choose a specific trend to view it in detail. Overall vote Extreme wards Close margins 70+% Dem. 60 – 69% Dem. 50 – 59% Dem. 50 – 59% GOP 60 – 69% GOP 70+% GOP Obama by 30+% Romney by 30+% Other Decided by <10% Other Source: State of Wisconsin election data Programming by Allan James Vestal of the Journal Sentinel staff.State of Wisconsin election data

The dividing lines in metro areas such as Milwaukee have more than just local consequences. Milwaukee is an especially stark example of the growing "density divide" in American politics — the political gap between densely populated and less populated places. Nationally, Democrats dominate in cities, Republicans dominate in outer suburbs and rural areas, and inner suburbs represent a shifting partisan battleground.

"What we have is a Democratic Party very focused on mobilizing its urban base ... and a Republican Party with almost no urban voters," says political scientist Clayton Nall of Stanford University, who grew up in Sheboygan Falls and has written about the urban-suburban fault lines in contemporary politics. "That has consequences for the issues the two parties engage with."

The parties today have clashing agendas on a host of policies that break along urban-suburban-rural lines — transit, aid to cities, voting rules, guns. It's not surprising that the interests of Democrats and Republicans are different on these issues when you consider the different places they're living, Nall says.

When the parties are representing different kinds of communities, it gives them little incentive to reach out across those geographic lines.

"Frankly some of the success the (Republican) party has had in motivating and persuading and pushing suburban voters out at the rate we have, has cost us urban voters, or even an open mind as to what a Republican has to offer," says Mark Graul, who has run GOP campaigns for president and governor in the state.

"A lot of Republicans put up a brave front, but deep down they know they're not going to spend a dime really trying to get African-American votes and win in big cities," says Democratic pollster Paul Maslin of Madison. In the same way, "I think, because even in the best of campaigns you never have all the money to do all the things you want to, we (Democrats) probably end up, if not giving up, at least throwing our hands up and saying, 'You know, we'll worry about (those GOP) suburbs in the next election.'"

These differences in where the parties get their votes affect how political power is won and lost, and explain a lot about the vagaries of Wisconsin elections in recent years.

Why is the party that utterly dominates state government (Republicans) incapable of winning a presidential campaign in Wisconsin? Why did the party that swept top-of-the-ticket races for Senate and president in 2012 (Democrats) lose the majority of the state's legislative and congressional races?

How could the same state in the space of two years elect the political odd couple of Tammy Baldwin and Ron Johnson to the U.S. Senate? How could the same state in the space of five months vote for Scott Walker and Barack Obama?

And why in such a competitive region of such a competitive state are there almost no competitive races for Congress or Legislature?

The answers to these questions are rooted in our polarized political landscape.

GOP's urban problem

Take the Republican Party's recent struggles in high-turnout presidential elections. They stem in large part from its inability to compete in the nation's most populous places.

Bigger counties trend Democratic Almost four times as many counties have been trending Republican as Democratic in presidential voting since 1960. But the Democratic-trending counties contain roughly 50 million more people, reflecting a big divide in American politics between densely populated and less populated places. In 2012, President Obama won the 50 biggest metro areas by a sum total of roughly 10 million votes. This map is based on an analysis of five decades of county election data. The counties shaded white did not have a meaningful partisan trend between 1960 and 2012. Hover or click on a county for more information. Analysis by Charles Franklin of the Marquette University Law School. Programming by Allan James Vestal of the Journal Sentinel staff. 48,402 Average population of a Republican‑trending county 311,251 Average population of a Democratic‑trending county

Obama carried the top 50 metros by more than 10 million votes in 2012 (he won the popular vote by roughly 5 million). An analysis of presidential voting (footnote 1) since 1960 by Charles Franklin of the Marquette Law School shows there are almost four times as many red-trending counties as blue-trending counties in the country. But the blue-trending counties contain roughly 52 million more people.

Charles Franklin found that since 1960, 1,419 U.S. counties have trended Republican in their presidential voting and only 388 have trended Democratic. But while the red-trending counties had a 2010 population of 69 million, the blue-trending counties had a population of 121 million. The remaining U.S. counties had no statistically significant trend.

A tale of two parties One of the battles within the war in state elections pits the GOP's suburban base against the Democrats' urban base in metro Milwaukee. In high-turnout presidential races, the Democratic base has outvoted the GOP base. In lower turnout races for governor, the reverse has happened. State of Wisconsin election data

In Wisconsin, Obama won the state's two largest counties — Milwaukee and Dane — by far larger vote margins than anyone in history, and dominated smaller cities such as Janesville, Kenosha and La Crosse.

"The increasing concentration of Democrats in high-density areas helps the party in statewide races, including presidential races, because the concentrated voters can be targeted and mobilized efficiently," says Franklin, who collaborated on the research for this project.

The two Obama elections were a vivid demonstration that in key swing states, Republicans don't have enough rural and suburban votes to offset presidential-year urban blowouts (footnote 2) by Democrats.

Barack Obama won Milwaukee and Dane counties by a combined 309,941 votes in 2012. By comparison, Democrat John Kerry won them by 208,049 votes in 2004. Democrat Al Gore won them by 155,365 votes in 2000.

"Unfortunately, we have become a party that can't lose a midterm and can't win a presidential," says Reince Priebus, the Wisconsinite who chairs the Republican National Committee. Priebus says his party won't succeed long-term at the presidential level unless it does better with minority voters and has a year-round, "massive presence in Hispanic, African-American and Asian communities across the country."

Republicans haven't won a major statewide election on a presidential ballot in Wisconsin since 1984.

But the GOP's urban problem recedes in midterm elections, as Priebus notes. That's when key pieces of the Democrats' demographic coalition — blacks, Latinos, young voters — turn out at lower rates, and the intensity of the GOP's older, whiter, high-turnout base comes to the fore. Republicans have won six of the state's last eight races for governor.

When Baldwin won her U.S. Senate race in 2012 (a presidential year), the Wisconsin electorate was 14% minority — the highest figure ever. One out of five voters was under 30, one of the highest figures in the country.

But when Johnson won his Senate race in 2010 (a midterm), the Wisconsin electorate was whiter, older and less urban. One reason Wisconsin could elect such opposites is that a different pool of voters was choosing them.

"Each side is weak and each side knows the other is weak," says Maslin. "Can Democrats get enough whites to win in these midterm elections? Can Republicans get enough diverse younger voters in presidential years?"

In the past two presidential races, blue urban Milwaukee easily outvoted red suburban Milwaukee. But in the past two races for governor, it was the other way around.

"There's more of us than them," says state Democratic chair Mike Tate, but "all their people vote."

Democrats' urban problem

Redistricting erases competition The previous legislative map (left) features four competitive state Senate districts in the Milwaukee media market (5, 8, 21 and 22). All four combined very red communities with very blue communities (the red and blue shades are based on the 2012 presidential vote). In the new map (right), three of the competitive districts became safe GOP seats (8, 5, 21) and one became a safe Democratic seat (22). The new map keeps red and blue communities largely separate. The result is no competitive seats in southeastern Wisconsin, and more GOP seats than Democratic ones. State of Wisconsin

It's not just Republicans who have an urban problem, however. Democrats do, too. As Franklin notes, the same phenomenon that boosts Democrats in statewide elections — the geographic concentration of their vote — hurts them in legislative and congressional races.

That's because so much of their support is clustered in urban areas that many of those votes are wasted — packed into a small number of landslide seats where the party has far more people than it needs to win. The more rural and suburban GOP vote is more efficiently spread out among a greater number of districts.

Redistricting has made this problem even worse for Democrats in Wisconsin, as it has in a number of states. The state's current maps, crafted by a Republican legislature, are dramatically stacked in the GOP's favor. They are so stacked that even when the huge presidential turnouts of 2012 produced an electorate friendly to Democrats, the Republican legislative advantage held firm.

Mitt Romney lost Wisconsin by 7 points statewide, but carried 56 of the 99 (footnote 3). Assembly districts, 17 of the 33 state Senate districts and five of the eight U.S. House districts, a sign that GOP majorities were effectively baked in by the new maps.

This means that in order to win a majority (50) in the state Assembly, Democrats have to win at least seven seats carried by Mitt Romney in 2012. Or put another way, they have to win numerous districts that are significantly more Republican than the state as a whole.

What helped make those one-sided maps possible was southern Wisconsin's highly polarized geography. Republicans didn't have to draw the contorted and crazy-looking shapes associated with gerrymandering to pack Democratic voters into a small number of urban state Senate districts. They just had to exploit the region's political landscape, clustering the most Democratic neighborhoods into ultra-blue seats in the cities of Milwaukee, Kenosha and Racine. As a result, eight of the 13 state Senate seats in the 10-county Milwaukee media market now tilt Republican in their makeup and five tilt Democratic — even though the region has roughly equal numbers of Republican and Democratic voters. That disparity is a central reason Republicans control the state Legislature — and can maintain that control even in down election years.

Democrats face the same geography problem in other parts of the country. Running thousands of computer simulations, Stanford political scientist Jon Rodden found that in some states the concentration of the Democratic vote makes it almost impossible to draw a truly neutral map.

Waning competition

The polarized landscape is changing elections in other ways too. While there is fierce and close competition for power nationally, the number of competitive places — states, congressional and legislative districts — is shrinking (footnote 4).

There are many fewer presidential battlegrounds than there were a few decades ago. In 1960, 32 states were bunched within 5 points of the national presidential vote. That declined to 28 in 1980, 22 in 2000, 18 in 2008 and 14 in 2012.

In southeastern Wisconsin, the combination of redistricting, political segregation and the decline in ticket-splitting by voters has become a huge barrier to competition.

There are four U.S. House districts that extend into metro Milwaukee, and none is very competitive (footnote 5).

The most competitive of the four U.S. House seats that extend into metro Milwaukee is Republican Paul Ryan’s. But Ryan’s seat has been made more Republican over time, and was 6 points more Republican than the state as a whole in its presidential vote in 2012, a sizable advantage in an age of party-line voting.

There are 29 state Assembly districts, and only one is truly competitive.

There are no competitive state Senate seats (footnote 6) even in the broader Milwaukee media market, an area that's home to 40% of the Wisconsin electorate.

Only one Assembly district in metro Milwaukee was closer than 9 points in its presidential voting in 2012. Either Mitt Romney or Barack Obama carried the rest decisively. Of the 13 state Senate districts in the larger Milwaukee media market, Romney carried eight by double-digits and Obama carried five by double-digits.

The polarized geography in southeastern Wisconsin creates a stark set of trade-offs when it comes to drawing political lines. Keeping "communities of interest" together means drawing one-sided seats and saying goodbye to competition. But preserving competition requires merging very red and very blue communities into hybrid districts that have overall "balance" but are hugely polarized.

There were four competitive state Senate seats like that in southeastern Wisconsin before the last redistricting, but Republicans turned three of them into safe GOP seats and one into a safe Democratic seat.

Now, the only real electoral threat that most members of Congress or the Legislature from southeastern Wisconsin have to worry about is from within their party.

"A conservative Republican and a liberal Democrat do not have to reach out to the other side," says former GOP Gov. Tommy Thompson. "So that at the end of the day, you would much rather be talking to other Republicans in a Republican district than crossing over to try to talk to Democrats because you don't want to alienate your base."

There have been more than 240 state Assembly races in metro Milwaukee in the past 16 years. Only two have been decided by less than 5 points. Today's legislative districts are more one-sided than ever in their partisan makeup.

Thanks to both the new map and long-term growth in like-minded communities, the outlook for legislative competition in the most polarized part of Wisconsin could not be grimmer.

No sign of diminishing

The polarizing trends in metro Milwaukee and Wisconsin — and across the nation —are so pronounced, it's natural to ask what the end point is.

Congress has grown dramatically more polarized in recent decades. And many state legislatures, including Wisconsin's, are more polarized than Congress, according to political scientists Boris Shor of the University of Chicago and Nolan McCarty of Princeton University, who have measured the ideological divide between Democratic and Republican lawmakers in all 50 states.

Only five states (footnote 7) have legislatures more polarized than Wisconsin's, say Shor and McCarty.

The five states are California, Colorado, Michigan, New Mexico and Washington. Boris Shor and Nolan McCarty found that legislative polarization has increased in most but not all states since the 1990s.

That probably won't surprise many people after the political upheaval of recent years. But this huge divide between the two parties in Madison didn't just happen. They have been growing apart for many years.

Some state legislatures have virtually "hit a ceiling of how polarized they can be," says Shor. "It's difficult to imagine these states getting more polarized than they are already."

The same could be said of the fractured landscape of Wisconsin's most polarized place, metropolitan Milwaukee.

Demographic and generational changes — like the small but growing Hispanic population in Waukesha County — could eventually soften some of the stark geographic dividing lines.

But the political gap between the area's red and blue communities will remain large as long as the gap between the parties remains large. And that divide — between voters in each party and between elected officials in each party — shows no sign of diminishing.

twitter.com/WisVoter cgilbert@journalsentinel.com