Michelle Obama rallies crowd in campaign stop for Mary Burke
Madison — Telling the crowd here "sorry if you're sick of me but I'm back," first lady Michelle Obama visited Wisconsin on Tuesday for the second time in just over a week to stump for Democrat Mary Burke in her tight race against Republican Gov. Scott Walker.

With a stage backdrop of a huge American flag and dozens of students behind, the first lady rallied a capacity crowd at Madison's Overture Center for the Arts.

The trio of Obama, Burke and Democratic attorney general candidate Susan Happ made for a clear message for a party that is seeking to run up the votes of women in the Nov. 4 election.

"I love (Burke) because it's hard to find decent people who are willing to do this, and when we find them we have to support them," Obama said in her 24-minute speech.

On the Midwest trip Tuesday, which included a stop in Chicago, Obama brought with her an approval rating that has hung far above her husband's own struggling poll numbers and made her one of her party's most valuable campaigners this fall. Last week, Michelle Obama rallied a crowd in Milwaukee to get out the vote for Burke in her challenge to Walker.

Repeatedly singling out young people in this college town, the first lady said Democratic voters have to turn out at the polls if they want to see progress on issues such as increases in the minimum wage.

"If you think people who work 40 or 50 hours a week shouldn't have to live in poverty in the wealthiest nation on earth, then you have to step up," Obama said.

Burke also got one of her biggest cheers when she called for raising the state's minimum wage from $7.25 to $10.10 an hour. She repeatedly portrayed Walker as a captive to special interests who wasn't focused on the majority of the state's residents.

"We have tried it Governor Walker's way, and it's not working," Burke said.

Walker campaign spokeswoman Alleigh Marré said the visit shows how closely Burke is aligned with the Obama administration.

"President Obama will not be on the ballot this November, but he reminded Americans last week that his policies will be. After Mary Burke's inability to name one place where she disagreed with the president, it's no wonder the first lady has visited Wisconsin, twice, to make the hard sell," Marré said.

The Overture's Capitol Theater, the smaller of the center's concert halls, was at its capacity of 1,250 people Tuesday, Overture's vice president of operations Rudy Lienau said.

Last week, after staffers at the Milwaukee event told reporters not to talk to people in the crowd, the White House backtracked, saying it had been an open media event and no one should have been obstructed. This time, reporters were free to talk to attendees.

However, staff of the conservative website Wisconsin Reporter were barred from Obama's speech, as they have been at other Democratic events in recent years.

The Franklin Center for Government and Public Integrity in Virginia, the parent group of Wisconsin Reporter, received $240,000 in 2012 from the Bradley Foundation of Milwaukee, which is headed by chief executive officer Michael Grebe, who also serves as Walker's campaign chair.