Ron Johnson launches statewide ad campaign, touts manufacturing roots
U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson (left), a Republican, faces an election challenge from former U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold (right). Credit: Associated Pres

By of the

With Ron Johnson releasing his first television ad of the 2016 campaign Tuesday, one thing is now clear in the contest with his rival, Russ Feingold.

The two men who have worn the title of U.S. senator are pitching themselves as down-home Wisconsinites.

In his debut spot, Johnson, the Republican incumbent, went back to his manufacturing roots to talk jobs and the economy, taking a page from his 2010 political playbook when he first ran for public office and ousted Feingold, a Democrat. The spot is expected to be the centerpiece of the campaign's $1.3 million TV buy in June.

Appearing on the factory floor of Pacur, the Oshkosh manufacturing company he helped build, Johnson said in the ad: "Career politicians manufacture hogwash — I manufacture plastic. And I respect you enough to tell you the truth. If you think it's time for Washington to start facing reality, I sure could use your support."

Before joining the U.S. Senate, Johnson was president of Pacur. He retains a 5% ownership stake in the company that is now headed by his brother, Barry Johnson.

The ad makes no mention of Feingold.

But in many ways the ad serves as a bookend to a digital ad the Johnson campaign pushed last month. Titled "Deficit of Trust," the earlier spot sought to portray Feingold as a career politician, charging he failed to adequately address the national debt.

Feingold campaign spokesman Michael Tyler said, "Senator Johnson spent the last six years in Washington rigging the system for giant corporations and multimillionaires like himself. Senator Johnson is not manufacturing anything now, he's just a typical politician who votes time and time again to send Wisconsin's jobs overseas."

Feingold, a former three-term senator, launched his first TV ad in April, titled "72 Counties." The ad took Feingold back to his roots, reminding voters of his annual pilgrimages around the state. Only, in this campaign, he's not the incumbent.

"I've visited all 72 counties, meeting people, listening to what they have to say. And I'm still at it. So if you hear a knock on your door, it just might be me," Feingold said in the ad.

The race will likely heat up as the candidates bid to reach voters ahead of the summer vacation season.

Over the next few weeks, the Johnson campaign is expected to zero in on jobs as well as Wisconsin-specific issues, including how Environmental Protection Agency rules affect farmers. The issue also has been raised in other states with a heavy reliance on agriculture.

The EPA used its authority under the Clean Water Act to redefine the types of waterways that fall under federal jurisdiction and regulation. The Clean Water Act gave the federal government broad powers to control pollution that runs off the land and into lakes and rivers.

Many agricultural interests believe regulations regarding U.S. waterways are overly broad and would limit the way farmers manage their land.