Robin Vos to back bill to raise speed limit to 70
Racine — Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said Friday that he will back an effort this fall to raise the state's speed limit to 70 mph to mirror the higher limits in other Midwest states.

Vos said freshman Rep. Paul Tittl (R-Manitowoc) has been working on the bill and plans to submit it by Labor Day — one of the busiest travel weekends of the year.

Tittl is expected to circulate the bill next week for co-sponsors.

"I think it's a common sense, straightforward bill," said Tittl.

The speed limit on interstates and other highways in Wisconsin is 65 mph. Raising that limit would mainly affect traffic on the state's major interstates, Vos said.

He noted that Minnesota, Iowa and Michigan all enforce a 70-mph limit and "we haven't seen any issues there," Vos said.

Vos' support is key to getting legislation through the Republican-controlled Assembly.

Gov. Pat Quinn of Illinois will decide by Monday whether to raise his state's limit to 70 mph, as well. Thirty-four states have raised their speed limits over the last two decades, a move safety advocates have criticized. The trend began after Congress removed federal speed limits in 1995.

Vos said the increased limit makes sense, especially with Wisconsin presently a "laggard" on the issue.

"As people are having to spend more time away from family and working further from home, being able to go a reasonable speed makes sense to get people home quicker and to market faster," he added.

Vos spoke about his legislative agenda for the fall on Friday at an Americans for Prosperity lunch event.

Former Sen. Tom Reynolds (R-West Allis) attempted to raise Wisconsin's speed limit to 75 mph in 2005, but his proposal went nowhere.

Top Republican legislators, including the chairs of the Assembly and Senate committees on transportation, opposed the higher limit at the time, and Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle said it would would "be pretty hard to sign into law."

GOP agenda

Aside from the speed limit, Vos told attendees at the AFP lunch the Republican-controlled Legislature would spend the next legislative session focusing on tightening protections against voter fraud in advance of the 2014 elections and expanding support for rural schools.

The first-term Assembly leader added that he is happy with the progress the state has made since it fell under full Republican control in 2010.

"Wisconsin is headed in the right direction and we really made good choices," Vos said. "As we look to the future, we also have to recognize the great job that we've done."