Rebecca Bradley leaves arguments early to speak to business group
State Supreme Justice Rebecca Bradley speaks during her primary election night gathering Feb. 16. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Madison — Wisconsin Supreme Court Justice Rebecca Bradley cut out of oral arguments last week so she could give a political speech to the state's chamber of commerce — a group that has spent heavily in the past backing conservative candidates.

Bradley refused an interview request, but a spokeswoman for her argued it was routine for justices to leave arguments early. So far, her campaign has not been able to cite an instance of another justice stepping out of arguments for campaign reasons.

"It's a matter of priorities," said former Justice Janine Geske, a Marquette University Law School professor. "I'm surprised because oral arguments are extremely important."

Geske, who served on the court from 1993 to 1998, said justices rarely left arguments early while she was on the bench.

GOP Gov. Scott Walker appointed Bradley to the bench in October, and she is now running for a full 10-year term on the court. She faces Appeals Judge JoAnne Kloppenburg in the April 5 election.

According to her campaign, Bradley left arguments about 15 minutes early on Feb. 24 so she could speak to an annual gathering put on by Wisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce, the state's largest business lobbying group and a heavy spender in past court races. Justice Michael Gableman also left the arguments early to attend WMC's event.

The Associated Press first reported on Bradley's early departure from arguments.

Bradley spokeswoman Madison Wiberg said in a statement that Bradley reviewed the briefs and did not have any other questions on the case when she left the arguments.

"Supreme Court Justices routinely excuse themselves from portions of oral arguments for personal or scheduling reasons," Wiberg's statement said.

Kloppenburg's campaign manager, Melissa Mulliken, took issue with the claim that Bradley's actions were routine, saying Bradley had disregarded her duties.

"There is nothing routine about a justice on the Supreme Court leaving oral arguments to curry favor with Wisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce," Mulliken said in a statement. "It is absolutely clear that Rebecca Bradley's allegiance is to the big money special interests and partisan politics that she has used to fuel her fast track rise."

Bradley told those at the WMC event, "I'll give you a little update...on how things are going at the Supreme Court. It is a very busy place, but I'm happy to report that the court, despite some reports to the contrary, is actually functioning quite well."

Bradley joined the court in October, after the justices began hearing cases for the 2015-'16 term. Most of the time, she hasn't participated in decisions if she wasn't there for arguments.

But last month, she cast a tiebreaking vote in a case that was argued before she got on the bench. She said she watched footage of the arguments and reviewed the briefs before helping decide the case, which allowed police to use evidence that had been acquired without a warrant.

The defendant in that case has asked the court to reconsider its decision because she wasn't there for arguments. He said her actions left the impression she was biased toward law enforcement groups that have backed her campaign.

In the case that was argued last week, it is difficult to tell precisely when Bradley and other justices excused themselves.

The WisconsinEye Public Affairs Network records all Supreme Court arguments, but its cameras focus on the speakers and in this case don't show when the justices leave. At the end of arguments, the camera pans out to reveal that three of the seven justices have left at that point — Bradley, Gableman and Annette Ziegler.

Ziegler said by email she didn't leave until after the last lawyer had finished speaking. She then attended the WMC event, which was held three blocks away.

Gableman said he left about 10 minutes before arguments ended. Early departures are not unusual, he said.

"My observations of the court over the last seven and a half years or so would be to say it is not uncommon at all for every member of the court to leave early if it is necessary to speak at an event or for any reason," he said.

But Justice Ann Walsh Bradley indicated it's not common for other justices to step away from arguments — and invoked the name of the late Justice N. Patrick Crooks to make her point. Crooks died in September, and the governor appointed Rebecca Bradley to fill his spot.

"The only time that Justice Patrick Crooks in his almost 20 years on the bench left the bench early that I can recall is the day he left the bench early and died later that day in his chambers," Ann Walsh Bradley said.

The two Bradleys are not related.

The case at hand is a challenge to a 2009 law that bars people with certain offenses on their records from holding child care licenses. A Dane County circuit judge threw out the case, and the District 4 Court of Appeals — with Kloppenburg in the majority — agreed with the lower court decision.

Sheila Sullivan, one of the attorneys challenging the law, said it would be inappropriate to comment on what she thought of the early departures.

The law is being defended by Republican Attorney General Brad Schimel's office. A Schimel spokeswoman did not immediately respond to a request for comment.