Lawmakers balk at parts of Scott Walker's budget
By of the

Madison - Gov. Scott Walker's fellow Republicans are embracing most of his proposed budget but also signaling they may scale back his plan to borrow more than $1 billion and hire 700 employees.

In another sign that significant changes to the budget could be coming, an Assembly leader said Thursday that Republicans are considering cutting taxes beyond what Walker proposed. Rep. John Nygren (R-Marinette), co-chairman of the budget-writing Joint Finance Committee, said Assembly Republicans will review the tax code and are looking specifically at making changes to at least some of 52 tax credit programs.

Some of those credits could increase, while others could be reduced or eliminated, he said. But the overall goal is to further reduce taxes beyond what Walker proposed, Nygren said. Those tax reductions would require cuts to other parts of the budget.

The review of the tax code is being headed by Rep. Dale Kooyenga (R-Brookfield) with help from Rep. John Klenke (R-Green Bay). Those two are accountants and members of the Joint Finance Committee.

Walker's administration secretary, Mike Huebsch, said the governor would welcome further tax cuts. Walker has proposed lowering income tax rates, cutting them by $343 million over two years.

Republican lawmakers' comments on further tax cuts, reducing bonding and limiting the addition of state workers underscore the point that the budget process is only now beginning. Meanwhile, a bloc of state senators has spelled out concerns about Walker's plan to expand school vouchers around the state.

Legislators will spend the coming months on the budget and then send it to Walker for his signature. Walker has broad line-item veto powers that give him the ability to rewrite what lawmakers present to him. The new fiscal year starts July 1.

Republicans control the Legislature, so they will be the ones to shape the budget. Democrats oppose major parts of Walker's budget, such as his plan to scale back parts of BadgerCare Plus, but there is little they can do to try to stop it.

The budget Walker unveiled Wednesday includes more than $1 billion in new bonding, according to Nygren's office. That number will rise because Walker will propose more bonding in a separate capital budget he will introduce next month.

"We think that's going to be problematic with our members," Nygren said of bonding.

The bulk of the bonding Walker has proposed so far is for transportation projects. Walker wants to bond $911.6 million for roads alone, with some of the money paid off by selling heating plants or other state properties.

Nygren and Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills), the Senate co-chairwoman of the Joint Finance Committee, said lawmakers will have to consider delaying some road projects. That's an idea that would be met with resistance from road builders and lawmakers who are awaiting upgrades to roads in their districts.

"I'm not saying anything is 100% safe at this time," Nygren said.

Both rejected raising the gas tax or registration fees to get more money for roads. Walker has also opposed those.

Darling said she would not be surprised if lawmakers learn they will be getting more revenue than expected because of a growing economy, and those new funds could be used to bring down bonding, she said.

Huebsch, Walker's administration secretary, said he understood lawmakers' concerns about bonding, but noted now is a good time to borrow money because of low interest rates.

"Also to consider is the cost of money is extremely cheap right now," he told reporters after discussing the budget at a luncheon sponsored by WisPolitics.com.

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said he shared the concerns of the finance committee co-chairs on bonding. Vos, Nygren and Darling said they also were concerned about Walker's plans to hire 710 employees over two years, bringing the number of state employees to 69,974.

"My bias is normally not to add people to the state payroll," Vos said.

Vos said he puts more faith in the private sector than the public sector, but added that he could accept hiring workers if it was shown to save money.

Huebsch said the state had to hire 117 people to meet requirements of the federal Affordable Care Act, the health care overhaul sometimes called "Obamacare." Those jobs are necessary even though Walker is not going along with key provisions of the federal law, Huebsch said.

Huebsch said the 61 tax enforcement workers Walker wants to hire would pay for themselves because they would generate more money for the state by identifying fraud and delinquent payments.

Also among those Walker wants to hire are 180 engineers and technicians at the Department of Transportation. The administration says that will save $5.6 million over two years because state employees are less costly than consultants who now do much of the state's engineering work. Even with the hiring of state engineers, the state would continue to contract for much of its engineering work, Huebsch noted.

"By beefing up the staff up there we can net save money," Huebsch said. "We know in transportation we have become much too reliant on outside contractors."

Jayne Martinko, president of the American Council of Engineering Companies of Wisconsin, questioned the administration's savings calculations. She said those hired by the state may need three to five years of training

"When are we going to see the $5.6 million savings?" she asked.

Correction: An earlier version of this story understated the amount of borrowing for roads Gov. Scott Walker included in his proposed state budget. Walker wants to borrow $911.6 million for roads, not $824 million.