State revenue for next budget $2.2 billion short of spending requests
Madison —Expected state revenue over the next two years will fall $2.2 billion short of what state agencies want to spend over that period, Gov. Scott Walker's administration reported Thursday.

In one sense, the report may have overstated the size of the potential shortfall over the next two years because agencies will not receive everything they're requesting to spend between July 2015 and June 2017. But at the same time, it revealed the challenge for Walker and Republican lawmakers because the numbers don't account for the property tax cut they have promised.

The figures from the administration also showed the state is on track to finish the current budget in June with a $132 million deficit. But Administration Secretary Mike Huebsch said the state would be able to manage its spending over the next seven months to prevent that shortfall.

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said Thursday he wasn't concerned by the report, saying that lawmakers would not fully fund many agency requests, including a $695 million increase in state aid to schools being sought by the state Department of Public Instruction.

"The numbers put out today show what it would cost to fund everyone's wish list," Vos said in a written statement. "The reality is that's not going to happen. We will continue to manage the state's finances by making prudent decisions and doing what's best for Wisconsin and its taxpayers."

Sen. Jennifer Shilling (D-La Crosse), who will serve as Senate minority leader starting in January, said in a statement Republicans had engaged in a "slash-and-burn approach to budgeting over the past four years."

"Rather than digging a deeper budget hole, we need to invest in education, worker training and economic infrastructure to create jobs and build toward a brighter future," her statement said.

Walker will submit a budget early next year that legislators will spend months revising. They will then turn it back over to Walker, who can further modify it with his veto powers.

Walker's fellow Republicans control the Legislature and they are expected to complete their work before July 1, when the new budget year starts. Walker, who is considering a run for president, has said he would like them to finish their work early, but legislators have signaled that is unlikely.

"As we have in the past, we will continue to protect Wisconsin taxpayers, provide a good value to those taxpayers, and live within our means," Walker spokeswoman Laurel Patrick said in a statement.

Also Thursday, Moody's Investors Service upgraded Wisconsin's bond rating outlook from stable to positive.

In the state report, Huebsch noted the state has $279 million in its rainy-day fund — the largest amount in state history, but also a sum that could run the government for less than three days.

The report projected state revenue would grow by nearly 5% in this fiscal year, 2.7% next fiscal year and 4.1% in 2016-'17. Huebsch cautioned that predicting economic growth over 21/2 years is "inherently difficult" and wrote those estimates would be updated before Walker introduces his budget.

While Huebsch and others emphasized state agencies would not get all the money they want, lawmakers face an array of budget strains.

For instance, Walker's Department of Health Services says it needs another $760 million over two years to cover increasing costs for health care for the needy. And his Department of Transportation is seeking more than $750 million in new taxes and fees to help pay for roads.

And Walker and Republican lawmakers also want to cut property taxes, which would leave less money for schools and state programs. They also have signaled they would like to find money to expand the statewide program that allows some students to attend private schools at taxpayer expense.

Using a different method, the nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau in September estimated the state would have a $1.8 billion structural shortfall heading into the next budget. That projection did not attempt to estimate how much state tax revenue may grow over the next two years or how much state costs might rise during that time.