Scott Walker defers debt principal payment to balance books
Gov. Scott Walker, shown delivering his budget address Feb. 3 in the state Capitol, again declines federal money to expand Wisconsin’s health programs for the needy under his new state budget proposal. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Madison — Gov. Scott Walker's administration in May will skip more than $100 million in debt payments to balance the state's shaky budget, bringing the total such payment delays to more than $1.5 billion since 2001.

The so-called "scoop and toss" maneuver belongs to a bipartisan — if not necessarily proud — tradition in Wisconsin budgeting going back to Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle and Republican Gov. Scott McCallum. The Legislature's nonpartisan budget office reported on the planned financial maneuver Monday, noting that like past delayed payments it will end up increasing costs for taxpayers in future years.

Also Monday, Democrats called on Walker to take federal money to expand Wisconsin's health programs for the needy and save the state up to $345 million over the next two years. Walker's budget proposal takes the opposite tack and keeps with his policy of avoiding a full federal expansion of health programs in the state.

The Legislature will not have to sign off on the delay of the debt payment, because it involves a kind of short-term line of credit that in this case is not subject to lawmakers' approval.

"He effectively wants to borrow money from the future to pay for his tax cuts today," Rep. Gordon Hintz (D-Oshkosh) said. "That doesn't sound fiscally responsible to me."

Sen. Rob Cowles (R-Allouez) wasn't impressed either, saying taxpayers would pay the price.

"Bad budgeting is bad budgeting whether it's done by a Republican or Democrat," he said.

Overall, Walker has slowed the previously rapid growth in state debt but is continuing to rely on borrowing for some priorities, such as road building, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported Saturday.

For months, Democrats have been asking the Walker administration how the governor would balance a budget hole in the current fiscal year ending June 30. A debt restructuring is a favorite tactic in such cases.

Speaking to reporters after an event in Madison last week, state Administration Secretary Mike Huebsch appeared to rule that out. He said the state wouldn't resort to scooping up the principal on its debt and tossing it into the future but instead would only refinance debt to pay less interest.

"What we are seeing is the benefit of very low interest rates," Huebsch said.

Administration spokesman Cullen Werwie said Monday that the Walker administration isn't doing anything that Doyle didn't do first. Werwie also said the delayed payment is allowed under the terms of the state's borrowing agreement with lenders.

"This is not a scoop and toss," Werwie said.

But the Legislative Fiscal Bureau made clear that the Walker administration also is delaying payments on principal, choosing in the coming months to pay only the interest on certain obligations and not make a scheduled payment of $108 million to lower the actual amount taxpayers owe. That helps avoid the spectacle of a state budget repair bill at a time when Walker's potential presidential run is gathering momentum.

Higher future payments

In return, state taxpayers would need to make higher principal and interest payments in the future, starting with an additional $19.3 million in the two-year budget starting in June.

A spokesman for Huebsch had no immediate comment Monday.

In itself, this sort of debt refinancing has only a modest effect on the state's massive budget, but its frequent use means it adds up over time. The maneuver has been used in seven different years since 2001, for a total of $1.56 billion in delayed debt payments.

Health care

On health care, Walker in 2013 rejected taking federal incentives to expand the state's Medicaid programs, saying the deal risked entangling the state in exponentially growing future costs.

Democrats said Monday that Walker's approach means that state taxpayers will pay up to $345 million more over the next two years to cover 80,000 fewer people in the BadgerCare Plus health plan. Citing estimates by the Legislative Fiscal Bureau, they said taking the added federal money could help the state escape significant cuts such as the one Walker has proposed to the University of Wisconsin System.

"Those resources could be used to achieve Wisconsin's goals, whether avoiding the damaging cuts to the UW System or strengthening our public schools," said Rep. Daniel Riemer (D-Milwaukee), who is co-sponsoring a bill to require the state to accept the federal expansion.

At the heart of the issue lies the question of how Wisconsin should handle the federal Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare, which sought to persuade states to add health coverage by promising to pay all of their short-term and most of their long-term costs to do so.

Walker has declined that offer and his 2015-'17 budget proposal would continue that approach. Walker and other Republicans dispute the idea that taking the federal money will save Wisconsin taxpayers, arguing the nation's growing debt may prevent the government from paying in the future.

In that scenario, state taxpayers might have to pay more money if the state didn't downsize the expanded program.

"If anyone thinks the federal government, which is currently $17 trillion in debt and cannot meet its current Medicaid obligations, will not renege on its future funding promises, they are not living in reality," Walker spokeswoman Laurel Patrick said.

When it comes to BadgerCare, the stakes for Wisconsin are huge. It covers just over 800,000 people, a little more than half of them children, who depend on the program to pay for immunizations, medication to control chronic conditions like diabetes and even surgery.

But that comes with a cost, with BadgerCare and other Medicaid programs like nursing homes costing state taxpayers $4.78 billion over the two-year budget. The federal costs are even higher.

Walker's approach expanded coverage through BadgerCare for the poorest adults in Wisconsin without coverage — those making less than $23,850 a year for a family of four — while dropping it for others making just above that amount.

The governor said in 2013 that the great majority of those adults losing their BadgerCare would receive subsidized coverage by buying it on the private market or through an online federal marketplace created under the health care law. So far, only about one in three has done that.

Under Obamacare, federal taxpayers would have paid 100% of the cost for the adults the state is bringing onto BadgerCare if Wisconsin hadn't dropped its coverage of the adults with somewhat higher incomes. The federal government's share eventually would drop to 90% of the cost.

Polling over the past year has shown Wisconsinites with a negative view of the federal Affordable Care Act but a more favorable opinion of a Medicaid expansion.