Wisconsin a model for country, Scott Walker says
Gov. Scott Walker compared himself with President Franklin D. Roosevelt Monday. Which president does he remind you of?

Detroit would not be bankrupt and Chicago public schools would be flourishing if those cities operated under Wisconsin's public union laws, Gov. Scott Walker said Monday in what amounted to a national stump speech — and came days before he hosts the National Governors Association conference in Milwaukee.

Walker likened his public union philosophy to that of Franklin Delano Roosevelt.

"The position I pushed is not unlike the principle that Franklin Delano Roosevelt — not exactly a conservative — pushed as well when it came to public sector collective bargaining," Walker remarked at the annual Governmental Research Association policy conference. "He felt that there wasn't a need in the public sector to have collective bargaining because the government is the people. We are the people. And so what we've done is to be able to empower our great employees, to affirm them."

The Republican governor was addressing people engaged in government research, but he acknowledged he was previewing his remarks to the nation's governors, who will meet Friday through Sunday. The convention is expected to draw national attention, and be a showcase for Walker.

Walker said he would tell the governors to "worry more about the next generation than the next election."

Other governors have pursued similar pension policies as he has in Wisconsin, Walker said. Though "we may have been the most aggressive," he said, Delaware Gov. Jack Markell and Rhode Island Gov. Lincoln Chafee — both Democrats — have also embarked on extensive pension reform.

Walker said Wisconsin was able to turn a $3 billion deficit at the time he took office into a $75 million surplus as of June 30 by passing legislation that repealed most collective bargaining for most public employees. In addition, the law required most public employees to pay more for their pension and health care benefits.

Act 10 gave the state, as well as local governments, free rein to "act on behalf of taxpayers" without being beholden to union contracts, he said. Instead of raising taxes and cutting Medicaid benefits when he took office in 2011, he said, he chose to reduce the amount of state aid sent to local governments while giving "all local governments the tools to be able to offset those reductions."

Those reforms laid the groundwork for "the largest rainy day fund we've had in our state's history," Walker said, enabling the state to invest in tax relief, public education, workforce development and mental health.

"Our pension system is the only one in the country that's fully funded," he said.

In the wake of Detroit's bankruptcy filing, Walker said the city would not be in such dire straits if it were located in the state of Wisconsin instead of Michigan.

"If Detroit were in Wisconsin, Detroit wouldn't be declaring bankruptcy right now," he said. "If (Chicago Mayor) Rahm Emmanuel had Chicago in Wisconsin, he would be able to do the sorts of school reforms he's trying to do to make the schools work better."

Walker's comments struck some as revisionist history.

Scot Ross, executive director of the liberal One Wisconsin Now, said Walker's "attack on 175,000 workers had nothing to do with budget deficits, but rather his desire to reduce the collective voice of working men and women in Wisconsin."

Ross referred to Walker's comparison to Roosevelt as "atrocious," saying Roosevelt "invested in people to lift the country out of the Great Depression, while Scott Walker's path has nearly turned the Great Recession into a second Great Depression for Wisconsin."

Walker invoked FDR's name frequently during the 2011 protests, even going so far as to host a fireside chat.

Prior to assuming the governor's office in 2011, Walker spent eight years sparring with union leadership in Milwaukee County as the county executive, an experience he said readied him to take on public sector unions statewide and to "make some tough, but I would say loooking back now, prudent decisions."

"We would look at what I thought were pretty reasonable requests of public employee unions in our county," he said. "Time and time again, we were told to forget it."

"They basically said 'take a long walk off a short pier,'" Walker added. "They basically implied to me: 'We don't care, go lay off four or five hundred employees because the people who vote for us are people who are closer in seniority to retirement and they don't want you to touch retirement benefits.'"

He said if Illinois had chosen to adopt a similarly hardline stance toward its public sector unions — an option Illinois Gov. Pat Quinn dismissed — the state wouldn't have had to raise taxes and would have a lower unemployment rate.

Defending Illinois

Illinois state Rep. Elaine Nekritz, a Democrat and a panelist at the conference, said she agreed with Walker's point that a state's fiscal well-being should not be a partisan issue.

Contrary to Walker's "negative comments about Illinois," she said, "we've done some very significant school reforms" in cooperation with school districts and public sector unions.

Stephen Kroes, president of the Salt Lake City-based research group Utah Foundation, said he understands why public sector employees mobilized in opposition to Walker after what he described as a "20% reduction in take-home pay."

The banging of a snare drum announced the entrance of two protesters before Walker began speaking. Event organizers pushed them from the luncheon and blocked the doors as they tried to re-enter. Lee Abbott, the drummer, was physically removed from the hallway, told that he could "either be arrested or get up on (his) own."

His fellow protester said they objected to Walker's evisceration of collective bargaining rights and record on the environment and voter ID, among other issues.