In New Hampshire, Scott Walker talks troop deployment to fight Islamic State
Gov. Scott Walker answers questions at an event at Concord High School in New Hampshire. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Concord, N.H. — In his first swing through the early primary state of New Hampshire since 2012, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker took a tough line Saturday against Islamic terrorism, laying out the possibility he would deploy troops to the Middle East if he were president.

"We need a commander in chief in this country who stands up once and for all and says our biggest threat is radical Islamic terrorism and we will do whatever it takes to weed that out anywhere in the world," Walker told a group of GOP activists at Concord High School.

"We need a president who will do whatever it takes, whatever it takes. Who understands we have an ally in Israel and we should start acting like it. Who understands that radical Islamic terrorism is like a virus and if you don't take it out entirely, it's like a virus in your computer that will keep coming back.

"And I don't know about all of you, but I'd rather take the fight to them than wait till it comes to us on American soil."

Walker's visit to New Hampshire came as he continued to scale up his political operation, hire staff, and zigzag his way across America meeting donors and voters. Under increasing scrutiny as one of the top tier likely candidates, Walker found himself facing questions over changing his stances on issues.

In one of the latest signs he plans to officially get in the race for president, he said his sons Matt and Alex would take a semester off from college this fall to talk to voters around the country — a move that would give Walker two campaign surrogates who can relate to young voters.

Walker will return to the Granite State for an April 17-18 summit with other likely candidates, said Jennifer Horn, chairwoman of the New Hampshire Republican State Committee. Walker had previously announced he would be in Europe at that time on a taxpayer-financed trade mission, but a Walker aide said Saturday he would likely return to the United States before the trip is scheduled to end April 20.

New Hampshire holds the second presidential nominating contest, after Iowa's caucus. Walker arrived in New Hampshire on Thursday night and was there while former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and former Texas Gov. Rick Perry were also in the state. U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas is visiting on Sunday.

Last week, Walker was in Iowa, and on Thursday, he is scheduled to appear in South Carolina, which will hold its 2016 primary soon after New Hampshire's.

Wearing khakis and a sweater he said he had just bought for $1 on sale at Kohl's, Walker aimed his New Hampshire appeal at everyday Americans as he made plain his worries about the country. He described his roots as humble, telling the crowd he was a preacher's son who flipped burgers at McDonald's in high school.

"From all my parents and grandparents, I didn't inherit fame or fortune," he said. "What I got was something more important. I got the belief that in America, if you work hard and you play by the rules you should be able to do or be anything you want. That has slipped away, and we need to restore that back again in America."

As he has in other recent speaking engagements, Walker noted six of the richest counties in the country are in the Washington, D.C., area, calling the nation's capital "68 square miles surrounded by reality." Walker didn't mention that's a phrase coined in the 1970s by Wisconsin Gov. Lee Sherman Dreyfus to describe Madison.

Enthusiastic reception

Walker spoke for about 20 minutes and took three questions from the stage in an auditorium named for Christa McAuliffe, the Concord High School science teacher who was killed when the Challenger space shuttle exploded in 1986.

One person asked Walker whether he would abolish the federal income tax.

"I haven't proposed that, though it sounds pretty tempting right now," Walker said before discussing his support for lowering taxes.

Afterward, Walker mingled with the activists in an event that was not open to the press. Journalists also were not allowed to observe him at his other events in New Hampshire, which included meetings with businesspeople and what his political operation called "liberty Republicans."

He also met with former Gov. John Sununu, former U.S. Sen. Scott Brown and others who told him how to campaign in a state known for a retail brand of politics.

"I encouraged him to come back and come back and come back, and he said he will," said Chuck Morse, New Hampshire's Senate president.

Walker earned an enthusiastic response from the crowd in Concord. Joan Rice of Hampton said she liked how Walker stood up to public worker unions in 2011 and eliminated most of their collective bargaining power, despite massive protests and attempts to recall him and other Republicans.

"He's done it. He's done it all," Rice said. "He's not making promises not knowing how to do it."

Beverly Evvard of Montville, Conn., said she was tired of politicians getting to Washington, D.C., and changing their positions. Evvard — who also likes neurosurgeon Ben Carson and U.S. Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky as potential candidates — said Walker appeared to be someone who could resist the ways of Washington.

Most candidates "get there to the swamp and feel the swamp is very nice," she said of the nation's capital. "The more people who can get in who can fight swamp fever, the better we'll be."

Charles Bradley of Laconia, N.H., decided he was backing Walker even before he heard him speak Saturday, calling him the "Winston Churchill of our time."

"To me, Scott Walker has proven he is a happy warrior," he said. "He can stand up to the power of the public unions in this country."

Union protesters marched outside the school, arguing his policies hurt the middle class.

"I think workers would be destroyed" if Walker were president, said special education teacher Sara Dallman, who grew up in Madison but now lives in New Hampshire.

"I think it would go back to the robber barons. We'd be living in Hoovervilles."

Zandra Rice Hawkins, executive director of Granite State Progress, said protesters show up for appearances for all likely Republican presidential candidates, but usually in smaller numbers.

"There's no turnout like there is for Scott Walker," she said.

Hitting Bush, others

In interviews with WMUR-TV and Florida's Tampa Bay Times, Walker took swipes at Bush.

"I think to beat a name from the past, we need a name from the future," the Wisconsin governor told WMUR-TV on Friday, alluding to both former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Bush, the brother and son of former presidents.

"We had Bob Dole, John McCain, Mitt Romney" as past unsuccessful Republican nominees, he told the Times. "If it's just whoever's next up, that hasn't worked so well for the Republican Party in the past....Jeb's a good man. You're not going to hear me speak ill will of Jeb. He's a friend of mine, he called me two days before (announcing) his PAC, I think highly of him. I just think voters are going to look at this and say, 'If we're running against Hillary Clinton, we'll need a name from the future — not a name from the past — to win.'"

In a Friday meeting with the New Hampshire Union Leader, Walker said he had shifted his stance on immigration but maintained he hadn't on other issues. As he pivots to a national run, Walker has taken criticism for softening his stance on ethanol mandates and championing a so-called right-to-work law after saying it would be a distraction and he would work to prevent it from getting to his desk.

Walker last week signed the right-to-work law, which bans labor contracts that require workers to pay union fees.

"I do not tailor my message," Walker told the Union Leader. "My message does not change, whether I am talking to a group in a city or a rural community, whether I am in Miami or Tallahassee."

He struck a similar tone in a brief exchange with reporters after his Saturday speech, saying other campaigns were trying to paint him as someone who had flip-flopped when he had actually been consistent.

After indicating for years he supported a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants, Walker has recently acknowledged he has changed positions and opposes "amnesty." He told the Union Leader he had "evolved" on the issue after speaking to governors from border states.

Among those whom Walker met with was Ted Gatsas, the mayor of Manchester, N.H. Gatsas told the Journal Sentinel he found Walker to be someone who is easy to talk to and tells it as he sees it. That's a trait Gatsas says he looks for in a candidate.

"The most important thing is how straightforward (a candidate) is, not telling me what I want to hear but what he believes," Gatsas said.