Walker would sign abortion bill with no rape, incest exception
Gov. Scott Walker said Monday he will sign a 20-week abortion ban regardless of whether there is an exemption for cases of rape or incest on Monday. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Gov. Scott Walker said Monday he's prepared to sign a 20-week abortion ban bill that has no exception for cases of rape or incest.

Asked Monday about the bill following a speech at a Boys & Girls Club event in Delavan, Walker said he would sign the measure banning the procedure after 20 weeks whether or not it had those exemptions.

The Republican governor and likely presidential candidate made his comments before a public hearing scheduled for Tuesday on the fast-moving bill before committees of both the Assembly and Senate.

Walker said in an open letter in March that he was willing to sign a 20-week abortion ban after repeatedly declining to spell out where he stood on the issue in last year's re-election campaign. But this is the first time he's addressed this specific bill and the issue of the decision not to include a rape and incest exemption.

Walker said that after 20 weeks of pregnancy he believed an unborn child or fetus could feel pain, saying that made it "rational and reasonable" to ban abortion at that point.

"It's an unborn child, that's why we feel strongly about it," Walker said.

Supporters of abortion rights sharply disagree with Walker on whether the fetus can feel pain, saying the scientific community does not believe fetuses can do so at that stage of development.

"Families who experience a pregnancy that has gone tragically wrong deserve help from doctors and access to needed health care without interference from politicians. The medical community uniformly opposes this bill because it prevents physicians from providing individualized care to patients based on their own medical circumstances," said Nicole Safar, who directs lobbying and other advocacy efforts for Planned Parenthood Advocates of Wisconsin.

The Senate Committee on Health and Human Services is expected to vote on the bill Thursday and it could reach Walker's desk before the Senate and Assembly begin floor debate on the state budget this month.

The bill includes penalties of up to $10,000 and 31/2 years in jail for anyone who is convicted of performing an abortion after 20 weeks.

Thirteen states ban abortion 18 or 20 weeks after fertilization, and a 14th, West Virginia, has a ban that is scheduled to take effect in June.

Similar laws in Georgia, Arizona and Idaho have been blocked by courts. State Senate President Mary Lazich (R-New Berlin) has said she isn't sure how her bill would fare in a courtroom because it would depend on the judge who would rule on the issue.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.