Scott Walker moves to limit future UW tuition increases to inflation
By of the

Madison— Gov. Scott Walker is using a cleanup letter on his budget to propose limiting tuition increases at the University of Wisconsin System to the rate of inflation once the current tuition freeze expires.

In another expected change, the letter to lawmakers also makes clear that the budget proposal released by Walker in February won't eliminate the Wisconsin Idea, the guiding principle for the state's universities for more than a century.

Traditionally, the letter sent to the Legislature every two years is aimed at correcting drafting errors in the budget bill, but this message from the governor also addressed some changes that had been called for by Republican lawmakers and some other critics of the budget proposal.

Walker's original budget bill would have broken the UW System off from the rest of state government; cut its state funding by $300 million over two years; and given the new quasi-public entity and the Board of Regents the authority to set tuition starting in the 2017-'18 academic year after a proposed tuition freeze expires.

After GOP lawmakers raised concerns about tuition increases, Walker said in February that he would consider limiting those to the rate of inflation after two years. Legislators have also said they're concerned with the proposed funding cut and with other aspects of breaking off the UW System and giving it more autonomy.

Tuition has been frozen by Walker and the Legislature since the 2013-'14 school year, and Walker's budget bill already seeks to extend the freeze through 2016-'17.

The error message to lawmakers modified the budget to limit resident undergraduate tuition increases for UW System students to no more than the annual increase in the consumer price index, which is used by the federal government to track inflation.

UW System President Ray Cross praised Walker Monday for restoring the Wisconsin Idea in his budget. But he said that UW System officials are working with lawmakers in hopes of avoiding the full $300 million in cuts and the tuition cap.

"Many legislators and stakeholders agree that this kind of price control is not compatible with the agile, market-driven and competitive entity the state needs us to be," Cross said of the cap. "We all agree that Wisconsin residents deserve a rational, transparent and affordable tuition-setting policy based on actual costs, competitive markets, the needs of the state, and affordability."

First articulated in 1904, the Wisconsin Idea states that the mission of the UW System is to solve problems and improve people's lives beyond the classroom. That mission encompasses teaching, research and public outreach.

The governor's budget proposal would have removed UW principles in state law about providing public service, improving the human condition and searching for truth.