Senate Republicans back abortion measure as Democrats hold up final vote
Senate Republicans gave preliminary approval Tuesday for a bill that would require women seeking abortions to get ultrasounds. Do you agree with the decision?

Madison — Republicans in the state Senate gave preliminary approval to a bill Tuesday requiring women seeking abortions to get ultrasounds and doctors providing them to have hospital admitting privileges, clearing the way for the measure to become law by the end of the month.

Democrats blocked a final vote on the bill Tuesday, but Senate President Mike Ellis (R-Neenah) said senators would return to the floor at 8 a.m. Wednesday to give final passage to the measure.

The plan has the support of Republicans who control the Assembly, as well as GOP Gov. Scott Walker. The Assembly could take it up as early as Thursday.

Opponents contend the provision on admitting privileges would shut down one of the state's four abortion clinics. Closing Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin's Appleton clinic would mean Milwaukee and Madison would be the only cities in the state where abortions were available.

Walker said Tuesday he would sign the measure if it gets to him.

"I don't have any problem with ultrasounds. I think most people think ultrasounds are just fine," Walker told reporters after a voucher school event at Hotel Metro in Milwaukee.

Democrats decried the bill while Republicans remained silent through much of the debate.

"It's designed to do one thing: Intimidate women, bully women and tell women the Wisconsin State Senate believes...you're not able to make your own medical decisions," said Sen. Jon Erpenbach (D-Middleton).

But Sen. Mary Lazich (R-New Berlin), the bill's author, said the measure would ensure patient safety and reduce the number of abortions by giving women more information.

"We see a lot of abortion trauma and people regretting their abortion," she said in an interview.

Republicans accepted a Democratic amendment to the bill that would require any facility providing free ultrasounds to make both abdominal and transvaginal ultrasounds available. Democrats said they were worried that without the amendment some groups would make only intrusive, transvaginal ultrasounds available.

Republicans are also seeking other changes to Wisconsin's abortion laws. On Thursday, the Assembly is to take up bills to ban use of taxpayer money to cover abortions in public employees' health insurance plans and outlaw abortions meant to choose the sex of a fetus.

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said he believed those bills would pass and be sent to the governor.

"They're common-sense bills that protect the lives of innocent human beings," Vos said.

The bill the Senate considered Tuesday would mandate that a physician or ultrasound technician display the ultrasound's images and describe to the patient the heartbeat and physical description of the fetus. The woman would not be required to look at the ultrasound's images.

The bill includes exceptions from having to get ultrasounds in cases of rape, incest and imminent medical emergencies.

Cases of rape and incest must be reported to the police for those exceptions. About half of rapes are reported, according to the Rape, Abuse and Incest National Network.

The bill would also require doctors performing abortions to have admitting privileges at a hospital within 30 miles of the clinic.

Planned Parenthood announced Monday it would have to close its Appleton clinic if the measure were to become law because no one at that clinic has admitting privileges. Applying for admitting privileges for doctors in Appleton could take months and likely wouldn't happen before the bill takes effect, according to Nicole Safar, the group's policy director.

Planned Parenthood also operates clinics that offer abortions in Madison and Milwaukee. Affiliated Medical Services also operates a clinic that provides abortions in Milwaukee, and doctors at that facility have admitting privileges.

The proposal is part of a national trend. If it's signed into law, Wisconsin would become the ninth state to require women seeking abortions to get ultrasounds and the eighth state to mandate hospital admitting privileges for doctors performing abortions, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a reproductive research group that supports abortion rights.

Patrick Simonaitis in Milwaukee and Jason Stein in Madison, both of the Journal Sentinel staff, contributed to this report.