Budget passes by one vote as vouchers take center stage
Madison – Senate Republicans passed the state budget by a one-vote margin just after midnight Friday as the state schools superintendent raised concerns a little-noticed provision could lead to a flood of students attending private schools at taxpayer expense.

The budget passed 17-16, with Sen. Dale Schultz (R-Richland Center) joining all Democrats in opposing it. The budget now goes to Republican Gov. Scott Walker, who can alter it using his vast line-item veto powers.

The budget would cut income taxes by $651 million and create a new statewide program that would allow children who meet income thresholds to use taxpayer money to attend private schools, including religious schools.

In a statement released after the budget was approved, Walker said he was proud of the Legislature for its work on the budget.

"Because of our sound fiscal management and tough, but prudent, decisions over the last two years, we are now able to provide nearly $1 billion in tax relief for Wisconsin families and businesses, more money for our public school system, and additional education options for parents across our state," Walker said.

The governor added that the budget also provides access to affordable health care options for all state residents.

The voucher plan was developed weeks ago and would bolster existing programs in Milwaukee and eastern Racine County, but outside of those areas would be limited to 500 students this fall and 1,000 students in future years.

Republicans who run the Assembly adopted an amendment Wednesday that would allow schools participating in the Milwaukee and Racine programs to accept students from anywhere in the state without it counting toward the student cap. Democrats said Thursday they had determined those schools could set up new, satellite institutions anywhere in the state that would not be subject to the cap, potentially rendering it meaningless.

Schools Superintendent Tony Evers said late Thursday that attorneys are reviewing the issue but that he is worried about it.

"That would essentially negate any kind of caps," Evers said.

"That would make a separate system of publicly funded private schools."

The matter is far from clear, Evers and others said. Bob Lang, the director of the nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau, said it would be up to Evers to determine whether such satellite schools would be subject to the cap.

Evers is a voucher opponent, but he said he was concerned that he would be legally compelled to exempt satellite schools from the caps because of the way the budget was written. He said it was unfortunate the amendment was adopted so late in the process.

"It’s pretty vague and everything is kind of a last minute deal here," Evers said.

But Sen. Luther Olsen (R-Ripon), chairman of the Senate Education Committee, said he was confident Evers would rule satellite schools would be subject to the caps.

"All he has to do is say no," Olsen said.

Jim Bender, a lobbyist for School Choice Wisconsin, said he had not heard of the issue when lawmakers were putting together the amendment earlier this week.

"I don’t know of any school that would do that," he said of schools opening satellite institutions.

Even if the schools were able to escape the statewide cap, another cap for each school district would remain in place. Under that limit, no more than 1% of the students in districts other than Milwaukee and Racine could attend voucher schools.

The issue came up in the final hours of the debate over a budget that would cut income taxes by an average of $150, raise property taxes by $29 on the typical home and reject a key element of the federal Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

Senators debated the budget for 12 hours Thursday and were to vote on it just after 10 p.m. under an agreement between Democrats and Republicans. But some Democrats believed they didn’t have enough time to consider all their amendments and blocked a final vote on the budget.

Republicans adjourned at 10:20 p.m. but returned to the floor at 12:01 a.m. Friday. After little debate, they approved it.

The Senate debate came after the Wednesday vote by the Republican-controlled Assembly. It will next go to Walker, who can reshape it with veto powers that allow him to eliminate provisions and even individual words.

The $68 billion, two-year tax and spending plan would cut income taxes by more than $650 million over two years; keep property tax increases to about 1% per year for the typical home; and freeze tuition at University of Wisconsin System schools.

The budget would sweep through many parts of Wisconsinites’ lives by legalizing bounty hunters; loosening residency rules for city and school workers; giving the governor’s administration the power to sell highways, prisons and other state properties; kicking the Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism off the UW-Madison campus; requiring the able-bodied to work for food stamps; and collecting DNA from people when there is probable cause to suspect them of committing felonies, rather than conviction.

Three and a half hours into the debate, the Senate fell briefly into turmoil as protesters chanted, "Focus on jobs, not on vaginas" — a response to the Legislature’s vote last week to require women seeking abortions to get ultrasounds.

Demonstrators tried to rush onto the Senate floor, but were stopped by aides to the Senate sergeant at arms. The senators continued their debate as about eight protesters were led away in handcuffs.

Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills) said the budget builds on plans Republicans developed when they took over all of state government in 2011.

"Are we better off today than we were two years ago? And the answer, in my opinion, is overwhelmingly yes," Darling said. "Our overall priority is to grow jobs and the economy."

But Democrats stressed that Wisconsin ranked 44th in private-sector job creation in the last quarterly jobs census.

"We are worse now than we were two years ago," said Sen. Jon Erpenbach (D-Middleton). "And we’re not trending up. We’re trending down. Wisconsin’s economy is actually contracting … And this budget won’t do anything about that."

Sen. Jennifer Shilling (D-La Crosse) denounced the budget as a "road map to mediocrity" that "doubles down on the failed policies of the past."

Senate President Mike Ellis (R-Neenah) responded that Republicans would boost the economy by cutting income taxes rather than letting more money flow to “the black hole of government.” He dismissed Democrats’ complaints that too much of the cuts would go to the wealthy.

"We are not going to apologize for giving the people back their money," Ellis said.

Senate Democrats offered dozens of amendments, but came up short on all of the votes. Schultz joined them on many of them, such as ones to take policy items out of the budget and allow the investigative journalism center to remain at UW-Madison.

The Senate Democrats’ debate strategy differed from the one taken by their Assembly counterparts, who stunned Republicans on Wednesday by forgoing offering amendments, saying the budget was so bad it couldn’t be fixed.

Senate Minority Leader Chris Larson (D-Milwaukee) said some of the amendments were targeted to draw the votes of moderate Republicans who have indicated they wanted to see changes to the budget. “A lot of amendments we modeled after what Republicans were saying when they were talking common sense in their own neighborhoods,” Larson said at a news conference.

The amendments included one to accept an expansion of Medicaid that would insure more people using federal money and help the state’s bottom line by $119 million. That’s an idea that Olsen and Sen. Terry Moulton (R-Chippewa Falls) favored at one point. Another amendment would have required referendums before allowing school vouchers in new districts, as promoted by Olsen and Ellis early in the budget process. Those two, however, went on to negotiate changes to Walker’s plans that they said would protect public schools.

Schultz, who more than 20 years ago voted to create Milwaukee’s school voucher program, on Thursday sided with Democrats in opposing the statewide voucher expansion.

"After 20 years, I haven’t seen adequate evidence that the experiment is working, let alone worthy of expansion," Schultz said. "We can’t adequately support one statewide school system. Why on earth would we want to create a second one? It just makes no sense."

Voucher backers countered that every child deserves a good education.

"We have to stop thinking about school systems and start thinking of systems of schools that educate all of our children," said Sen. Leah Vukmir (R-Wauwatosa).

Schultz’s votes Thursday follow others in which he has parted with with his fellow Republicans. In recent years, he also voted against limits on collective bargaining for public workers and legislation aimed at siting a massive open-pit mine in northern Wisconsin.

Rep. Howard Marklein (R-Spring Green) has announced he will run for Schultz’s Senate seat next year, setting up a primary if Schultz chooses to run again as a Republican. Marklein was one of three Assembly Republicans to vote against the budget on Wednesday, saying it wasn’t fiscally responsible enough.

The nearly 1,400-page Joint Finance budget bill would:

Tax cuts. Cut income taxes by $651 million over two years and provide $30 million a year in income tax savings for the parents of the nearly 100,000 private school students in Wisconsin. Families could receive an income tax deduction of up to $4,000 for private school tuition paid for each kindergarten through eighth-grade student and up to $10,000 per high school student.

School funding. Provide public schools with $150 more per student in state aid and local property taxes this fall and another $150 increase in 2014-’15, for a total of $289 million over two years. However, because of the $50 one-time per-pupil bump to many districts in this past school year, the proposed $150 per pupil funding increase in 2013-’14 would represent a $100 per-pupil increase this fall over current spending.

Health care. Shift nearly 90,000 people from the BadgerCare Plus program into a new online insurance marketplace, where the participants are supposed to find replacement health coverage. A detailed analysis of the plan by the Legislative Fiscal Bureau found that many of the people now receiving BadgerCare Plus coverage through Medicaid likely would not buy the more expensive insurance through the marketplaces.

In doing so, Republicans are passing up a federal offer to cover 84,700 more people in Medicaid than their plan and receive enough additional federal tax money over the next two years to pad the state budget by $119 million even after covering the cost of those additional people, according to the Fiscal Bureau.

Walker has said he wants fewer people on government coverage and is concerned that the federal government won’t keep its commitment to the higher Medicaid funds over the long term.

Residency. Repeal all residency rules for teachers and other workers for local units of government with one exception: Local officials could still require police, fire or emergency personnel to live within 15 miles of the boundaries of their jurisdictions.

Bail bonds. Allow for-profit bail bondsmen in Wisconsin for the first time since 1979, with judges able to opt out of the system. The program would be limited for the first five years to Milwaukee, Waukesha, Kenosha, Racine and Dane counties.

State property. Allow the Walker administration to sell state assets including parking garages, university dormitories and roads.

Jason Stein and Michael Phillis of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.