Senate debates bills on school snow days, campaign laws, early voting
Madison — Late into the night Tuesday, the state Senate debated bills to help schools adrift in snow days, overhaul campaign laws and make far-ranging changes for residents of the Milwaukee area.

With only a few days of floor sessions left, Senate GOP leaders packed Tuesday's schedule with proposals, including several election bills condemned by Democrats.

The Milwaukee bills would allow Marquette University to create its own police department, end weekend absentee voter drives in the city and help clear the way for a massive development near Lake Michigan.

One proposal passed on a voice vote by senators Tuesday would give schools more leeway to make up their run of snow and cold days in this year's bitter winter. It now goes to the Assembly.

The bill would repeal the requirement that schools have 180 days of instruction each school year while keeping in place requirements for the minimum number of hours. That would give districts flexibility to make up canceled school days or otherwise shorten the school year by lengthening the school day through the end of the year.

Going forward, districts could also choose to lengthen the school year by reducing their daily hours.

Schools would still be required to have at least 1,137 hours of teaching for students in middle school and high school; 1,050 hours for students in elementary school; and 437 hours for students in kindergarten.

Early voting hours. Weekend voter drives would end under an absentee voter bill that senators debated Tuesday as part of a series of elections measures. Democrats used a procedural tactic to block a final vote on that bill and several others until Wednesday morning, when the Senate will return to finish advancing them.

Under the proposal, early voting in clerks' offices would be limited to weekdays between 8 a.m. and 7 p.m. Such a change would limit how Milwaukee, Madison and other urban areas hold voter drives.

Democrats see the move as an effort to suppress voting by their supporters. Republicans say it levels the playing field for urban and rural areas, because rural clerks don't have the staff to keep the long hours that cities do.

Republicans amended the bill to have the state pay half the expenses for rural municipalities offering early voting at an undisclosed cost. But Democrats said that didn't make up for blocking weekend voting in urban areas.

The measure still needs a final vote in the Senate and another vote in the Assembly before it goes to Gov. Scott Walker.

On the floor at one point, Sen. Tim Carpenter (D-Milwaukee) accused Sen. Mary Lazich (R-New Berlin) of "hating blacks and Latinos" living in urban areas, drawing vehement objections from Lazich.

"I call it election creep. Bill by bill, it's making it more difficult for Democrats to take on Republicans, and I think it's by design," Carpenter said.

Sen. Paul Farrow (R-Pewaukee) responded that Carpenter owed Lazich an apology for his "rude and reprehensive" comments.

Republicans responded that the bills were meant to avoid situations where some rural voters in their districts don't get the same opportunities to vote that urban residents do.

"It's offensive on its face," said Sen. Glenn Grothman (R-West Bend), the proposal's lead sponsor.

Scot Ross of the liberal group One Wisconsin Now said that if the bill becomes law, his organization may sue to overturn it on the grounds that it discriminates against minorities.

In 2011, Republicans reduced early voting from three weeks, including three weekends, to two weeks, including one weekend.

Lobbyist donations. The Senate also debated a bill that would allow lobbyists to give campaign donations to lawmakers and other state candidates starting April 15 of election years — moved up from June 1. Supporters say the change is needed because partisan primaries have been moved up from September to August, lengthening the campaign season.

Senators have backed off from another change that would have allowed lobbyists to pass on campaign checks from others during the legislative session. Democrats blocked a final vote on the bill until next week.

Poll workers. Another bill debated by the Senate would allow poll workers to come from anywhere in the county where they live, rather than just from the municipality or ward where they live. Democrats blocked a final vote on the bill Tuesday.

Party affiliation. Poll workers of opposite political parties would have to perform certain duties together when practical, under another bill that the Senate sent to Walker on a voice vote.

Under existing law, clerks are to choose poll workers from lists submitted by the major political parties, putting similar numbers from each party at each polling location. The bill approved Tuesday specifies that when two or more poll workers must perform a task, they should be of opposite parties.

Signatures. Those signing candidate nomination papers and other petitions would have to include their printed names as well as their signatures to help decipher them, under another bill passed by the Senate on a voice vote. The measure now goes to Walker.

Asbestos lawsuits. Trials for those exposed to asbestos would be slowed underanotherbill debated by the Senate.

Long used for fireproofing and insulation, asbestos can cause cancer and other illnesses. Many of the companies that manufactured products with asbestos have gone bankrupt and set up trust funds to pay victims.

Victims can file claims against those businesses, as well as lawsuits against companies still in business. The bill up for debate Tuesday would require plaintiffs to disclose any claims against trusts they have filed or plan to file. Once they made those disclosures, their trials could not start for six months.

Backers of the bill say some plaintiffs don't tell courts they are also seeking money from the bankrupt businesses' trust funds and that judges can't properly assign liability. Opponents say that the delays could mean asbestos victims, including veterans, would die before their cases could be decided.

Republicans passed an amendment to the bill that they said would reduce delays and give courts more flexibility in how they deal with the new information disclosed. But Democrats blocked a final vote on the bill until next week.

The Assembly passed a different version of the bill in May on a party-line vote.

Lake Michigan shoreline. Senators also advanced a bill seeking to resolve questions about whether Milwaukee's Downtown Transit Center can be redeveloped as a hotel and apartment high-rise. The Senate voted 24-9 in favor of the bill, with senators from both parties voting for and against it.

The Assembly approved the bill last month on a voice vote, and so it now goes to Walker, a supporter. The legislation is a response to concerns raised by Preserve Our Parks, a local park advocacy group.

The group claims most of the 2.2-acre transit center site, at E. Michigan St. and N. Lincoln Memorial Drive, is covered by the Wisconsin Constitution's public trust doctrine.

The doctrine largely bars private development on former lake beds. The group says it must be upheld in this case to prevent private development on other filled lake beds throughout Wisconsin.

Preserve Our Parks says it might sue to halt the county's plans to sell the underused transit center site to a group seeking to demolish it and develop the 44-story Couture building.

"We are creating certainty for a $160 million economic development project that is expected to create 4,000 new jobs," Sen. Leah Vukmir (R-Wauwatosa) said.

The bill says any restrictions on building on filled lake bed wouldn't apply to the planned Couture project.

Preserve Our Parks says, however, that the measure wouldn't override the constitutional issues. The group says a map filed with a state agency in 1884 shows that about two-thirds of the transit center site was then in Lake Michigan before the land was filled.

Senate Minority Leader Chris Larson (D-Milwaukee) said the bill wouldn't prevent a lawsuit.

"The state is sticking its nose where it doesn't belong," he said.

Marquette police. Under a bill that senators passed on a voice vote, Marquette University, a private school, could create its own police department. University officers would have the same powers as City of Milwaukee police to enforce the law and could also enforce Marquette rules.

The bill now goes to Walker, who intends to sign it, spokesman Tom Evenson said.

To establish the department, the private institution would still need to reach an agreement with Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen. That agreement would also be subject to review by the Milwaukee Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.

Under the bill, Marquette would have to pay for any liability incurred because of the actions of its private officers and would be subject to the state open records law.

Highway funding. The Senate voted unanimously to approve abill from Walker to use a separate surplus in the state's road fund to boost spending on highway projects this year by $43 million. That proposal now goes to the governor for his signature.

Propane prices. Senators also voted unanimously to create a loan program to help middle-income homeowners purchase propane and other heating supplies amid the steep jumps in price for those goods. The proposal now goes to Walker.

Twitter: twitter.com/patrickdmarley and twitter.com/jasonmdstein