Senate votes to end Wisconsin's handgun waiting period
Handguns for sale at Shawano Gun and Loan in Shawano are seen in a 2010 file photo. Credit: Rick Wood

By of the

Madison — Taking action as gun violence captures particular attention across the state and especially in Milwaukee, the state Senate on Tuesday approved a repeal of the state's two-day waiting period for handgun purchases, sending the bill to the Assembly on a voice vote.

Current state law prohibits consumers from taking a handgun from the store until 48 hours after a background check is started, with that waiting period extended three additional days in certain cases. Under the bill proposed by Sen. Van Wanggaard (R-Racine) and supported by Gov. Scott Walker, handgun purchasers could take possession of them as soon as they clear state background checks that with today's technology typically take a matter of hours.

"There's no statistical evidence that it reduces violence whatsoever," Wanggaard said of the so-called cooling off period.

The proposal was approved by the Senate committee last month on a party-line vote of 3-2, with the panel's three Republicans in favor and its two Democrats against.

The state has been shaken by several recent shootings, including a case in which Archie Brown Jr. was fatally shot in Milwaukee after accidentally hitting and killing a toddler with his van. The toddler's uncle, Ricky R. Chiles III, was suspected of gunning down Brown and killing another nephew in the spray of bullets. He committed suicide last week as authorities closed in on him at a Chicago-area hotel.

Chiles was barred from possessing firearms in the first place because of a robbery conviction for serving as the getaway driver in a 2011 Brown Deer bank heist.

Last month, Steven Timothy Snyder robbed a bank, gunned down a Wausaukee man and engaged in a shootout with State Patrol Trooper Trevor Casper that killed both men.

Noting that technology makes background checks easier, Sen. Nikiya Harris-Dodd (D-Milwaukee) sought unsuccessfully to amend the bill to require background checks for nearly all gun sales — they currently are required for sales by licensed dealers but not for those done by private sellers. She cried as she described the recent shootings in Milwaukee.

"Many of you say it yourself, 'Background checks are easy.' I'm asking you to partner with me to save lives," Harris-Dodd said. "Do it for these children. These children will never be able to grow up and have a family and go to college and own a home."

Milwaukee County Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr., who favors gun rights, said Tuesday that the vote allowed the law to catch up with technology.

"Background checks can now be accomplished in hours instead of days. Why delay a law-abiding citizen the right to exercise their Second Amendment right to purchase a handgun?" Clarke said.

But echoing Harris-Dodd, Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett said the benefits of technology should justify expanding background checks and not just ending the waiting period.

"I believe that the next logical move for the Senate is to apply background checks to all private guns sales. Doing that would really assist law enforcement in their investigations of gun crimes," Barrett said in a statement.

Wanggaard has said his proposal makes sense because there is no waiting period in Wisconsin for rifles or shotguns, and many states don't have them for handguns.

Democratic senators such as Sen. Fred Risser of Madison said they feared the bill could lead to an increase in crimes of rage or passion, such as a husband or wife who gets in an argument with his or her spouse and then buys a gun before having a chance to cool off.

"What's wrong with a little inconvenience?" Risser said.

An August 2000 study in the Journal of the American Medical Association looked at the effect of a separate federal waiting period during the 1990s and found it appeared not to be associated with reductions in homicide rates or overall suicide rates, though it was associated with reductions in the firearm suicide rate for people ages 55 or older.

Wanggaard said the 48-hour waiting period, adopted in 1976, amounts to a "time tax." The state Department of Justice can currently extend the waiting period for three additional days if it needs that extra time to complete a background check.

The Department of Justice conducted about 100,000 background checks last year. On average, the checks are completed in about four hours.

The bill would give the Department of Justice up to five days to complete its background checks, keeping the maximum amount of time for the checks in line with current law.

Walker, who is expanding his political operation for a likely presidential run, indicated he supported the measure in February while he was at the Conservative Political Action Conference in National Harbor, Md.

Wisconsin is one of eight states that have waiting periods for handguns at the point of sale, according to the National Rifle Association. Some other states have other waiting periods; for instance, Iowa has a waiting period to acquire a license to purchase a gun.

Rideshare legislation

Senators Tuesday also approved on a voice vote a proposal to establish state standards for app-powered rideshare companies such as Uber and Lyft and block cities from imposing tougher requirements on the services. The Assembly passed the proposal last week on a bipartisan vote of 79-19, so the bill now goes to Walker for his signature.

Uber and Lyft work by using smartphone apps to match drivers in an area with passengers looking for a ride. Like the Internet-assisted ride companies themselves, the bill to expand their presence in the state has provoked debate.

The services have drawn raves for using ordinary drivers to provide convenience and competitive fares. But they've also drawn criticism from taxicab companies and some others for having fewer standards than traditional public transportation.

Some Democrats argued Tuesday the proposal doesn't include enough protections for consumers, saying lawmakers should require vehicle inspections and allow the public to review complaints against drivers. Risser said Republicans were wrong to repeal local ordinances in Milwaukee and Madison regulating rideshare providers.

"If we have solved the problem, let it be," Risser said. "Don't unsolve the problem."

Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald of Juneau said the Republican bill is all about solutions.

"It's just a new technology and it's an awesome service that's providing a new option," Fitzgerald said of ridesharing services. "We're simply catching up with that."

The bill would require the companies to impose a $1 million insurance requirement for vehicles with passengers as well as background checks for drivers. The legislation is based on a law in Colorado and has included input from Uber.

The state would license rideshare companies and local governments could not regulate them. Local officials would be permitted to keep all their same regulations in place on competing taxi companies, however.

Since September, City of Milwaukee ordinances have treated rideshare drivers the same as taxicab drivers and required more than the state legislation would. That includes a vehicle inspection by the city and a more substantial annual background check.

The state legislation would require a zero-tolerance policy on drug and alcohol use by drivers and would prohibit drivers convicted of certain crimes or driving violations.

It would require companies to disclose their pricing method and to keep records of their passengers and drivers for a year after the ride or departure of their drivers. But the ridesharing firms wouldn't have to provide round-the-clock service and could increase their fares at times of peak demand.

Opponents say the bill might affect existing cab companies as well as shared-ride taxi systems that operate in rural areas and serve elderly and disabled residents.

Remedial courses. The Senate also approved on a voice vote a bill to require a yearly report from the University of Wisconsin System on how many students from Wisconsin high schools had to take remedial courses once they got to college. The Assembly passed the bill on a voice vote last month, so it now goes to Walker.

The report would not identify which students had to take such courses. But it would let the public monitor whether particular high schools had a significant portion of their graduates having to take remedial courses in English or math.