State budget panel votes to pay hospitals $73.5 million for uninsured patients
By of the

Madison — Republicans on the Legislature's budget committee on Tuesday voted to pay hospitals up to $73.5 million over two years to care for uninsured patients but otherwise stuck with Gov. Scott Walker's response to reject a federally funded health care expansion that would boost the state's bottom line by $119 million over two years.

The Joint Finance Committee adopted the measure on a 12-4, party-line vote as it headed into its final round of budget approvals.

In the main, the committee embraced the Republican governor's plan to shift nearly 90,000 people from the BadgerCare Plus health program into a new online insurance marketplace, where the participants are supposed find replacement coverage. A detailed analysis of the plan by the nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau found that many of the people now receiving BadgerCare Plus coverage likely would not buy the more expensive insurance through the federal program.

The vote was one of the last actions the committee was to take. From there, the budget will go to the Assembly and Senate, which are both controlled by Republicans. They will then send it to Walker, who can reshape it using his sizable veto powers.

The proposal the committee adopted would move tens of thousands of state residents above the federal poverty level out of BadgerCare Plus, which is a part of the state-federal Medicaid program. Those people would be eligible for private coverage through the federal insurance exchanges, which will offer subsidies for low-income consumers.

Along with that move, Walker would also bring in a slightly smaller number of new Medicaid recipients with incomes under the federal poverty level.

In doing so, Republicans are passing up a federal offer to cover 84,700 more people in Medicaid than their plan and receive enough additional federal tax money over the next two years to pad the state budget by $119 million even after covering the cost of those additional people, according to the nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau. If the federal government delivers on its legal commitments, accepting the federal Medicaid expansion would save the state an additional $340 million through 2021, the fiscal bureau has found.

Walker has said he wants fewer people on government coverage and is concerned that the federal government won't keep its commitment to the higher Medicaid funds over the long term.

Under his Medicaid plan, anyone below 100% of the federal poverty level — $11,490 a year for a single adult — would end up in BadgerCare; those with incomes above 100% would go into the federally subsidized marketplace, a larger group than foreseen under the federal law.

The Walker administration has assumed that nearly all of the people leaving BadgerCare between 100% of the federal poverty level and 133% — $15,280 a year for a single adult — could and would buy health coverage through the federal exchanges. But the fiscal bureau in its recent report said that assumption "appears unreasonably optimistic."

The committee tweaked Walker's plan to say that if the exchanges are not ready in October as scheduled, people will continue to remain eligible for BadgerCare Plus under existing income guidelines, 200% of federal poverty for most adults. The new income criteria would be put in place shortly after the exchanges were ready.

Republicans on the committee added to Walker's plan by agreeing to pay hospitals up to $73.5 million over the next two years in anticipation that they could see an increase in uninsured patients visiting emergency rooms. State taxpayers would fund $30 million of that, with the rest coming from the federal government.

The size of the payments would be linked to how many patients hospitals see who cannot pay for services. The most any hospital could get would be $2.5 million a year.

Democrats said the inclusion of the hospital payments was a tacit acknowledgment that a significant number of poor people would not buy insurance from the exchanges.

"You may be taking care of hospitals, but you're not taking care of poor people," Sen. Bob Wirch (D-Somers) told the Republicans.

Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills), the committee co-chairwoman, said the GOP plan would provide people with "certainty."

Obamacare "is like quicksand," she said. "We don't know where it's going to go."

"We didn't choose to make Obamacare the law of the land," Darling said. "We didn't choose that, but we have to deal with it. And it's going to get more complicated."

Democrats said the plan would leave vulnerable people behind, with Rep. Jon Richards (D-Milwaukee) saying passing up the $119 million in federal money was "mind-blowing."

"I feel like this committee is about to commit fiscal malpractice when it comes to health care," said Sen. Jennifer Shilling (D-La Crosse).

But Sen. Mary Lazich (R-New Berlin) said lawmakers need to be skeptical of the promises written into federal law to pay Medicaid costs.

"To think that there's this sack of money out there that's going to treat us so nicely — it's not," she said. "We have no guarantees that this will be sustainable."

Before the vote, two opponents of the plan were led out of the packed committee room by police after they briefly disrupted the proceedings.

"Who pays for your health care?" one of the protesters asked lawmakers. "We do. We pay for your health care."

The committee also approved a study of expanding the Family Care program to northeastern Wisconsin. The program, available in 57 of Wisconsin's 72 counties, provides long-term care outside institutions for needy recipients who are unable to care for themselves because of age or disability.