DNR Secretary Cathy Stepp defends Scott Walker's changes to advisory board
By of the

Madison — Reversing a past position, Natural Resources Secretary Cathy Stepp on Tuesday defended Gov. Scott Walker's plan to make her agency's board advisory, even as she acknowledged she hadn't been consulted about the plan.

Walker's proposed budget would drop the power of the Natural Resources Board to make binding decisions.

"I feel that it's extra layers," Stepp said of the board in a briefing to the Legislature's Joint Finance Committee. "I think it's duplicative."

The idea has sparked opposition from Democrats as well as some of Walker's fellow Republicans. Sen. Luther Olsen (R-Ripon) said he had "some concerns" about the plan.

"What's gone wrong with that system that we need to change that and not let folks on that board make policy?" Olsen said.

"We're talking about streamlining government," Stepp responded.

She said Walker did not consult with her on his plan in advance, but that she considered it a "smart way to go now."

"I think the current structure is what is compounding the bureaucracy," she added. "The way the structure is currently, I think, is unnecessary."

Her comments were in conflict with what she said in April 2011, shortly after Walker appointed her DNR secretary. Then, Stepp — a former member of the Natural Resources Board — praised the board for its objectivity and called it "a really, really critical part of Wisconsin's history and it's something that's treasured by me. And I know the governor feels the same way."

Stepp emphasized the members of the Natural Resources Board are not elected and suggested transferring more powers to the administration would make the department more accountable and efficient. But Olsen noted those powers would shift to her and others who also are not elected.

"When is your election?" Olsen asked her.

Sen. Jon Erpenbach (D-Middleton) blasted the notion.

"Why not get rid of it? It's pretty clear to me their input's not going to matter," he said.

The seven members of the Natural Resources Board are appointed by the governor and serve six-year terms. The panel's roots date to the 1920s, and until 1995 it had the power to hire and fire the DNR secretary. Republican Gov. Tommy Thompson shifted that authority to governors, and over the years some have advocated returning that power to the board.

The briefing — expected to last all day — is an early step in the Legislature's review of Walker's sprawling budget. The committee of 12 Republicans and four Democrats will spend the coming months reshaping the budget before handing it off to the Assembly and Senate for their approval.

Tuesday marked the second day of budget briefings. Later Tuesday, the committee is to get briefed on education funding; plans to cut the University of Wisconsin System by $300 million over two years and spin it off as a public authority; and proposed changes to BadgerCare Plus, the state's health care program for the needy.

To protest the UW System plan, the United Council of Wisconsin Students announced it plans to "occupy" the hearing. Around 10:30 a.m., as the natural resources hearing was ongoing, one man tried to bring a banner into the hearing room and was arrested after he did not comply with officers' orders, according to the Capitol Police.

"I have zero power in this community," the man shouted as he was led away by officers.

Stewardship program

In the briefing on natural resources, legislators spent much of their time on Walker's plan to effectively freeze land purchases for 13 years under the Knowles-Nelson Stewardship Program, which was started in 1990 and is named after Republican Gov. Warren Knowles and Democratic governor and U.S. Sen. Gaylord Nelson.

Under that program, the state has issued bonds to buy land or easements to more than 560,000 acres. Almost all of that land is open for public use, including in most cases for hunting and fishing.

The cost of the program has raised concerns among Walker and some others. The state spends $1.6 million a week to repay nearly $1 billion in stewardship debt.

Walker's plan would bar most new purchases until the annual cost of paying off debt would drop to $54 million, which is expected to be in 2028. Now, the state pays about $84 million a year to pay off that debt.

Walker would continue to use stewardship money to refurbish facilities, such as boat launches, roads on state land and the Kettle Moraine fish hatchery.

Stepp acknowledged the stewardship program is popular and "fantastically successful" but said it was unsustainable.

"At what point do we decide now we pause to get our house in better fiscal order?" she asked.

But some members of the committee expressed skepticism of the plan.

"It does not seem balanced, this approach," said Rep. Chris Taylor (D-Madison).

State park fees

Walker's budget would also raise the annual vehicle admission fee to state parks by $3, from $25 to $28. In addition. it would raise nightly camping fees by $2. Camping fees are currently $12 to $15 per night for Wisconsin residents and $14 to $17 per night for those from other states.

Sen. Howard Marklein (R-Spring Green) called for raising the camping fees even higher, noting campsites such as those at Peninsula State Park in Door County fill up quickly. In addition, the costs could be hiked even furtherfor those visiting from Illinois and other states, he said.

"They love coming up," Marklein said. "They can drink beer in our parks. They can't there."

Some but not all Illinois parks ban alcohol, according to that state's Department of Natural Resources.

Paul A. Smith of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.