Taxpayers pay more under Walker Medicaid plan
SHARE

By of the

Madison - If the federal government keeps its current commitments, Gov. Scott Walker's plan for avoiding a full expansion of the BadgerCare program under the federal health care law would cost Wisconsin taxpayers roughly $250 million more through 2020, under preliminary estimates by the Legislature's nonpartisan budget office.

In addition to lower state costs, the full expansion of the Medicaid health program would also cover tens of thousands more people than the Republican governor's proposal.

But either way, there will be substantial costs for federal taxpayers as more people gain health coverage.

The full Medicaid expansion would cost the federal government $3.9 billion more through 2020, the Legislative Fiscal Bureau found. No all-inclusive estimate of Walker's plan is available, but it could have federal costs of its own as great or greater.

"It's clear that Governor Walker has chosen an option that will cover fewer people and cost the state more in this budget and through 2020. His option would cost us a quarter of a billion dollars more (than a full expansion)," said Rep. Jon Richards (D-Milwaukee), who requested the memo.

The report made public late Friday lays out figures that both Republicans and Democrats will reach for in the coming months as they debate how the state should respond to President Barack Obama's health care law. Republicans Friday rejected a key assumption of the memo as requested by Richards - that the federal government would have the financial ability to carry through with its pledge of bearing the vast majority of the cost of a Medicaid expansion for states like Wisconsin.

"I just absolutely do not believe the federal government is going to keep its promise once it sees the full impact of the (health care law)," Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said.

On Wednesday, Walker proposed allowing extremely poor adults without dependent children to enroll in BadgerCare while shifting those adults in the program with somewhat higher incomes into a subsidized insurance marketplace scheduled to debut in 2014 under the federal health care law. Walker's said that most of those leaving Medicaid would gain coverage through the federal marketplace and that his plan would cover 28,000 fewer people than under the full BadgerCare expansion sought by Democrats.

A spokeswoman for the Department of Health Services, Stephanie Smiley, said that the Fiscal Bureau study didn't account for important factors, such as increases in the state's administrative costs due to a Medicaid expansion. "The governor deserves credit for ensuring that people in poverty are covered under his plan while also realizing that there is instability with regard to federal funding," she said.

The Fiscal Bureau report analyzed a plan that had those same broad outlines as Walker's but wasn't necessarily identical. That's because Walker won't release the full details of his health care plan until he introduces his budget proposal on Wednesday.

The Fiscal Bureau report doesn't look at the state's ongoing Medicaid costs, which are already sizable, or how the federal health care law currently in place would increase those costs. That's because state officials can't change a federal law, only decide how to adapt to it.

The Walker administration's own estimates found his plan would lead to a net total of 5,000 fewer people receiving state BadgerCare coverage, similar to the Fiscal Bureau estimate that 9,000 people would lose that form of coverage.

The costs of Medicaid are shared by the state and federal government, with federal taxpayers currently picking up just under 60% in Wisconsin.

But from January 2014 through the end of 2016, the federal health care law covers the full cost for states of expanding Medicaid coverage for adults with incomes of up to 133% of the federal poverty level. Starting in 2017, the coverage for those new enrollees drops gradually, reaching 90% of its initial coverage by 2020.

But Obama's administration has advised states that the 100% federal funding would not be available for Medicaid expansions such as Walker's proposal that stop short of those called for under the federal health care law. Federal officials have said that proposals such as Walker's would receive the usual 60% matching funds - the main reason the governor's plan costs more.

The Fiscal Bureau estimated that a full Medicaid expansion would cost the state $67 million more through 2020 than it would to keep the state's current programs in place without change. Walker's proposal would cost the state $320 million more through 2020.

Advocates for the uninsured said they worry about the effects of Walker's plan on the tens of thousands of low-income adults who would be pushed out of BadgerCare. They say that those recipients might not have enough income to buy coverage through the federal exchanges and could lose their health care.

For coverage on those exchanges, a single person with income at the poverty level set by the federal government - $11,490 a year - would pay a maximum premium of $19 a month. But once he or she sought medical treatment, the deductibles and co-pays could run considerably higher.

Walker said last year that the state would not seek to partner with the federal government in setting up the insurance marketplace in Wisconsin. But he said Wednesday that he's confident they will be affordable for those who use them.

So far, six Republican governors, including those in Ohio and Michigan, have agreed to the Medicaid expansion, while 14 have turned it down. Nationally, 19 states plus the District of Columbia appear to be on track to expand their Medicaid programs, although some governors are encountering opposition from their state legislators.