Twists, turns in John Doe hard to follow? This Q and A may help
UPDATES: You can find more Doe questions and answers in our updated John Doe Q&A. You can also check our John Doe section for more updates.

Madison — In a pingpong match of court orders this week, a federal judge halted an investigation into conservative groups' political activities, an appeals court immediately blocked that ruling and the judge then reinstated his injunction blocking the probe.

They were the latest twists and turns in the complex litigation surrounding the secret John Doe probe looking into fundraising and spending during the attempts to recall Gov. Scott Walker and state senators.

Here's a look at how the situation got to this point and where it could go next.

Q. Who launched the investigation?

A. Milwaukee County District Attorney John Chisholm, a Democrat, conducted a wide-ranging probe of aides and associates to the Republican governor going back to Walker's time as Milwaukee County executive. That investigation led to six convictions, ranging from misconduct in office for campaigning on county time to stealing from a veterans fund. Walker was not charged, and that investigation was shut down in March 2013.

Before closing that probe, however, Chisholm launched a separate investigation in the summer of 2012 based on information learned in the first one. To get the investigation off the ground, Chisholm worked with district attorneys from both parties in four other counties and the state Government Accountability Board, which administers the state's elections and ethics laws. Francis Schmitz, a former assistant U.S. attorney and self-described Republican, has been named special prosecutor in the case.

Q. What is a John Doe investigation?

A. The state's unusual John Doe law — which dates to the 19th century — allows prosecutors to compel people to give testimony under oath and turn over documents. They've been dubbed John Doe probes because their purpose is to determine whether a crime has been committed and, if so, by whom.

Prosecutors are allowed to conduct their investigation in secret and can order targets and witnesses not to tell anyone about the matter, other than their attorneys.

Critics argue that process creates a risk of prosecutors overreaching because it gives them so much power and the cloak of secrecy keeps them from being held accountable. Others contend the secrecy helps protect the innocent at a time when charging decisions have yet to be made.

The probes are conducted in front of a judge — in this case, Reserve Judge Gregory Peterson, a former appeals judge from Eau Claire. The judge issues and enforces the secrecy orders, presides over testimony and rules on legal questions that arise.

If the judge determines charges are warranted, he or she enters an order allowing prosecutors to issue them. Prosecutors then file charges, and from there the case goes through the usual process — with the changes being heard before a different judge.

Q. What is being investigated?

A. The full details of the investigation are not known because the probe is being conducted in secret. Enough specifics have been made public to show investigators are looking into whether the Wisconsin Club for Growth and other conservative groups illegally coordinated with the campaigns of Walker and candidates for state Senate during the recalls that were sparked by Walker's limits on collective bargaining for most public workers.

Q. What is illegal campaign coordination?

A.Candidates are required to disclose all the donations they receive, and individuals who donate to their campaigns face limits (for statewide offices such as governor, they can give no more than $10,000 each in a four-year election cycle). Independent groups — if they're set up in a certain way — can keep their fundraising secret and accept and spend unlimited amounts from individuals, corporations or unions.

Candidates and such independent groups are not generally allowed to closely cooperate with each other on spending. For instance, candidates and those independent groups can't directly share their ad strategy with each other.

Experts differ over what type of coordination is acceptable and how closely candidates can work with certain types of groups. Such questions are at the heart of this investigation and related litigation.

Q. Is the investigation ongoing?

A. For the moment, it has been halted by a federal judge. It could be revived, however, depending on the rulings from courts in that case and others.

Q. How did a federal judge get involved?

A. In February, the Wisconsin Club for Growth and one of its directors, Eric O'Keefe, sued in federal court in Milwaukee in an attempt to stop the investigation because they said it violated their rights to free speech, free association and equal protection under the law. They portrayed the investigation as a partisan witch hunt aimed at bullying conservative groups from making their voices heard during election time.

U.S. District Judge Rudolph Randa soon began expressing skepticism toward the prosecutors and refused to dismiss the lawsuit as they requested. They said the case should be thrown out because federal courts generally can't interfere with state proceedings and because prosecutors are usually immune from lawsuit.

On Tuesday, Randa issued a preliminary injunction halting the probe while he considers the lawsuit. He said the probe had to be stopped for now because it appeared prosecutors were violating O'Keefe and the club's First Amendment rights.

He ordered prosecutors to return any material they had gathered in the investigation and destroy whatever copies of it they had made.

Q. What happened after he halted the probe?

A. Less than 24 hours after Randa issued his decision, a panel of the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals in Chicago reversed him. It said Randa didn't have the authority to put the injunction in place because the prosecutors had already appealed his decision against dismissing the case.

The three-judge panel told Randa he could issue an injunction only if he first certified that prosecutors' earlier appeal was frivolous. Even then, he could not order that the prosecutors return evidence or their copies of it at this early stage of the case.

On Thursday, Randa entered an order finding the appeal frivolous and reinstating his injunction.

Q. What happens next in the case?

A. The appeals court is now considering whether to dismiss that lawsuit and has told lawyers to file briefs on that aspect of the case through the end of July. The court could issue rulings on other matters before then, particularly if prosecutors ask the panel to review Randa's latest injunction.

Q. What other issues are being addressed in the lawsuit?

A. Randa wrote in his ruling that illegal coordination is not possible if groups engage only in so-called issue advocacy — that is, for groups that don't explicitly urge people to vote for or against a candidate, even if their support for that candidate is obvious.

Those who disagree with Randa say there can be illegal coordination between candidates and issue ad groups. They argue such help would give a candidate an unfair advantage and hide activity that amounts to contributions to candidates.

Q. Are there other impediments to the investigation?

A. Yes. Peterson, the judge overseeing the John Doe investigation, in January quashed subpoenas prosecutors had issued, saying — much as Randa later ruled — that the alleged coordinated activity in question was not illegal.

Q. How did prosecutors respond to that ruling?

A. Chisholm and Schmitz in February asked a state appeals court to overturn Peterson's decision on the subpoenas. The District 4 Court of Appeals in Madison has not ruled.

Walker's campaign last month asked the state Supreme Court to take the case without having the appeals court first weigh in on it. The high court hasn't said whether it would take the case.

Q. Are there other legal challenges to the investigation?

A. Yes, there are two others:

■ Three unnamed parties in November filed suit before the state appeals court in Madison challenging the investigation on procedural grounds, contending special prosecutors can't lead a John Doe investigation and arguing state law doesn't allow coordinated multicounty John Doe investigations.

The Court of Appeals rejected that challenge in January and those who brought the case have appealed to the state Supreme Court. The high court hasn't said whether it would take the case.

■ Two of the three unnamed parties involved in that case have also brought a separate challenge to the John Doe investigation. Little is known about that case, which was filed directly with the state Supreme Court. The high court has not said whether it would consider that challenge.

Q. Who brought the challenges in state court?

A. The filings don't say who brought the cases. But documents in the federal court case suggest the Wisconsin Club for Growth was one of the parties that brought the challenge involving three petitioners.

Jason Stein of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.