Unreasonable assumptions may threaten Medicaid plan
SHARE

By of the

Madison — "Unreasonably optimistic" assumptions may threaten Gov. Scott Walker's budget plan to move people in state health programs into a new federal plan under Obamacare, according to a report from the Legislature's budget office.

The Republican governor's plan for dealing with the looming federal health care law involves shifting nearly 90,000 people from the state's BadgerCare Plus program into a new federal online insurance marketplace, where the participants are supposed find replacement coverage. But a detailed analysis of the plan by the Legislative Fiscal Bureau finds that many of the people now receiving state Medicaid coverage would likely not buy the more costly insurance through the federal program.

Meanwhile, GOP lawmakers are considering making state payments to some hospitals to help cover the costs of emergency room visits by the uninsured.

These questions could be settled Tuesday as the Legislature's Joint Finance Committee takes its final actions on Walker's 2013-'15 budget bill and Republicans on the panel decide where to strike the balance between covering the uninsured and limiting Wisconsin's role in the federal health care expansion.

Needy families leaving BadgerCare under Walker's plan — especially those without any immediate medical needs — could decide they can't afford coverage once they've paid other expenses like rent and food, said Jon Peacock, research director of the Wisconsin Council on Children and Families.

"As a general rule, they're going to be really strapped to do it," Peacock said. "They won't scrape together the money unless they really need it."

At the heart of Walker's proposal is his plan to move tens of thousands of state residents above the federal poverty level from state Medicaid coverage onto the so-called federal insurance exchanges, which will offer private coverage to the uninsured, with subsidies for low-income consumers. Along with that move, Walker would also bring in a slightly smaller amount of new recipients with incomes under the federal poverty level.

Foregoing aid

In doing so, Walker is passing up a federal offer that would allow the state to cover 84,700 more people in Medicaid than his plan and receive enough additional federal tax money over the next two years to boost the state budget by $119 million even after covering the cost of those additional people, according to the fiscal bureau. If the federal government delivers on its legal commitments, accepting the federal Medicaid expansion would save the state an additional $340 million through 2021, the fiscal bureau said.

Walker says he wants fewer people on government coverage and is concerned that the federal government won't be able to keep its commitment of the higher Medicaid funds over the long term.

"Governor Walker is seeking true entitlement reform which will strengthen health care in Wisconsin. It will provide Wisconsin residents with opportunities in the commercial health care market and will reduce the uninsured rate by half," state Health Services spokeswoman Claire Smith said.

Walker's plan has drawn loud criticism from Democrats but praise from GOP lawmakers who control the Assembly and in general support from Republicans in charge of the Senate.

Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) said Friday that some members of his caucus had concerns about Walker's overall Medicaid plan, but that he expected the Legislature to adopt it or something close to it.

He also said lawmakers are considering making a cash payment to hospitals to help them deal with a possible increase in emergency room visits from the uninsured.

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said Assembly Republicans are firmly behind Walker's Medicaid plan and are hopeful that Senate Republicans will coalesce around it. He said legislative leaders are discussing giving additional payments to hospitals with a disproportionate share of indigent patients, but there is no agreement on whether to provide it.

'Positive step'

The Wisconsin Hospitals Association supports the federal Medicaid expansion. But Eric Borgerding, a lobbyist for the association, said that the extra money from the state could help make up for higher numbers of the uninsured showing up at emergency rooms because of changes in the state's health care system.

"I think it's a positive step," Borgerding said.

Under Walker's Medicaid plan, anyone below 100% of the federal poverty level — $11,490 a year for a single adult — would end up in BadgerCare; those with incomes above 100% would go into the federally subsidized marketplace, a larger group than foreseen under the federal law.

The Walker administration has assumed that most of the people leaving BadgerCare between 100% of the federal poverty level and 133% — $15,280 a year for a single adult — would still buy federal coverage. The administration says that a full 93% would buy health coverage through the new federal exchanges.

Assumption questioned

The Legislative Fiscal Bureau analysis raises questions about that assumption. The report notes that the administration put in effect similar premiums last year for people in BadgerCare with slightly higher incomes.

In the first month alone, nearly 18% of those BadgerCare recipients with the new premiums failed to pay them and were dropped from Medicaid, the fiscal bureau report found. In the light of that, the Walker administration's assumption "appears unreasonably optimistic," the report found.

The state's Smith said that the projection by the Department of Health Services took into account factors not in play for the BadgerCare case such as the federal mandate that people purchase coverage and outreach efforts that will be conducted by the state and federal government.

"Taking all of the above information into account, we don't believe we will see as big a drop in those currently enrolled in BadgerCare Plus as we did when the policy changes went into effect in July 2012," Smith said.

For coverage on those exchanges, a single person with income at the poverty level set by the federal government — $11,490 a year — would pay a maximum premium of $19 a month. But once he or she sought medical treatment, the deductibles and co-pays could run considerably higher, up to $2,100 per year for each adult on a plan.

Peacock said it was difficult to predict how many people leaving BadgerCare would end up with no coverage.

"I think it's going to be way more than 7%," Peacock said.

Rep. Jon Richards (D-Milwaukee), a member of the Joint Finance Committee taking up the Medicaid proposal Tuesday, said the fiscal bureau report revealed the problems with the governor's plan.

"It just shows that the administration is living in a fantasyland that is going to result in fewer people insured, the state losing nearly $100 million and the hospitals seeing more people in the emergency room," Richards said.