Scott Walker says he'll be a stay-at-home governor
Gov. Scott Walker said his plans are to continue on as governor following his withdrawal from the presidential race. He toured Apache Stainless Equipment Corp. in Beaver Dam in first public appearance this week.

By

Beaver Dam— Taking his first questions since suspending his White House campaign, Gov. Scott Walker on Friday declined to say whether he'll endorse one of his rivals or take a vice-presidential post if offered by the Republican presidential nominee.

"I'm really just focused on being governor, and I think any other suggestion to me is pretty presumptuous on my part or anybody else's," Walker told reporters after touring a manufacturing plant here. "Who knows who the nominee is and who knows who that person would want or not want in terms of their running mate."

Like a spouse returning home from a long trip on the road, the Republican governor said he believed the best way to prove he was committed to the remaining three years of his second term was to spend some quality time with his state and its citizens.

"Be there," Walker said of his strategy now as governor. "I think all of us know in a relationship you can say all you want but the best way to make that case is to be there."

The demands of the presidential campaign often kept Walker away from Wisconsin in recent months. A calendar his office released late Friday shows only two full days of official work in the state between July 13 and 31, with many of the others limited to short phone calls with official staff.

With his approval rating in Wisconsin at 39%, Walker will have to make his case forcefully and well to give himself a shot at running for a third term. He declined to say whether he would do so Friday, focusing instead on the next conservative proposal he's promoting as part of his five-year transformation of his state.

Looking more relaxed and rested than he had in the presidential campaign's rough final weeks, Walker spoke at Apache Stainless Equipment Corp. Company executives there supported the right-to-work bill that Walker signed earlier this year to prohibit forcing workers to pay union fees.

Sen. Jon Erpenbach (D-Middleton) said if Walker were truly committed to serving out the remainder of his term, he would rule out a vice-presidential post.

"He's never really been committed to Wisconsin. The only commitment he's had to the state is as the next rung to wherever he's climbing," Erpenbach said.

To reassert a Wisconsin agenda, the governor on Thursday joined with Sen. Roger Roth (R-Appleton) and Assembly Majority Leader Jim Steineke (R-Kaukauna) on a proposed overhaul of the state's civil service system for 30,000 employees, saying its safeguards against political patronage in hiring and firing state workers need to keep up with the times and the crush of retiring baby boomers.

Friday, Walker declined to say whether civil servants would play the same role in determining merit hires under the plan, which would eliminate the state's current civil service exams and replace them with a résumé-based system for hiring qualified workers.

Unions and many Democrats are condemning Walker's proposal as a threat to clean government in Wisconsin.

Erpenbach pointed out that when Walker signed Act 10, his 2011 repeal of most collective bargaining for most public workers in Wisconsin, the governor said those unions weren't needed because the civil service system would protect government employees.

"He said he wouldn't touch the system, and now he's blowing it up. ... The system works well. It protects taxpayers," Erpenbach said. "In the long run, it's just not going to be good for the state."

On Friday Walker disagreed, saying he wasn't going back on his word from four years ago.

"What we keep intact is the good. We keep intact the merit (hiring). We keep intact the just cause. What we get rid of is the silliness and the ridiculous stuff," Walker said. "I would encourage a few of the skeptics out there, before they speak, look at the bill."

Scot Ross, executive director of the liberal group One Wisconsin Now, wasn't convinced. He said he believed some of the problems with soured financial awards at the Wisconsin Economic Development Corp. were tied to the fact that its employees had lost job protections when it was created as a quasi-public replacement for the state Department of Commerce.

"State employees lost civil service protections when WEDC was created, and it has been plagued with unprecedented cronyism, corruption and incompetence ever since," Ross said.