Walker official says feds have verified his jobs numbers
Visit our election section for complete coverage of the 2012 spring, fall and recall elections.

In the latest twist of the political saga over Wisconsin's employment data, the administration of Gov. Scott Walker on Wednesday said the job-growth numbers that he made public earlier than normal have been verified by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development spokesman John Dipko said the Washington-based agency confirmed Wednesday that Wisconsin added 23,608 jobs in 2011. That figure is slightly higher than the initial 2011 figure publicized by Walker, which showed a gain of 23,321 last year.

However, Rick Clayton, a senior Bureau of Labor Statistics official on Wednesday would only confirm that the agency had completed its review of Wisconsin's 2011 jobs data.

Clayton, who oversees the preparation of the state jobs data, declined to say whether the figure used by Walker was accurate.

"We have completed our review of the data, and we will release that data on June 28," which is the regularly scheduled release data, Clayton said.

The jobs numbers dominated political debate Wednesday night after Walker's announcement.

In response to Walker, Democratic Party of Wisconsin Chairman Mike Tate issued a statement claiming that Walker's pre-release is "illegal" - a charge that a bureau official said is unfounded.

Tate cited a 2006 order by the commissioner of the bureau that said it is illegal to pre-release monthly bureau jobs data, which at the national level comes with a closely held embargo and is highly sensitive because it can cause major moves in financial markets.

But the monthly BLS data, which is collected and owned by the federal government, is different from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages data, which is the information Walker released. The Quarterly Census data is collected and owned by each state, Clayton said.

"The commissioner's order does not apply to the (Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages,)," Clayton said. "The states have the right to use it as they see fit."

Job creation is a central focus in the gubernatorial recall election Tuesday between Republican Walker and Democrat Tom Barrett. In an unusual move two weeks ago, Walker released the preliminary job numbers, before the bureau had finished reviewing them.

Walker promised in the 2010 campaign that the state would gain 250,000 jobs by the end of his four-year term.

The 2011 figures touted by Walker from the quarterly census of more than 95% of all state employers is regarded as the most accurate available.

The census figures appear to discredit monthly job count data, which is based on a survey of less than 5% of the state's employers. The monthly figures indicate that Wisconsin lost more jobs last year than any other state last year. Those monthly survey figures, however, come with a high margin of error, according to officials at the bureau.

The dual sets of jobs data are at the center of the state's political debate. Barrett has accused Walker of "cooking the books" and trying to spin the numbers to his advantage.

"I'm waiting for the official numbers from the bureau of labor statistics," Barrett said after a campaign rally in Madison on Wednesday evening.

Now that the bureau has signed off on the Wisconsin data, Dipko said the state would publish the figures on Friday on the website of the Department of Workforce Development.

Journal Sentinel reporter Jason Stein contributed to this report.