In the Beltway, Walker stresses shifting power to states
Gov. Scott Walker speaks at the American Action Forum in Washington, D.C. Walker is expanding his political operation as he fights for early momentum in the increasingly crowded field of GOP White House prospects. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Washington — Amid a wave of media attention, Gov. Scott Walker took his anti-Washington message to Washington on Friday, saying the best way to move the country forward is to transfer power from the nation's capital back "to the hardworking people of this country."

Walker spoke here at the invitation of the American Action Forum, a conservative pro-market policy shop.

His appearance drew heavy coverage and coincided with a remarkable burst of early attention and activity surrounding the emerging GOP presidential field.

About an hour before Walker's appearance, 2012 nominee Mitt Romney announced he would not run in 2016, resetting some momentary assumptions about how the Republican primaries could play out.

Walker, who could be one of the beneficiaries of Romney's decision, commented Friday on Twitter that he talked to Romney and that "he's a good man." He also thanked Romney for encouraging the party to nominate someone new on the national scene, which happens to be a big Walker talking point. Romney said in a statement Friday he thought one of the next generation of GOP leaders, "one who is just getting started, may well emerge as being better able to defeat the Democrat nominee."

In a 17-minute talk and a friendly question-and-answer session afterward with the organizers, Walker hit on the themes of his nascent presidential bid, pitting himself against what he called a "top-down, government-knows-best ... tired old approach" to governing.

"What I see in the states is ... a craving for something new, for something fresh, for something dynamic," he said. "We need to really transfer power, power from our nation's capital here in Washington back to the states and the cities of this country where the people, the hardworking people of this country, can actually hold their government accountable."

The governor referred to Washington as "68 square miles surrounded by reality," a variation of a line he has used about Madison, and which was popularized a few decades ago by former Wisconsin Gov. Lee Dreyfus.

Without mentioning President Barack Obama by name, Walker accused the "president we currently have" of wanting to grow the economy in Washington and not in the rest of the country, citing in support of that claim the affluence of the D.C. metro area compared to most other parts of the United States.

"Six of the 10 richest counties in America, according to median income, are right here in the Washington, D.C., market," he said. "Six of the top 10! To me that suggests there's a disconnect between those who want to grow government in Washington and the rest of us who want to grow the economy out with real people, in cities and towns and villages all across this great country."

The Wisconsin governor is enjoying a sudden spurt of early hype over his presidential prospects, fueled by a well-received appearance in Iowa last Saturday. Walker's animated pitch to Iowa Republicans struck a chord with his audience of activists, and his performance may have altered expectations within the party about his campaign skills.

Days later, the governor formed a political committee to lay the groundwork for a presidential bid, generating more media attention.

The Wisconsin governor has accepted a raft of upcoming out-of-state speaking invitations and will appear Sunday on ABC's "This Week." He just accepted an invitation to be the Republican speaker at the annual Gridiron Dinner in D.C., a 130-year-old tradition in which reporters and politicians "roast" each other. That dinner takes place hours after a New Hampshire GOP event where Walker is the headline speaker.

His speech Friday was hosted by a conservative nonprofit headed by Douglas Holtz-Eakin, who once ran the Congressional Budget Office, served in the White House under President George W. Bush and oversaw domestic policy for John McCain's 2008 presidential campaign.

Walker spoke in a small room in which journalists made up about half the audience.

The group's chairman, Fred Malek, is a prominent longtime GOP insider and past adviser to Republican presidents and nominees. In laudatory introductory comments, Malek described Walker as a "perfect leader." Citing Walker's battle with opponents over collective bargaining, Malek said there was no one he'd rather be in "that foxhole with in a firefight."