State budget panel holds up $63 million in WEDC funding over problems
SHARE

By of the

Madison - The Legislature's budget committee Thursday held up $63 million in state money for Wisconsin's troubled jobs agency over the next two years.

The committee also piled new oversight on the Wisconsin Economic Development Corp., voting hours after lawmakers on a separate audit panel directed their bipartisan ire at its financial controls.

Under the proposal, WEDC's state funding could rise to as much as $59.3 million in each of the next two years, up $2 million annually from the $57 million the agency receives this year. But WEDC would be guaranteed only its first year of funding, with the release of its entire budget in the second year subject to lawmakers' discretion.

The committee voted 12-4 to approve the motion, with Republican lawmakers backing more accountability for Gov. Scott Walker's jobs agency after downplaying the need for it earlier in the week. Democrats praised the steps taken but sought unsuccessfully to further restrict the agency's spending and give more power to its board.

To get the full amount of money over the two years, WEDC's chief executive officer, Reed Hall, would have to go before the Joint Finance Committee in December to give a report showing the agency is complying with a scalding audit released last week.

"We're saying this agency could be gone in a year if they don't step up the way they run their agency and the services they provided to the people of the state," said Sen. Joe Leibham (R-Sheboygan), a member of the budget committee who recently joined WEDC's board.

The action follows months of criticism of WEDC's operations and an audit last week by the nonpartisan Legislative Audit Bureau that found that WEDC repeatedly failed to follow state law last year in discharging its duties to taxpayers and the public.

WEDC, a quasi-public authority, was created by Walker and lawmakers in July 2011 to provide help and subsidies to businesses and serve as a more flexible replacement to the state Department of Commerce. Walker, who pushed for WEDC's creation, serves as the chairman of its board.

"I'm glad to see the Republicans had a change of heart today. I'm genuinely encouraged by that. . . . But we don't agree with providing this agency more money," Rep. Jon Richards (D-Milwaukee) said.

Lawmakers' proposal

The joint finance proposal would require:

• A detailed report to the budget committee by WEDC officials on their plans to create a nonprofit foundation to raise private money for economic development efforts.

• An annual independent audit of WEDC's financial statements to be submitted to the Legislature. The Journal Sentinel first reported in December on the lack of this requirement for WEDC under existing law - a marked contrast to the reporting requirements placed on other state authorities. Democrats unsuccessfully sought to have the annual review performed by the Legislative Audit Bureau.

• All employees of WEDC to be subject to state ethics laws and file a yearly financial statement with state ethics officials. Now, only WEDC's board and Hall, the CEO, are covered by state ethics laws designed to ensure that public employees act in the public's behalf and are not influenced by gifts or other favors from special interests.

• That WEDC follow state purchasing rules. Last week's audit found that WEDC provided some vendors with no-bid contracts, a provision allowed to the agency because it is exempt from state rules governing such contracts.

• Yearly reports to the Legislature that provide more details on the financial incentives that WEDC is awarding to businesses and their results.

Democrats on the budget committee unsuccessfully sought to spell out that the WEDC board would approve all agency policies and hire its CEO, chief operating officer and chief financial officer. Democrats also tried and failed to remove Walker as board chairman in favor of one elected by the board.

Quizzed by audit panel

Earlier Thursday, members of the Legislature's Joint Audit Committee shot one tough question after another at Hall and other WEDC officials.

The audit bureau report last week found that WEDC didn't require financial statements from companies receiving incentives; gave awards to ineligible businesses and ineligible projects; and awarded nearly $1 million in tax credits to companies for actions taken before they had signed their contracts with the state. The agency didn't adequately follow up to see whether jobs were being created and didn't clearly report the jobs numbers that it did have, the audit found.

At the audit committee meeting, Rep. Howard Mark lein (R-Spring Green), a certified public accountant and fraud examiner, said he was worried about the apparent lack of timely and adequate financial reporting by the agency to its board.

Marklein was also concerned that the board may not have quickly recognized and corrected that, saying he would like to see an accountant on the audit committee of the WEDC board.

"That concerns me, and it also concerns me that it went this long," Marklein said of the poor financial reporting.

In Thursday's hearing, the legislative auditors revealed that they have not been able to complete their legally required audit of the agency's finances and are still working to obtain and analyze the data they need from the agency.

WEDC officials and Walker have said they are working to address the audit findings and have already made some corrections. But state auditor Joe Chrisman said that WEDC had not at the time of the audit's close in February provided policies to respond to all the auditors' findings, only assurance that the policies were in the works.

"We can do many things. We do not audit aspirations," Chrisman said.

CEO promises compliance

Hall vowed to members of the audit committee that he would bring his agency into full compliance with state law. To do that, the agency will consult with nonpartisan legislative attorneys to ensure that WEDC staffers understand all the laws applying to them, said Hall, the former Marshfield Clinic executive brought in by Walker in November to clean up WEDC.

"We will have all of our policies in place we think by the end of this calendar year. . . . I assure you our entire organization from top to bottom intends to comply with the law," he said.

But Hall did make clear that WEDC disagreed with some audit bureau findings that the agency had failed to follow the law.