County Board adopts budget with changes that rankle Chris Abele
SHARE

By of the

The County Board on Tuesday passed a 2014 budget with the property tax freeze sought by County Executive Chris Abele but broke ranks with him on transit changes, lakefront park patrols and pay cuts to some of his top aides.

The board approved a $279.3 million levy, the same as this year's, on a 15-3 vote. The overall $1.3 billion budget was adopted on a 14-4 vote.

Supervisors Mark Borkowski, Steve F. Taylor and John Weishan Jr. voted against the levy and the budget. Supervisor Deanna Alexander also voted no on the budget, but in favor of the levy.

Board Chairwoman Marina Dimitrijevic said the budget showed major agreement with Abele on most issues. She called it "a very responsible budget" and said the lopsided votes on places where the board differed with Abele made it unlikely he could prevail on any vetoes.

The board is scheduled to consider any vetoes from Abele on Nov. 21.

Abele said changes wrought by the board were not well thought out or based on good data.

"I wish our disagreements weren't rather self-evident in their wrongness," Abele said. He singled out the board's vote to cut the pay of six of his top aides as particularly unwise.

Abele said those cuts seemed to be motivated by anger by supervisors over the new state law that curtails County Board power. Abele was a prime backer of the legislation.

"If the board is angry about something, well they can take it up with the state (officials) who changed the law," Abele said.

On transit, the board voted 17-1 to shift operation of the Milwaukee County Transit System to the county, unless the board approves a vendor contract by April 1. The move played out as Abele and the board have failed to come to an agreement on whether the Dallas-based MV Transport should take over operation of the system.

The firm was tentatively awarded a three-year contract in July to take over the local bus system, a choice strongly backed by Abele. That decision needs County Board approval, but that's been delayed by a lawsuit and an appeal of the contract award by Milwaukee Transport System, the current operator, and Veolia, a large French firm.

Dimitrijevic said she expected an appeal panel on the contract would be named this week. Abele has criticized the board for stalling on that step.

The board also unanimously voted to reject major cuts Abele had proposed for Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr., including dumping for the second year in a row his plan for outsourcing lakefront and some other county park patrols to the Milwaukee Police Department.

Abele had called for paying the City of Milwaukee nearly $1 million for the patrols. He says MPD would do the work more efficiently than the sheriff's office.

The board didn't debate that part of a 2014 budget amendment, which included saving 15 of 25 jobs of deputies assigned to a sheriff's unit that does park patrol.

The amendment included keeping the county's emergency 911 system in the sheriff's office, and dropped Abele's idea to switch responsibility for capturing escaped work release inmates to the district attorney's office.

The same vote included cutting in half Abele's request to pay $350,000 to the city for expansion of its gunshot locator system, to $175,000.

Taylor said the proposed county payments to the city were an obvious way to try to get the county to subsidize part of the city's budget.

"Come on now, how stupid do you think we are?" Taylor said. "This sets a horrible, horrible precedent."

Supervisor David Bowen said there was no truth to criticism that the board was "in bed with the sheriff" by restoring millions of dollars to Clarke's budget.

The board also unanimously approved cutting down Abele's $400,000 request for a personal security detail to $100,000 and assigning the job to Clarke, even though the sheriff has said he doesn't want the task. Clarke has been highly critical of Abele, especially over cuts to the sheriff's budget.

Abele has gone without security since taking office in April 2011. His predecessor, Gov. Scott Walker, also eschewed having personal security. Unspecified threats prompted him to ask for security now, Abele has said.

The board also voted unanimously to repair and keep open indoor swimming pools at Noyes and Pulaski parks, boosting the admission fee by 50 cents to $3.50. Abele wanted to close the pools to avoid costly repairs and operational costs and add a skate park at Noyes and a splash pad at Pulaski.

The board included $2 million for the pool repairs.

Supervisors also revised Abele's plans for downsizing the Mental Health Complex, voting 17-1 to remove his target of closing one of the complex's long-term care units by the end of 2014. Supervisors said the availability of community care should be ensured before the unit shuts down.

The action included a requirement of a detailed plan on costs and availability of community options before moving patients.

Supervisors also voted to reverse Abele's proposed outsourcing of 45 jobs along with the county's Community Support Program to private agencies.