Suspect sought in double slaying is felon on supervision
By of the

A man wanted for fatally shooting two people — a distraught motorist who struck and killed a 2-year-old with his van and the toddler's 15-year-old brother who rushed out to check on him — was released from prison in August 2013 after serving two years on a bank robbery conviction, court records show.

Ricky Ricardo Chiles III, 27, who was the getaway driver during a Brown Deer holdup in 2011, was on extended supervision at the time of Sunday's double homicide, Department of Corrections records show. As a felon, he was prohibited from possessing firearms.

Chiles pleaded guilty to being a party to the crime of armed robbery with threat of force in connection with the 2011 incident. He was sentenced to far less than the maximum penalty of 10 years after the judge was told about his cooperation in an unrelated homicide case, which stemmed from an argument during a dice game.

Chief Deputy District Attorney Kent Lovern said Chiles testified for the state at the trial of "a more dangerous offender" who was convicted of first-degree reckless homicide.

In addition to the bank robbery, Chiles also had 2011 convictions for disorderly conduct and resisting an officer. In January of that year, he was charged with domestic violence battery and theft, but both charges were dismissed.

In 2004, when he was 17, Chiles was charged with of fourth-degree sexual assault, pleaded guilty and was sentenced to two years' probation.

Now, police are searching for Chiles, who they say killed Archie Brown Jr., 40, after Chiles' nephew, 2-year-old Damani Terry, darted into the street and was hit by Brown's van.

Police say Brown was standing over the child's body, grieving and upset, when Chiles shot him with a gun retrieved from a nearby home.

In the gunfire, 15-year-old Rasheed Chiles — Damani's brother and Ricky Chiles' nephew — was shot. He died later in the evening at a hospital during surgery.

Attorney Michael Hupy has offered a $25,000 reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the shooter.

Inadequate monitoring

Milwaukee County Circuit Judge David Borowski said he was extremely frustrated by the week's events, which included at least four homicides in addition to those of Brown and Rasheed Chiles.

"The biggest problem is that in certain segments of Milwaukee — and it's very unfortunate, very tragic — there is a lack of education, a lack of respect for life, a lack of any parenting," said Borowski, who presided over more than 150 homicide cases between 2011 and 2014.

"None of what led up to this excuses what happened in terms of this shooting, but someone needs to answer why a 2-year-old was not being supervised, and allowed to run out into traffic," he said.

Another part of the problem, in Borowski's view, is that the Department of Corrections is not doing an adequate job of monitoring people on extended supervision.

"Someone who is young and has already committed a violent crime with a gun needs more supervision," the judge said. "They need structure. They need significant requirements from the judges and Department of Corrections — requirements that if they're not followed in terms of rehabilitation, there are consequences."

Problematic numbers

The killings over the past three days came amid a spike in violent deaths in Milwaukee, which has seen 43 homicides so far this year, compared to 14 at this point last year.

A review of homicides in Milwaukee reveals that this year's mid-April total is higher than any other year going back a decade, according to data compiled by Milwaukee Journal Sentinel staff.

The number is sobering but bears further explanation.

Homicide numbers are a problematic measure of violent crime because so many factors — including medical care and the shooter's aim — contribute to whether someone dies or not. But homicides are closely watched because there is no more serious crime in terms of outcome.

While this year's total to date is a 10-year high, last year's total as of April 15 was a 10-year low.

Further, a high total on April 15 doesn't necessarily predict a high year-end total. The second-highest tally in the past decade was in 2008, when there were 31 homicides as of April 13. However, the year ended with 105, which is just slightly above average, records show.

In 2004 and 2005, the numbers were virtually the same in spring but vastly different by year end.

In 2004, there were 22 homicides as of April 15 and 88 by year's end; in 2005 there were 24 by April 15, and 122 by year's end.

Not fair to blame police

There appears to be no strong pattern behind the current cluster of killings. The types of homicides have ranged from domestic violence to road rage, drug deals to child abuse. There appears to be no gang war or turf battle over drugs.

Criminologists say it is hazardous to draw conclusions from such a short period of time. They also note there does not appear to be a strong pattern regarding homicides in the nation's cities so far this year. Some cities such as New York are up, while Boston and others are down.

"Thankfully, homicides are relatively rare and one has to be very careful before deriving a pattern. Because they are rare, you have to wait several months to glean patterns," said Rick Rosenfeld, a criminology professor at the University of Missouri-St. Louis.

It's not fair to blame police for the uptick, said James Allan Fox, a criminologist at Northeastern University in Boston. By the same token, police shouldn't get undue credit when homicide numbers are lower.

"It's no consolation to the victims' families to say this is an aberration, but it is," he said of the rash of homicides in Milwaukee recent days. "If there are big jumps three years in a row, you start to think something is going on, but this is not evidence that's going to happen."

A review of killings here so far this year shows about 80% involved firearms.

"The presence of a gun can make a big difference in whether an incident is an argument vs. a homicide, whereas other weapons do not have such an impact," according to Dewey Cornell, a clinical psychologist and professor of education at the University of Virginia. "When carrying guns becomes commonplace in a community, the potential to settle disputes with guns will rise."

Call for tougher penalties

In recent days, as in the past, Police Chief Edward Flynn and Mayor Tom Barrett have called for tougher penalties when people are caught carrying guns in violation of the law.

Wisconsin legalized carrying concealed weapons for those with permits in 2011. Felons cannot get a permit and are prohibited from carrying guns. But people with misdemeanor convictions can get one, unless the crimes involve domestic violence.

"We're talking about career criminals with guns that they buy legally on the streets without a background check, and they qualify for concealed carry permits," Flynn said.

What's more, carrying a gun without a permit is a misdemeanor no matter how many times someone does it.

"We're the only place I know where it's a misdemeanor to carry a gun illegally but a felony for a second rap for carrying pot...," Flynn said. "Is it any wonder these knuckleheads out there with guns aren't learning a lesson from getting locked up by us?"

The penalty for illegal gun possession needs to be tough enough to make people think twice about doing it, Barrett said.

"What I need to see, and what I think is important, is that we make sure that it's a felony to carry a gun without a permit — and certainly in sentencing, there have to be meaningful disincentives for illegally carrying a guns," he said. "We have to change the calculus so that individuals know they are going to be doing some serious time if they commit a serious crime with a gun."

Borowski also wants the Legislature to institute mandatory minimum prison sentences for felons caught with guns and to make the maximum sentences tougher. Now, the maximum state penalty for being a felon in possession of a firearm is five years in prison and another five on extended supervision, which Borowski says is only a "very, very minimal deterrent."

"As a judge I do not like having my discretion taken away by anybody," he said. "But someone who is a felon, like (Chiles), by definition he's a danger to the community. He's already proven himself as a danger to the community."

Ashley Luthern and Crocker Stephenson of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.

Editor's note: An earlier posted version of this story incorrectly said Ricky Chiles faced a maximum of 40 years in prison for his role in the Brown Deer bank robbery. Maximum confinement under sentencing guidelines was 10 years.