Barrett, Walker battle over budgeting
Election 2010

In back-to-back addresses on Monday, Milwaukee County Executive Scott Walker and Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett traded accusations over budgeting and pensions in an attempt to show that he - and not his opponent - would be the more fiscally responsible candidate for governor.

Walker criticized part of Barrett's austerity plan to cut the state's deficit, saying it would harm local units of government.

Barrett, in turn, criticized Walker for his handling of the county pension system. The mayor also took a dig at Walker's pay as county executive.

Each spoke to the annual meeting of the Wisconsin Counties Association at the Frontier Airlines Center in downtown Milwaukee - three days after their first debate.

On Monday, Walker took a more aggressive tone than he did during the one-hour debate on Friday when Barrett lambasted Walker on numerous fronts and Walker largely steered clear of responding to his charges.

Walker, first up with the county officials, ridiculed Barrett's plan to "put Madison on a diet" by claiming that Barrett's proposal for health care savings would result in a reduction of $287 million in state-shared revenue to local units of government.

In all, Barrett's plan calls for $1.1 billion in savings. That includes $339 million in savings for state government, if local employees are permitted to buy into the state's health insurance plan. The state faces a $2.7 billion deficit in the next two-year budget.

By adding local employees to the state pool, state officials will be able to negotiate lower rates that save hundreds of millions of dollars. But most of those savings would help local governments, not the state budget - unless the state makes equivalent cuts to aid to local governments.

But the Walker campaign seized upon footnotes in the plan - "It's in the details of his plan," Walker told the county officials, which estimates $287 million in savings from local employees moving into the state health plan.

The only way that Barrett could recoup such savings is to reduce state dollars that it sends to local units of government by an equal amount, Walker said.

Barrett's campaign said there is no proposal to reduce shared revenue. Barrett told reporters afterward that the savings will cut state costs, and "the response I've gotten from the people in this group is that they are more much more inclined to believe what I say than he says."

When Barrett addressed the group, the mayor compared his take on the county executive's stances to radio legend Paul Harvey's "The Rest of the Story."

Contrary to what Walker has said, Barrett said the county executive hasn't fixed the county pension system, which came under fire before Walker took office for large pension payments - some more than $1 million - that some employees obtained. Barrett noted the county had made more than $7 million in so-called backdrop payments over the summer.

He also blamed Walker for failing to make adequate payments into an underfunded pension system, which, in part, prompted the county to borrow $400 million in 2009.

In contrast, Barrett said he made budget cuts to help address a $49 million shortfall in the city's pension system when the stock market fell.

"I called it a gut-check moment," Barrett said.

Barrett said Walker's call for having state employees pick up a portion of their pension contributions rings hollow because county employees don't.

City employees, however, pay a share of their pension costs, and recently negotiated contracts raise the amount from 1.6% to 5.5%.

Also, Barrett said Walker has touted the $370,000 in pay that he has not accepted since he was elected county executive, but noted that he stopped taking the largest give-back - $60,000 a year - in 2008. Since then Walker has reduced the amount to $10,000 a year.

Afterward in an interview, Walker said:

"Only a politician like Tom Barrett would think that giving $370,000 of your salary back is anything but a pay cut."

Walker defended his handling of the pension system: The county can't take away benefits from vested employees. His borrowing is prudent and will save the county money - he says $237 million - in the long run. The budget he will propose this week will again ask that county employees pay for a portion of their pension benefits.

Walker said, "The bottom line is that they don't have anything to run on, and so they are trying to attack us."