Doyle ready to begin removal process against DA
Madison — Shortly after his office released a letter detailing what he called "unimaginable" new allegations against Calumet County District Attorney Kenneth R. Kratz, Gov. Jim Doyle said Monday he will begin the process of removing the prosecutor from office as soon as possible.

Doyle said he cannot take steps to remove Kratz from office until he receives a formal complaint from a resident of Calumet County. He said he expects to receive such a complaint soon, possibly this week.

Kratz, 50, has been under intense pressure to resign since it was revealed last week that he sent sexually suggestive text messages to a domestic violence victim while he was prosecuting her ex-boyfriend last year.

More allegations against Kratz surfaced Monday, when Doyle's office released a letter from a second woman who says Kratz discussed confidential details of an active investigation with her and even invited her to watch a crime victim's autopsy.

Doyle said an aide has spoken with the woman making the latest allegations, but his office has not had a chance to verify her allegations.

"It's mind-boggling," Doyle said of the accusations. "To have an autopsy be used for the premise of a social engagement is just beyond anything anyone can imagine, I think. . . . That's the part that concerns me the most because it's really the use of official duties, in his official status as district attorney, for purposes completely unrelated to his job as district attorney."

Kratz said Friday that he will not resign and will seek therapy; in a statement Monday, he announced he is taking a medical leave of absence. He has not said when he plans to return to work.

Kratz, a Republican, said last week that he plans to run for re-election in 2012. He can be removed from office before then by the governor or through a recall election.

Neither Kratz nor his lawyer returned voicemails left by a reporter Monday afternoon after Doyle spoke during a news conference at the Capitol.

'Deeply troubling'

Doyle said he first learned of Kratz's text messages through media reports last week and described the entire situation as "deeply, deeply troubling."

Doyle, a former attorney general and Dane County district attorney, was careful to say he would not determine whether Kratz should be removed until after holding a public hearing. Kratz would be given a chance to be heard at the hearing, Doyle said.

"It is my intention to move very, very swiftly upon receipt of a verified complaint," Doyle said.

He said he hoped to resolve the situation within 30 days of receiving a complaint and did not anticipate Kratz's medical leave slowing the process. Kratz is being paid while he is on leave, Doyle said.

Kratz said last week that the Office of Lawyer Regulation investigated his text messages to the domestic violence victim and determined that no professional misconduct had occurred. The president of the regulation office has said he is prohibited from confirming Kratz's statement.

Doyle said he was surprised the Office of Lawyer Regulation had not taken action on a complaint filed against Kratz.

"It's hard to believe there is not a violation of the code of professional responsibility for attorneys that are involved," Doyle said.

The state Department of Justice determined Kratz's text messages did not constitute a crime, spokesman Bill Cosh said. The department did not reveal its investigation of Kratz's text messages to the public while it was occurring because "such an announcement may have jeopardized the underlying criminal domestic violence prosecution," Cosh said.

The Department of Justice did not know that the Office of Lawyer Regulation had not sanctioned Kratz until the story was reported in the media last week, Cosh said.

The woman who wrote the letter released by Doyle's office Monday said Kratz contacted her on Match.com in December. She said they had dinner at a Green Bay restaurant in January, and that during the meal Kratz took several phone calls from detectives investigating the disappearance of a person who investigators believed had been killed.

The woman, whose name was redacted from the letter, wrote that Kratz discussed several aspects of the case with her that had not been revealed to the public. The woman wrote that she and Kratz communicated by text for a couple of days after their dinner.

The woman wrote in the letter that Kratz eventually sent a text "inviting me to go with him to the autopsy (provided I would be his girlfriend and would wear high heels and a skirt)."

Attempts to reach the woman were unsuccessful Monday.

Calls for resignation

Legislators, advocates for crime victims and prosecutors from across the state had already been calling for Kratz's resignation in the wake of reports that he had sent 30 text messages last year to Stephanie L. Van Groll, 26, while he was prosecuting her ex-boyfriend on domestic violence charges.

Van Groll's lawyer, Michael R. Fox, said Monday that he is aware of the new allegations against Kratz.

"If it's credible, it's incredible," Fox said of the letter released by Doyle's office.

Kratz began texting Van Groll just minutes after she met with him Oct. 20 to discuss the abuse her ex-boyfriend had inflicted upon her.

After Van Groll told Kratz about the abuse, he asked if she would mind if he dropped the charge from a felony to a misdemeanor, according to documents released Monday by the state Department of Justice.

Van Groll said she considered the request odd and told Kratz that trying to strangle someone is a felony, the documents show.

Kratz sent his first text to Van Groll about 10 minutes after the meeting, telling her that she had potential and signing the message, "KEN (your favorite DA)."

In other text messages sent over three days, Kratz referred to Van Groll as a "young, hot nymph" and asked if she "likes secret contact with an older married elected DA."

Van Groll reported the text messages to police. Kratz removed himself from the prosecution of Van Groll's boyfriend after the state began investigating his communication with her.

The state appointed a prosecutor to take over the case, and Van Groll's ex-boyfriend was convicted in April of a domestic violence felony, according to court records.

Wisconsin governors have taken disciplinary action against district attorneys before.

In August 1996, then-Gov. Tommy G. Thompson removed Lincoln County District Attorney James Blask from office after Blask was convicted of disorderly conduct after he shoved a referee in his son's basketball game against a wall.

In November 2006, Doyle suspended Bayfield County District Attorney Craig Haukaas when he was charged with felony misconduct in office. Haukaas was acquitted and Doyle reinstated his job.