Regulators to reopen investigation of Kratz
By of the

The state Office of Lawyer Regulation said Friday it would reopen its investigation into Calumet County's district attorney, but continued to refuse to explain why it took no action against the prosecutor after learning last year that he had sent sexually suggestive text messages to a crime victim.

The office, known as OLR, has been criticized by Gov. Jim Doyle, the attorney general's office, lawmakers and victims' advocates for a lack of transparency regarding its decision since news of District Attorney Kenneth R. Kratz's text messages broke last week.

Of particular interest: Who actually made the decision, and why?

On Friday, the first part became somewhat clearer.

OLR, which has the power to suspend or revoke a lawyer's law license, receives more than 2,000 grievances each year, John O'Connell, the agency's deputy director for formal investigations, said in an interview Friday.

Each grievance is assigned to one of four intake investigators, who can then take one of four steps: close the case if there is not sufficient cause to proceed, refer the case to another agency, refer the lawyer for education about minor misconduct or refer the case for additional investigation.

In the case of domestic violence victim Stephanie Van Groll, OLR closed the matter without further investigation, according to the letter the agency sent to her in March. Intake investigator Cynthia Schally signed the letter to Van Groll informing her that the case had been closed. Elizabeth Estes, deputy director of OLR's Central Intake division, must sign off on an investigator's recommendation to close a case.

O'Connell said OLR's director Keith Sellen does not see cases that are closed unless the person who filed the grievance requests that he review the case. There's no indication that happened with Van Groll.

OLR officials had not issued any public statement about the case until Friday, citing confidentiality rules that usually prevent them from discussing cases unless a public disciplinary action is filed with the state Supreme Court or public discipline has been imposed on the lawyer. OLR's confidentiality rules are meant to protect lawyers as well as those filing grievances, often their clients.

Despite those rules, Rep. Terese Berceau (D-Madison) this week requested an audit of the agency while Doyle and two victims' rights groups demanded some kind of explanation.

The statement Friday from Sellen said OLR would reopen its investigation into Kratz because the office "has received substantial new information, particularly information related to what may be a pattern of conduct."

Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen said in a statement Friday that OLR's decision to reopen the investigation shows that the office is now giving the allegations against Kratz "the attention they deserve."

Nevertheless, Bill Lueders, president of the Wisconsin Freedom of Information Council, said Sellen's statement was "wholly inadequate in terms of addressing the serious issues that have been raised" about OLR.

In an e-mail to Sellen, Lueders said the rules requiring the agency to operate in secret need to change.

"The media and public want to know what information the OLR had at the time that it cleared Mr. Kratz of ethical wrongdoing, and how it would justify that decision," the e-mail says. "The concern is that OLR has abused its license to keep complaints secret to cover up serious prosecutorial misconduct."

Kratz admitted publicly last week that he had sent 30 text messages over three days last year to Van Groll, 26, while he was prosecuting her ex-boyfriend on domestic violence charges. The state Department of Justice investigated the texts and determined Kratz had not committed a crime but pressured him into reporting himself to OLR.

Kratz, 50, initially resisted reporting himself, but he eventually did so in December in a letter in which he said "no overt sexual activity was ever suggested" in his texts to Van Groll.

Kratz referred to Van Groll in one text as a "young, hot nymph" and asked in another message if she "likes secret contact with an older married elected DA."

OLR closed the case in March without disciplining Kratz, saying in a letter to Van Groll that Kratz's texts were inappropriate but "did not appear to involve possible professional misconduct."

At least three more women have made similar accusations against Kratz since news of his texts to Van Groll was first reported, including a law student who requested Kratz's support for a pardon from a drug conviction and a woman who said Kratz invited her to a crime victim's autopsy.

Kratz's lawyer, Robert Craanen, has said Kratz denies inviting the woman to an autopsy. Craanen also said this week that because Kratz is in inpatient therapy, he has been unable to ask him about accusations from the law student and a fourth woman who told Van Groll's lawyer she also received sexual messages from Kratz.

Craanen did not return a call seeking comment Friday. Kratz, who has resisted widespread calls for his resignation, announced Monday that he was taking an indefinite medical leave of absence.

OLR is not the only state agency to come under fire for its handling of Kratz's case.

Kratz resigned in December as chairman of the state Crime Victims Rights Board, which has since been questioned about why it also did not take action against him.

During a meeting in Madison on Friday, board staff member Julie Braun said Kratz's resignation from the board was made in a closed session. Bruce Olsen, the board's legal counsel, advised the board that talking about the closed session resignation would be inappropriate Friday. The board put off any discussion until a further meeting.

Olsen would give few details about why the board has not acted or been able to act with respect to Kratz.

In general, he said, the board only has jurisdiction over certain violations of victims' rights.

When pressed about whether the board had referred Van Groll to other help, Olsen said that question "gets close to revealing the subject of the discussion in closed session" when Kratz resigned.

Removal proceedings against Kratz will begin Monday, when a scheduling conference will be held at the Calumet County Courthouse. Doyle has said the proceedings could be resolved within 30 days.