Two more women step forward, accuse Kratz
At least two more women contended Tuesday that they had received sexually suggestive communications from Calumet County District Attorney Kenneth R. Kratz, bringing to four the number of women who have accused Kratz of inappropriate conduct.

One of the women, a 31-year-old law school student, said Kratz sent her sexually worded text messages in 2008 after he agreed to support her application for a pardon from a drug conviction.

Meanwhile, a lawyer representing the woman whose sexually charged text messages from Kratz were disclosed last week said Tuesday he was investigating claims from another woman who said she had received inappropriate messages from Kratz after she became a victim of domestic abuse.

The new accusations surfaced one day after the governor's office released a letter from a woman who said Kratz discussed confidential details of an active investigation with her during a date and later invited her to watch a crime victim's autopsy.

Kratz's lawyer, Robert Craanen, said Tuesday that Kratz denies inviting the woman to an autopsy and told Craanen the allegations are "completely ridiculous."

Neither Craanen nor Kratz returned calls seeking comment after the new accusations were made public later Tuesday.

Kratz, 50, has been under intense pressure to resign since it was revealed last week that he sent sexually suggestive text messages to Stephanie L. Van Groll, 26, while he was prosecuting her ex-boyfriend for domestic violence last year.

Gov. Jim Doyle has said he will begin the process of removing Kratz from office as soon as possible, but the process cannot begin until Doyle receives a formal complaint from a resident of Calumet County. Doyle said he expects to receive such a complaint as soon as this week.

The state Office of Lawyer Regulation declined earlier this year to bring any disciplinary action against Kratz over his text messages to Van Groll, a decision Doyle and now Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen's office have publicly questioned.

Kratz has refused to step down despite calls for his resignation from lawmakers, prosecutors and victims' advocates. He announced Monday he was taking an indefinite medical leave of absence. Craanen said Kratz is enrolled in inpatient treatment.

Similar accusations

The allegations leveled against Kratz on Tuesday mirror the circumstances of his communications with Van Groll.

The law student, Maria Ruskiewicz, said Tuesday she believes Kratz tried to gain sexual favors from her after agreeing to support her efforts to receive a pardon for a 1997 drug conviction.

Ruskiewicz, an Appleton native who attends Oklahoma City University, said she met with Kratz in his office in 2008. She said he began sending her sexually suggestive texts a short time later, including a message in which he asked how she would impress him in bed.

"This is not an isolated event," Ruskiewicz said of Kratz's texts to her. "This happened a year prior to the first woman who came out. He is choosing women who are in vulnerable positions, not just women in general."

Doyle granted Ruskiewicz's pardon last month.

An official at Oklahoma City University and an assistant district attorney in Kenosha County said Tuesday that she had previously discussed Kratz's text messages with them.

Ruskiewicz said she did not speak up about Kratz at first because she was afraid of derailing her pardon, but she decided to come forward after news of Kratz's texts to Van Groll broke last week.

Damon Gardenhire, assistant dean for communications at the university's law school, said another university official had viewed some of the text messages when Ruskiewicz brought them to the school's attention.

The assistant Kenosha County prosecutor, Richard Ginkowski, said Ruskiewicz mentioned Kratz's texts to him while they were discussing her pardon application in 2009.

Ginkowski said he offered to refer Ruskiewicz to a victim-witness advocate and told her she could report the incident to the Office of Lawyer Regulation, but Ruskiewicz chose not to take any action and asked him to keep her information confidential.

"I decided in the end I didn't want to rock the boat," said Ruskiewicz, who said Kratz should resign.

Four accusers

Van Groll's lawyer, Michael R. Fox, said Tuesday he is investigating allegations from four women against Kratz: Van Groll, Ruskiewicz, the woman who accused Kratz of inviting her to an autopsy and a fourth woman who contacted Fox on Tuesday about inappropriate communications she said Kratz sent her a few years ago.

The information about the woman who said Kratz invited her to watch an autopsy was included in a letter released by the governor's office Monday, but the woman's name was redacted from the letter. The Journal Sentinel's attempts to reach the woman have been unsuccessful.

Fox declined to name the woman who he said contacted him Tuesday about Kratz.

Fox said the woman said she was a domestic violence victim and had received messages from Kratz "similar if not identical" in nature to the texts Van Groll received.

Fox said he had not yet verified the woman's accusations. He said he would not be surprised if more women step forward with complaints about Kratz's conduct.

"I think (the accusations) are upsetting," Fox said. "To the extent they're verified, they are troubling in terms of the function this district attorney was supposed to be serving and the power he had over the individuals who are making these allegations. There is a dramatic difference between the power he had and the position these people found themselves to be in."