Walker and GOP just took away the weekend
SHARE

By

The book of Genesis recalls that on the seventh day, God rested. For working people in Wisconsin, it may soon take an act of God to get similar consideration. At the last minute, Wisconsin Republicans and Gov. Scott Walker inserted an ill-conceived and unnecessary item into the state budget that eliminates the requirement to allow workers one day off per week.

In short, they took away the weekend. Supporters said the change simply makes it possible for employees to "volunteer" to work seven days a week without a break. In an era of increasing job insecurity, this is both disingenuous and cynical. In most workplaces, particularly those without a union, employers enjoy enormous coercive power over their employees. For these workers, a seven-day work week is an offer they can't refuse.

Like many of the policy items slipped into the budget, this change is a solution in search of a problem. Republicans claimed that even in situations in which employees wanted to work, the existing law prohibited it. This is simply not the case. If an employer and employee agree to a seven-day work week, they can jointly request a waiver from the Department of Workforce Development. This hardly represents a significant administrative barrier. In the last two years, for example, 100% of all waiver requests were granted.

A break from work is a universally recognized human right. We must not allow a day of rest to become a luxury reserved for the fortunate few. In its 1961 McGowan vs. Maryland decision, the Supreme Court of the United States held that rest laws promoted the values of "health, safety, recreation, and general well-being".

These are fundamental values that benefit both individual workers and society at large. Health care officials warn about an American epidemic of stress, recommending regular breaks to allow people to relax and rejuvenate. Beyond promoting physical health, time off allows us to fully participate in the life of our communities and take care of our families. The worker on the job seven days a week can't volunteer at his or her kids' school or help an elderly neighbor or coach Little League.

Americans already work more than their counterparts in other countries. According to the United Nations International Labor Organization, on average we spend more time on the job than workers in other industrialized nations such as Japan, Britain and France. The United States is now one of just 16 countries in the world that don't require time off each week. With their repeal of our state's one-day-off-in-seven statute, Republicans have aligned Wisconsin with places like Burma and Sudan.

There was a time in our nation when people spoke of the leisure class — those wealthy individuals who could afford to take time off to enjoy life while everyone else toiled long hours without a break. The labor movement helped bring that basic human right, a day of rest, to everyone. Now, like so many hard-won workplace protections in our state, it is again under assault by Walker and the Republicans.

Working families would do well to reflect seriously on what these politicians are doing to undermine individual workers, strong families and stable communities. That is, if you can get a day off to think.

Stephanie Bloomingdale is secretary-treasurer of the Wisconsin State AFL-CIO.