Part 1: Subsidies without scrutiny: Millions for jobs worth it?
NOTE: This story was updated July 15 to clarify state assistance offered to Acuity Insurance. See clarification published in newspaper

Part 1: Subsidies without scrutiny: Millions for jobs worth it?

Falling Short The prediction: General Motors said its $8 million grant would allow it to retain 3,300 jobs The result: 542 fewer jobs. The prediction: Kohl's Department Stores hoped the money it received would create 1,000 jobs. The result: 240 hired.

Beating Expectations The prediction: Meatpacker Patrick Cudahy said it would use its $3 million grant from the state to add 390 jobs The result: 725 additional jobs.

Business subsidy programs at the state Commerce Department number in the dozens, but the largest are tax credits, grants and loans. Tax credits: Companies claim credits on state income-tax liability over several years as they create promised jobs through expansions or by cleanup of polluted sites. Maximum amount is $3 million, but some exceptions have been made. Grants: Outright aid is awarded to underwrite costs of business expansions or training. Some aid also is given to promote new technology. Loans: These are low-interest, often forgivable. Loans have become a less prominent part of state subsidies, as competition for expansions among states has grown. The state Development Finance Board decides which firms get grants or loans, based on recommendations from Commerce Department staff.

THE COST OF PLANTING THE FLAG Faced with the prospect of losing the home office of Acuity Insurance in Sheboygan to Illinois, Wisconsin offered the company $7 million worth of incentives toward a $40 million expansion. The project included this 338-foot, $450,000 flagpole hugging I-43, which the firm calls the tallest in the United States. If Wisconsin hadn't stepped up, would Acuity have left? "I don't know," Acuity Vice President Wally Waldhart said.

First of two parts

Wisconsin distributes millions of dollars of taxpayer money to companies each year to encourage economic growth and job creation. But the state fails to track subsidies to see whether they work.

If officials did check, they'd find that thousands of new jobs promised by companies in exchange for state aid never materialized.

The Journal Sentinel examined 25 companies that were awarded about $80 million in state subsidies over a six-year period, including the 10 largest aid recipients. These 25 firms accounted for roughly one-fourth of all business subsidies given.

Only two of the companies fully reported their job creation and retention efforts, causing huge gaps in the state's accounting.

Where records were unavailable, the Journal Sentinel contacted the companies to find the accurate totals. Among the findings:

• About 40% of the jobs companies agreed to create for their subsidies do not currently exist.

• The state spent nearly $17,000 per new job, 70% more than the state's own guideline for an acceptable subsidy.

• When companies do report lower job totals, the state often adjusts its requirements for job creation downward rather than cancel subsidies or seek repayment.

Wisconsin officials say the incentives are necessary. Without them, business expansions might be lost to other states offering more tax breaks, low-interest loans, job training, infrastructure improvements or outright handouts. In fact, in many cases, the state aggressively pursues businesses or companies that are considering a move or cutbacks and takes the lead in putting together a subsidy plan.

"They need to see a sign . . . that we value their presence," said Mary Burke, the state's commerce secretary.

Critics say it's impossible to determine whether the incentives actually help create jobs or spur economic development - especially when the state is so lax in collecting data from subsidy recipients.

"We'd rather fly blind into the snowstorm," said Joel Rogers, a University of Wisconsin-Madison professor who heads the Center on Wisconsin Strategy.

Some companies exceeded the state's expectations. Meatpacker Patrick Cudahy received $3 million to create 390 jobs. The company said it actually added 725 - nearly doubling its goal.

Others have fallen short. General Motors promised to retain 3,300 jobs at its Janesville plant in exchange for $8 million in state aid. Instead, the automaker has reduced its work force by 542. Kohl's Department Stores received $4.15 million in state subsidies to create 1,000 jobs. It has hired 240. The company declined to comment.

"If we can't agree that we're supposed to get jobs out of the other end of the tube, what's the benefit?" said Greg LeRoy, executive director of Good Jobs First, a Washington, D.C., organization that advocates for public subsidy reforms. "Taxpayers ought to be getting their money back."

$50 million a year

Subsidy programs for corporations have proliferated since Wisconsin began providing grants, tax credits and forgivable loans in earnest two decades ago to keep businesses from fleeing the state.

The $50 million or so a year in taxpayer- provided aid generally comes with some strings: creating or preserving jobs, or helping low-income areas.

Wisconsin's spending on business incentives makes it neither a standout nor a piker among states. Minnesota spends roughly twice as much. And the numbers pale compared with aid packages such as the $242 million that North Carolina used to lure a Dell computer factory.

The competition among states can be fierce.

"It's a game of poker that every community plays," said George Erickcek, an economist at the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research in Kalamazoo, Mich.

Chicago, for instance, persuaded Boeing to move its headquarters from its hometown of Seattle in 2001 with state and local incentives exceeding $53 million, beating out competing offers from Dallas and Denver - and far surpassing any single Wisconsin public incentive deal.

In the early 1990s, Alabama won a bidding war for a Mercedes-Benz plant, which now employs 1,700 people, by offering $253 million in incentives and tax breaks.

"Alabama really purchased that Mercedes plant," said Gary Hufbauer, a former U.S. deputy assistant Treasury secretary for international trade and currently senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington, D.C.

North Carolina's Research Triangle also began with lavish government help. "It was hugely subsidized in a state that was renowned for textiles and tobacco," Hufbauer said. "But it has paid off terrifically."

3,626 recipients

The state offered nearly $300 million in public aid from 2000 to 2006 to 3,626 Wisconsin companies and organizations. The money went through more than three dozen programs run by the Commerce Department.

A third of the subsidies went to two dozen companies, each offered $2 million or more.

While it is clear that some companies can well afford to expand without taxpayers' help, Burke said the aid is necessary to keep Wisconsin competitive with other states.

"With the larger projects, it's the price to even be in the game," she said.

Consider Acuity Insurance.

Wisconsin offered the company $7 million worth of incentives in early 2003 toward a $40 million expansion of its home office in Sheboygan after the company said Illinois had offered even more.

The Acuity complex hugging the east side of I-43 is easy to spot because of one prominent feature: the massive U.S. flag atop a 338-foot pole, tallest in the United States, Acuity boasts.

The corporation's distinctive $450,000 flagpole was part of the expansion project, but according to the company was not erected with state funds.

If Wisconsin hadn't stepped up, would Acuity have left?

"I don't know," Acuity Vice President Wally Waldhart said. "That decision didn't have to be made, because (Wisconsin) came through."

Wisconsin doubled its tax credit offer to Acuity just days after the firm e-mailed figures showing that Illinois had offered Acuity $18.6 million to move. Illinois officials confirmed they had discussed a possible Acuity relocation but declined to say what incentives were offered.

To date, Acuity has accepted a $3 million tax credit for retaining existing jobs. The company also received $480,000 in tax credits for creating 96 jobs and turned down a $1 million loan.

Acuity has until 2010 to claim the rest of the job-creation tax credits. The tax credits for new jobs amount to $5,000 per position.

During the six-year period, the average state business subsidy was about $7,800 per job, when both existing and new jobs are counted, an analysis of the state's available data shows.

The department's publicly listed maximum is $10,000 per job, although 161 of the projects examined exceeded that - even when you factor in existing jobs.

But new jobs are considered the big prize. Viewed in that light, the cost figures rise. Among those above the $10,000 threshold is Kohl's. Its subsidy amounted to $17,292 for each new worker. The state also credited Kohl's for some 2,700 workers it already had on its payroll, in parceling out the assistance.

Help for GM

The case of General Motors offers a window into how subsidies work.

In early 2003, Commerce Department officials learned that the company was considering a $175 million expansion of its Janesville assembly plant. State officials asked what they could do to help.

A few months later, the state told GM it would expect the company to maintain the 4,500 jobs it then had in Janesville through the end of 2008 or it would have to pay back some of the state funding, plus interest and administrative costs.

GM resisted, arguing that employment at the Janesville plant already was down to 3,750 and further cuts were planned.

Eventually, the deal called for 3,300 jobs to be maintained in Janesville through the end of 2010. GM's Janesville employment now stands at 2,758.

GM officials inserted provisions to minimize any penalties for letting employment fall below agreed upon levels. Boilerplate language in state subsidy contracts often calls for companies to repay grants if they miss job targets. But GM was able to negotiate changes.

"We need 'outs' of any repayment clause," Candace Butler, a senior project manager for GM Worldwide Real Estate, wrote in an e-mail included in the Commerce Department files.

The state relented.

"There are a lot of elements that go into a business case, and for competitive reasons I can't go into all of the elements," GM spokeswoman Pam Reese said.

GM isn't the only company that fell short of its job promises. Sixteen of the 25 companies reviewed by the Journal Sentinel failed to deliver agreed upon jobs, though the clock is still ticking for a handful of them.

It's the price of doing business, some current and former state officials say.

"If the business struggled to meet the goal (and failed) and I tell them, 'OK, now you have to give me back $100,000,' is that productive?" said Cory Nettles, a Milwaukee attorney and Gov. Jim Doyle's first commerce secretary. "The result of that might be their bankruptcy, which means that they shut down their whole operation and that many more people become unemployed."

Sometimes the state does crack down. Papermaker P.H. Glatfelter repaid the full $292,000 it had drawn on a $750,000 forgivable state loan, after it closed a 102-year-old mill in Neenah early last year. It also paid the state a $75,000 fine for violating terms of its loan deal.

Such paybacks are rare, Burke said. The state, however, does not track such things routinely, so it is unable to document the actual extent.

Documentation lacking

Many of the state subsidy files examined by the Journal Sentinel were in disarray. Companies are supposed to file annual or semiannual progress reports on job creation. But many of the reports were late or missing. That hobbles the Commerce Department's ability to tally how successful its aid programs have been.

The Journal Sentinel found, however, that 59% of 6,732 jobs promised by the 25 firms have been created so far. The information was gathered by contacting the firms and from public records filed with the department and elsewhere.

Until recently, many staffers had a hand in monitoring job claims, but no one had overall responsibility, Burke said. That left information scattered in many paper files.

Milwaukee's Historic Third Ward Association, which won a total of $2.5 million toward a parking ramp and the Milwaukee Public Market project from 2000 to 2004, failed to submit some reports and filed others late. None of the required reports was filed on $750,000 in aid for the market in 2004, one of three state subsidies awarded to Historic Third Ward.

Problems with reports not getting filed happened under previous management of the market, said Historic Third Ward CEO Ron San Felippo.

"In the end, do the reports matter, or do the results matter?" San Felippo said. "I'd argue the results matter."

The market has 75 full-time workers - 45 fewer than the Historic Third Ward Association pledged.

The lack of reporting has some lawmakers frustrated.

"You can put a dollar out there, but you don't know what happens," said state Sen. Robert Cowles (R-Green Bay). Companies "get the money, and then the agency doesn't really make an effort to see what happened."

Documentation submitted in support of state aid varied greatly. Some applications included hundreds of pages of description and proof of expansion costs, while other aid requests listed few details.

Criticism of Wisconsin's business subsidy programs is longstanding, including reports last year and in 1990 by the Legislative Audit Bureau that found poor oversight.

Peter Thillman, a board member of the Wisconsin Economic Development Association and a former Commerce Department official, said state programs need consolidation and better accountability. He also argued in favor of greater flexibility and an emphasis on improving skills of the existing work force.

Wisconsin could use more money for incentives but first needs to get a better handle on what it's doing now, he said.

"I don't know if we have adequate funding, because we don't know what our outcomes are," Thillman said.

Minnesota's example

Some states are making strides. Minnesota led the way in 1995 with stricter and more explicit rules for aid recipients than Wisconsin's.

Minnesota also requires detailed reports from companies specifying project costs, workers' wages and the public purpose of a subsidy. A public hearing must be held before a subsidy is awarded.

Companies must file annual updates on what they have accomplished with Minnesota taxpayer money. Firms failing to do so are denied additional aid until the tardy reports are filed. Failure to fulfill job goals can trigger state action to force companies to pay back subsidies.

Catalog retailer Fingerhut Corp., for example, had to repay $1 million in state loans in 1997 under Minnesota's provisions that force companies to forfeit subsidies if they don't deliver promised jobs. The company acknowledged it had fallen short of the goals.

The Minnesota model has resulted in subsidies being targeted to companies creating higher-paying jobs and has cut down on "pie-in-the-sky" job claims, said John Hottinger, a former state senator and co-sponsor of the accountability law.

"It's made those job goals and wage goals enforceable and made the (aid) proposals more realistic," said Hottinger, who left the Minnesota Legislature last year.

Burke said her department now does a better job of follow-up with firms receiving state cash but acknowledged record-keeping shortcomings. She said that tight budgets have trimmed staff and that monitoring was a lower priority.

A department reorganization and assignment of a full-time person to coordinate monitoring has addressed the problem, Burke said.

The department plans to record more job-creation details in a computer database, which would make it easier for the public to find results of a particular subsidy. The department also is working on a single Web site that links the state's economic development programs.

The state, however, continues to add subsidy programs, putting a further strain on Commerce Department staff.

Six programs were approved by the Legislature in the last budget, "none of which we asked for," Burke said.

They included tax credits for filmmakers and aid for equipment to reduce idling of diesel trucks, but no money for more oversight.

John Schmid of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.