Business subsidy reforms backed
The state gives out hundreds of millions of dollars to businesses for job creation and retention but doesn't track whether the subsidies work. The Journal Sentinel found that thousands of jobs promised by companies have yet to materialize.One factory in Racine County won nearly $10 million in state subsidies through a succession of owners - each promising to spare, revive or create hundreds of jobs. The results have been less than stellar.

Wisconsin needs to toughen its standards for parceling out millions of dollars in business subsidies, including tighter scrutiny of who gets aid and better monitoring to ensure the money is used effectively, state lawmakers and subsidy reformers said.

Disclosures in a Journal Sentinel series this week and a 2006 state audit might help subsidy reforms take root, lawmakers said.

The series, "Subsidies Without Scrutiny," found 40% of jobs promised by 25 firms that won $80 million in state aid over a six-year period failed to materialize. The series also found major shortcomings in state subsidy records, making job-creation promises difficult to track. And the state often lowered job goals rather than cancel subsidies or seek repayment.

The state audit called for program consolidation and standardization of subsidy rules.

Changes under study include accountability measures that would require clearer goals for subsidies and holding companies to terms of deals, such as job creation, lawmakers said. Some also hope to winnow the large number of programs - 40 in the Commerce Department and 152 subsidy variants in all of state government.

State Sen. Mark Miller (D-Monona) said he plans to introduce legislation this year with Minnesota-style reforms. One likely provision: Any subsidized jobs must pay a living wage, defined as double the federal poverty line. That would work out to about $20,000 a year for a family of two, he said.

Minnesota requires detailed reports on project costs, worker wages and statement of public purpose for a subsidy. If a business fails to file a required report, a portion of a subsidy could be delayed or withdrawn.

Minnesota and Illinois also post details of subsidies on a Web site. In Minnesota, a public hearing in the town where a business seeking assistance for an expansion is also required.

Details of Wisconsin subsidies are difficult to find because there is no centralized information source.

Changes sought

The series finding that 40% of promised jobs hadn't been created shows "we have some more work to do," Miller said. "If we are spending taxpayers' money in economic development, let's try to make sure the money is well-spent," he said.

Sen. Robert Cowles (R-Green Bay) said he favored similar reforms. He'll request a "mini-audit" by the Legislative Audit Bureau to continue to pressure the Commerce Department to follow through with promised improvements.

He suggested giving the non-partisan audit bureau oversight authority on the business subsidies, though he said he feared resistance to the idea. Cowles said whoever is governor - Republican or Democrat - dislikes curbs on business subsidies.

"They want the money, but they don't want us looking over their shoulder to see what's going on," said Cowles, a member of the audit committee.

The newspaper reviewed subsidies awarded between 2000 and early 2006, under Republican Govs. Tommy Thompson and Scott McCallum and Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle.

Review backed

Sen. Julie Lassa (D-Stevens Point) suggested a wholesale review to update Wisconsin's subsidy programs. She and other members of a group of 10 lawmakers plan to offer reform legislation this year, Lassa said.

State Commerce Secretary Mary Burke has said her department is already directing most aid to firms creating higher-paying jobs. She also said the department was making strides in better recording of subsidy information. And she said she has already taken steps to improve subsidy oversight, including requiring her sign-off whenever a company wants to cut its job promises.

"We're doing a lot of the work already," she said.

She also has noted that one safeguard in place was that companies can't claim tax credits unless they meet job goals. The newspaper, however, found companies often got tax credits for preserving old jobs as well as for creating new ones and that companies routinely get more time to meet job goals than contracts specified.

Miller gave Burke's department credit for efforts to improve procedures. But he said the changes should be written into law to ensure they are followed.

Lawmakers skeptical

Some lawmakers were skeptical that the changes would happen any time soon, saying fondness for the giveaways posed a major obstacle.

Legislators and governors love to trumpet payouts to companies promising expansions, said Rep. Bob Ziegelbauer (D-Manitowoc).

"Everybody wants to feel good" about spending money for more jobs, he said. "It's kind of an intoxicating thing." Government officials like to pose with their "cardboard checks" celebrating the latest subsidy windfall, he said.

Reform advocate Greg LeRoy said the newspaper's findings suggested that Wisconsin had fallen behind other states in implementing good controls on subsidies. While Wisconsin officials could point to only one instance in which a company failing to create jobs returned its full subsidy, other states have made strides in clamping down in such cases, said LeRoy, executive director of the Washington, D.C., group Good Jobs First.