Walker's wetland bill is criticized
A bill proposed this week by Gov. Scott Walker to sidestep a Department of Natural Resources' review of a wetland at a Green Bay-area retail project is drawing sharp criticism from environmentalists while also signaling his willingness to use his powers to advance his economic agenda.

The legislation would allow a developer to fill a small wetland for a retail sporting goods store at Highway 41 and Lombardi Ave.

The measure would remove the parcel from the DNR's normal review process and allow the developer to effectively ignore an ongoing challenge by an environmental group.

The Walker administration, environmentalists say, is setting a bad precedent by trying to weaken the authority of a regulatory agency.

And they worry the legislation will not only help a prominent businessman but also could lead to the destruction of other wetlands in Brown County.

"We have a lot of problems with this kind of legislation, which treats wetlands in one area of the state differently from wetlands in another area," said Becky Abel, executive director of the Wisconsin Wetland Association.

But Walker thinks that state regulatory agencies have become too powerful. In his run for governor, he often railed against unelected bureaucrats who he said often ignore the economic consequences of their decisions.

Walker has vowed to streamline the state's regulatory system to be more business-friendly and sympathetic to property owners.

"To me its kind of backwards," Walker said in an interview on Wednesday with the Journal Sentinel's editorial board. "There should be more power in the hands of elected officials."

Walker's wetlands legislation asks the Legislature to address a specific environmental dispute in Green Bay.

The bill would exempt disturbing wetlands that are 3 acres or smaller from being reviewed by the DNR if the wetlands are within a tax incremental financing district in Brown County.

Large development

At issue in Brown County is 1.65 acres of a wetland that businessman and automobile dealer John Bergstrom wants to fill as part of a project in the Village of Ashwaubenon to build a retail development on nearly 21 acres at the southeast corner of Highway 41 and Lombardi Ave.

Though no deal has been signed, documents show that Bergstrom has been in negotiations with retailer Bass Pro Shops to construct a store near Lambeau Field. The development is part of a larger Green Bay business plan to leverage the drawing power of the famed stadium to bolster tourism and retail opportunities in the area.

Bergstrom is chairman and chief executive officer of Neenah-based Bergstrom Corp., which owns automobile dealerships.

He has been a significant campaign contributor to Republican and Democratic candidates, donating $16,700 since July 2008, records show.

In 2010, he gave $1,000 to Walker and $1,250 to Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett, the Democrat who ran against Walker for governor.

The DNR approved Bergstrom's plans in July, but the Wisconsin Wetlands Association got DNR approval to challenge the decision.

The group is concerned about the accumulated loss of wetlands and said the parcel in question is critical for wildlife habitat, water quality and flood abatement.

Abel noted that a DNR employee, Jon Brand, a water regulation specialist in Green Bay, recommended on July 2 that the land not be filled because it did not appear to meet state regulations for disturbing wetlands.

Brand also relied on the input of staff, including wildlife biologist Dick Nikolai.

"This is one of the best urban wetlands in my tenure and deserves to remain functional and intact," Nikolai said in a May 19 memo to Brand. Nikolai joined the DNR in 1989.

On a site visit, Nikolai observed a wide range of wildlife, including sandhill cranes and five adult geese.

Brand, who has worked at the agency for 29 years, declined to approve plans to fill in the wetland.

Local DNR administrators did not sign off on the plan, but it was approved by Bruce Baker, the administrator of the DNR's water division.

Baker, a longtime DNR official, said that Bergstrom agreed to reconfigure the site five or six times, including an agreement to reduce the size of wetland to be filled from 2.51 acres to 1.65 acres.

Bergstrom also agreed to create or restore 4 acres of wetland nearby.

"It was all pretty persuasive to me," Baker said.

Paul Kent, an attorney representing Bergstrom, said his client "spent a lot of time and money to get DNR approval, only to find at the end of the process that the decision could be second-guessed by other groups."

He advised Bergstrom that the challenge could drag on for months.

"We looked at: How do we solve this problem?" Kent said. "How do we move forward here? This was an issue we thought should be brought to the attention of the Walker administration - and they were willing to look into it."

George Meyer, a former DNR secretary and executive director of the Wisconsin Wildlife Federation, said that worries about the way Wisconsin allows the public to challenge the process misses the point.

"This is accountability," Meyer said. "This sets a very bad precedent to enact legislation to stop a party's appeal right in the middle of litigation."