Scott Walker proposes expanding voucher school program, raising taxpayer support
By of the

Madison - Gov. Scott Walker is proposing increasing by at least 9% the taxpayer funding provided to private and religious voucher schools - an increase many times larger in percentage terms than the increase in state tax money he's seeking for public schools.

The governor's education funding proposals released Sunday and Monday set the stage for an unprecedented expansion of private voucher schools and independent public charter schools in Wisconsin. At the same time the governor would hold flat a key factor for traditional districts - the per-pupil revenue limit - meaning even with an increase in state aid, schools can't send any more resources to the classroom unless voters approve it.

The proposed increase in funding for existing voucher schools in Milwaukee and Racine, the first since 2009, comes as the Republican governor seeks to expand the program to nine new districts, including Waukesha, West Allis-West Milwaukee and Madison.

Walker is also proposing allowing special-needs students from around the state to attend private schools at taxpayer expense.

Even after the proposed increase to voucher funding and the substantial cuts Walker and lawmakers approved for public schools in 2011, the aid provided to voucher schools would still be substantially less on a per-pupil basis than the overall state and local taxes provided to public schools.

To provide the bigger increase to voucher schools, Walker would need to persuade lawmakers to break a link in state law that currently binds the percentage increase in aid to voucher schools to the percentage increase in state general aid given to public schools.

Walker is also proposing a state board that would help create more independent public charter schools that would be free of school district oversight.

"Our focus overwhelmingly is on improving public schools in the state of Wisconsin because that's where the majority of our students are," Walker told reporters Monday at an event in Madison. "Beyond that, though, if we have schools that are failing to meet those expectations . . . we think it's realistic for parents in those districts . . . to be given a viable alternative for their kids."

On Monday, Walker's proposals drew immediate concern from four GOP senators - a large enough number to force at least some changes.

Walker's voucher school proposal will be spelled out in the budget he formally proposes Wednesday, and it must then be approved by the Republican-dominated Legislature. On Monday, conservatives praised the plan and Democrats joined public school advocates in harshly condemning it. The deciding votes will likely come from more moderate Republicans in the Senate.

"This is phase one of a wide-open school voucher program for the state," Senate President Mike Ellis (R-Neenah) said. "The governor didn't respect the thoughts of about eight or 10 Republican senators who didn't want it in the budget."

The governor's proposed budget would increase state aid to kindergarten-through-eighth-grade voucher schools in the 2014-'15 school year to $7,050 per pupil from $6,442, an increase of $608 per pupil, or 9.4%.

For voucher high schools, the per-pupil aid would rise to $7,856, an increase of $1,414, or 21.9%. For public schools, Walker is proposing a 1% increase in state general aid, though he has also proposed several other separate increases in state money for specific items, including a new set of incentive payments for high-performing schools and additional money for turning around failing schools.

No revenue cap increase

But Walker is also rejecting an increase in the state-imposed cap in revenues that public schools are allowed to raise from both the state and local property-tax payers. Before Walker's tenure, the cap had gone up around $200-plus most years. Two years ago, Walker cut the cap by 5.5%, or about $550 per student.

With no increase in the cap for the next two years, school districts would have to hold a referendum to spend any more in public money on classroom resources than they do now.

Walker's proposed increase in state general aid for public schools would be $129.2 million over two years. For the much smaller system of voucher schools, the increase would be $73 million - $45 million from the state and $28 million from local property-tax payers.

Public school districts where new voucher programs were established would lose state aid and money generated by property taxes as students went into private schools. School choice proponents argue that voucher schools use those dollars more efficiently, educating children for less taxpayer money than the public schools.

Ellis wants to require that a binding local referendum be held for each district before students are allowed to attend voucher schools. Republican Sens. Rob Cowles of Allouez and Dale Schultz of Richland Center said they also back that idea.

"This dramatic expansion of vouchers leaves me cold," Schultz said. "We have a hard enough time to support one education system in this state, let alone two."

In his Madison remarks, Walker flatly refused to consider the referendum requirement, saying it shouldn't be up to a vote on whether students in failing public schools have a subsidy to attend a private school.

Ellis and Sen. Luther Olsen (R-Ripon), chairman of the Senate Education Committee, said they were also concerned that Walker's plan would apply to all students in a district, not just those attending troubled schools. That would mean students in high-performing schools could get into the voucher program, while some in failing schools could not, they said.

Walker said that he was willing to limit both his voucher and charter school proposals to the schools within a district that were receiving poor marks.

Republicans have an 18-15 majority in the Senate, and losing two or more Republican senators would likely be enough to kill or at least change the proposal, though Walker's decision to include voucher expansion in his larger budget bill, and not as separate legislation, gives it a boost.

Democrats and their allies, such as state schools Superintendent Tony Evers, said they didn't want to see such a large chunk of new education money going to a small percentage of students.

"Private voucher schools will receive $73 million in additional funding and spending authority, coupled with a dramatic statewide expansion. This means an up to $1,400 per-pupil funding increase for the 25,000 students in voucher schools, while freezing spending ($0 revenue limit growth) for our 870,000 students in public schools," Evers said in a statement.

Trouble for MPS

Walker's proposals also spell trouble for the perennially cash-strapped Milwaukee Public Schools. The district expected to see at least a $50 per-pupil increase in the revenue cap - or $2 million extra dollars in spending authority - which it built into preliminary budgets already sent to principals.

"This is devastating," School Board member Larry Miller said in an interview. "We lose the enrollment (to more charter and voucher schools) and we lose the funding because there's no increase to the revenue limit."

While Walker's proposal faces challenges in the Senate, it will have an easier path in the Assembly, which is controlled 59-39 by Republicans.

"Parents have the right to give their children the best possible education, and expanding school choice will give options to those stuck in underperforming schools," said a statement from Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester).

Under Walker's proposal, districts would be opened up to voucher programs if they have at least 4,000 students and two school buildings receiving a grade of "fails to meet expectations" or "meets few expectations" on state report cards.

Under Walker's plan, districts would be given voucher programs as they meet certain criteria, leaving open the real possibility that more cities would get such a program in the future. Wisconsin has 42 districts with at least 4,000 students, and of that group there are 11 districts that have at least two schools with a failing grade. Besides Milwaukee and Racine, they are Beloit, Fond du Lac, Green Bay, Kenosha, Madison, Sheboygan, Superior, Waukesha, and West Allis-West Milwaukee.

The expansion would start small. This fall, just 500 students around the state could attend private schools at taxpayer expense outside Milwaukee and eastern Racine County. That would increase to 1,000 the next year, and there would be no cap after that.

Walker also wants to expand opportunities for new independent charter schools statewide that would not have to be a part of local school districts.

Charter schools are different from voucher schools in that they are public schools given more freedom from traditional regulations, in exchange for meeting performance targets spelled out in a contract with an authorizing authority.

Walker's proposal would allow a statewide board to authorize more nonprofit entities to approve new charter schools. Higher-performing districts would have a veto over their children leaving for an independent charter. But lower-performing districts would not.

Right now charter schools that are independent from a district only exist in Milwaukee - where the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and the Common Council can authorize charter schools - and in Racine, where UWM authorizes an independent charter school.

"I think it's a positive step to have additional authorizers opening high-quality schools," said Sean Roberts, executive director of Milwaukee Charter School Advocates. In Madison, Walker said he would also be willing to limit his charter proposal to just students from failing schools within a target district.