Planned Parenthood, citing budget cut, to close four rural Wisconsin centers
Planned Parenthood will be closing four rural Wisconsin locations between April and July because the nonprofit health care organization has lost $1.1 million in state funding, officials announced Monday.

The centers in Beaver Dam, Johnson Creek, Chippewa Falls and Shawano don't get enough private funding to stay financially viable without the state support, which the Legislature eliminated in the 2011-'13 state budget.

The locations are the only reproductive health care providers in their communities, officials said during a conference call from Madison. That means about 2,000 low-income residents who need cancer screening, breast exams, birth control, pregnancy test or testing and treatment for sexually transmitted diseases may have to travel up to an hour to go to a location in another county, Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin officials said during a news conference Monday.

"They are small centers in small communities and they needed the state funding to make them financially viable," chief executive officer Teri Huyck said. "It's terribly unfortunate for the women who live in these areas. Without the state support, we didn't have a choice."

The Beaver Dam location had been open for 35 years, officials said.

Planned Parenthood officials stressed that the $1.1 million the organization lost in state funding for nine counties mainly paid for infrastructure costs. The money was never used to provide abortion services, which would have been against state and federal laws, officials said.

"They weren't reimbursements for patient services directly," said Nicole Safar, director of public policy for Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin. "None of these centers provided abortion services. . . . In these communities, there is nowhere else for low-income women to get these services. These centers focused on preventing unplanned pregnancies and reducing the need for abortions."

The centers provided 11,400 health care services a year. Officials said they worry that the closings will mean that about 2,000 people in the affected communities won't be getting checkups or treatment, putting patients at risk of cancer and other illnesses.

"The women who come in to see me every day don't care if their legislators are Republicans or Democrats," said Deb Lidbury, a nurse practitioner at Planned Parenthood. "What they care about is having access to screenings, birth control and having access to someone who can answer their immediate concerns and questions. Many of the patients I see may skip their annual exam or go without getting a lump check."

Sam Austin, a fiscal analyst with the Legislative Fiscal Bureau, said Gov. Scott Walker had suggested $1,935,600 in budget cuts, but the Joint Committee on Finance restored about 90% of the funding, so the actual cut was closer to $200,000.

Planned Parenthood was disproportionately affected by the cut because the finance committee redefined in 2011 who was able to receive the women's health block grant, which is half federally and half state funded. Any organization receiving funding now has to be a public entity and can't provide abortion services, make referrals to abortion services or be affiliated with abortion services.

Planned Parenthood has three centers in the state that do perform abortion services - Madison East, Milwaukee Jackson Street and Appleton North - officials said, but those will stay open.

The funding that no longer goes to Planned Parenthood now goes to other county or statewide projects, Austin said.

Patients can find a health center on Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin's website or by calling (800) 230-7526.