Trump says 100% tariffs hurt Harley-Davidson sales in other countries
President Donald Trump greets Harley-Davidson CEO Matthew Levatich as he arrives with Vice President Mike Pence to meet with Harley executives and union representatives on the South Lawn of the White House on Feb. 2. (Photo: Getty Images)

The challenges that Harley-Davidson Inc. faces in selling motorcycles in other countries was highlighted Tuesday night by President Donald Trump in his address to a joint session of Congress.

Trump met in early February with Harley executives in Washington, D.C., and said in his address that he was told business was good, but could be better in other countries.

"They told me — without even complaining because they have been mistreated for so long that they have become used to it — that it is very hard to do business with other countries because they tax our goods at such a high rate," Trump said. "They said that in one case another country taxed their motorcycles at 100%."

The president added: "They weren't even asking for change. But I am. I believe strongly in free trade, but it also has to be fair trade."

In India, where big touring motorcycles and cars are saddled with a 100% import tariff, Harley's sales have grown by a brisk 30% in the past two years. That's largely because the company has been able to get around the tariff by assembling bikes In India, something it's done in that country since 2011.

Harley executives visited the White House and had lunch with the president Feb. 2 after tentative plans for Trump to visit Milwaukee were scrapped.

During the visit, Trump pushed his "America's First" theme.

"A lot of countries are taking advantage of us," Trump said following the meeting. "Thank you Harley-Davidson for building things in America."

Journal Sentinel reporter Rick Barrett contributed to this report

RELATED: Harley executives meet with Trump at White House

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/money/2017/03/01/trump-says-100-percent-tariffs-hurt-harley-davidson-sales-other-countries/98575588/