Lombardi places call to Kennedy
SHARE

By ,

Vince Lombardi changed the course of the 1961 NFL Championship Game by dialing President John F. Kennedy's private line in late December and making a request.

Could he adjust Paul Hornung's Christmas leave so he could play against the New York Giants?

Hornung was one of more than two dozen NFL players in the National Guard called to active duty in response to the Berlin Crisis in early October.

No other league team was hit as hard as the Packers, whose star halfback, middle linebacker (Ray Nitschke) and starting receiver (Boyd Dowler) also were activated to serve.

Lombardi needed his full arsenal of playmakers, and the latter two had not missed a game as they were granted weekend leave to participate. Hornung, however, was a different story.

Pvt. Hornung, assigned as a Jeep driver to the 896th Engineer Floating Bridge Company at Fort Riley, Kan., had already missed two regular-season games. The NFL's Most Valuable Player was in jeopardy of missing the championship contest because his Christmas furlough ended before the Dec. 31 game.

Hornung still marvels at the sequence of events that occurred five decades ago.

Lombardi had endorsed and met Kennedy on a campaign swing through Wisconsin in 1960. Kennedy admired the Packer head coach and gave him his personal phone number.

When he was an assistant coach at West Point (1949-'53), Lombardi also met many friends at the highest level of the Army and Pentagon.

"Can you believe it's been 50 years?" Hornung asked. "Sometimes I can't remember what I did five years ago, but that was something else and I'll never forget it.

"Unbelievable. Vince got me out with a phone call to the president of the United States. I don't think that could happen today with Obama or anyone else."

After speaking with Lombardi, Kennedy called Fort Riley to talk to the company commander.

"The captain didn't believe he was the president," Hornung said with a laugh. "But it all worked out and my Christmas leave was changed."

Kennedy then phoned Lombardi back and reportedly told him, "Paul Hornung wasn't going to win the war on Sunday, but football fans of this country deserve the two best teams on the field that day."

Hornung admitted he was not in the best physical condition for the title game and not forthright with his head coach.

"Any time Coach Lombardi asked me if I was working out at Fort Riley I told him I was," said Hornung, who nearly failed his Army physical due to an injured shoulder and pinched nerve. "But I wasn't. I had the shoulder (injury) and was kind of camouflaged in the Army."

Hornung returned to Green Bay three days before the championship game. After just two days of practice, Hornung turned in one of the greatest performances on the NFL's ultimate stage.

"I had to have a good game," Hornung said. "I wasn't in great shape, but I was ready to play the Giants and knew we could beat them.

"Vince said we'd never lose in a championship game again after the loss to Philadelphia and he was right."