Job creation slowed sharply in Wisconsin in 2016, raising questions and worries
CLOSE Wages and employment fell sharply in 2016 in Wisconsin’s manufacturing sector – the biggest piston in the state’s economy – in a year that also saw the weakest overall job performance in the Badger state since the last recession. Wochit

Factory smokestack (Photo11: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Wages and employment fell sharply in 2016 in Wisconsin’s manufacturing sector, the biggest piston in the state’s economy, in a year that also saw the state’s weakest overall job performance since the 2008-'09 recession.

The anemic jobs figures surprised economists at a time when the national economy evidently remains in expansion mode, and even have some beginning to wonder if a recession might be on the horizon.

The 2016 decline in manufacturing employment was all the more confounding after Madison lawmakers phased in a deep tax cut that took full effect last year and was designed as “a powerful incentive (that) will encourage manufacturers to expand in Wisconsin,” according to Wisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce, the state’s biggest business lobbying group.

Some analysts postulate that Wisconsinites are working fewer hours and less overtime as automation increasingly replaces humans in manufacturing plants. Other workers, meanwhile, appear to be accepting pay cuts, while employers create jobs at lower pay levels.

Other analysts, however, have begun asking whether the new data may signal a downturn. Among them: the Wisconsin Taxpayers Alliance, a nonpartisan research group in Madison that has been analyzing state trends for decades.

In previous national recessions, Wistax researchers say, Wisconsin has acted as a bellwether.

“Wisconsin tends to slow and go into recession before the rest of the country,” typically with slumps in the state’s manufacturing economy, said Todd Berry, the group’s president.

That was true in the last recession, which saw a pronounced employment slowdown in 2007 in Wisconsin before the national economy began to cool in the summer of 2008 and then collapsed a few months later amid a full-blown financial crisis.

“We are the canary in the coal mine,” said Dale Knapp, head of research at Wistax, adding that he hopes that he’s wrong but that the numbers should “raise a caution flag.”

According to the latest data, which cover the 12-month period from December 2015 through December 2016:

NEWSLETTERS Get the Business Watch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Get todays business headlines delivered to your inbox. Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Business Watch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Wisconsin added 11,590 private-sector jobs, lagging job creation gains in every other year of the current upswing, which ranged from a low of 29,723 in 2013 to a high of 38,077 in 2015.

The state’s overall 2016 hiring gains amounted to an increase of only 0.5%, well under half the typical rate, which ranged from 1.3% in 2011 and 2013 to 1.6% in 2014 and 2015.

Average weekly private-sector wages in the state declined 0.6% last year, led by a 5.3% plunge in manufacturing wages.

Manufacturers lost 3,776 jobs in the 12-month period, which amounts to a 0.8% decline in employment in the sector.

Wisconsin Department of Revenue chief economist John Koskinen said he’s not worried about a slowdown.

Wisconsin’s estimated unemployment rate dropped to a 17-year low of 3.2% in April, the latest month available, well below the peak of 9.2% late in 2009 in the worst days of the last recession.

Nor have tax revenues dipped below the state's projections. “Our collection data is holding up. They are meeting our expectations,” he said.

The 2016 job-creation numbers were the worst in Gov. Scott Walker’s six years in office, which largely overlap with the national economic recovery. In the six years ended December 2016, Wisconsin added fewer than 180,000 private-sector jobs, which is still some 70,000 jobs short of the 250,000 that Walker promised for his first term.

“The first thing I’d say is, ‘Is this data right?’” said Madison economist David Ward, who chairs the WiSys Technology Foundation, which promotes state university research.

Ward is skeptical because the steep wage declines come at a time when many industrial employers complain of labor scarcity, which in theory should be bidding labor costs higher, not letting them drop.

In an appearance in Beloit on Tuesday, Walker also cited the worker shortage, blaming the decline in manufacturing jobs on a lack of skilled workers to fill open positions.

“Manufacturers here and all across the state will tell you they don’t have enough people to fill the jobs they have open today, and until they can fill those positions with confidence, they can’t add more for the future,” the governor said, according to a Wisconsin Public Radio report.

To validate the quarterly data, Knapp looked to statistics from other agencies. What he found was that Wisconsin manufacturers lost more than jobs last year: Manufacturing output in the state fell every quarter in 2016, following steady gains in previous years, as measured by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.

“I always try to confirm data trends like these with other data,” Knapp said.

There is no doubt that the last recession set in motion a fast-paced economic restructuring that has been remaking the Midwest economic landscape.

The Midwest has fractured into wildly divergent industries, occupations and regions that move at different speeds. The adage that a rising tide lifts all boats no longer applies, particularly in a perennially slow-growth state like Wisconsin.

“I’d argue that manufacturing has been in a recession” in the state, said Brian Jacobsen, senior economist in metro Milwaukee at Wells Fargo Funds Management. “I don’t see anything to suggest a heightened risk of recession at the state level. That doesn't mean there aren't issues. Some are quite acute and depend on where you live.”

Dane County, which includes Madison and its technology spin-off industries, reported the state’s lowest jobless rate in April at 2.1%.

Unemployment was worst across northern Wisconsin, dominated by timber, forestry and paper mills. Thirteen far northern counties led the state with jobless rates that ranged as high as 7.4% in Iron County, worst in the state.

“There are many communities that have been in a depression, let alone a recession,” Jacobsen said. “While durable goods manufacturing stumbled, nondurable goods manufacturing and services plowed ahead. At the state level, growth was weighed down more by the manufacturing slowdown, but the economy is diverse enough that it avoided a recession.”

Even though the manufacturing slowdown was impossible to ignore in the latest report, the sector has been slowing continuously since February 2015, Wistax said. By February 2016, manufacturers began losing jobs, and losses grew progressively in subsequent months.

Nor were manufacturing job losses limited to a single troubled industrial sector, the Wistax analysis showed. They were spread across the state’s durable goods makers; metal fabricators; machinery makers; paper mills and printers; and manufacturers of transportation equipment, electronics and wood products.

One sector in manufacturing bucked the trend. Wisconsin still makes a lot of what people eat: cheeses, meats and dairy goods. Food processors, Wistax found, have been adding jobs.

The job figures were taken from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. They are based on a census of 96% of the state’s employers in both the public and private sectors, making them the most comprehensive data available. The census tracks the economy in rolling 12-month increments, measured every three months.

The quarterly figures are used retroactively to clean up monthly job reports, which are extrapolated from far smaller sample sizes and prone to significant revisions, particularly at the state level.

The state Department of Workforce Development released the quarterly data for Wisconsin on the Friday ahead of the three-day Memorial Day weekend, so it wasn't until this week that economists could dissect them. Comparisons of the 2016 Wisconsin data with statistics from other states and the nation as a whole won’t be possible until the full national report comes out Wednesday.

Read or Share this story: http://jsonl.in/2rMqHia