U.S. agency backs lower blood-alcohol limit for drivers
For archived coverage in the Wasted in Wisconsin series visit our special section .

The National Transportation Safety Board on Tuesday recommended cutting the threshold for evidence of drunken driving from a blood-alcohol level of 0.08 to 0.05, a step a Tavern League of Wisconsin lobbyist immediately labeled a "prohibitionist agenda."

"The federal government has enough problems without trying to coerce states into doing what they say," said Scott Stenger, the government affairs director for the league in Madison.

The NTSB's move came the same day Wisconsin's Assembly passed two bills related to alcohol. One would allow owners of bars and liquor stores to sue underage drinkers who try to trick them into selling them alcohol. The other would ensure repeat drunken drivers spend time behind bars.

Tuesday's recommendation by the NTSB said states should cut the current blood-alcohol level for evidence of intoxication as part of a series of recommendations aimed at reducing alcohol-related highway deaths.

Each year drunken driving claims more than a third of the 30,000 people killed on U.S. highways, and new approaches are needed to combat the problem, which has remained consistent for the past decade, the NTSB said.

"Our goal is to get to zero deaths because each alcohol-impaired death is preventable," NTSB Chairman Deborah Hersman said. "Alcohol-impaired deaths are not accidents, they are crimes. They can and should be prevented. The tools exist. What is needed is the will."

Milwaukee County Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. said he's not in favor of lowering the blood-alcohol limit, because he doesn't think that's the big problem.

"What we're seeing from analysis of our data is that the heart of the problem is that Wisconsin doesn't criminalize the first offense," he said Tuesday.

The first offense of drunken driving should be a misdemeanor, he said. On average, many of those arrested have a level of 0.15, or nearly twice the legal limit, and some are even higher, he said.

"People we stop, test and arrest are drunk out of their minds," he said.

There's nothing in the NTSB recommendations that talks about stiffer sentences, and that's what's needed, he said.

"Our problem is multiple-time offenders, and we don't send a strong enough message after the first time," Clarke said.

In Wisconsin, a conviction for first-offense drunken driving results in a ticket.

More than 100 countries have adopted the 0.05 blood-alcohol-level standard, according to a report by the NTSB board. In Europe, the share of traffic deaths attributed to drunken driving was reduced by more than half within 10 years after the standard was adopted.

Stenger said he doesn't buy that comparison. There are other factors in Europe that affect the data, such as mass transit in other countries, which Wisconsin doesn't have, he said.

"It really does a disservice to try to combat and fight drunken driving throughout the country because it takes away resources from the problem of high and repeat offenders," Stenger said.

The 0.05 standard could mean that having a glass of wine for dinner could make a person drunk, he said.

Studies show that a woman weighing less than 120 pounds can reach 0.05 after just one drink. A man weighing up to 160 pounds reaches 0.05 after two drinks, studies show.

Stenger said the NTSB recommendation also disregards the facts. Many involved in fatalities are at a lower level and that doesn't support what the NTSB is advancing, he said.

He called it a state issue that legislatures should decide.

"They can go to zero if they want," he said.

In Wisconsin in 2011, there were 218 driving fatalities attributed to alcohol and impaired driving, according to the state Department of Transportation. While Wisconsin falls in the middle of the pack nationally in terms of alcohol-related road fatalities, it's among the highest in the country when it comes to self-reported drunken driving surveys.

Little chance of passage

State Rep. Terese Berceau (D-Madison), who favors taxing beer and alcohol products to pay for treatment, said that while the idea of reducing the alcohol standard sounds good, she doesn't think it would get anywhere in the Legislature.

"Zero, zilch, nada," she said.

"We protect our drinking culture," she said. "We are a state that does nothing when it comes to getting serious about drunken driving problems."

The Assembly did pass two alcohol-related bills Tuesday.

One bill would allow those who sell alcohol to sue those younger than 21 for $1,000 in small claims court if they used fake IDs or other means to try to get into bars or buy alcohol at a store.

The measure passed on a voice vote without dissent. It next goes to the Senate, which like the Assembly is controlled by Republicans.

"This is a public health and public safety issue," said Rep. André Jacque (R-De Pere), the bill's author.

It is meant as a response for owners of taverns and liquor stores who face hundreds of dollars in fines and the possible loss of their liquor licenses when they sell liquor to those younger than 21, as happened last month when 105 Marquette University students with fake IDs were ticketed at Victor's nightclub in Milwaukee.

Backers say the bill would provide an incentive for liquor store clerks and bar bouncers to confiscate fake IDs, because they probably would receive some of the cash from the young person who tried to buy alcohol or get into a bar.

The second measure, which passed on a voice vote, would mandate minimum prison sentences for those found guilty of drunken driving seven or more times. Those convicted of a seventh, eighth and ninth offense would face three years in prison.

Those convicted of 10th, 11th and 12th offenses would have to spend four years in prison.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.