Wisconsin Senate panel votes to allow concealed guns without permits
Buy Photo The Wisconsin Legislature is considering a bill that would allow people to carry concealed guns without getting training or state permits. (Photo: Mike De Sisti / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

MADISON - A state Senate committee on Tuesday approved a bill that would allow people to carry concealed guns without getting training or state permits and in some cases bring them onto school grounds.

The Senate Judiciary and Public Safety Committee signed off on the bill 3-2, with all Republicans for it and all Democrats against it. The wide-ranging legislation would also allow people to carry Tasers without training or permits and would allow felons to carry muzzle loaders.

Sen. Van Wanggaard (R-Racine), the chairman of the committee, said Senate Bill 169 would make the public safer and ensure Wisconsin's policies are the same for carrying weapons openly and concealed. Wisconsin has long allowed people to openly carry guns without training or permits.

CLOSE Dan Sajdowitz carries a gun everywhere he goes. On June 14, 2014, Sajdowitz went to Home Depot, Petco and Pick 'n Save on Milwaukee's south side while openly carrying his weapon.

"Quite honestly, I think I would rather have an individual that can lawfully possess a firearm and is carrying it, (and) I'd rather have them carrying it concealed because I think it creates a lot less tension when you're in a group of people," Wanggaard said.

"If they’re there for a lawful purpose and they’re carrying it for personal protection, they’re not going to be the problem. The one that’s going to be the problem is the dirtball that has one that’s illegal and they’re going to use it to conduct crime."

Democrats and other opponents disagreed.

"We need to be able to do this with a balance and some level of decency," said Sen. Lena Taylor (D-Milwaukee). "We need to have some regulations to make sure that we’re protected."

Taylor voted for Wisconsin's 2011 concealed weapons law, but opposes the latest legislation.

Tuesday's vote clears the way for the legislation to be taken up by the Senate this year or in early 2018. Wanggaard predicted it would clear both houses and be signed by GOP Gov. Scott Walker, even though Walker expressed reservations about the bill in June.

The measure would allow people to carry electric weapons such as Tasers and stun guns without getting permits or training. It would also allow some people to bring guns onto school grounds — a provision that was included so that parents who carry weapons aren’t breaking the law when they pick up and drop off their children at school.

Sen. David Craig (R-Town of Vernon) and Rep. Mary Felzkowski (R-Irma) introduced the legislation this spring in hopes of turning Wisconsin into a “constitutional carry” state that allows people to pack firearms without having to register with the state, pay government fees or get training.

The Senate committee adopted a modified version of the bill that they said addressed some of the concerns of opponents. But those against the bill said the changes did little to appease them.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Walker in June cast doubt on the legislation, saying he was happy with the concealed weapons law he signed in 2011 and believed it was "appropriate" for the state to require people to get permits to carry hidden weapons.

The bill would drop a blanket restriction under state law that prevents people from bringing guns into all police stations, secure mental health facilities and schools. Instead, officials in charge of those places would individually decide whether to ban guns from their properties.

Even if guns were specifically banned from the grounds of a school, those with permits to carry concealed weapons would still be able to bring them there, as long as the guns stayed in their vehicle or within five feet of their vehicle. Those with permits would also be free to bring guns onto any school grounds when there were no school activities.

The legislation also would allow felons to possess muzzle loaders and firearms manufactured before 1898.

While people would no longer need permits to carry concealed weapons in other places in Wisconsin, they would still be able to get them from the state if they wanted.

The lawmakers left the permitting process in place because many other states recognize concealed weapons permits from elsewhere. Keeping in place Wisconsin’s permitting system would make it easier for people from here who want to carry weapons when they travel to other states.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2xeuaWC