Bice: Out-of-state groups cash in on Milwaukee County Sheriff David Clarke
Milwaukee County Sheriff David A Clarke, Jr. (Photo: Calvin Mattheis / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Milwaukee County Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. is good for business:

Lucrative, and sometimes shady, political business.

Four out-of-state political groups are now raising money via solicitations saying they are trying to draft Clarke, the national political firebrand, to take on U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin next year, even though Clarke has given no indication he wants to run.

The first draft Clarke committee, based in North Carolina, has raised more than $300,000 from 5,886 donors in 30 days, according to the group's national chairman. Baldwin, by comparison, raised $562,000 in the final three months of last year.

Three other pro-Clarke political action committees have the trappings of "scam PACs" — groups that drop the names of popular politicians in fundraising appeals but then use the cash primarily on consultants, not candidates. In this case, the PACs appear to be trying to cash in on Clarke's popularity with President Donald Trump's crowd even as they vilify Baldwin, the first openly gay U.S. senator.

If that's not enough, one of the groups touting America's Sheriff is run by a Florida businessman who disparages cops and lavishes praise on Black Lives Matter. Another group making an issue of Baldwin's sexuality uses a gay political consultant for most of its work.

"Leftist lesbian Senator Tammy Baldwin is a pervert," says an email solicitation from a group called Restore American Freedom and Liberty. "She is working to end all marriage laws and require all Americans to be subjected to LGBT sensitivity training. In fact, she wants to require children starting at age 5 to learn about gay sex! She is disgusting, and it is vital that Sheriff David Clarke defeats her!"

A state Democratic Party spokeswoman urged Clarke to call out the groups using his name.

"Once again, an out-of-state special interest group is spewing attacks in Wisconsin's Senate race," said Gillian Drummond. "We demand that Sheriff Clarke and other potential Republican candidates denounce the false, divisive attacks on Tammy."

“We demand that Sheriff Clarke and other potential Republican candidates denounce the false, divisive attacks on Tammy (Baldwin).” Gillian Drummond, spokeswoman for state Democratic Party

Clarke has declined to comment on these efforts.

Nearly a month ago, a North Carolina-based super PAC called Sheriff David Clarke for U.S. Senate registered with federal election regulators as the official draft campaign dedicated to convincing Clarke to run.

Since then, the group has piled up $300,154 in donations and gathered 53,000 signatures for its pledge to support Clarke's candidacy. Kay Daly, an advisory board member, said the all-volunteer group has bought a sponsorship at next week's Conservative Political Action Conference, done professional polling and bought digital ads on a number of conservative websites.

"There is one and only one PAC registered with the FEC for the purpose of drafting Sheriff Clarke, and that is ours," Daly said.

In an effusive story, the conservative website Newsmax said last week that the super PAC was making an "extraordinary splash."

In short order, other groups began hitting up potential donors under the guise of trying to draft Clarke to run.

First, there was the Committee to Defend the President, a super PAC that used to go by the name Stop Hillary PAC. It put out a "Trump action alert" urging people to make donations in support of Clarke, even while misspelling his name.

"Sheriff David Clark can defeat leftist Tammy Baldwin for Wisconsin's U.S. Senate race!" said the email from the Virginia-based group.

Dan Backer, treasurer and a consultant to the super PAC, referred questions to "my client." Politico reported in 2015 that Backer acted as the treasurer, lawyer and consultant for 15 different PACs at that time. One of his groups targeted House Speaker Paul Ryan last year.

Then there is BlakPAC, a group headed by George Farrell, a Florida businessman and GOP activist.

"Sheriff Clarke is clearly testing the waters to gauge whether or not he’s got the grass-roots backing to take on and defeat an entrenched incumbent like Tammy Baldwin," says a post on BlakPAC's website.

Another post took last week's Newsmax story on the official Draft Clarke committee and replaced its name with BlackPAC so it would look like Farrell's group had raised $175,000 while promoting the sheriff.

Farrell is an odd politician to be promoting Clarke. Farrell published a book last year in which he sings the praises of Black Lives Matter, makes numerous anti-Semitic statements, disparages police officers, praises rapper Tupac Shakur for shooting two cops and urges blacks to leave the country because of its rampant racism.

“The entire goal of the United States is to brand every Black man as a criminal," Farrell wrote in "Success is Colorblind." Farrell, the biggest donor to BlakPAC and its biggest recipient of its funds, did not return calls Wednesday.

Finally, there's Restore American Freedom and Liberty.

"Leftist lesbian Tammy Baldwin is an extremist on every issue," says the Colorado group's fundraising note. "She even supports importing millions of terrorist immigrants from the Middle East! She is a threat to America!"

What the group doesn't mention in its overheated rhetoric is its own very questionable spending record.

While claiming to back Trump and other Republicans, such as Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson, Restore American Liberty has put hundreds of thousands of dollars in consulting firms such as Amagi Strategies. The firm was Restore American Liberty's largest vendor, receiving more than $300,000 from the group in the past two years for "electronic electioneering," among other things.

Who exactly is behind Amagi Strategies? Tyler Whitney — a gay, twentysomething Libertarian consultant — founded the firm and runs it out of his East Village apartment in New York City. Records show Amagi was paid some $842,000 from eight super PACs since January 2015.

Whitney could not be reached for comment. Alexander Hornaday, an attorney for Restore American Liberty, did not return a call.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.

Read or Share this story: http://on.jsonl.in/2lls17R