Uninsured rate falls in Wisconsin
Gov. Scott Walker should be investing in Wisconsin’s colleges and universities, argues state Rep. Dana Wachs (D-Eau Claire). (Photo: Associated Press)

Madison — The uninsured rate in Wisconsin has fallen by more than one-third over the past two years, new federal data show.

The number of Wisconsin residents without health insurance fell from 518,000 in 2013 to 323,000 in 2015, according to the figures from the U.S. Census Bureau.

The uninsured rate in the state dropped from 9.1% to 5.7% over that two-year period while the national rate declined from 14.5% to 9.4% over the same two years, the federal agency found.

That put Wisconsin in a tie with Rhode Island for sixth best among states nationally — essentially the same ranking as two years ago. Wisconsin Republicans opted in 2013 not to use federal money to fully expand state health programs, but in 2015 only Massachusetts, Vermont, Hawaii, Minnesota and Iowa had a higher insured rate among their residents.

"Overall, these numbers are extremely good news nationally and also in Wisconsin," said Jon Peacock, research director for the Wisconsin Council on Children and Families. "I'm relieved that we haven't lost more to the expansion states."

Nationally, 29.8 million people were uninsured at some point in 2015, down from 36.7 million in 2013. The drops in the uninsured population came amid the expansion of the federal Affordable Care Act in 2014.

That law, sometimes known as Obamacare, was designed to expand coverage in two ways.

People with incomes above 138% of the federal poverty level — $16,242 for an individual this year — were eligible for subsidies to buy private health plans sold on state or federal marketplaces set up under the law. And people with incomes below 138% of the federal poverty level would be covered through an expansion of Medicaid programs.

A 2012 Supreme Court ruling gave states the option of not expanding their Medicaid programs. That gave Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and the Republican-controlled Legislature the ability to put their own take on the law by expanding Medicaid but doing so only partially.

The state expanded eligibility for the BadgerCare Plus Medicaid program to include adults who previously were not always eligible — those who did not have dependent children — and who have incomes below 100% of the poverty level, or $11,770 for an individual.

Adults with incomes above the threshold can buy subsidized health plans sold on the marketplaces.

Announcing his plan in 2013, Walker predicted it would help an additional 224,600 state residents obtain health coverage.

Over the past two years, Walker's plan has resulted in about 195,000 more people gaining health coverage, or about 87% of what he had said at the time, though some have had to leave BadgerCare for private coverage.

At the time, Walker said his plan wouldn't expand health coverage as much as the federal law allowed but said his proposal was better because it would control the size and role of the federal government in the state.

"Wisconsin is now tied for the sixth-best uninsured rate in the nation thanks to Governor Walker’s reform plan, and the fact that Wisconsin’s uninsured rate dropped from 9.1% to 5.7%, a nearly 40% drop, is welcome news," Walker spokesman Tom Evenson said.

Peacock said the state is forgoing substantial federal aid for its health programs as well as missing out on the chance to likely expand health coverage to tens of thousands more people. In February, the Journal Sentinel reported that Walker and the Legislature's opposition to taking the federal expansion money is projected to cost the state nearly $680 million by June 2017.

Wisconsin already had one of the lowest uninsured rates in the country before the Affordable Care Act and has kept its ranking over the past two years. It is currently the only state in the top 20 for health insurance rates that didn't fully expand its Medicaid program.

Read or Share this story: http://on.jsonl.in/2cXfHqI