Jim Sensenbrenner holds feisty town hall
CLOSE

Buy Photo A crowd of about 200 filled a meeting room at the Delafield City Hall for a constituent meeting Saturday held by U.S. Rep. Jim Sensenbrenner (R-Wis.). (Photo: Mark Hoffman, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

Delafield — Some politicians are wary of holding contentious town hall meetings. But not U.S. Rep. Jim Sensenbrenner, the dean of the Wisconsin delegation.

On Saturday morning at Delafield City Hall, Sensenbrenner showed up and faced a roomful of constituents, a lot of them upset with President Donald Trump's policies and ready to make their views heard, either through tough questions or simply holding aloft paper signs that read "Disagree."

"I'd rather have a town hall meeting in a crowded room than one with 12 people," Sensenbrenner said at one point.

Sensenbrenner faced questions on a range of issues from the GOP plans to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, to his views on impeachment.

Yes, things did get testy. And Sensenbrenner banged a gavel several times.

At one point, Mike Cummens, of Oconomowoc, told Sensenbrenner that by voting against Obamacare he was in effect voting himself a tax cut since Obamacare contained a net investment income tax that hit wealthy taxpayers.

RELATED: Rep. Gwen Moore meets friendly Glendale town hall crowd

Sensenbrenner disputed Cummens claim about his net worth, said his assets are "fully disclosed down to the penny" and took umbrage at the suggestion that he was voting his economic interests.

"I am not getting a $100,000 tax break by repealing Obamcare. And for you to say that ... I cast my vote basically to line my pocket, that (would be) illegal," said Sensenbrenner.

"That attacks my integrity. And I resent that."

Later Cummens told the Journal Sentinel that he was "surprised and upset" that Sensenbrenner "kept interrupting me."

Ed Cohen of Oconomowoc questioned Sensenbrenner on Russia's influence on the 2016 election and potential scenarios that might lead to Trump's impeachment.

Sensenbrenner said he's waiting for the results of investigations launched by the FBI and U.S. Senate and House Intelligence committees. He said any foreign meddling in American elections is "unacceptable."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"I’ve yet to find the first person to change their vote from Hillary Clinton to Donald Trump because Vladimir Putin suggested they do that," Sensenbrenner said.

Sensenbrenner said he opposed the appointment of a special prosecutor to deal with the claims about Russia, explaining: "I don’t think it’s good for our country to have the executive branch under constant investigation."

As the conversation continued, the subject of Trump's undisclosed tax returns came up. Sensenbrenner said there are certain parts of tax returns that are "nobody's business," such as charitable donations.

Someone in the audience blurted out what about contributions to the Ku Klux Klan and Sensenbrenner fired back, "That's a cheap shot on Donald Trump."

"Donald Trump is not a racist," Sensenbrenner said, and some in the crowd piped up in disagreement.

"I guess this shows everyone around here you can have disagreements with anyone of us. But once you start getting into the personal stuff, then I think you’re over the top. Donald Trump never would have been elected President of the United States if he was in sympathy with the Ku Klux Klan," Sensenbrenner said.

Khary Penebaker of Hartland, a Democrat who ran and lost against Sensenbrenner in 2016, objected to how the Congressman used the gavel.

Later, Penebaker said that Sensenbrenner will "brag about the number of town halls he has done, but what he is not talking about is what he learned at these town hall meetings."

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2lqDmUY