Democrat and iron worker Randy Bryce challenges Paul Ryan for Congress
CLOSE

Randy Bryce. (Photo: Handout photo)

MADISON - A Democratic veteran and iron worker announced Monday he will challenge Republican Paul Ryan for Wisconsin's 1st Congressional District in 2018.

The long-shot bid will pit Randy Bryce against the most powerful member of the U.S. House. Ryan, former vice presidential candidate and current House speaker, has held the district in southeastern Wisconsin since 1999.

Bryce, a union leader who served in the U.S. Army, lost races for the Wisconsin's Legislature in 2012 and 2014 and lost a 10-way primary for Racine County Board of Education in 2013. Bryce said he's learned from the losses and is planning to raise at least $2 million for this run.

"I've learned a lot," Bryce said. "The people of Wisconsin know who I am. I have community roots."

A spokesman for Ryan had no immediate comment.

Bill Hyers, campaign manager for New York Democratic politicians Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand and Mayor Bill de Blasio, has signed on to assist Bryce. Hyers also managed Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett's unsuccessful 2010 run against Gov. Scott Walker.

Bryce said he's focusing on getting people good-paying jobs, not necessarily union jobs.

“Every American deserves a good-paying job, health care security, and the ability to have hard work pay off," Bryce said in a statement.

Bryce voluntarily represented the union Iron Workers Local 8 for nine years as a political coordinator. He is also a member of the Milwaukee Area Labor Council board of directors, the president of Wisconsin Veterans Chamber of Commerce board and chair of the Democratic Party of Wisconsin Veterans Caucus.

The 1st Congressional District covers all or part of these counties: Kenosha, Racine, Walworth, Rock, Waukesha and Milwaukee. Bryce lives in Caledonia in Racine County.

Also running against Ryan are David Yankovich, a Democratic activist from Ohio, and Republican Paul Nehlen, who lost by 68 percentage points to Ryan in last year's primary.

Read or Share this story: http://jsonl.in/2tkpagy