Speaker Paul Ryan calls North Korea 'No. 1' foreign policy concern
Buy Photo House Speaker Paul Ryan toured WPC Technologies in Oak Creek Thursday. Afterward, he held a town hall with employees but did not take questions from reporters. (Photo: Michael Sears / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

OAK CREEK - House Speaker Paul Ryan said Thursday that North Korea is now his top foreign policy concern.

"North Korea is racing to have a nuclear weapon that they can deliver — a long-range missile," Ryan said during a visit to a company in Oak Creek. "That is something we cannot accept as a nation if we want to preserve our own safety. This is not a regime we want to see in possession of nuclear weapons."

The Janesville Republican added, "It's a big concern — quite frankly, my number one current foreign policy concern."

Ryan's comments came after North Korea fired a ballistic missile Tuesday in the direction of Japan.

On Wednesday, one of Ryan's Democratic challengers, Randy Bryce, seemed to struggle with a question about North Korea during an interview with CNN.

"I don't have specifics. I haven't seen exactly what — I don't have information on what North Korea launched. I plan on going — we're going to take a trip later this month to Washington, D.C., to get better educated on the issues, and I hope to have more information then," Bryce said. "I mean, I have ideas and there are things I'd like to say. But right now, it would honestly be speculation."

On Thursday, he said in a statement: “I served my country overseas, and I will always put country over party. No one can figure out what Trump’s daily 140 character rants even mean or what his policy even is. Paul Ryan has been in office for 20 years, during which time he's voted for the Iraq War and let North Korea escalate their nuclear program to its current level, so he's got no credibility on these issues. We need a consistent diplomatic effort with China and our regional allies to push North Korea to stop threatening our security."

Bryce, an ironworker and activist, that same day announced that he had raised $430,000 during the first 12 days of his campaign after he launched his bid with a viral video.

Ryan Thursday visited a pair of companies in Oak Creek and Racine.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

During his Oak Creek stop at WPC Technologies, a company that manufactures pigments for noncorrosive paints used on airplanes and buildings, Ryan toured the facility and took mostly presubmitted questions from workers.

He did not take questions from reporters Thursday.

Milwaukee County Supervisor Marina Dimitrijevic, director of Wisconsin Working Families Party, slammed Ryan's private events and accused him of being out of touch with those in his district.

"Paul Ryan has been avoiding his own constituents like the plague and still refuses to hold a public town hall," she said in a statement. "His political stunt today only underscores how scared he must be of real interaction with his own constituents — and for good reason."

Asked in May if he had plans for any upcoming in-person town halls, Ryan insisted there were other ways to reach out to constituents without them going into a "harassing environment."

"For lots of reasons, I'm doing it in different ways. I think, first of all, I can get to constituents, and not just people coming in from out of state, by doing a lot of my telephone town halls, going to their places of employment, doing my office hours," Ryan said at the time. "So there's a lot of ways I'm being able to interact with constituents without creating other disturbances."

In Oak Creek, Ryan fielded friendly questions about topics including North Korea, public safety, education, trade, student loans — and yes, the Green Bay Packers and Milwaukee Brewers.

The speaker was also asked about whether he had any plans to run for president.

"No, none at all," Ryan said. "That's an easy one to answer. Absolutely not."

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2tWv4br